29 Herders and the ‘Christ-Child’

Animal and plant domestication in the Andes, and coastal foragers, 10,500–5000 BC

With aching limbs, John Lubbock shelters from a bitter wind as another
spell of dizziness overcomes him.¹ Beyond the rocks there is a grassy
plain and then a lake which blends imperceptibly with the distant sky.
He is in the puna grasslands of the Peruvian Andes, having left the
tropics long ago to climb steep valleys while the forest dwindled to
woodland, and then to scattered and stunted trees. The air has become
thin, his mind and body aches with fatigue and nausea.

The puna is a 4,000-metre-high landscape of rolling hills and rocky
escarpments, one riddled with small streams and pock-marked by lakes.²
The lake before him is the largest he has seen; it will become known as
Lake Junin, located 800 kilometres northeast of its much larger and more
famous neighbour, Lake Titicaca.

Lubbock needs to visit the puna as this will eventually become home to
the Incas. Their great cities, roads, and temples will appear several
thousand years after his travels have come to an end. But a foundation
of their civilisation now grazes before him on the plain. Not one, but a
whole herd of creatures about the size of a deer, with long necks and
pointy ears. They are vicuños, the wild ancestor to the alpaca that will
become an essential source of meat and wool.

On his journey to the puna, and indeed throughout his South American
travels outside of the tropics, Lubbock has encountered a similar but
rather larger type of camelid, as these animals are known, the guanaco,
which also lives in herds but prefers lower elevations and is less tied
to streams and lakes. It will give rise to the other key domesticate,
one which has a broad back and will be the principal means of
transporting goods across the high Andes – the llama.

All the animals Lubbock has seen are wild and will remain so for several
thousand more years. The date is 10,500 BC and they are hunted by people
who have already been living in the puna grasslands for many
generations. A group of hunters arrive by Lubbock’s side, their
footsteps and voices having been silenced by the wind. There are eight
of them, dressed in thick hides and armed with stone-tipped spears.
Within a few minutes four have left, departing in the opposite direction
to the lake. The others sit and check their weapons; they need to ensure
that the points are secure and sharp. One takes a bone awl from his bag
and forces it so hard against his spear point that a small flake is
removed from near the tip; this perfects its symmetry to enhance its
penetrating power.

After an hour’s rest the men set off for the vicuña herd; Lubbock’s
dizziness has passed and so he follows as they clamber over the crag and
head towards the lake. They walk slowly and in silence, soon beginning
to crouch among the knee-length grass. Before long they are flat on
their stomachs, wriggling inch by inch through the wet grass towards a
grazing beast. The target is the leader of the herd, the male who rarely
moves far from his harem and ensures that they keep within territorial
bounds.

Momentarily disturbed, the vicuña raises its head, sniffs the air and
looks quizzically around, but with nothing to be seen or heard he soon
returns to the grass. Lubbock moves with the hunters once again and
eventually draws so close that he can hear the tearing and grinding of
tough grass stems by the vicuños’ teeth.

A subtle nod is given and the hunters stand and launch their spears in
unison. The weapons miss, but all is not lost, for, as Lubbock watches,
the hunters take up the chase, scattering the harem and sending the male
running straight into a second set of spears. These come from the other
hunters who had taken cover in the lakeside reeds on the far side of the
harem.

That evening Lubbock sits with the hunters and their families in the
mouth of a large cave that is to be found among limestone crags on the
southern side of the lake. Small walls have been built in the cave mouth
to keep out the wind that persists throughout thier summertime
occupation. There is a spectacular northward view across the water to
distant peaks, once snow-capped but now fading silhouettes as the day
draws to a close.

When John Rick of Stanford University excavated Pachamachay Cave in 1974
and 1975 he found the remains of many vicuña carcasses and the spears
used to hunt them.³ Those from 10,500 BC were deeply buried below the
debris left by many later generations of occupants as the cave continued
in use for 9,000 years. But whereas the first occupants had been hunters
of vicuña and guanaco, the last had been herders of alpaca and llama –
an economic switch that probably occurred as a gradual drift from
hunting to herding rather than a sudden break in lifestyles. While it is
impossible to know exactly when this switch occurred, as the bones from
these four animals are nearly identical,⁴ the best guess is that it was
around 5000 BC. By that date the camelids begin to account for the vast
majority of the animals killed, not just in Pachamachay Cave but in all
the excavated caves of the Peruvian puna. Before then, the hunters had
been killing a greater diversity of game, including deer and birds.

Perhaps more telling is that around 5000 BC the proportion of new-born
and young animals increases from about a quarter to a half of the
total.⁵ Bruce Smith of the Smithsonian Institution, and a leading expert
on the origins of food production in the Americas, suspects that this
reflects the increase in infant mortality that arises when animals are
kept in crowded corrals and infectious diseases become rampant. Such
high levels of disease-induced mortality among young animals are a
pervasive feature of llama herds today.⁶

John Rick’s studies concluded that the hunters of the puna grasslands
took up permanent residence within the largest of the caves soon after
10,500 BC. There were probably several groups, each using a territory
centring on a lake basin and containing a cave as the principal
residence. The density and range of artefacts within Pachamachay,
together with the evidence for walls and constant cleaning, suggest that
the cave had been used in a manner quite unlike the temporary,
short-term occupations of hunter-gatherers who are always on the move.
And hence, just as with the Natufian people in western Asia, sedentism
may have been a crucial step towards agriculture. But in this case it
was the prelude to animal herding rather than plant cultivation.

One can readily imagine settled hunters developing an intimate knowledge
of the herds within the catchment of their cave, most likely identifying
many of the individual animals, especially those males who gained
control of harems. The other males lived in troops and may soon have
become the principal prey as such animals were expendable – their loss
caused no threat to the survival and reproduction of the population as a
whole. Selective hunting may then have been supplemented by providing
forage during harsh winters and so controlling the movements of herds.
Injured or orphaned animals may have been cared for, which would
ultimately have provided the basis for a domesticated herd. Once
present, such herds may have played a significant role in bringing
another species in from the wild, not an animal but a plant: quinua.

Quinua is one of two plants that dominated the early prehistoric
food-producing economies of the high-altitude basin and valleys of the
Andes, the other being the potato.⁷ A member of the chenopod group of
plants, known more familiarly to many as goosefoot, quinua became a key
crop of the Incas and is still grown by subsistence farmers today who
value its high protein content. When mature, its multicoloured
seed-heads stand waist-high, and can be harvested to make biscuits,
bread and porridge. The two key differences between the wild and
domestic chenopod variants are the same as those between the wild and
domestic wheat of western Asia: both domestic variants ‘wait for the
harvester’ and neither can delay germination, which results in the
simultaneous ripening of all plants within a crop.

The earliest quinua has come from another cave in the Junin basin, no
more than 30 kilometres from Pachamachay and also excavated by John
Rick. This is Panaulauca Cave which contains a similar range of
artefacts and animal bones, and was most likely a base camp used by
another group of hunter-gatherers who had settled in the puna. The
chenopod seeds from Panaulauca of 5000 BC had thin ‘testas’, or seed
coats, comparable to those of domestic quinua and indicative of the
reduced ability to delay germination. So, by this date, stands of quinua
may have been growing in the vicinity of the cave, perhaps close to
corrals where llama or alpaca were being kept – or perhaps actually
within old corrals themselves.

Camelids enjoy eating the wild varieties of quinua, but cannot digest
the seed. These pass through the animal’s gut undamaged and are
deposited with a quantity of natural fertiliser, often far from where
the plants had originally grown. Bruce Smith suggests that if the early
herders had begun to corral their herds at night, then stands of
chenopods would have flourished within their organic soils. By simply
relocating the corrals, and using the fences to protect the thriving new
stands from grazing, a substantial food source could have easily arisen
close to their settlement. It would then have been a small step for
cultivation – weeding, watering, transporting – to have begun the
subtle, unintentional genetic alterations to those plants, turning the
wild chenopods into domesticated quinua.

Another plant was domesticated in the Andes, probably in the basin of
Lake Titicaca. But unlike quinua, this plant played a major role in
global history after it was taken from South America to Europe in the
sixteenth century. It was the potato. There are several variants of wild
and cultivated potatoes in South America today and the Lake Titicaca
basin is the centre of genetic variability – a sign that this is where
the first domesticated variants arose.

No archaeological traces of early cultivation have yet been found within
the basin and surrounding river valleys. But this most likely reflects
the limited search for open settlements. Almost all excavation has taken
place in the highland caves which are unlikely to provide a complete
picture of prehistoric life in central Peru. Bruce Smith believes that
once such open settlements are discovered, the domestication of the
potato will be found to have arisen as part of a joint package with the
llama, alpaca and quinua.

One more species may also have been involved: the guinea pig. Bones from
these animals were found by John Rick in Pachamachay Cave and they are
known to have been a much-hunted species throughout the Andes before
becoming a domesticated source of meat. Exactly when that occurred also
remains unknown. Like the mice and rats of western Asia, the wild
variants may have been attracted to the first sedentary settlements due
to the reliable food supplies either from human waste or from crops.
Guinea pigs were susceptible to domestication because of their high
reproductive rate and the ease of being raised in confined areas – which
also makes them ideal pets for children today.

The day begins slowly at Pachamachay Cave. John Lubbock wakes at dawn
and finds that most others remain asleep. They use the rear of the cave,
which is made comfortable and warm by soft bedding and hides. A young
woman sits in the entrance nursing her baby; a few children fiddle with
sticks close by. A man wakes and invigorates the fire that has
smouldered all night. As the others stir, spiny spheres are taken from a
wicker basket and tossed into the ashes. These are fruits from prickly
pear cacti that grow as rounded mounds throughout the puna zone. After a
few minutes they are dragged or flicked out of the ashes. The now
spineless but juicy fruits are passed around, wiped clean and eaten
whole.

All the plant foods eaten by the residents of Pachamachay Cave are from
wild species. Their excavated remnants were analysed by Deborah Pearsall
of the University of Missouri who found a great variety of species, even
though the opportunity for preservation was limited to what had been
accidentally charred in the fire.⁸ While some remnants, such as those
from prickly pears and chenopods, had most likely come from fruits and
seeds collected for food, others may have had a medicinal role. There
were, for instance, ninety seeds of a plant from the Euphorbia family.
Such plants are widely used in Andean folk medicine today: the white sap
from some is used as a laxative, the mashed tubers of others help
relieve stomach pains, and provide an ointment for skin eruptions.

Lubbock takes a small portion of dried vicuña meat and a couple of
prickly pears and leaves the Junin basin, embarking on a challenging
journey across the mountains to Lake Titicaca. From there he descends
through a labyrinth of valleys to the coastal lands of modern-day Peru.
At 10,000 BC he arrives in a landscape of barren, dusty foothills cut by
narrow tree-lined valleys which make ribbon-like oases. It is warmer
than in the mountains but surprisingly cool for the tropics, especially
when the coastal hills are so frequently covered by a thick grey-fog.

Fishy smells greet Lubbock on his arrival at a small cluster of circular
dwellings on the north bank of what will become known as Quebrada
Jaguay, or the Jaguay Canyon. Canoes are also arriving, returning from a
fishing trip in the estuary mouth about 8 kilometres away. Heavy nets
are being hauled ashore in the half light of dusk. Lubbock joins in,
emptying the fish into baskets and picking out those trapped between the
vegetable-fibre cords.

The semi-subterranean huts are built from brushwood, clay daub and thick
wooden posts. Smoke ekes its way through the roofs and soon tempts
Lubbock to sit by the fire inside. Between the huts there is the typical
debris of hunter-gatherer life: scatters of tool-making waste, piles of
roots waiting to be turned into fibres, and of rushes to be made into
baskets. Along the riverbank are the remnants of fireplaces and roasting
pits.

Lubbock finds these coastal dwellers in the midst of change. People have
been living in the same vicinity for almost 1,000 years and throughout
that time have been fishing and collecting clams. This settlement was
once a campsite used by people who travelled each year from the coast
into the mountains. On their highland visits they hunted the guanaco and
collected obsidian – that volcanic glass valued throughout the Stone Age
world – returning with as much as they could carry.

But such mountain sojourns are no longer made and so there is no
obsidian for Lubbock to see. The people now spend all year in the
coastal lands, although they occupy three or four different settlements
each year. They come to Quebrada Jaguay with a specific purpose in mind:
to catch the shoals of drum fish that flourish in the estuary mouth and
to collect the abundant clams. While doing so they will also restore the
huts and collect gourds from the valley floor. Once the shoals depart,
the people leave for the next site in their annual round, perhaps to
trap cormorants or to fish for anchovy.⁹

The site of Quebrada Jaguay was discovered in 1970 but excavations only
began in 1996 by Daniel Sandweiss from the University of Maine.¹⁰
Because it lacked any distinctively-shaped stone tools – such as the
fishtail points Lubbock saw in Tierra del Fuego or the triangular points
from the Amazon – Sandweiss had no idea how old the fishbones, clam
shells, burnt stones and post holes were before radiocarbon dating. When
it was shown that people had lived on the edge of Quebrada Jaguay since
11,000 BC, the site was immediately acclaimed as a major discovery. It
demonstrated how the very earliest people in Peru were proficient in the
use of marine resources, implying boats and a fishing technology. It
also provided further evidence for the diversity in Early American
lifestyles.

For the next few weeks Lubbock remains with these coastal people –
helping to knot fibres, joining the fishing trips and accompanying them
when they visit neighbours and keep watch upon the ever-changing sea and
sky. During his travels he notices that much of the landscape is covered
by a thick mantle of sediment – sometimes a fine silt, at others a
coarse gravel. In the mouth of one valley, this reaches waist height
around tree-trunks; in others, the trees have evidently been toppled and
crushed. On one occasion he finds a vertical exposure that looks like
the side of an extraordinarily deep archaeological excavation. River
water had undercut the steep valley side and a mass of sediment had
slumped into the river to leave a vertical wall. Within that, he sees
the crushed walls, timbers and fireplaces of a hut.

More than 10,000 years later David Keefer of the US Geological Survey
made a similar discovery when he inspected a cutting through sediments
made for new roads in Quebrada Tacahuay, a valley about fifty kilometres
south of Lubbock’s fishing village.¹¹ Sandwiched between thick layers of
coarse gravels, he found traces of hearths and rubbish heaps which were
dated to 10,800 BC:¹² the remnants of a settlement that had been
suddenly inundated by a massive flow of debris caused by violent rains.

After Keefer and his colleagues had acquired more dates, they realised
that the coastline of southern Peru had suffered four major debris flows
between 10,800 and 8000 BC. There could have been only one cause of such
repeated devastation to the landscape. Keefer had found the earliest yet
known work of the ‘Christ child’ – better known by its Spanish name, El
Niño – which continues to lay waste to the modern world.¹³

El Niño is caused by a change in the pattern of sea-surface temperatures
and atmospheric pressure across the tropical Pacific Ocean. This happens
when a large mass of warm water forms off the coast of Central and South
America at regular intervals of between two and ten years in length,
disrupting the currents and preventing the nutrients from lower, colder
levels reaching the surface. As a result, fish populations abandon the
region for cooler, nutrient-rich waters. This can have a devastating
effect on the fishing industry – something which most likely supported
no more than a few hundred people in 10,000 BC but which now sustains
millions of lives.

Even more dramatic is the havoc that changing air pressure wreaks on
regional weather patterns around the world. The Pacific coasts of the
Americas become inundated with El Niño storms, leading to extensive
flooding, while Southeast Asia is afflicted with drought. Computer
models predict that the frequency and strength of El Niño events are
likely to increase with global warming. This appears to have been proved
by David Keefer’s discovery that such events only occurred every 700 to
800 years at the close of the ice age but have intensified to a mere
ten-year cycle during the last 150 years. That development was most
likely due to natural global warming alone, which peaked at 7000 BC. And
so we are left to wonder about the impact – environmental and economic –
of the next hundred years of artificial global warming on El Niño.

While we can only guess at the events and suffering at Quebrada Tacahuay
in 10,800 BC, a vivid illustration of El Niño’s power is provided by the
catastrophe that struck the coast of Peru in 1997–8.¹⁴ A pool of warm
water 400 metres deep and the size of Canada had developed in the
Pacific. The resulting storms began pounding the Pacific coast in
December 1997 and their impact soon reached apocalyptic proportions.
Within six months, rain-swollen rivers and mud-slides had destroyed
three hundred bridges, swept away entire villages, and made half a
million people homeless. The fishing industry was devastated, ports were
destroyed, and ideal conditions created for the spread of disease. The
sea flooded 15 kilometres inland. The deluge that struck the desert city
of Trujillo eroded the city’s oldest cemetery and sent ancient coffins
and cadavers floating through the streets. When faced with this
terrifying spectacle, the city leaders dedicated one stormy Sunday in
March 1998 as a day for beleaguered citizens to beg God for relief.
Perhaps that is just what people had done in 10,800 BC when their
settlement was destroyed. What else can people do when faced with the
might of El Niño – the ‘Christ Child’?

A pair of cormorants momentarily appear in the moonlight as they fly low
across the water, their wing-tips almost touching the sea. They
disappear into darkness as clouds engulf the moon and waves suck at the
sand as they retreat across the beach. Lubbock sits shivering on a
headland in the dead of night, transfixed by the Pacific Ocean.

It is time to leave South America. As Lubbock steps into the darkness,
his thoughts return to drinking hot tea at Monte Verde. And then to
horsemeat in Tierra del Fuego, fishing in the Amazon, stalking vicuña in
the Andes and collecting clams in Quebrada Jaguay. He wonders whether
the Monte Verde people really were the First Americans, about the
meanings of rock paintings, and why people had become herders rather
than hunters. South America after the ice has been a continent of
remarkable people and unanswered questions. But now he must travel to
Mexico and then North America to discover what happened after the time
of mammoths and Clovis.

30 A Double-Take in the Oaxaca Valley

The domestication of maize, squash and beans in Mexico, 10,500–5000 BC

I must confess to a feeling of boyish excitement on a September
afternoon in AD 2000 when I sat cross-legged against one cave wall and
then leapt up to squat beside another. The desire to perform such antics
had overwhelmed me as soon as I had penetrated the last thicket of
thorns and manoeuvred around the final prickly pear to arrive at Guilá
Naquitz, a small cave in central Mexico.

It was hardly a cave at all – little more than a ledge below an overhang
within a cliff face, one located in the valley of Oaxaca. Near by there
were proper caves, ones with gaping entrances and tunnels deep into the
rock. Further away in the valley there were spectacular archaeological
sites, most notably the ancient city of Monte Alban where the Zapotec
civilisation had built their capital city 2,500 years ago.

Although Monte Alban’s architecture had been impressive, my visit to its
hilltop had been of marginal interest. I had come to Oaxaca to visit
Guilá Naquitz – the site where the earliest domesticated plants in the
New World have been found.¹ And even if its speleological credentials
were limited, crouching below the overhang was worth all the sweat,
cactus spines and thorn scratches that I had acquired during the long
walk in the midday sun.

One moment I imagined myself as one of the hunter-gatherers who had
camped in Guilá Naquitz at 8000 BC, and in the next I was the
Michigan-based archaeologist Kent Flannery at the moment of his
(re)discovery of the cave on 26 January 1966 – thirty-four years and 243
days before my own visit. He would later describe how he had found stone
artefacts and plant remains on the surface, the latter surviving due to
the extreme aridity of the soil. For me, the cave was bare – except for
a pile of goat droppings left by its most recent occupants. Flannery had
taken just six weeks to make his excavation in the spring of 1966. He
then required another fifteen years to analyse the finds and publish the
results.

My fascination with Guilá Naquitz was due to the contrast it provided
between ordinary lives and extraordinary events in the history of the
world. Between 8500 and 6000 BC the cave had been occupied on several
occasions by no more than four or five people, probably members of a
single family. They had used the shelter as a place to make and repair
stone tools, to cook rabbits and small turtles, to shell, grind, peel
and roast an immense variety of plant foods gathered in the vicinity of
the cave. They had slept at Guilá Naquitz, using oak leaves and grass as
bedding. I imagine much of their time had been spent gossiping, joking,
perhaps even singing and dancing. Each visit had been made in the autumn
and may have lasted for anything between a few days and a few months.
For them, Guilá Naquitz was just one of many camping places in the
Oaxaca valley; it had no special significance and those who went there
were simply getting on with day-to-day life during the Early Holocene in
Central America.

Flannery discovered that while they did so, they were also making
history. When they first came to the cave, all of their plant foods had
been from wild species. By the time of their last visit, however, some
were from domesticated varieties – plants dependent upon humans for
their survival. Unbeknown to the Guilá Naquitz people, the new plants
they created would eventually support the great Meso-American
civilisations – the Olmec, Zapotec and Aztec.

These thoughts had been in my mind when I left my hired four-wheel-drive
as far as I dared venture up the dry river-bed of the Gheo-ala, a small
tributary of the Oaxaca valley, on my way to Guilá Naquitz. I then
followed an overgrown track and at times embarked through the scrubby
woodland, not entirely sure of the way and looking out for the
distinctive cliff face I had seen illustrated in Flannery’s book. Many
of the trees and shrubs, let alone the cacti, were quite unfamiliar to
me. Some were laden with extraordinary epiphytes – those plants which
attach themselves to another for support and extend wandering tentacles
through the air. Butterflies and bees abounded.

My inability to identify the plants caused considerable frustration. I
loved the exotic yellow and white flowers, the occasional pungent
aromas, the small berries beginning to form and seed pods beginning to
swell. But I hardly knew what I was looking at. I was annoyed at not
having done my homework because the vegetation in this part of the
Oaxaca valley is thought to be close to that which had surrounded Guilá
Naquitz in 8000 BC. So those ancient foragers would have seen just the
same flowers and seed pods, smelled the same aromas and spiked
themselves on the same type of thorns. But they, of course, knew exactly
what the plants were – which provided the best food and which the best
fibres, which had medicinal properties and which were stimulants.

When I arrived at the cave, a pendulous bell-shaped wasps’ nest was
hanging from the ceiling. It was surrounded by the scabs of previous
nests that overlapped and buried each other, just as the layers of
debris from successive human occupations had done on the floor. Once my
antics were over I scrambled back through the thorn trees and down the
boulder-strewn slope below the cliff to find the overgrown track. It was
only then that I realised that this was the very track that Kent
Flannery and his team had made as they repeatedly drove their vehicles
far closer to Guilá Naquitz than I had dared.

I paused to watch a line of ants marching and thought I heard an engine
straining its way through ruts and potholes. And then I imagined
Flannery and company bumping and bouncing past me in their Ford Pickup
after the end of a day’s work more than thirty years ago. I strolled on
and imagined a second vehicle, one less congruous to the setting: a
Mercedes-Benz negotiating its way along the dry river-bed that now
stretched out before me. That was Kent Flannery on his first visit to
Oaxaca, having been lent a car by a business executive relative – one
presumably quite innocent of the ways of archaeologists. Apparently the
Mercedes had been more effective than many four-wheel-drives in getting
Flannery around the valley, along donkey paths and negotiating canyons.
I walked back through the cactus and thorn trees to find my own vehicle,
tired but exhilarated to have sat within the cave of Guilá Naquitz.

It is 8000 BC and John Lubbock sits in that cave reading Prehistoric
Times. Around him is the clutter and debris of a hunter-gatherer camp;
its occupants are away gathering plants. The floor has woven mats; piles
of grass have been arranged for bedding; a fireplace contains warm
ashes. Bowls, baskets and bags sit upon the mats and hang from pegs
wedged into the wall. Lubbock has returned to the chapter about North
American archaeology to check on his namesake’s knowledge of American
agriculture and whether he had views on how farming had begun. Victorian
John Lubbock knew that it had been founded on maize and commented that
‘it resulted from, and in return rendered possible, the gradual
development of American semi-civilisation’.² Modern John Lubbock
pondered these words, which suggested that domesticated crops had arisen
in a society far more complex than that he had found at Guilá Naquitz.

Today we know that initial crop domestication happened in central Mexico
because the wild ancestors of the three key domesticated plants – maize,
beans and squash – are found in this region.³ Those of maize and beans
have been pinpointed quite precisely by locating which of the possible
wild populations have the specific genetic markers of the domesticated
varieties.

Maize evolved from a wild grass called teosinte which continues to grow
in remote areas of Mexico today. Rather than having a single stalk, with
its grain packaged in a few easily harvested cobs, teosinte has numerous
branching stalks, each with several small grain spikes. That which grows
on the slopes of the Balsas River valley in central Mexico is
particularly similar – in biochemical terms – to modern maize. So it may
have been within that valley that the intense cultivation of teosinte by
prehistoric plant gatherers began, with the repeated selection of those
plants with the largest gains for both food and seed for new plants.

Wild beans, on the other hand, grow throughout the whole of Central
America. A cluster around the modern city of Guadalajara has been
identified as the ancestor of the common domesticated bean (Phaseolus
vulgaris) which comes in many different forms including red, pinto and
kidney. All have one key difference from their wild ancestor: just like
the barley, wheat and lentils that we examined in western Asia, the
domesticated beans ‘wait for the harvester’. And if the harvester does
not come, the beans cannot spread their seed. As with those West Asian
plants, the transition to the domestic bean came about as people
repeatedly chose – either intentionally or by accident – those pods
which had less tendency to split apart.

The wild ancestor of the third key domesticate, the squash, has not yet
been located. There are certainly many wild varieties of squash still
growing throughout Mexico, all of which have small, green fruits. It
seems likely that one of these will soon be identified as the specific
progenitor of the domestic varieties that come with larger orange fruits
and which were cultivated by those who had used the Guilá Naquitz
rockshelter.

The study of when and why these domesticated plants arose began in the
late 1940s when Richard MacNeish, who at that time was a graduate
student from the University of Chicago, came to work in Mexico, drawn to
the region by its native plants. This was the start of a long and
distinguished career, one that was ended by a road accident in January
2001 – while he was still on fieldwork at the age of eighty-two.⁴

MacNeish began work in the northeast, excavating caves with bone-dry
sediments in the Tamaulipas mountains. By the early 1960s he had shifted
his work further south into the Tehuacán valley of central Mexico. Here
he excavated Coxcatlán Cave which provided abundant remains of maize,
beans and squash, along with a host of wild plants.

The corn cobs were no more than two centimetres long but undoubtedly
from domesticated plants. They were initially thought to date between
6000 and 4500 BC on the basis of radiocarbon dates from pieces of
charcoal found near by. But when the cobs themselves were directly
dated, they were shown to be considerably younger, dating to no more
than 3500 BC. The same happened with the remains of domesticated beans
from MacNeish’s excavations: they were initially believed to be 4,000
years older than was eventually shown to be the case.

This leaves the cobs found at Guilá Naquitz, which date to 4200 BC,⁵ as
the oldest currently known. If this is the date at which domestication
occurred, then it indicates a very long delay between the end of the ice
age and the emergence of domestic maize in Mexico – an altogether
different situation to that of domestic cereals in western Asia. But
these radiocarbon dates may be providing a quite erroneous picture about
when the first domesticated strains arose. That is the message from a
recent study of the genetics of modern maize, which indicates that
domestication had occurred by 7000 BC.⁶

Flannery also recovered the earliest-known samples of domesticated
squash from Guilá Naquitz. Although these samples were no more than
fragments of rind, stalk and seeds, they were quite sufficient to
differentiate between the wild and domestic varieties. The key
difference is simply size: the domestic squash are significantly larger.
When the Guilá Naquitz sample was first studied, however, just one seed
was thought to have come from a fruit sufficiently large to be labelled
domestic. That seed was dated to 8000 BC.

When the sample was restudied by Bruce Smith of the Smithsonian
Institution in the 1995, he found a great deal more evidence to support
the idea that the Guilá Naquitz people were cultivating squash by that
date.⁷ Although the squash fragments from the earliest levels were
unequivocally from wild plants (except for that single seed), those
coming from levels dated to between 7500 and 6000 BC were evidently from
domesticated plants. The seeds and stem fragments were significantly
larger than those from wild plants; the rinds were thick and bright
orange, rather than thin and green as in a wild fruit.

Smith concluded that the Guilá Naquitz people were cultivating squash
plants by 8000 BC – weeding around wild plants, selecting seed from the
largest squash fruits to replant for next year’s crop. And, if so, it
seems likely that the Guilá Naquitz people, those in the Tehuacán and
Balsas valleys, and those who gathered on the foothills around
Guadalajara, were cultivating beans and teosinte/maize. The question
then arises of why people had begun to do so. Why were they unwittingly
laying the foundations for the future Meso-American civilisations?

There are at present two major, but radically different theories for the
origin of domesticated plants in central Mexico. One has been devised by
Flannery himself on the basis of his excavations at Guilá Naquitz, the
other by Brian Hayden of Simon Fraser University, drawing on extensive
knowledge of historically documented hunter-gatherers. These theories
hinge not on the contents of the caves but on whether there had been
permanent hunter-gatherer villages on the floor of the Oaxaca and other
river valleys.⁸

Athough Flannery has the advantage of first-hand field experience of the
Oaxaca valley, we need to consider both theories before choosing the one
that is most likely to be correct. To enable us to do so, John Lubbock
needs to have a double-take on the Oaxaca valley at 8000 BC: he needs to
spend ten years living in the world that Kent Flannery has imagined for
the Guilá Naquitz people, followed by the same ten years in the one
imagined by Brian Hayden.

During his first decade in the Oaxaca valley, Lubbock participates in
all the plant-gathering, hunting, singing and story-telling activities
of the Guilá Naquitz people. As he does so, he watches children grow up
and learn the skills of hunting and gathering for a living. These
included the techniques for making hunting weapons, baskets for plant
gathering and containers for carrying water. Footwear and clothing had
to be manufactured from vegetable fibres, bark, skins and feathers. They
also had to learn about medicinal plants, how to care for the very
young, the infirm and the old. Hardly any of this was done by
instruction. The children simply participated in activities with the
adults; they watched, they listened; they tried things out, made
mistakes, and gradually became as skilled and as knowledgeable as their
parents and grandparents.

Towards the end of that decade, one of the girls left the group to join
the families who live in the Tehuacán valley. Soon after that, with the
consensus of other members, one of the boys becomes the unspoken leader
of the group. He is now allowed to speak first and last when decisions
are required that affect the group as a whole, such as when to move camp
and where to go. Everybody listens carefully to his views, but they also
voice their own. Special attention is paid to the opinions of the older
men and women. Decisions gradually emerge from group discussions – the
leader’s role is essentially that of chairperson, acting to summarise
options and expressing the emergent viewpoint.⁹

Summer months are spent on the valley floor at an encampment known to
archaeologists today as the site of Gheo-Shih. Squash are cultivated on
the alluvial soils, and hackberry and mesquite are harvested. Large
black iguanas are hunted and then roasted among hot coals. In some
years, the group at Gheo-Shih is joined by another, especially when food
is plentiful. Visitors frequently arrive and remain for a few days while
news and gossip are exchanged; arrangements are made for communal
celebrations when marriages will take place. The couple will then depart
as members of a new group, soon to bear children.

Each autumn is spent at Guilá Naquitz. Lubbock soon appreciates its
attraction. There is an abundance of plant foods near by – at least,
there is if one knows how to distinguish underground tubers from tiny
wisps of grass; which berries to eat and which to avoid; where the wild
melons, runner beans and onions can be found; and how some plants become
edible only after having been baked for many hours in an earth oven.
There are animals to hunt, notably the white-tailed deer, collared
peccary and rabbits, and birds to shoot – quails, doves and pigeons.

Permanent drinking water is the key resource; it comes from the river
that flows below the cliff-face and from a scattering of springs. These
are often no more than small ponds, but they make the cave and its
environs far more attractive than other places. Turtles are often found
within the ponds or on the muddy riverbanks and taken to be roasted
whole within their shells. Lubbock soon finds that the region is covered
by a network of tiny paths leading between springs, clusters of nut
trees, clumps of cacti and patches of squash. It is, in effect, another
wild garden – one quite similar to that around ‘Ain Mallaha but stocked
with an entirely different range of plants.

With the end of autumn, the dry season arrives. By the end of the year
the river is often no more than a trickle and the summer springs are
only recognisable by patches of damp ground. And so Lubbock travels with
the Guilá Naquitz people into the more humid uplands for the winter.
Many belongings are left in the cave – it is so dry there is no fear
that they will become damp and rot. Indeed, if gathering during the
autumn has been particularly fruitful, supplies of seeds, acorns, tubers
and especially squash – which they know store particularly well – are
left to provide food for when the group return.

Every autumn the people return to Guilá Naquitz, relieved to be back at
the centre of their world. They have a life on the move within which the
values of sharing, co-operation and consensus are paramount. Although
hunting is rarely successful, and sometimes the tubers are small and the
seed pods almost empty, people rarely go hungry.

The longer Lubbock lives with the Guilá Naquitz people, the more he
appreciates that some years are relatively wet, with abundant food, and
others quite dry. The timing of either a wet or a dry year is quite
unpredictable and the Guilá Naquitz people have become used to
responding to whatever conditions arrive.

When the spring and summer rainfall are plentiful, Lubbock finds that
they are prepared to travel further from the cave to experiment with a
wider range of plant foods and in an attempt to hunt more exotic
species. They are able to do so because there is a guaranteed supply of
their traditional foods if these enterprises fail. Such forays are
essential to maintaining their knowledge of the landscapes around them,
even when they return empty handed. In this respect the people of Guilá
Naquitz are much like the Monte Verde people, and indeed like all the
other hunter-gatherers Lubbock has visited on his travels – they have an
unquenchable thirst for natural history that they attempt to satisfy at
every opportunity.

It is during an especially wet year that Lubbock first witnesses another
activity. The people are familiar with several patches of squash plants
in the vicinity of Guilá Naquitz, knowing that this year these will
produce large and abundant fruit. They visit them early in the season to
check their flowers and the developing fruits. When doing so they simply
pull up any other plants immediately around the squash, and then pinch
off and throw away all but the very best of the flowers and fruits. They
can afford such waste as there will be plenty of other plant foods that
autumn, even if no more than one or two squashes develop on each plant.
Any plants with blighted leaves are simply dug up and thrown away.

On one occasion Lubbock arrives at a particularly dense and tangled
patch of squash. The women he has followed use their digging sticks to
uproot two or three of the strongest-looking plants and place them in a
basket. They then proceed to thin out the other plants, and help the
pollination of remaining flowers. On the way back to Guilá Naquitz they
pause and, in no more than a moment, have replanted the squash, watering
them from a large hollow gourd they carry. This takes place in what
appears to Lubbock as a nondescript part of the landscape, one that he
would have had difficulty finding again. Anyone coming upon these newly
planted squash would have had no reason to think that they were anything
but entirely wild.

The Guilá Naquitz people never speak about their cultivating activity.
They do it as a routine part of their hunting, gathering and travelling.
It is not until a particularly dry year that Lubbock appreciates the
dividend it provides.

In this year the landscape lacks the vibrancy that Lubbock has come to
expect. The yellow and white flowers are scarce, the greens of the cacti
are dull, and when their red fruits arrive they are drab and shrivelled
in size. Game is especially scarce. But in their parched landscape the
people can rely on the squash. As the plants are free of disease and any
weak strains have been weeded out, there are always fruits packed with
substantial seeds to be collected. Even though the quantity of food they
provide is limited, it is quite sufficient to support a short visit to
the cave.

During Lubbock’s decade with the Guilá Naquitz people he doesn’t notice
any change in the fruit themselves. But if he had remained not for ten
but for a hundred, or even a thousand years, he would have seen the
fruit increase in size and change in colour from green to orange. Edible
flesh would have developed, growing from the thin layers to which the
seeds were once attached. Such plants would have become dependent upon
the devoted care of the Guilá Naquitz people. The domesticated strains
simply emerged from attempts by these hunter-gatherers to guard against
food shortages when the rainfall was scarce.

John Lubbock has spent those ten years living as part of Kent Flannery’s
reconstruction of the Guilá Naquitz people and watching them act out
Flannery’s explanation for the domestication of squash – one that could
readily be extended to maize and beans. This was a world of mobile,
egalitarian plant gatherers who cultivated squash to offset potential
food shortages in years when the rain was limited. In that world, Guilá
Naquitz was one of their key localities; they returned every autumn to
use the cave as a base for hunting and gathering. For Kent Flannery, the
origins of domesticated plants lay in the hunter-gatherers’ attempts to
combat the irregular rainfall and supply of wild foods. But Kent
Flannery might be wrong. And so Lubbock must relive that decade in quite
a different world – that imagined by Brian Hayden who has very different
views about the origin of domesticated plants.

At the start of this second ‘take’ on life in the Oaxaca valley at 8000
BC Lubbock is sitting on the floor of Guilá Naquitz with three women,
one of whom carries an infant strapped to her back. It is late afternoon
and this plant-gathering party is resting before the walk back to their
settlement in the bottom of the Oaxaca valley. They have been collecting
an assortment of seeds, nuts and leaves and each has a bulging sack to
carry, one of which contains many small green spherical fruits – wild
squash. In the fading light the party sets out, down the steep slope to
the river below the cave and then through the scrubby woodland to the
valley itself. The women have no difficulty in finding the way even
though they have no wild gardens to walk through and no paths to follow
– visits to the cave are too infrequent for these to have arisen.

Three hours later Lubbock emerges with them out of the darkness and into
the firelit village. There are ten or perhaps a dozen huts forming a
rough circle around a central fireplace which radiates with glowing
embers. The huts are circular, with brushwood roofs hanging over wattle
and daub walls on timber frames. Many people are sitting around the
fire; several rise to greet the women, helping to unload their sacks and
offering water.

Lubbock’s relief is probably greater than the women’s as he drops his
sack to the ground and watches it taken away for storage. He sits with
the women as they tell the other villagers about what they have seen and
brought back, answering questions about the state of the cave, of the
springs and animal tracks. Lubbock looks around at the timber buildings
and courtyards. There had been no such villages in the Guilá Naquitz
world established by Kent Flannery’s extensive fieldwork – just small
campsites such as Gheo-Shih, little different to those within the caves.
But Lubbock is living within Hayden’s imagination and wonders if this
village is the semi-civilisation envisaged by his Victorian namesake,
from which he thinks agriculture arose. Lubbock stretches out upon the
ground and falls asleep.

He wakes long after preparations have begun for a feast. The seeds and
nuts that he helped to carry have already been shelled and are now being
ground within wooden mortars into a paste. Several small earth ovens are
baking tubers and a large pit has been prepared for roasting a peccary.
Lubbock can see many other baskets of food, including one stacked high
with large orange squashes, quite different to those collected in the
vicinity of Guilá Naquitz. Logs, reed mats and cushions made from
bundles of grass are being placed around the fire.

Lubbock wanders around the village and sees that within the largest hut
an elaborate robe is being prepared. The basic garment, one woven from
twisted vegetable fibres, has been removed from a bark box and is now
being adorned with an assortment of brightly coloured feathers, flowers
and shells. Immediately behind this hut there is a well-tended garden of
squash plants. The largest fruits have already been picked but there are
many others beginning to ripen. A brushwood fence encloses the garden,
suggesting that it is private property.

The feast begins late in the afternoon. It is for the benefit of a
visiting group from the Tehuacán valley who are now seated on one side
of the fire. Their leader is also dressed in a colourful robe and is
raised above his followers upon a wooden seat. The Oaxaca people sit on
the other side of their robed leader, each person positioned according
to status. Lubbock also sits near the fire, a prime seat to watch the
competition of words, songs and food that is about to begin.

For the next five hours this is precisely what happens: one side will
tell a story which is then replied to by the other. At first the stories
are short and related quite matter-of-factly; but as the evening
progresses they become longer, and are told with more passion, involving
sudden bursts of song, dance and dramatic reconstructions of the
ancestral deeds being described. Periodically food is brought from the
ovens and roasting pits by Oaxacan women and distributed among the
guests. Some stories involve the giving of gifts from one leader to the
other – precious stones, shells and exotic feathers.

When the Oaxacan leader reaches a climax in his story, a platter of
orange squash is brought to the fire and placed to roast in the ashes.
Lubbock watches the visitors gasp at the number, size and colour of the
fruit.¹⁰ Once roasted, they are split and the seeds distributed
throughout the crowd, with the Tehuacán leader being given a whole
bowlful to eat. He has never before seen such impressive fruits and such
a quantity of seed; he eats them and then admits defeat by telling a
final story that exalts the Oaxaca valley and its people.

The feast continues until the moon rises. The Tehuacán people depart to
their own temporary camping site; the Oaxacan people retire to their
huts, some accompanied by one or more visitors, perhaps to enjoy sex as
extravagant as the food they have eaten. On the following day the
Tehuacán people depart for their own valley, their obligations fulfilled
and their leader’s status maintained. When he arrives at his village he
will display the gifts received, objects that cannot be found in his own
valley. And he will instruct his followers to tend the maize plots in
the surrounding hills with ever greater care, to ensure that he has a
stack of the largest corn cobs ever seen – perhaps as large as his
outstretched thumb – when he entertains the Oaxaca people the following
year. Cultivating such plants is serious business – not for the calories
they supply but for the status they bestow.

The competitive feasting continues year after year, sometimes with just
two groups, sometimes with three, four or five. Lubbock sees a variety
of exotic foods brought to these occasions. In addition to squash and
maize cobs, there are chilli peppers, avocados and beans – all much
smaller than those he knows in the modern world but on the way to
becoming fully domesticated varieties. These are eaten as delicacies and
used by leaders to impress not only their visitors but also their own
people. If they fail to do so, they will be replaced – all the young men
have their own gardens behind their huts in which they work at
cultivating plants. Unknowingly, they are putting in place the
foundations for the Zapotec civilisation that will one day level a
hilltop and build its city at Monte Albán with its spectacular view
across the Oaxaca valley.

The world imagined by Hayden for the Guilá Naquitz people and the
reasons he proposed for plant domestication, were radically different
from those of Flannery. Guilá Naquitz was now quite peripheral to the
lives of the Oaxacan people. It was only occasionally used as a shelter
on hunting and plant-gathering trips away from a permanent village in
the valley bottom. In Hayden’s imagined world, ‘big men’ – individuals
who wielded authority and power – had the pick of the females as wives
and displayed their power through communal feasting and by the
acquisition of exotic shells, feathers and stones. In this world, the
origins of domesticated crops lay in the hunter-gatherers’ attempts to
impress their neighbours with ever more exotic foods.

To decide which of these two theories about squash and maize
domestication is most likely to be correct we must evaluate Hayden’s
claim that permanent hunter-gatherer villages had existed on the valley
floors, where he believed the competitive feasting had occurred.
Although no traces of any such sites have been found, Hayden argues that
this is because their archaeological remains have been buried by several
millennia-worth of river sediments.

Kent Flannery is an ardent critic of Hayden’s views. He argues that
while alluvium might exist in places, it is far older than 8000 BC.
Consequently, if such villages had existed their archaeological traces
would remain upon the surface today. Extensive and detailed surveys of
the valley floors have been undertaken and many archaeological sites
have been found; but none of these even roughly resembles the type of
villages that Hayden envisages being used for competitive feasting in
8000 BC. Gheo-Shih, which was most likely a small summer encampment
located just a few kilometres from Guilá Naquitz, was excavated in 1967
and provided a large number of artefacts but no sign of any structures.
The activities that had occurred there appear to have been little
different to those within the caves.¹¹ Any substantial hut timbers found
eroding into drainage ditches have been dated to 1500 BC at the
earliest. This is when the first villages in the valleys appear to
arise.

When I drove back to the town of Oaxaca after my own visit to Guilá
Naquitz I paid attention to the fields on either side of the road,
weighing up the respective claims of Hayden and Flannery. Even though
dusk had arrived I could see that these were intensively farmed, growing
a range of what seemed to me to be exotic crops – chilli peppers,
avocados, beans, maize – together with more familiar carrots and
lettuce. I guess squash was also grown. The likelihood that villages had
existed at 8000 BC seemed remote and I found myself entirely persuaded
by Flannery’s scenario for the origin of domesticated plants.

Competitive feasting was certainly important among many historically
known Native American communities – but this had only occurred when
there was an immense surplus of food. The Indians of the northwest coast
had fabulous quantities of salmon from the Pacific and used feasting –
or potlatches – to impress and humble rival chiefs. It seems quite
inappropriate to impose this lifestyle on to those living in the Oaxaca
valley at 8000 BC. Not only do their social lives seem to have been more
based around sharing than competition, but it seems unlikely that a
rival would have been impressed, let alone humbled, by no more than a
handful of squash seeds, however large they might have been.¹²

Before arriving at Oaxaca town I stopped at a roadside bar and tried
some of the mezcal – the local tequila. It was unpleasant to taste but
looked splendid in a bottle stuffed with herbs and fruits. I bought one
to take home – such an exotic drink would be bound to impress when we
next had a dinner party.

31 To Koster

Hunter-gatherer lifestyles in North America, 7000–5000 BC

John Lubbock’s journey from Mexico takes him through the San Pedro River
valley in Arizona, passing the localities of Lehner Ranch and Murray
Springs where mammoth bones and Clovis points lie buried in the ground.
He encounters people using Folsom points to hunt bison and deer; points
like those Jesse Figgins will excavate at Folsom itself. Others use new
styles of stone points, all of which lack the characteristic flute of
earlier times. Everyone has a much greater reliance on plant foods than
in Clovis times, as one day will become evident to archaeologists by the
number of grinding stones they excavate at Early Holocene camping
sites.¹

The change in diet reflects the growth of woodland that resulted from
warmer temperatures and increased rainfall. Along the river valleys
stands of willow, cottonwood and ash have become quite dense, while
Lubbock treks through oak and juniper woodlands where the Clovis people
had hunted upon open plains. The undergrowth is rich in shrubs and
grasses; for those with sufficient knowledge, food, medicine and
materials are there for the taking.

Archaeologists refer to the Early Holocene Americans as Archaic
hunter-gatherers. This term distinguishes them from Palaeo-Indians,
those of the Late Pleistocene, such as the Clovis people, and is a term
broadly equivalent to that of the Mesolithic in Europe. And just like
those Mesolithic people, Archaic hunter-gatherers were diverse in their
lifestyles. Some adopted a sedentary life very rapidly, and eventually
became farmers, developing societies which included chiefs, priests and
slaves. Others remained as hunter-gatherers throughout the Holocene –
right up to the fateful year of AD 1492 when the first Europeans arrived
and the decimation of Native American society began.

By 7500 BC Lubbock has passed through Arizona and entered the rugged
canyons at the southern edge of the Colorado plateau. He rests in a cave
in today’s Chevelon Canyon, which archaeologists now know as Sandal
Shelter.² It was once a crevasse at the juncture of sandstone below and
limestone above, but was eroded and widened into a cave when the river
flowed several metres above its current height. Behind him on the cave
floor are the remnants of a fireplace, a scatter of burnt bones, chips
of stone and wooden digging sticks. There is also a pair of sandals
beside the cave wall. These are made from tightly woven yucca leaves
with open toes and straps to tie around the ankle. Lubbock slips one on
and it fits rather well; but he resists the temptation of new footwear
in case the owner should return.

A curiously large number of intact Archaic-period sandals have been
found by archaeologists in the caves of the Colorado plateau, preserved
by the bone-dry conditions and because they were made of tough
materials. Other organic remains include fragments of clothing, bags and
baskets. We must also thank the pack-rats that still flourish in the
caves today. The large nests of twigs and leaves built by these hairy
rodents have done an immeasurable service for archaeology. When building
their nests they made use of human debris that would otherwise have
decayed. In Sandal Shelter they dragged no fewer than nineteen
abandoned, forgotten or simply mysteriously lost sandals into their
nests.

In 1997 Philip Geib of Northern Arizona University had gone to
investigate, after finding a forgotten shelf of sandals in his local
museum which had once been collected from a pack-rat midden in the cave.
He secured radiocarbon dates which covered a period of almost 1,500
years, the earliest dating to 7500 BC. The sandals were so well
preserved that Geib could reconstruct exactly how they had been made,
and compare them with sandals from caves further north. He documented
how Archaic footwear varied between regions and changed over time – a
very welcome alternative to the studies of stone tools which so dominate
archaeological research. As a result, we probably know more about the
footwear of the Archaic people of the Colorado plateau than any other
aspect of their lives.

Dawn breaks and as no one has returned for the sandals Lubbock leaves
the cave and follows the Chevelon Canyon to its confluence with Little
Canyon, which then takes him 200 kilometres northwest into the Grand
Canyon itself. Here he finds hunter-gatherers as much in awe of the huge
cliffs, the colours, moving shadows and rapids as any modern-day
visitor. Lubbock travels on and begins his crossing of the Great Basin –
a misnomer, as it is really an area of many small basins between the
Rockies to the east and Sierra Nevada to the west. Today it includes
most of Nevada and suffers from extreme aridity.

At the LGM it had many clear blue lakes, notably the vast Lake
Bonneville. These were a consequence of the quite different rainfall
patterns that arose from the impact of the North American ice sheets on
atmospheric circulation.³ But even at 7500 BC these lakes have all but
disappeared and Lubbock crosses a landscape of small ponds, shallow
lakes, marshes, streams and springs.⁴ Some basins and valleys are
completely dry, their soils being slowly colonised by salt-tolerant
plants. Elsewhere, there is a sagebrush-dominated scrub already
beginning to take on a desert-like appearance. Piñon nut and juniper
trees grow on lower slopes of the hills, while pine and spruce woodland
flourish at higher elevations.

The hunter-gatherers of the Great Basin are living in small, scattered
groups. They hunt a variety of game: deer, antelope, rabbits, squirrels,
gophers and the occasional bison. They fish and collect a wide variety
of plant foods. As they never remain in one place for more than a few
weeks, often no more than a few days, their shelters are flimsy, while
any discarded animal bones or plant material soon decomposes in the
acidic soils.⁵ And hence, the traces left for future archaeologists are
minimal: small scatters of broken spear points and discarded grinding
stones.

This meagre archaeological fare is supplemented, however, by the finds
from still more dry caves. Almost as good as these are their evocative
names: Last Supper Cave and Dirty Shame Rockshelter where sixty pieces
of cordage have been found; Fishbone Cave and Danger Cave, which
provided a cedar-bark mat and willow basketry; Spirit Cave where the
only Archaic burial for the region has been found – one with a
rabbit-skin robe and a plant-fibre mat for a shroud.

One of the archaeologically richest caves is known as Hogup, located on
the northwest edge of Utah’s Great Salt Lake.⁶ Here the excavated
material included grinding stones and remnants from a variety of
baskets, bags and willow-bark trays. But perhaps the most significant
finds were coprolites – human faeces that had been deposited in the
cave.

Eleven coprolites were excavated, along with another six from nearby
Danger Cave. When these were pulled apart they were found to contain a
diverse assortment of plant remains, notably from prickly pear, bulrush
and goosefoot. Pieces of crushed bone, insects and animal hair were also
present, the latter possibly arising from the use of teeth as a vice
when cleaning hides, while minute fragments of charcoal and gravel most
likely derived from methods of food preparation, the gravel having been
used to help grind the plants.

Lubbock descends through the eastern foothills of the Rocky Mountains
into the High Plains – an immense swathe of rolling hills and grasslands
that bisects the continent all the way from Canada to Mexico. It is now
7000 BC and he has arrived in Bighorn basin, northern Wyoming, at what
will become the Horner site.⁷ A cloud of dust has just settled, to
expose a dozen men and women crouched around four freshly killed bison
on the floor of a narrow gully. Within the last few moments they have
changed from being brutal killers to lovers of nature and are solemnly
paying homage to the animals that have given their lives for these
people of the plains.

The bravest hunters had positioned themselves behind boulders at the
cul-de-sac end of the gully; others had remained on the sides of the
inclines looking towards the gully floor; all gripped their spears
tightly and had blood pounding through their veins. At first they heard
a rumbling and then they gained a taste of dust; there was the roar of
galloping hoofs and the panting of mighty lungs. Four rampaging bison
charged towards them, running from men and women who were shouting
loudly and banging sticks. The hunters waited for the perfect moment –
one that made their own potential death just a few seconds away – before
they threw their spears. One, two and three bison collapsed to the
ground as they struck. Another was wounded; it writhed in pain and
bellowed in anger with lethal thrashing hooves. And then, with an
almighty roar, the fourth bison died as its heart and lungs were pierced
by the final spears to be thrown.

Butchery begins. As stone knives and choppers are withdrawn from leather
bags, Lubbock recalls watching reindeer being butchered at Verberie in
the Paris basin 5,500 years and one continent ago. The bison hunters
face a more urgent task, for they lack the surrounding deep-freeze and
flies are already congregating upon the wounds. These beasts are far
larger than the bison Lubbock has seen in wildlife parks and Wild West
movies before his travels began; they are some of the last members of
Bison antiquus, a species soon to be extinct. Once gone, the plains will
be grazed by the smaller and unimaginatively named Bison bison.

The work is undertaken swiftly. Everybody is eager to complete it before
the flies lay their eggs and the meat begins to sour. Large stone flakes
are used to cut the skin of each animal’s belly from tail to throat. The
innards are removed – vast entrails spilling across the ground – and
left for inevitable future scavengers, while favoured organs are
carefully put aside. The butchers constantly clean the grease and blood
from the edge of their stone tools by wiping them on the thick bison
hide. Some work with bison bones themselves: lower legs, skinned and
cracked apart, make skinning and defleshing knives as effective as any
stone tool.

The meat is removed in long thin strips and immediately hung from the
tree at the gully end. Within a few minutes a hard film will form over
their surface and although flies arrive in hordes, they are unable to
penetrate this crust to lay their eggs. Soon the tree can take no more
weight and so racks are built from branches and boulders. Butchery
continues for several hours as windpipes and tongues are removed,
pelvises smashed apart, hides partially cleaned and folded. Lubbock
lends assistance whenever he can – helping to roll over the beasts after
one side has been finished, carrying the meat to the drying racks,
throwing stones at the thieving magpies and ravens.

As evening arrives, fires are lit to deter scavengers and to roast some
meat. The people are to spend the night in the gully before returning to
their settlement at daybreak with their heavy load. As darkness descends
and the work is finished, they sit around the fire and relive the hunt.
The livers are eaten raw – a favoured delicacy – evenly divided between
all present, with Lubbock stealing a tiny scrap. One man leaves the fire
to rummage among a pile of wasted innards and returns with a
gall-bladder which he squeezes over his sliced liver before chewing it
with gusto.

In the morning the hunters head north, returning to their summer-time
settlement where the old and young eagerly anticipate bison steak.
Lubbock travels south, following the plains into Colorado. Here, he
joins another group of hunters, and remains with them as they hunt
mountain sheep in the hills and deer within the thickets of woodland.
Prairie voles and gophers are sometimes trapped, or dug from their
burrows, and plant foods are collected – a rather dismal selection
compared to that he helped gather at ‘Abu Hureyra, Monte Verde and in
the Amazon. But whether stalking deer or grinding seeds, the minds of
his unknowing hosts are never far from the bison and the planning of a
hunt.

Spears are their prized possessions. The stone points are the finest
Lubbock has ever seen, some up to 15 centimetres long and masterfully
worked into a perfect symmetry with lethally sharp edges. The spear
shafts are treasured – suitable wood is not abundant and the success of
a hunt depends as much on the spear flying true as on the point itself.
The binding of sinew and resin is also critical. This has to be
sufficiently robust for the point to be secure, but also slim and
streamlined so that it does not interfere with the penetration of the
spear. The knack is to strike the animal between the ribs, let the edges
of the point cut a hole through the hide, and then gain sufficient
penetration by the shaft so that the lungs or heart are pierced by the
point. Within a fraction of a second, the hunters have to aim and throw
with both accuracy and power.

Lubbock remains on the plains until the end of the autumn of 6500 BC.
During those years, life for the bison hunters becomes harder, and will
continue to do so for another two millennia. Every year there is less
rain; periodic droughts appear, and then become regular and persistent.

This climatic period is known in America as the Middle Holocene
altithermal⁸ and its droughts were severe, hitting the whole of the
southwest. Water tables plummeted while dust storms became frequent,
causing erosion and the establishment of dunes. The marshes of the Great
Basin finally dried up, while the gradual drift to desert was
accelerated and reached its finale. Although grasslands survived across
much of the High Plains, plant diversity collapsed, to leave only the
most hardy of species. With poorer grazing, bison gave birth to smaller
and weaker calves, fewer of which survived to adulthood.

The bison hunters of 6500 BC have to dig wells to reach the much-fallen
water table. Having helped with this, Lubbock takes his turn at the
grinding stones as plant foods have become essential to survival. The
men talk about searching for bison, but no longer know where to find
them and often decide that it is simply not worth the effort. As rivers
and springs dry out, settlements become tied to the few remaining water
sources. The quality of stone points deteriorates as people are forced
to rely on poor-quality local stone.

The droughts will eventually come to an end and bison hunting will
return; indeed, it will continue into historic times. But the soils of
the plains will always be too dry and the frosts too frequent for the
Native Americans to settle down and cultivate the maize, squash and
beans that were spreading around the continent by 2000 BC.⁹ They will,
however, develop new hunting methods: herds of bison will be stampeded
off cliffs; when no natural falls are available, fences and corrals will
be built as animal-traps; bows and arrows will replace spears. They will
burn vast tracts of grassland to encourage new shoots and attract the
bison. None of these will threaten the survival of the herds; that
apocalypse will only come after horses return to the continent with the
Europeans. Then, both Native Americans and Whites will use the horse to
rain a hail of bullets upon the bison herds and slaughter them in
thousands.

The sun has risen to begin a warm autumn day in 6000 BC and the dry and
dusty plains seem a world away. From his seat upon a limestone crag,
Lubbock looks west towards a wide, fast-flowing silvery river bordered
by marshes and meadows. Beyond that, thick deciduous woodland, soft and
golden, thrives now that the rains have returned. Below the crags, a
steep slope falls into a grassy tree-scattered hollow. At the bottom, a
village – five rectangular huts with thatched roofs whose reds and
russets match the leaves and grass of this autumn morn. Smoke rises
gently from the first fire of the day; a dog barks, a child cries.

The river is the Illinois and the village Koster, named after Theodore
Koster, the farmer on whose land its remnants were found in 1968.¹⁰ Had
that been the year of Lubbock’s visit, he would have been 80 kilometres
northeast of St Louis, and 400 kilometres southwest of Chicago, looking
down upon a cornfield undistinguished from the thousands of others that
dotted the plains.

The excavation began in 1969 and became one of the largest undertaken on
American soil. It revealed that people had first camped in the hollow at
8000 BC.¹¹ The successive layers of soil and human debris traced how
people continued to dwell within the hollow for many thousands of years.
With the help of soil washed from the valley sides, they created 10
square metres of deposits as thirteen distinct settlements were built,
one upon another. By 5000 BC a permanent village had been established,
from which the people hunted game, collected plants and fished without
fear of hunger – a Garden of Eden in the American midwest.

The day at that village’s predecessor of 6000 BC begins with people
pushing back hide drapes and emerging from their dwellings. They sit and
talk, brew tea and eat porridge made from mashed seeds and warmed with
hot stones from the fire. Some are dressed in neatly tailored tunics and
skirts, others eschew clothes, exposing their lithe bodies to the
morning sun. An old, arthritic man is sat upon a doorstep by his wife
and will remain there for much of the day, doing odd jobs brought to
him, telling stories for children and throwing sticks for his dogs.

People gradually disperse to their daily tasks. A party of women and
children leave for a grove of nut trees, knowing that they will make a
rich harvest, the hickory nuts being the most abundant of their autumn
foods. Young men leave with spears to hunt deer; others head towards the
river. Work begins in the village – there are wicker baskets to repair
and medicine to prepare for a sickly child.

Lubbock watches, now sitting by the fire and happy to rest after his
recent travels. A woman comes and sits beside him. She takes a nodule of
stone and places it among the hot embers. While it heats, she stirs a
little pot of resin and cuts notches in a wooden haft. The nodule is
retrieved. While still hot, she holds it in a leather wrap and strikes
to remove five or six fine flakes from the now brittle stone. These are
set into the notches and stuck firm with the resin. She leaves, her
knife complete. A couple of discarded flakes remain by the fire, to be
meticulously excavated, washed and labelled many thousands of years
later.

The sun begins to set behind the western hills. The nut gatherers return
with heavy baskets, the hunters empty-handed and those from the river
with bundles of reeds. Rush mats and soft hides are set out round the
fire, and a communal supper is followed by stories. When the moon rises
and night descends, Lubbock remains seated while others return to their
dwellings for sleep.

Night-time brings moths to the glowing embers and bats overhead. It also
brings the stars and the cold. Lubbock hears rats scurrying through the
grass.

Another day begins as the fire is lit by an early riser and once again
Lubbock watches daily life unfold at Koster, one of many hamlets
scattered through the valleys of the midwest.¹² Most people remain at
home; it is a day for shelling and pounding nuts, for making rush mats
and attending to roof repairs. And then another night and another day –
one with torrential rain. Through a succession of sunrises and sunsets,
Lubbock remains seated at the fireside, watching the kindling as it
crackles into flame, basking in the heat of a roaring fire and shivering
as cold ashes waft upon a night-time breeze. Day by day he watches
village life and the archaeology it is making: tools lost in the grass,
rubbish dumped in middens, pits dug to divert the rain. Then the frosts
begin. At night he huddles below the hides and woven mats that had been
left by the fire.

After one freezing night Lubbock watches as the old man is carried from
his bed and laid out on the frosty grass below an ice-blue sky. All day
people come and pay their respects beside his body, remembering how he
had taught them to hunt and fish; recalling his stories of the ‘old
days’, when people had always been on the move. That night he is buried
behind the huts. There is a feast; singing, dancing and prayers from a
shaman. In the shadows an old woman weeps.

Winter arrives and still Lubbock remains seated by the fireplace. Now he
watches as each family packs their belongings and leaves the village.
Some depart together, some go alone – where to, neither he nor future
archaeologists can say. But no winters are spent at Koster in 6000 BC
except by Lubbock as he waits for their return.

They come back in the spring; repair and clean their huts and begin
another year. Some sit next to Lubbock, spending many hours knotting
fibres into new fishing nets. On other days he watches the same people
return from the river, their nets replete with fish. In the summer,
Lubbock listens to their plans for hunting white-tailed deer; throughout
autumn, the village reverberates with the pounding of nuts into flour,
not just those of hickory but also walnuts and acorns, hazelnuts and
pecans. And then, once again, the people leave, while Lubbock remains to
face another winter of frost and snow. So it continued year after year
until one spring no one returned and the village was left to nature. So
ended what the archaeologists will come to call Koster phase 8.¹³

As the years pass, Lubbock watches the dwellings tumble and their
timbers rot. Sprouts appear from the middens and become sunflowers and
elders, saplings of oak and hickory. Rainwater cascades down the valley
sides, bringing silt to bury the grass which had long since hidden those
lost tools, drainage pits, and the low mounds which marked the dead. He
watches as nature reclaims that which had once been its own: its stone
that had been transformed into knives and points; its wood, reeds and
bark used for houses; the bones, hides and guts of its animals all
turned to human design rather than rotting in the earth.

Year by year the rains increase and the river bursts its banks earlier
and with ever-increasing force. The annual floods can no longer drain
away so lakes are created on what had been marshes and meadows. Now
Lubbock witnesses flocks of geese, ducks and swans discovering the new
lakes and adopting them as a summer home. Their waters are soon brimming
with fish and edged by mussels.

And then, one spring morning, there is a voice whose peculiar tones wake
him with a start. After one thousand years, people are returning to
Koster. Lubbock decides to stand up and watch them arrive. He digs his
feet free of the knee-deep soil that had accumulated around him as he
had been patiently awaiting this moment. Yet all he sees is a couple of
men approaching from the river. They walk right past, wondering aloud
whether anyone had ever lived within this sheltered hollow, so well
served by woodlands, rivers and lakes.

The following week several families arrive. Some erect tents and
brushwood shelters while others begin to fell trees, clear scrub and
construct their houses. Within days the skeleton of a new village has
appeared, that which, to the archaeologists of the 1970s, will be Koster
phases 6 and 7.¹⁴

It is a different phase, but little different in nature as the people
continue to live by hunting and gathering. During the summer that
follows, a terrace is made in the slope and a trench dug for the posts,
as further houses are built. Lubbock helps by holding the timbers steady
as they are packed with stones, and with the weaving of saplings for the
walls. He spends days with the women at the riverside, holding baskets
below the dry heads of marsh elder and sunflowers as they are shaken for
their seed. On other days he finds himself at dawn knee-deep in the new
backwater lakes, ready to help throw weighted nets over mallards and
widgeon. He goes to the woods and stalks deer, stays in the village and
sweeps out the houses. At night Lubbock paints his face and joins the
Koster people as they sing and dance around the new fire that burns
amidst the huts.

The settlement is now larger than before, at least a dozen huts and
about a hundred people. A much wider range of foods are eaten, racoon
and turkeys joining the deer, many types of fish and mussels which are
gently steamed in clay-lined pits. The village is made far busier by the
many visitors who arrive by canoe – the river now being a highway as
much as a place to fish. They bring items for trade: copper from the
Great Lakes, marine shells from the Gulf of Mexico, fine-quality flint
from what will be Ohio. Much of this material ends up as bracelets and
pendants and seems to be worn by the few, not the many.

So change is under way and cracks appear in the old egalitarianism.
Lubbock is reminded of his travels in Mesolithic Denmark at a similar
date; how farmers’ axes and cereal grain had helped destroy an ancient
hunter-gatherer way of life. At Koster he observes another sign of
social change: the dead are no longer all buried together. Those with
any physical ailments have shallow graves in the dingy area behind the
huts and close to the rubbish heaps; those who die with a fine physique
are laid in cemeteries upon the headlands overlooking the rivers and
lakes and where the sun strikes as soon as it has risen.¹⁵

The village is thriving, and will continue to do so until finally
deserted. Before that date, at around 1000 BC, it will become a village
of farmers using a brand-new set of domesticated plants: the descendants
of the marsh elder, sunflowers and goosefoot that Lubbock had helped
gather. Later still, those in the Illinois valley will finally adopt the
cultivars that had originated long, long ago in central Mexico: squash,
corn and beans – although the squash may have been independently
domesticated in eastern America itself. The tightly woven baskets will
be replaced by clay vessels, spear points will be spurned for
arrowheads, and great burial mounds will be built for chiefs who claim
their power by right of birth. But it will not be until the Europeans
have arrived on the continent that the forests will be cleared and the
Midwest begins its transformation into today’s great corn belt of
America.¹⁶

Such developments are far beyond the scope of this history. Lubbock’s
last day at Koster is spent in 5000 BC. In the morning he hunts deer and
gathers fungi; at midday he climbs on to the limestone crag where he had
sat on first arriving in Koster and takes his last look at the village.
Later that day he follows a pair of traders to their canoe. They load
newly acquired hides and furs and then set off, paddling northwards
towards their home on the shore of what will become Lake Michigan.

32 Salmon Fishing and the Gift of History

Complex hunter-gatherers of the northwest coast, 6000–5000 BC

John Lubbock’s stowaway canoe ride along the Illinois River begins the
end of his travels through American history. After several days he
reaches the traders’ settlement at the far south of what is now Lake
Michigan. It appears to be a place of manufacturing and exchange with
people coming from all directions, and where the population will soon be
expanding too fast for the hunter-gatherer ethics of equality and
sharing to be maintained.

Sitting by the lake on a summer afternoon Lubbock faces a tranquil
scene: cloudless skies and still water, children paddling and the smell
of wood smoke from huts spread along the shore. It was not always like
this, nor will it remain so.

At the LGM this location was covered by thick ice, the southern margin
of the Laurentide ice sheet. In the millennia that followed it had been
drowned by the vast melt-water lakes, subject to torrential rivers,
turned into tundra, battered by violent winds, colonised by pine and
spruce, before it was discovered by the First Americans. But perhaps all
of that was nothing compared to the future that awaits this spot. It
will become Chicago; the canoes and the brushwood huts are the
harbingers of steam trains and skyscrapers.¹

Lubbock, however, must make a return to the west coast, back to the
Pacific Ocean beside whose southernmost reaches he had once sat when in
Peru. And so he embarks on another enormous trek. It begins by foot
until he reaches the Mississippi, and then he continues northwards by
canoe between many riverside villages towards the vast Canadian
wilderness that will continue, little changed, into the modern day. In
this land of lakes, rivers and thick forests, Lubbock finds people
living in small mobile groups, little different to the long-gone Clovis
people. They hunt caribou and moose, they trap beavers and muskrats and
they leave few traces for archaeologists to find.

Lubbock heads due west, eventually leaving the woodlands and crossing
the northernmost extent of the Great Plains. Bison are still being
hunted and he passes close to what will become a celebrated cliff-jump
site of mass slaughter known, appropriately, as ‘Head-Smashed-In’. After
the plains Lubbock crosses the Rockies, and then the Columbia mountains.
The Fraser River is traversed, followed by a plateau with high ridges
and meadows where he watches the hunting of mountain goat and sheep.
Lubbock descends through a valley with steep gorges and canyons, their
tabletops covered in pine forest. The river alternates between slow
meanders and turbulent rapids. During rainy winter days he follows a
well-worn path between thick ferns and below tall evergreens to where
the river enters the sea. The waters are shallow and sheltered by a
chain of islands. This is the Pacific. Lubbock sits exhausted after the
3,500 kilometres of his journey from Koster.

The land beyond the Fraser River is known to archaeologists as Cascadia.
It includes modern-day Washington State and British Columbia, and
stretches from southern Alaska to northern California. Its Pacific
coastline is ragged with deep fjords, convoluted sea passages and many
offshore islands. It is pierced by a series of great rivers – the
Columbia, Klamath, Skeena, Stikine and the Fraser itself – and a
multitude of smaller streams. Cascadia is an appropriate end-place for
Lubbock’s American journey as this is where the most elaborate
hunter-gatherer societies of America, and most probably in the whole
history of the world, will develop.²

When Europeans first encountered the Native Americans of the northwest
coast in the late eighteenth century, they found people quite unlike any
they had met before. This was not because of their timber-framed houses
and settlements with more than a thousand inhabitants. Neither was it
because they found aristocracies, freemen and slaves, and great chiefs
who commissioned artists to carve and paint their house-fronts and totem
poles in the manner of Renaissance patrons. Nor was it because the
people had notions of land ownership and indulged in theatrical feasts,
during which immense amounts of food and materials were given away as
means to demonstrate wealth and status.

Such houses, towns, art works and customs would have been of no surprise
had the people been cultivating corn and herding cattle. But the people
of the northwest coast were hunter-gatherers. More accurately, they were
fishermen: their elaborate cultures were based on the harvesting of
salmon. The sea levels of the North Pacific stabilised at around 6,000
years ago, after millennia of rising and falling as the impact of
glacier melt-waters was counteracted by the rebound of land once freed
of its icy burden.³ Vast shoals of salmon began to swim with unerring
regularity up the great rivers of the northwest coast to reproduce and
die. Every year the fishermen were ready; with hooks and lines, with
rakes, nets, weirs, clubs, harpoons and traps they harvested the fish
just as a farmer would harvest the corn.

Such harvests were only of value if the product could be stored. Fish
were filleted and placed on racks to be dried by the sun and the wind;
others were suspended from ceilings and preserved in the smoke of
household fires. Cascadia had an abundance of resources so salmon was
not the only food; many other types of fish were also caught. The people
hunted seals and otters, deer, elk and bear; they collected berries,
acorns and hazelnuts. Indeed, it might have been the immense diversity
of foods they had available, rather than the super-abundance of salmon,
that was the key to their success.

With such unlimited wild foods the Native Americans of Cascadia lived in
permanent villages, relying on their stored supplies during the lean
periods of the year. They could afford to support specialist craftsmen
and engage in trade. Their populations grew, uninhibited by the usual
constraints on hunter-gatherer numbers: the need to keep on the move and
periodic shortages of food. It is hardly surprising that, amidst such
wealth, leaders emerged and waged war upon their neighbours.

Such ‘complex hunters’, as they are referred to by archaeologists, first
appeared at around 500 BC. But when Lubbock arrives on the northwest
coast at 5000 BC the groundwork for their emergence is already being
laid. After having rested, he explores the headland at the mouth of the
river that had led him through the canyons and forests. He notices a
scatter of oyster shells and some animal bones partially buried by sand
and grass. Amongst these are a few broken cobbles and flakes of stone;
he finds that some have been chipped into small points. Near by there
are the remnants of what were once brushwood huts: a few posts in the
ground, some woven branches, pieces of hide still tied to frames but
hanging in a dishevelled state. Lubbock takes a couple of the thicker
posts, some of the woven branches, collects new brushwood and builds
himself a shelter.

The sound of voices interrupts his work. Turning, he finds about a dozen
people, a couple of families, inspecting the collapsing huts just as he
had done a few hours before. They pull off the fragments of hide and
tatters of wall, secure the wobbling posts with rocks and begin to
rebuild. A few leave for the shore and return within the hour carrying
shellfish. Once eaten, the shells are dumped on to those partially
buried below the grass – right next to the small shelter that Lubbock
hurries to complete as storm clouds are building in the evening sky.

Throughout the next day more families arrive, all greeting each other
after a summer spent scattered along the coast and in the woods. Soon
there is a village of brushwood huts housing at least a hundred people.
The rubbish dump accumulates and Lubbock finds himself surrounded not
only by oyster and mussel shells, but the remnants of butchered deer and
porpoise. Unwanted fish stew is poured on to the heap; people use it as
their toilet. Sometimes a fire is lit to kill off the maggots and deter
scavengers; Lubbock’s hut becomes engulfed in smoke as well as the
stench of rotting food and human waste.

The people are busy preparing for the salmon run. On some days Lubbock
leaves them and explores the woodland. He searches for deer and muskrat
among the pine, hemlock and spruce. He finds small red cedars, trees
colonising the woodlands whose massive descendants will be prized for
their timber when people begin building houses, canoes and totem poles.
On other days Lubbock sits among the fishermen as they fashion harpoons
and spears, prepare slate knives and use branches to build drying racks.
Every evening there are stories, many about the spirits of the woodlands
and the sea.

The salmon arrive, initially in ones or twos and then in great shoals of
fish compelled to swim upstream. The fishermen are ready – men and
women, young and old, all armed with spears and harpoons, standing
ankle- or knee-deep in the water. Within a few days the salmon run has
ended; hundreds have been killed, but thousands have passed by unharmed.
The racks are heavy with fillets drying in the autumn sun.

Some families take their share and depart, but most remain. Soon the
herring will become abundant in the estuary and while waiting there are
plenty of salmon to eat. On most days it rains; the old and young suffer
from constantly damp clothing and bedding; an elderly man will die and
be buried in a shallow grave behind the dump. Visitors will arrive and
exchange obsidian for dried fish. In the spring the families will go
their separate ways, planning to return next autumn when the salmon will
once again swim for their lives. In the meantime their shelters will
collapse and the rubbish become lightly buried by blown sand.

When the rain is torrential, Lubbock shelters within his rickety
dwelling and reads Prehistoric Times. Towards its end, his namesake
writes about North American Indians as a further example of modern
savages.⁴ Victorian Lubbock drew his information largely from a
publication of 1853 by a Mr Schoolcraft, entitled History, Conditions
and Prospects of the Indian Tribes. The tone was quite different to the
constantly abusive passages about the Fuegians; most of it was a
relatively dispassionate description of the clothing, equipment,
hunting, fishing and farming practices of various groups throughout the
continent.

The rubbish dump around Lubbock’s hut became the archaeological site of
Namu, named after the river at whose mouth it is located on the coast of
British Columbia. When Roy Carlson of Simon Fraser University excavated
the midden in 1977–8 he found that it had begun to accumulate at 9500
BC,⁵ and continued to do so for 8,000 years. Initially the rubbish had
been dumped during brief visits to the river mouth, the remnants of a
wide assortment of fish, birds, molluscs and animals. Broken tools and
tool-making waste had also been left at the midden, including
microliths.

Soon after 6000 BC a change occurs in the composition of the midden as
salmon bones suddenly overwhelm all the others. This indicates the start
of the salmon runs. The discarded tools also change: no more microliths
but increasing numbers of slate points. Fragments of obsidian appear,
suggesting that trade and exchange had begun, but other than a few post
holes there is no sign of houses. These had probably been too flimsy to
leave much trace, indicating that although the salmon run at Namu had
been productive, it was not of a sufficient size to allow occupation all
year.

Namu is just one of several shell middens along the northwest coast that
were accumulating in the Early Holocene. It shows how the people were
beginning to specialise in salmon while continuing to exploit an immense
diversity of other resources. During the next few thousand years, the
salmon runs became bigger, while new technology was invented to harvest
them in ever greater numbers. The demand for food grew from a burgeoning
population. Some people took their opportunity and claimed ownership of
the best fishing spots; others disagreed and began to fight.

Sitting on the headland, Lubbock looks out across what will become the
Fitzhugh Sound to a string of offshore islands. Their white beaches
glisten in the evening sun; the still water is broken by a lone canoe
that crosses from the mainland to an island shore. A few thousand years
ago a canoe was quite unnecessary. People could have walked to those
islands as they were hills within a wide coastal plain. The first human
footstep on American soil may have occurred on that plain, a foot that
may have stepped from a boat that had crossed the icy waters of the
North Pacific from an Asian shore.

That was the start of American history. It was a time when no human had
ever climbed the Rockies, canoed on the Amazon or ventured to Tierra del
Fuego. But now, at 5000 BC, people are living from the far north to the
far south of the continent, most by hunting and gathering, some by
farming. They have given it a history, but taken its nature in return.
Their Clovis ancestors may have helped to edge the mammoths and ground
sloths into extinction; their Archaic ancestors created new varieties of
squash and maize. But the people of Namu – neither big-game hunters nor
farmers – have done much more; they have appropriated the whole of
nature for themselves. For them, the bear and the raven are no longer
mere animals; the mountain peaks and rivers are far more than products
of geology and rainfall; the seasons no longer come and go because the
earth orbits the sun, and night no longer follows day because the planet
spins around.

A few metres away, a fire burns while voices sing. The people of Namu
are thanking the spirits who created the mountains and rivers and who
visit their world as the bear. They recall how the raven had first come
to their land and found it cold and empty of people but with a plentiful
supply of game.⁶ They sing so that the sun will rise and the spring will
come.⁷ Lubbock stands, turns and walks to the fire. He sits and helps to
sing the new dawn into being.

GREATER AUSTRALIA AND EAST ASIA

[images]

33 A Lost World Revealed

Tasmanian hunter-gatherers, 20,000–6000 BC

Daylight enters through a shaft to illuminate shiny brown faces and set
quartz crystals sparkling as pebbles are split apart. Wallaby fur,
wrapped around human bodies, shimmers as muscular hands work the stone.
Beyond, there is a brighter light – the cave entrance. That brings an
icy wind and so the people sit and work in a sheltered, half-lit corner.
John Lubbock steps forward out of the dark, damp recess of the cave. He
is shivering with cold but ready to begin his journey through Australian
prehistory.¹

At the LGM, Australia was a continent of hunter-gatherers, and it
remained so until 1788, the year of the first European settlement. At
least 250,000 Aborigines were living in this southern land mass,
distributed between the tropical forests of the north and the edge of
Antarctic waters in the south. Lifestyles were varied. In the arid
interior, Aborigines lived at low densities, with few possessions, and
covered vast distances in the course of their foraging activities; in
the river valleys of the fertile south, there were near-permanent
villages with wooden huts, their walls plastered in clay and built on
stone foundations.

Predictably, the earliest accounts of the native Australians are often
little more than dismissive racist tracts. Anthropologists, however,
soon began to appreciate the complexity of Aboriginal society. At least
two hundred distinct languages were recorded; extensive trade networks
were documented along which foodstuffs, axes, grinding slabs and ochre
travelled; the mythological world of the Dreamtime, in which Ancestral
Beings created the landscape and continued to intervene in human
affairs, was partly revealed. What had appeared to be simple depictions
of animals, people and signs were found to have complex meanings, often
relating to the activities of Ancestral Beings.

Initial assumptions of a hand-to-mouth, catch-as-catch-can existence
were revised as the sophistication of Aboriginal hunting and gathering
was realised. Aborigines were found to have a profound knowledge of
plant distribution and animal behaviour; they were able to adapt to
ever-changing conditions, often adopting radically different lifestyles
in wet and dry seasons according to the range of available resources.
Although they were all hunter-gatherers, many managed their landscapes
and food supply by the controlled burning of vegetation.

Recognising the complexity of Aboriginal society was the first of two
shifts in European views about the native Australians. The second was to
appreciate that these people were not a timeless relict of an original
human society, a people without history. Their societies were as much a
product of history as those of the European colonists. The start of
their history – the date at which Australia was first colonised – has
gradually shifted back in time, from an initial guess of 10,000 BC, to
35,000 BC during the 1980s, to almost 60,000 years ago today.²

John Lubbock has travelled to Australia to explore part of that history:
the developments in Aboriginal society between 20,000 and 5000 BC,
between the time of the LGM and the peak in the warm, wet conditions
that arrived with the Holocene. Whereas it was the spurt of global
warming at 9600 BC which had the greatest impact on people in Europe and
western Asia, it was only towards the end of this period that the most
fundamental changes occurred in Aboriginal societies. Moreover, while
people in all other continents had adopted agriculture by 5000 BC, from
either indigenous invention or the spread of ideas and people, all
Australian Aborigines remained as hunter-gatherers – although with
lifestyles quite different to those of their Pleistocene forebears.

The date of Lubbock’s arrival is 18,000 BC; the continent remains as
‘Greater Australia’ – a continuous land mass from Tasmania in the south
to New Guinea in the north. As he travels through the continent and
through time, the sea level, which is more than 100 metres lower than
today, will rise, temperatures and rainfall will increase, seasonal
contrasts in weather will become marked.

Lubbock’s encounters with prehistoric Aborigines will depend on the
interpretation of a sparse archaeological record. Compared with other
continents, there are relatively few Pleistocene archaeological sites
and many of these consist of nothing more than a few flakes of stone.
Consequently, it is hard to resist the urge to draw on the historical
accounts of Aborigines when attempting to translate such mute artefacts
into human lives. In that lies the risk of simply writing the Aboriginal
present into the distant past and failing to recognise how Aboriginal
society has changed through time. It is a risk that cannot be wholly
avoided as Lubbock sits on the cave floor and peers over shoulders to
watch ice-age hands at work.

He has entered what is known today as Kutikina Cave; owing to its size
and location, it is a favoured place for the Tasmanian Aborigines of
18,000 BC. Even so, they will remain for just a few weeks, preferring to
keep on the move as they deplete the animals and plants around each of
their transient camps.

Those within Kutikina Cave are expecting the return of a hunting party.
Lubbock watches as a fire is built in another of its sheltered corners,
one where any smoke will disperse through a second and much smaller
entrance. With their new set of stone knives and choppers complete, the
group shifts to sit around this fire. Lubbock joins them, glimpsing a
view across the open valley beyond.

Two remarkable achievements allow him to sit with these ice-age hunters,
no more than 1,000 kilometres from the sea ice of the Antarctic Ocean.
The first was that of the ice-age Australians themselves. Having arrived
in the far north of Australia at around 60,000 years ago, after an
island-hopping journey from Southeast Asia involving sea-crossings of at
least 100 kilometres, generation after generation kept spreading south
and eventually moulded a new lifestyle around wallaby hunting in
Tasmania as the southernmost inhabitants of the ice-age world. The
second achievement was that of the Australian archaeologists who
discovered and began to reconstruct that Tasmanian ice-age world no more
than two decades ago.

Today the valleys of southwest Tasmania are uninhabited. Covered by
dense and almost impenetrable temperate rainforest, with treacherous
swift-flowing rivers, they are one of the last great wildernesses of
planet earth. And so when Rhys Jones of the Australian National
University observed stone artefacts embedded in the banks of the Denison
River on 11 January 1981, and described them as ‘a very interesting
discovery’, he could justifiably be accused of understatement.³ Those
specific artefacts turned out to be no more than a few hundred years
old; but their discovery was highly significant.

A few weeks later Rhys Jones and his colleague, Don Ranson, visited
Kutikina Cave with Kevin Kiernan, a geomorphologist from the University
of Tasmania.⁴ Having travelled along rivers for ten hours, sometimes
hauling their boats over rapids and wading waist-deep in icy water, they
fought through dense vegetation and squeezed behind the trees that now
hide the cave entrance.

When a gas lamp was lit, Rhys Jones found himself within a huge cavern
with gleaming white walls reflecting the light of the hissing lamp:

the floor was crumbly orange clay that rose in banks 70cm high on three
sides … Protruding from the slightly eroded face and strewn along its
base were hundreds of stone tools and burnt fragments of animal bones.
Dense layers of charcoal, alternating with burnt red clay, documented a
series of ancient hearths. Beyond one of the banks was a trench cut away
by water, a 2m section through which clearly showed wallaby skull
fragments, jaws and limb bones piled one on top of the other … That
night we cooked our food in the shelter of the cave and laid our
sleeping bags on hard limestone in a dry alcove at the back of the main
chamber. Later we would learn that we were the first people to sleep
here in more than 13,000 years.⁵

Jones and his colleagues excavated less than one cubic metre of deposit
and recovered a staggering 250,000 animal bones and some 40,000 stone
artefacts. These were later dated to around 15,500 BC, and charcoal from
a rubble layer below to 20,000 BC. So it was revealed that today’s
uninhabited forests of southern Tasmania had once been home to ice-age
hunters.⁶

The discovery in Kutikina Cave began two decades of research in the
rainforests of Tasmania. Led by Jim Allen and Richard Cosgrove of La
Trobe University, many seasons were spent in arduous field conditions
while archaeological sites were excavated to produce an astonishing
record of ice-age life.⁷ The date of the first Tasmanians was pushed
back to 35,000 years ago, and their tool repertoire expanded from stone
artefacts to include fine spear points made from wallaby bone and knives
made from naturally occurring glass. Fragments of ochre in Kutikina Cave
had hinted at art and this was discovered in January 1986: a panel of
sixteen hand stencils, coming from at least five individuals, was seen
by torchlight in the deep recesses of Ballawinne Cave in the Maxwell
River valley. Iron oxide had been ground, mixed with water and then
sprayed across hands placed flat against the wall.

The following year, more hand stencils were discovered in Wargata Cave,
85 kilometres to the southeast. Both adults and children, using human
blood as one of their pigments, had made the signs.⁸ By the start of the
1990s, Rhys Jones felt able to compare the ice-age archaeology of
southwest Tasmania with that of southwest France – Ballawinne and
Wargata being the Lascaux and Altamira of the Southern Hemisphere.⁹

This is a generous comparison, to say the least. Although Tasmania has
ice-age archaeological sites in which stone artefacts, animal bones, and
rock art are found, any similarities with reindeer hunters of northern
latitudes are quite tenuous.¹⁰ In any case, the archaeology of each
region should be examined on its own terms – the days when ice-age
Europe provided the ‘gold standard’ by which the archaeology of other
regions is measured should have ended long ago.

Of greater interest is the detailed work conducted by Allen, Cosgrove
and their colleagues on the artefacts and bones excavated from the
Tasmanian caves. Their study of wallaby hunting is of particular
interest.¹¹ It required a reconstruction of the ice-age landscape from
pollen evidence, a study of modern wallaby ecology and the analysis of
many thousands of excavated bones. The ice-age hunters appear to have
lived within the valleys during the winter, spring and early summer.
They utilised a selected area of grassland until the wallabies became
too scarce to justify further hunting; they would then move to another
area, perhaps using a new cave as their base. Although other animals
were sometimes taken, the wallabies were specially targeted, probably by
being driven towards hunters clasping spears and waiting in ambush.

Owing to the rarity of bones from feet and paws within the caves,
Cosgrove and Allen learned that the wallabies were partly butchered at
the kill sites – only the meatiest parts of the carcasses had been
returned. By examining the manner in which limb bones had been broken,
they knew that wallaby marrow as well as meat had been eaten. On some
occasions, the menu had included wallaby brain. In the late summer the
hunters left the valleys for the uplands where plant foods featured more
prominently in their diet.

Back in 18,000 BC John Lubbock watches hunters return to Kutikina Cave
with a joint of wallaby meat. The group now comprises about thirty
people: men and women, old and young. They wear wallaby-fur cloaks and
spend much of each year together, one of several groups living in the
valleys of southern Tasmania.

After skinning and filleting, roasted meat is prepared with chopped
bulbs and then shared between all present. The shin bones of the larger
wallabies are set aside to be worked into spear points. Most other bones
are cracked open for marrow; even the toe bones are split apart for the
morsel inside. The rubbish is dumped in a corner of the cave, along with
blunted and grease-covered tools. People disperse to different parts of
the cave – some to sleep, taking ashes from the fire to spread upon the
floor to keep their children warm, and some to work the bone into
elegant points.

Lubbock sits near the fire by the cave entrance. With sufficient light
to read, he opens Prehistoric Times to find out what his Victorian
namesake had known and thought about the Tasmanian Aborigines in 1865.
There was a short passage in which two ‘authorities’ were quoted.
According to Captain Cook, who had visited ‘Van Dieman’s Land’, as
Tasmania was originally known, during his third voyage between 1776 and
1779, the Aborigines ‘had no houses, no clothes, no canoes, no
instruments to catch large fish, no nets, no hooks; they lived on
mussels, cockles, and periwinkles, and their only weapon was a straight
pole sharpened at one end.’¹² Worse was to come. Victorian John Lubbock
quoted the Reverend T. Dove who had written in the Tasmanian Journal of
Natural Science that the Tasmanians were ‘distinguished by the absence
of all moral views and impressions. Every idea bearing on our origin and
destination as rational beings seems to have been erased from their
breasts.’¹³

Lubbock looks at the Tasmanians of Kutikina Cave sleeping below their
thick fur cloaks, having shared their wallaby meat, cared for their
children and finished making new tools. Plenty of morality, but not a
cockle or periwinkle in sight.

The group plan to remain in Kutikina Cave for the next few days; they
have seen several groups of wallabies grazing in the grasslands of the
valley bottoms and browsing in the scrub of the ridges between. The next
day Lubbock accompanies three men on a 25-kilometre trek along the
Franklin River valley, and then one of its tributaries, to what is
called today the Darwin Crater.

The route follows well-trodden paths through knee-high grass and
thickets of stunted trees in sheltered valley corners. The higher slopes
are covered in shrubs while small glaciers can be seen in the uplands.
Although Lubbock’s companions do not hunt, they nevertheless inspect
every animal track and many of the leaves to see where the wallabies
have been feeding. They can also tell where the animals have slept and
the size of the herd.

Darwin Crater is indeed a crater – a hollow, one kilometre wide and two
hundred metres deep, created by a meteorite strike 700,000 years ago.
Lubbock’s companions climb to the rim and spend an hour collecting
nodules of glass – siliceous bedrock that has been melted by the impact.
The glass is precious and will be used to make razor-sharp points and
knives.¹⁴ It will be traded with people who live further south so that
one day archaeologists will find glass points more than 100 kilometres
from its source.

Lubbock leaves his companions and journeys into the windswept lowlands
of northern Tasmania, a landscape interrupted by sporadic hills and
ridges. In 15,000 BC he shelters within a cave upon a rocky outcrop,
disturbing a pair of roosting owls as he arrives. There is a scatter of
gnawed bones showing that a carnivore, perhaps a Tasmanian devil, had
recently used the cave. It may have come to scavenge on the debris left
behind by human occupants as ash and burnt stones are also spread across
the floor.

From the cave’s entrance, Lubbock looks across a vast grassy plain. To
the north, east and west the sea has already begun to edge across the
plain; it will eventually surround the rocky outcrop and turn it into
the Hunter Island of today. Lubbock’s land-locked shelter will become a
sea cave, battered by the violent waters and winds of Bass Strait that
will divide Tasmania from the mainland, and one Aboriginal culture from
another.

Cave Bay Cave, as it is known today, is now six kilometres off the
northern coast of Tasmania. Its heyday for human occupation had been in
the two millennia before the LGM, when visiting hunters lit fires and
left their debris behind.¹⁵ They hunted wallabies, wombats and
bandicoots in the surrounding grasslands. When the LGM arrived, the
landscapes around the cave became too impoverished of animal and plant
foods to sustain human occupants. Constant freezing and thawing of water
in crevices of the cave destabilised its roof, creating rockfalls that
buried all the pre-LGM human debris.

When the extreme ice-age conditions began to relent, the cave was used
on just one occasion before it became surrounded by sea. This was at
15,000 BC when a single fireplace was made, created by hunters exploring
what had become an unfamiliar land. Such hunters went further north and
buried one of their dead in a cave within hills that would eventually
become King Island, now 100 kilometres south of the Australian coast.

Archaeologists discovered the burial and examined the skeletal remains
after the Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre granted permission to do so. The
deceased had been a man aged between twenty-five and thirty-five years,
whose bones were bundled together and covered with jagged rocks to make
a small mound within the cave. Small lumps of ochre were found among the
bones. These may have once been items of body decoration similar to that
worn by the Tasmanians when first encountered by Europeans.¹⁶

The physique of this man was telling: he had short, robust bones giving
him a stocky disposition similar to that of modern people who live
within cold landscapes, such as the Inuit of the far north. This
physique serves to conserve body heat by minimising surface area. The
first people to arrive in Tasmania 35,000 years ago must have looked
quite different – tall and slender, as is appropriate for those who live
in tropical environments. The change in stature was no doubt a
consequence of living in the glacial conditions of this southern land.

From Cave Bay Cave Lubbock heads northwest across the north Tasmanian
plain until he encounters the sea heading in the opposite direction.
Much of the plain has already been flooded but it will take another
three thousand years at least to detach Tasmania from the Australian
mainland. Lubbock follows the coastline to the east and then northwards,
crossing the 100-kilometre-wide isthmus that leads to the hills that
will soon become the southern coast of Australia.

The rising sea level transformed the lives of many coastal dwellers in
ice-age Australia. But for those in the southwest valleys of Tasmania it
was the increasing rainfall and temperature that threatened their way of
life and ultimately led to their demise. Each generation of hunters who
sat within Kutikina Cave found the valley less attractive than the last.
The invasion of the trees and rising of the rivers made getting around
and watching for game more difficult. Year by year new saplings of beech
and pine appeared, while existing saplings made remarkable growth.
Between the trees a thick undergrowth of ferns took hold. Wallaby herds
split into small, scattered groups that clung on to patches of surviving
grassland; their numbers collapsed as the rainforest took hold. A new,
tree-dwelling fauna began to thrive: some familiar-sounding animals such
as the long-tailed mouse and ring-tailed possum, together with more
exotic creatures like the pandemelon and spotted-tailed quoll.¹⁷

Soon after 15,500 BC, Kutikina Cave was entirely abandoned; it was the
lowest-lying of the caves and the first to drop out of the wallaby
hunters’ seasonal round.¹⁸ Within a few more generations the rainforest
had spread to higher ground and all the caves in the southwest had been
abandoned and were soon forgotten. A few caves in the southeast of
Tasmania escaped the stranglehold of rainforest and continued to be used
for a few thousand more years.¹⁹

There are hardly any archaeological sites in Tasmania between 10,000 and
6000 BC. Where had the people gone? Perhaps population numbers had
declined through falling birth rate or by migration northwards across
the remnants of the isthmus into Australia. Or perhaps there had been no
population decline and archaeologists have yet more discoveries to make.
Archaeological sites dating after 6000 BC are relatively abundant and
tell us about a completely new style of Tasmanian life: the descendants
of forest dwellers and wallaby hunters had become inhabitants of the
coast and gatherers of shellfish.

When European settlers arrive, when the anthropologists and
archaeologists begin their work, it will be assumed that such coastal
occupation was all that had ever occurred upon the island. That was what
Captain Cook believed, his views of the Tasmanians reported so
faithfully in Prehistoric Times. Only when Rhys Jones and his colleagues
penetrated the rainforest to find the wallaby bones, stone tools and
fireplaces on the floor of Kutikina Cave would a start be made on
revealing a lost ice-age world. Only then would we begin to understand
the depth of human history in this southern corner of the world.

34 Body Sculpture at Kow Swamp

Burial and society in Southeast Australia, 14,000–6000 BC, and mega-faunal extinctions

The band of kangaroo teeth around the dead man’s head catches the
moonlight as his body is lowered into its sandy grave. He is laid on his
left side with knees drawn up under his chin. The singing halts for his
moment of release from human care; he now joins the ancestors whose
bones also lie within the dunes but whose spirits reside within the
night. Silence. And then a shriek reignites the music as painted bodies
leap from darkness into firelight and dance to a frenzy as the moon
climbs high in the night sky. Sand is spread across the corpse and the
dead man has gone for ever.

It is 14,000 BC. John Lubbock’s journey from Tasmania has taken him
across grassy plains to the Murray River in southeast Australia. Trees,
animals and birds became abundant and travel more pleasant. He arrives
at a cluster of timber-framed huts with reed and hide coverings in a
locality known today as Kow Swamp. Preparations are under way for a
burial.

Lubbock spends several hours wandering in and out of the dwellings; he
watches paint being mixed and applied to bodies, and the corpse being
prepared for its grave. Groups of old men sit talking quietly; women are
preparing food and keep their children inside. A fire has been built
upon an adjacent ridge of sand, close to where the burial pit had
already been dug. As darkness descends and the first stars appear,
people gather upon the dune. Lubbock sits among them and soon finds the
rhythm of their gentle singing, which seems to raise the moon into the
night-time sky. The fire is lit, the body buried and the dancing begins.

Not far from him a women presses her thumb against the forehead of the
baby cradled in her arms. She begins just above the brow and runs her
thumb to the crown of the head, then releases it. And she repeats the
action again and again, slipping into a rhythm with the dance. She will
do the same the next morning, in pace with the pounding of tubers. There
is always some rhythm to follow; if all is quiet she will sing to make
her own as her thumb lovingly works against the fragile skin and bone.

At least fifty people are gathered around the fire, their minds consumed
by the flames, song and dance that celebrate the passing of the dead.
Lubbock stands to look at them, following the light as it flickers from
face to face; some have headbands like the deceased, some are painted;
there are the faces of the old and young, men and women. Some look
shocked, others scared; some sing and clap while others stand in
silence, mesmerised by the spectacle.

There is a familiarity about the occasion acquired from Lubbock’s
travels through prehistory elsewhere in the world. The songs and dances
always differ, as do the burial rites and costumes; but the intense
emotion, the sense of belonging, the idea of past and present merging
into one is always the same. And yet there is something new, something
quite different about this particular group of people beneath the moon
and stars of the Australian night.

The flames throw light on to the face of an old man; his skin is dry and
taut. He has a huge jaw, quite disproportionate to his shrivelled body.
The face is large – wide and projecting; the eye-sockets are pronounced,
angular at their base and with the bone curving steeply away behind;
brow ridges are prominent. Above these, his forehead seems abnormally
long, sloping away from his brow.

The flames flicker, returning him to darkness as a young boy is thrown
into view; he too has a large and rugged face, his forehead slopes and
his jaw seems thickly set. He sings loudly, with lips curled back to
reveal teeth that match the jaw in size. And so Lubbock looks from face
to face, finding the same features in all, less pronounced in the women
and the young, but quite definitely there. Unthinkingly he runs his
fingers around his own slender jaw; his tongue explores his teeth. Then
he feels his brow, quite flat, his forehead, quite upright; both
entirely different to those of the people who are singing and dancing at
Kow Swamp in Southeast Australia at 14,000 BC.

In August 1967 Alan Thorne, now retired from the Australian National
University, came across fragments of a skeleton and skull lying
unregistered and forgotten in a box at the back of a cupboard in the
Museum of Victoria.¹ Such bones would have been quite unremarkable to
the untrained eye, but he was intrigued: they reminded him of a skull
found in 1925 near the town of Cohuna that had seemed abnormally large
for a native Australian. The only label referred to the local police
office; Thorne followed this lead, which eventually took him to the find
spot that was no less than ten kilometres from Cohuna itself.

By 1972 Thorne had excavated more than forty individuals from a
lunette-shaped sand dune at Kow Swamp. Most had been buried in shallow
graves between 9500 and 8000 BC in one of the largest hunter-gatherer
cemeteries in the world.² Some had been buried with artefacts – lumps of
ochre, shells, stone artefacts and animal teeth. One had a band of
kangaroo teeth around his head. Some burials had been made at an earlier
date, most likely reaching back to 14,000 BC.

A study of the remains was made in conjunction with those from 126
individuals collected in 1950 from another cemetery, known as Coobool
Creek. Murray Black, an amateur archaeologist, had dug these up on the
opposite side of the river but failed to keep any records.³ Even the
specific location of the cemetery remains unclear; but the burials from
Coobool Creek are believed to cover the same time-period as Kow Swamp
and the two samples can be reasonably placed together. When the most
ancient skulls were reconstructed, Thorne found they had large, rugged
facial bones, thick craniums, low-set rectangular eye-sockets and
strongly sloping foreheads. Their bodies matched their heads in size. He
described them as ‘robust’.⁴

When faced with these skulls, Thorne made a radical claim: although he
did not dispute that the Murray River people were Homo sapiens, he
proposed that they were descendants of the H. erectus populations that
had been living in Southeast Asia more than one million years ago. The
fossilised skulls of those premodern humans, such as the specimen known
as Sangiran 17 from Java, were also ‘robust’ and Thorne compiled a long
list of shared features. In effect, he was challenging the widely
accepted view that all Homo sapiens had a single origin in Africa at
around 130,000 years ago. Homo erectus was supposed to have gone quite
extinct without contributing to the modern gene pool; but Thorne claimed
them as the forebears of the Australian Aborigines.⁵

Thorne is most unlikely to be correct. His claimed similarities between
the H. erectus specimens from Java and those from Kow Swamp are spurious
– or at least the similarities are of no greater significance than
between any other H. sapiens and H. erectus samples.⁶ And so the only
feasible scenario for the origin of the Australians lies with one or
more colonising populations of H. sapiens, the first of which arrived
around 60,000 years ago.

Why, therefore, are the Murray River skulls so robust and quite unlike
those from elsewhere in the continent? The answer seems to lie in the
particular nature of the final Pleistocene environments and communities
in the Murray River region, amongst whom Lubbock has recently arrived.

As soon as the Kow Swamp skulls were published in the premier science
journal Nature, the issue of artificial cranial deformation was raised:
could the particular shape of the skulls have been a product of culture
rather than biology? Peter Brown from the Australian National University
compared the Kow Swamp and Coobool skulls with those of the Arawe people
of southern New Britain, an island in Melanesia whose inhabitants were
known to have practised skull deformation.⁷

Immediately after birth, an Arawe baby’s head was tightly bound with a
bark cloth for three weeks. Its impact was immediate – even after one
day, the skull had begun to take on an elongated form. As the baby’s
head grew, the bandage was replaced, until the mother felt that the head
had been sufficiently moulded. Brown found strong similarities between
the Arawe and Murray River skulls, enough to argue that the people from
Kow Swamp and Coobool had also deformed their babies’ skulls. But their
deformations were more subtle than those of the Arawe, lacking a
narrowing of width as well as an elongation of length. Rather than using
a tight binding, those who lived by the Murray River appear to have
simply used their thumbs and palms to apply constant pressure to the
foreheads of their newborn.

Such body sculpture accounts for the sloping forehead but not for the
robust features of the Kow Swamp skulls, especially the large jaws and
teeth. These can only be explained by genetic inheritance. As
contemporary populations elsewhere in Australia lacked such features,
the Kow Swamp communities appear to have been genetically isolated, with
considerable inbreeding amongst their people. Why should that have been
so?

Colin Pardoe of the South Australian Museum explains it by the
development of strict territorial behaviour to protect access to the
abundant resources of the Murray River region, which were far in excess
of those elsewhere.⁸ By 14,000 BC, the Murray River was beginning to
approach its modern form – one that Pardoe describes as being ‘stocked
with unimaginable wealth in fish, fowl and invertebrates’. Trees were
colonising the well-watered land immediately adjacent to the river and
were housing small mammals such as possums and lizards. A wealth of
plant foods, such as grass seeds and tubers, were available. Away from
the river itself, a large range of mammals lived in the surrounding
scrubland: kangaroos, wallabies and bandicoots.

In the early twentieth century, the British social anthropologist Alfred
Radcliffe-Brown described the Murray River as ‘the most densely
populated part of Australia before the days of White Settlement’.⁹ He
found Aboriginal tribes who claimed exclusive ownership of stretches of
river and the surrounding land; people who were prepared to defend their
boundaries by force. As such, they were much like the people that
Lubbock had observed at Skateholm when travelling in Europe in 5000 BC.

Moreover, the Murray River tribes that Radcliffe-Brown encountered, such
as the Yaralde, organised their social lives quite differently to those
in the arid deserts of Australia. Rather than having a system in which
everyone was related to everyone else in both adjoining and quite
distant groups by a complex system of social ties, those in the Murray
River region had far fewer outside links. They were more concerned with
rules and customs which excluded people from their social group, rather
than those which would include as many people as possible, as found
among the desert-living Aborigines.

Colin Pardoe believes that the origin of the Murray River societies
described by Radcliffe-Brown is found several millennia before the
Holocene began, with the people of Kow Swamp and Coobool Creek. These
were, he believes, the first to live at high densities in a
resource-rich environment; the first to establish boundaries and develop
a social system on the principle of exclusion rather than inclusion.
This, he suggests, explains the ‘robust’ skeletons and skulls: with
greater degrees of inbreeding, gene flow became restricted and regional
differences in physique appeared. It also explains why cemeteries were
made: to invest the land with the bones and spirits of one’s ancestors
and hence claim ownership. And it explains the body sculpture: this was
a means to accentuate existing physical differences from other groups.
Having an elongated skull was a mark of belonging to Kow Swamp or
Coobool Creek, and with such belonging came rights to hunt and fish.

The people of Kow Swamp and Coobool Creek of 14,000 BC appear to have
been the first Australians to live in this manner. During the next few
thousand years their lifestyle spread throughout the whole Murray River
valley. New methods were adopted to demonstrate group membership, such
as tooth avulsion – knocking out particular teeth during a rite of
passage from adolescence to adulthood. Both men and women suffered
injury as territories were defended. By 6000 BC many cemeteries had been
established along the course of the river. It is not unreasonable to
surmise that they contained the direct ancestors of the Aborigines that
Radcliffe-Brown and other early anthropologists encountered; indeed, the
ancestors of today’s Native Australians. So it is appropriate that the
skeletal remains of Kow Swamp and Coobool Creek have been returned from
the museums and laboratories of Western scientists to the current
Aboriginal communities.¹⁰

Back in 14,000 BC the persistent tickle of flies crawling across
Lubbock’s face forces him to wake. He scrambles up from his sleeping
place upon the dune and finds that the sun has risen. The women and
children of Kow Swamp have left to gather plants and shellfish, while
the men have gone hunting. On the river a canoe is about to depart,
heading for a lagoon where its two occupants plan to fish, and so
Lubbock seats himself behind them and is paddled downstream.

The canoe moves swiftly, sometimes providing views across open country,
sometimes travelling between tree-lined banks and through corridors of
reeds. The two men paddling have long and steeply sloping foreheads,
like those Lubbock had seen the night before, and he recalls a passage
from Prehistoric Times about cranial deformation among North American
Indian tribes. Various methods had been described: fastening babies to
cradle boards, placing bags of sand upon foreheads, binding with tight
bandages. Modern John Lubbock recalls, and agrees with, his namesake’s
last words on the subject: ‘It is very remarkable that this unnatural
process does not appear to have any prejudicial effect on the mind of
the sufferers.’¹¹

Lubbock’s attention is suddenly drawn to the riverside woodland where he
glimpses the movement of what might be a large animal – a very large
animal. His eye registers the curve of a shoulder, and then a rump, but
it was largely hidden behind the trees. The canoe has passed on and so
he turns and strains his neck to get a second look; but it is too late.
Perhaps it had been a kangaroo or perhaps there had been no animal at
all.

As in America, Australia had an abundance of large animals – mega-fauna
– during the Pleistocene, all but one of which became extinct before the
Holocene began.¹² Of almost fifty different species, only the red
kangaroo survived, a beast that weighs up to 90 kilograms and stands two
metres tall.¹³ There had once been kangaroos two, three or even four
times as large, as well as giant wombats and a range of other exotic
creatures. Megalania had been the largest carnivore on the continent: a
lizard seven metres in length with sharp teeth and claws; Genyornis, a
flightless emu-like bird weighing 100 kilograms and with a beak 30
centimetres long; Diprotodon, a mammal the shape of a wombat and the
size of a rhinoceros; Thylacoleo, the marsupial lion.

As with the American mega-fauna, there has been a debate as to whether
these animals became extinct owing to the climatic changes associated
with the ice age or hunting pressure caused by the arrival of modern
humans in the continent.¹⁴ And, as in the American debate, strong
evidence on either side is lacking. There is just one site where human
artefacts have been found with the bones of extinct animals: Cuddie
Springs in New South Wales. Excavations at this water-hole revealed
stone artefacts associated with the bones of Diprotodon and Genyornis
dating to about 30,000 years ago. When microscopically examined, blood
and hair residues from those animals were found on the artefacts. But as
hunting implements were absent, the excavators believe that Aborigines
had simply come to scavenge on animals that had recently died of thirst
or become trapped in mud at the water-hole.¹⁵

The key difference between the Australian and American extinctions is
timing. Whereas the mammoths survived until the very end of the
Pleistocene, all of the Australian mega-fauna, except for the red
kangaroo, appear to have gone extinct by 20,000 BC, and perhaps long
before. This makes a climatic explanation more persuasive: by 20,000 BC
people had already been on the Australian continent for more than 30,000
years and the extinctions may coincide with the development of the
extremely arid conditions of the LGM.

The mega-fauna that went extinct are likely to have been particularly
susceptible to the loss of water-holes and most probably died of hunger
and thirst. But the precise timing of many extinctions remains unclear.
The newly available evidence from Tasmania suggests that the mega-fauna
of that region had already died out by 35,000 BC. This was before the
arrival of people, leaving climate change as the only explanation

Many Australian archaeologists believe that the extinctions throughout
Australia occurred at an even earlier date – between 50,000 and 40,000
BC. As such, they point to the coincidence with the arrival of people in
the continent.¹⁶ Conversely, Colin Pardoe believes that some of the
mega-fauna survived long after 20,000 years ago in the vicinity of the
Murray River.¹⁷ And so Lubbock may well have caught a glimpse of
Diprotodon or some other beast. Or not – the canoe moved too swiftly to
tell.

At the lagoon, the men who paddled the canoe begin to unravel a net made
from twisted plant fibres. But with another 5,000 kilometres and 9,000
years of Australian prehistory to cover, Lubbock has no time for
fishing. He sets off on foot through the thicket of trees around the
lagoon and on to the open plain, heading northwest, towards Australia’s
arid centre.

35 Across the Arid Zone

Hunter-gatherer adaptations to the Central Australian Desert, 30,000 BC–AD 1966

Dusk in the Central Australian Desert:

The western sky is suffused with a rich after-glow, against which the
mulga branches stand out sharp and thin. All shrubs and tufts of grass
are deep purple in colour as seen against the golden light. Towards the
east the scene is changed completely. The white-blue salt bushes, with
pale grey patches of low herbage and still lighter tufts of grass stand
out in strong contrast to the warm, rich browns of the gibber¹ fields
stretching away to the horizon where the sky is a cold, steel blue
melting above into salmon pink and this into a deep ultramarine speckled
with brilliant stars. Gradually the light fades and the outline of the
horizon becomes indistinct. Save for the weird plaintive call of a
passing curlew everything is absolutely silent. One after another the
stars rise in the east and mount higher and higher in the sky, and then
with a feeling of perfect freedom and a delicate sense of absolute fresh
air, as the night wind rises and blows over you, gently rustling the
leaves of some old gnarled gum tree, you fall asleep.²

So wrote Baldwin Spencer and Frank Gillen in their 1912 book, Across
Australia. Spencer was Professor of Biology at Melbourne University and
Gillen had the grandiose title of ‘Special Magistrate and Sub-Protector
of Aborigines for South Australia’. As well as describing the desert,
they wrote one of the first accounts of the Arrente Aborigines of
central Australia – whom they referred to as the Arunta tribe – focusing
on their religious customs and beliefs.³

Whether travelling in the present day, in AD 1912 or 14,000 BC,
everything in central Australia is on a vast scale – boundless
scrub-covered plains, great valleys four or five hundred kilometres in
length, impressive gorges and wide river channels that are either
absolutely dry or flooded with water. For urban dwellers such as myself,
Spencer and Gillen’s descriptions make the desert sound heavenly. Until,
that is, one reads about the plagues of mosquitoes and flies. A mouthful
of these often accompanied any food they ate; on some occasions they
woke in the morning with ‘bung eye’ – the attempt by a female fly to lay
her eggs in the soft and mucous membrane of the eyelid. As soon as the
sun had risen, they recalled, the low buzz of mosquitoes began and then
grew in intensity, becoming worse and worse until a climax was reached
which remained until dusk.

By suffering such conditions, Spencer and Gillen provided some of the
earliest accounts of the Central Desert Aborigines, publishing a
succession of classics including The Native Tribes of Central Australia
in 1899, The Northern Tribes of Central Australia in 1904 and The Arunta
in 1927. Spencer had written the texts while Gillen had undertaken most
of the fieldwork, sending extensive letters and notes to his colleague
and receiving demands for further information and clarification by
return. Their books made extensive use of black-and-white plates and
contributed to the development of anthropological thought, influencing
Durkheim, Freud and Lévi-Strauss.

Across Australia combined accounts from several expeditions into ‘a
simple narrative of some of the most interesting things we have seen’.
That had been a great deal, not only of the Australian landscapes but of
the indigenous people. Both Spencer and Gillen had become fully
initiated members of the Arunta tribe and were allowed to attend many
ceremonies previously unwitnessed by Western eyes.

And yet a lifetime of studying the Aborigines failed to dispel their
Victorian notions about tribal people. The introduction to Across
Australia provided a warning to any unwary reader who might be fooled by
their own descriptions of complex ceremony and ritual:

It must be remembered [the authors wrote] that though the native
cermonies reveal, to a certain extent, what has been described as
‘elaborate ritual’ they are eminently crude and savage. They are
performed by naked, howling savages, who have no permanent abodes, no
clothing, no knowledge of any implements, save those fashioned out of
wood, bone, or stone, no idea whatever of the cultivation of crops, or
of the laying-in of a supply of food to tide over hard times, and no
words for any numbers beyond three or four.⁴

The irony is that it is precisely these qualities of high mobility,
limited possessions and intense ceremony that so impress anthropologists
today. By surviving within the Central Australian Desert, the Aborigines
documented by Spencer and Gillen had attained one of the greatest
achievements of humankind. And yet those alive in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries may have had it relatively easy in
comparison to their forebears, those who had occupied the desert at – or
very soon after – the LGM.

Central Australia has been hot and arid for more than a million years.
Today the arid zone of Australia covers five million square kilometres,
70 per cent of the continent.⁵ Defined as the region where evaporation
equals or exceeds rainfall, summer temperatures pass 35°C, while average
annual rainfall is less than 500 millimetres and fails to reach 125
millimetres in the driest parts. Almost 80 per cent of the region
consists of ‘open desert’ – stony or sandy surfaces, bare rock and clay
pans which lack defined drainage patterns; surface water may be abundant
immediately after rain but rapidly disappears. Scattered between the
vast expanses of open desert are the uplands: the Musgrave, James and
MacDonnell ranges of the centre, the Pilbara district to the west and
the Kimberley ranges in the northwest. Within these uplands, run-off is
concentrated into streams that provide the most reliable water sources
of the arid zone and support a relative abundance of plant and animal
life. Along the margins of most uplands are riverine flood plains.
Surface water can be found on these throughout most of the year,
providing a surprising source of food for such an arid land: fish,
shellfish, waterfowl and aquatic plants.

When people first entered the arid zone close to 30,000 BC, temperatures
were little different to those of today but it was much wetter,
resulting in widespread lakes and permanent water courses. As global
temperatures fell to the LGM, an already meagre rainfall was halved;
wind speeds increased, lakes dried up and extensive dunes were formed.
The arid zone expanded to cover 80 per cent of the continent, leaving no
more than the northern tip and eastern margins with a temperate climate.

When the climate turned after 20,000 BC, conditions began to improve;
rainfall increased, leading to reliable water sources once again; plant
cover also increased which, together with a decline in the winds, led to
stabilisation of the dunes. Conditions for human settlement improved
continuously up until 7000 BC. After that, the climate became rather
cooler and drier, resulting in today’s desert, so evocatively described
by Baldwin Spencer and Frank Gillen.

To examine its history of occupation, John Lubbock has arrived in the
Central Desert at 13,500 BC. On his journey from Kow Swamp he has
crossed a vast extent of scrubland killed off by drought, encountered
desiccated carcasses and passed many extinct lakes. These were brilliant
white sheets of salt, quite sterile of life but which told of a time
when there had been freshwater expanses surrounded by woodland
harbouring a myriad of animals and birds. Lubbock crossed clay pans;
some had flimsy surfaces, broken into little curled flakes glistening in
the sun, others had thick hexagonal pavements of cracked clay, covered
by the tracks of emu and kangaroo and surrounded by withered shrubs and
the dead shells of snails and mussels.

When the rain came, the normally dry creeks were soon transformed into
torrents and the clay pans became pools of water brimming with snails,
crabs, mussels and crayfish. Thousands of frogs would emerge from below
ground where the sand had been cool with an inkling of moisture. The
frogs would spawn, eggs hatch, tadpoles develop and turn into bright
green and orange frogs in time to disappear into the ground when the
drought returned. They fed upon caterpillars that appeared as if from
nowhere on the revitalised plants and the mass of seedlings that erupted
from the ground. Wildfowl arrived – coots, spoonbills, pelicans – as did
hawks and eagles, all feeding with a feverish anxiety.

Now Lubbock, sits within a large sandstone rockshelter practically in
the centre of the continent. It is in a south-facing escarpment on the
southern side of the James mountain range. Lubbock looks across the
seemingly endless arid scrubland in which he both enjoyed the dusk and
was plagued by flies; it is now baking under the midday sun. By climbing
on to the escarpment he has looked north and seen tinted rows of
mountains, all shimmering in the heat haze, threatening and yet inviting
for the traveller, whether in prehistoric or modern times. Beside him on
the cave floor is debris from others who recently sought shelter there:
a scatter of ash, burnt fragments of animal bone, a few flakes of
quartz.

At the time of Lubbock’s visit, the cave walls are quite bare. In the
future, though, they will be covered with hand stencils and the
rockshelter will gain the name Kulpi Mara, meaning ‘cave of hands’. This
is how Peter Thorley of Northern Territory University found it when he
excavated the cave in 1995–6, discovering the remnants of successive
hearths sandwiched in sediment that had weathered from the roof and
walls, supplemented by a little blown sand. Radiocarbon dates indicated
that people had lit fires within Kulpi Mara at some date prior to 30,000
BC, at around 27,000 BC and between 13,700 and 11,500 BC.⁶

About 200 kilometres to the northwest of Kulpi Mara lies Puritjarra,
another and larger sandstone rockshelter, which provides comparable
dates for occupation. Located in the Cleland Hills, its name means
‘shade area’ – an appropriate title as it provides protection both from
the midday sun and from the prevailing wind. Its massive entrance is 45
metres long by 20 metres high; paintings and stencils cover the walls.
The absence of wind was a blessing for the Aborigines who occupied
Puritjarra until the 1930s, but a curse for Mike Smith from the
University of New England, the archaeologist who excavated there between
1986 and 1988. With no blown dust, there was such a low rate of
sedimentation that artefacts made thousands of years apart could have
been separated by no more than a few millimetres of sediment.⁷

Smith believes that the shelter was first occupied about 30,000 years
ago, although his oldest radiocarbon date – from a layer containing
fragments of charcoal and red ochre, stone tools and waste flakes – is
around 25,000 BC. Above this, there were very few artefacts embedded in
the cave’s deposits before a date of 15,000 BC was reached. The upper
horizons covered the last 7,000 years and contained cooking hearths,
flaked stone and grinding implements.⁸

Had Puritjarra and Kulpi Mara been used continuously between 25,000 and
15,000 BC, throughout the time of the LGM when the climatic conditions
had been most severe?⁹ Mike Smith thinks so, proposing that the Cleland
Hills had maintained permanent water-holes, creating a refuge for people
expelled by drought from the surrounding desert. But whether the few
dates from Puritjarra and Kulpi Mara had derived from sporadic,
exploratory visits or record a constant human presence in Australia’s
arid centre, remains unclear. Whatever the answer, Aborigines were
evidently using the rockshelters when conditions were far more arid than
those that Spencer and Gillen had witnessed a century ago – or even than
today. How did they manage to do so?

We know how the recent Aborigines have survived in the Australian
deserts thanks to anthropologists who have meticulously studied their
adaptations, undertaking quite different types of research to that
adopted by Spencer and Gillen. During the late 1960s Richard Gould, who
later became Professor of Anthropology at the University of Hawaii,
lived with Aborigines in a region to the west of Puritjarra Cave – a
region that can claim the most unreliable water supplies and
impoverished plant and animal communities of anywhere in the world.¹⁰

The Aborigines usually lived in groups of around twenty. The men spent
several hours each day hunting but rarely killed anything larger than
lizards and mice, while the women collected seeds and tubers from more
than thirty different plants, of which seven provided the bulk of the
food. They too caught small game, along with insects and grubs – in
fact, almost fifty different varieties of meat and fleshy food were
collected.¹¹

The key to survival was opportunism – being prepared to move to wherever
rain had been seen to fall, and where a water catchment was known. To do
so they needed very few possessions and ‘permanent abodes’ would have
been no use at all. Rainfall could be seen from 80 kilometres away and
vast distances were regularly covered; in just three months during 1966,
Gould’s group moved to nine different campsites spread across 2,600
square kilometres. This lifestyle required a detailed and extensive
geographical knowledge that was embedded in the Dreamtime stories. As
the younger members of the group learned the mythology and were
initiated into sacred knowledge, they had to memorise the names and
locations of many landmarks, notably water-holes. Such initiations took
place on the rare occasions when hunting was good; up to 150 people
would gather and remain together until local game became depleted. And
so the story-telling, ceremonies, and dancing – that performed by
Spencer and Gillen’s ‘naked, howling savages’ – were absolutely
essential to human survival.

Another key ingredient of the desert adaptation was the sharing ethic.
All food brought into the camp was meticulously shared between all
members of the group, even when it was no more than a small lizard.
Beyond this, kin ties between groups served to ensure that one group
would be welcomed into another’s territory if they were suffering from
drought and a shortage of food. These links were established through a
‘cross-cousin’ marriage system in which a man was expected to marry a
woman who was his mother’s mother’s brother’s daughter’s daughter. As
these relations were understandably not easy to find, men often sought
partners among groups living hundreds of kilometres away. And as a man
could take several wives, he often became related to different families
living throughout thousands of square kilometres of desert.
Consequently, there was always the possibility of finding kin, and hence
access to water and foraging opportunities, in times of need.

Gould describes fire as the most useful tool of the desert Aborigines.
Much of their landscape was covered by spinifex – a spiky shrub that
didn’t provide any edible material. This was burnt off, resulting in the
growth and succession of several productive food plants until spinifex
was once again established. Gould watched the Aborigines burn extensive
tracts of land, but they never voiced any intention about encouraging
the growth of new plants. Fire was also used to flush out small game,
and sometimes to smoke lizards and mammals out of their burrows.

Grinding stones were equally essential; without these, many of the seeds
collected would have been inedible. Such stones were acquired from
quarries or trade and left at campsites in anticipation of a future
return. With one exception, all other tools were remarkably simple:
stone flakes, often used as found upon the ground and then discarded,
digging sticks for plants, wooden spears. The exception was the
spear-thrower – a stick up to one metre in length that was used for many
tasks other than propelling spears. These were usually flattened to
serve as a mixing tray for pigments and tobacco; they were used to start
fires and often had a stone flake hafted to one end for woodworking.
Surfaces were frequently incised with geometric designs that functioned
as maps to sacred landmarks.

The Aborigines of the twentieth century survived in the incredibly
difficult environment of the Australian desert with this combination of
tools, rules and profound geographical knowledge. But is this how the
Aborigines who made the stone flakes and fireplaces in Kulpi Mara and
Puritjarra Caves had also lived? We must be extremely cautious about
imposing modern patterns of behaviour on to the past – especially when
dealing with such archaeologically invisible matters as cross-cousin
marriage.¹²

Richard Gould excavated two rockshelters in the desert: Puntutjarpa and
Intirtekwerle. Both had long sequences of deposits that stretched back
to 10,000 BC. And both had stone artefacts little different to those
used by the Aborigines with whom Gould had lived during the 1960s. In
his 1980 book, Living Archaeology, which described his experiences and
excavations, Gould proposed that the culture of seed grinding, marriage
networks and Dreamtime mythology stretched back not only to that date
but to the very first occupation of the arid zone at 30,000 BC. This was
a bold claim as, in the 1960s, the oldest known grinding stones dated to
a mere 3500 BC.¹³ It wasn’t until 1997 that Gould was vindicated by the
discovery of grinding-stone fragments at Cuddie Springs – the site in
New South Wales where people had once either hunted or scavenged upon
the carcasses of now extinct mammals. Excavations by Richard Fullagar
and Judith Field of Sydney University have recovered thirty-three
grinding-stone fragments from a 150-centimetre-deep trench with layers
dating from earlier than 30,000 BC up to the present day. Many of the
fragments came from the same layers in which butchered mega-fauna bones
were found. Microscopic remains of plant tissues and a distinctive
polish on the grinding stone fragments confirmed that they had been used
for processing seeds.¹⁴

The evidence from Cuddie Springs suggests that the Aborigines living in
the Australian deserts during and immediately after the LGM had a
seed-grinding economy, similar to that observed in the 1960s by Richard
Gould. But the fragments of ochre that have been recovered from Kulpi
Mara and Puritjarra Caves are hardly sufficient to enable archaeologists
to determine whether the desert Aborigines also had similar Dreamtime
mythologies and marriage rules – as crucial to recent survival as the
grinding of seeds.

For three days John Lubbock remained in Kulpi Mara Cave, hoping for the
return of whoever had recently built the fire. He wished to meet them,
to travel with them, to discover how they lived. Nobody came. Lubbock
gathered his own food: wild figs and roots, a lizard dug from its
burrow. While waiting, he opened Prehistoric Times to read about his
namesake’s knowledge and views of the Aborigines. In the few pages
devoted to the Australians, the author had drawn upon the accounts from
various nineteenth-century travellers¹⁵ – but not those of Spencer and
Gillen whose initial publication did not appear until thirty years after
the first edition of Prehistoric Times (1865).

For Victorian John Lubbock, the Aborigines were – unsurprisingly –
‘miserable savages’. But just as modern John Lubbock had found when
reading about the people of Tierra del Fuego and the North American
Indians, such statements conflicted with Victorian Lubbock’s evident
appreciation of the many tools which the Aborigines had skilfully made
and used. Prehistoric Times explained how they were ‘well practised’ in
the use of spear-throwers, boomerangs and turtle spears with moveable
barbed blades, describing such implements in some detail. It also seemed
difficult to understand how the Tasmanians could be described as being
entirely lacking in moral views (as quoted from the Reverend Dove) and
yet the Australians as being capable of recognising selfish and
unreasonable behaviour. Once again, Victorian Lubbock seemed to be
wrestling with how to reconcile the blatantly racist views of those
whose journals he relied upon and the evident value he himself attached
to the technology and lifestyles of those he called ‘modern savages’.

After an early-morning vigil looking for that key sign of human life, a
spiral of smoke, Lubbock climbs down from the crags and leaves Kulpi
Mara Cave. His direction is due north, across what will become the
MacDonnell ranges and through the future Alice Springs. Lubbock has
another 1,200 kilometres of desert to cross before he reaches Arnhem
Land, a land that will be transformed by global warming.

36 Fighting Men and a Serpent’s Birth

Art, society and ideology in northern Australia, 13,000–6000 BC

Two men face each other, ready for combat. They wear ornate clothes with
elaborate head-dresses. Their hands grip boomerangs. Lethal weapons.
Neither man will think twice about killing the other.

John Lubbock has seen many similar scenes during his last few days of
travel. The majority have been one-to-one boomerang and spear contests,
happening close to water-holes. The combatants had all been men wearing
tunics and trousers of animal hide decorated with feathers and shells;
their faces painted red and their statures extended by menacing
constructions of plumes, furs, bones and bark. Some men had transformed
themselves into beasts by wearing animal masks and yet remained on two
legs as they advanced to attack those who dared to stand in their way.

At Deaf Adder Gorge, Lubbock had seen one man running towards another,
about to throw his boomerang. His opponent, dressed as a wild animal,
stood his ground, ready with a handful of spears. Amongst the rocky
crags above Twin Falls two men had stood face to face, each quite intent
on bringing the other to a bloody death. One held a spear aloft, poised
to strike, while the other gripped a boomerang, ready to assault and
break his opponent’s arm. Elsewhere Lubbock saw the outcome of these
battles: bodies falling to the ground or lying dead, pierced with
spears.

Now, though, Lubbock has reached the crags and eucalyptus trees above
Jim Jim Falls. It is midday; the sun is scorching and the air bone-dry.
A pair of birds, perhaps vultures, are circling in the clear blue sky.
Despite the heat, another fight is about to break out – two men dressed,
armed and engaged in a battle of minds before the first boomerang is
thrown. Lubbock sees it in mid-flight, hurtling off the artist’s brush
as the rock painting is finished with a deft flick of red paint. There
the boomerang will remain, pinned to the wall for many millennia to
come. Lubbock turns to the artist; he is an old Aboriginal man with a
gnarled face and grey stubble; a peaceful man, one who has never lifted
a spear or boomerang in anger throughout his long life but who dwells
upon scenes of violence and death.¹

Lubbock is in today’s Arnhem Land, at the ‘top end’ of the Northern
Territories in Australia. It is a landscape of sandstone escarpments,
savannah woodland and deep gorges. An arid landscape, one in which
rivers struggle to survive and periodically fail. The date is uncertain
– it is hard to say exactly when he could be visiting the rock paintings
of fighting men and sitting with an artist who quietly mixes his ochre
pigment.

The present-day Aborigines of Arnhem Land attribute these paintings,
referred to by archaeologists as ‘Dynamic Figures’, to the work of the
Mimi people.² These are believed by the Aborigines to have been their
forerunners in Arnhem Land, and to have taught them how to paint. The
Mimi people decorated high rockshelter ceilings by flying and survive
today as spirits, sometimes nestled within the cracks of a rock-face.

‘Dynamic’ is an appropriate description. Each figure is no more than a
few centimetres high; many have legs outstretched as if running with
utmost speed, this emphasised by the small dashes close to their feet
suggesting movement. Similar marks seem to emanate from their mouths,
perhaps depicting heavy breathing or war cries. But not all Dynamic
Figures are involved in fighting; some are shown hunting emus; some are
depicted simply standing, sitting or tumbling through the air; some hold
leafed branches and others are engaged in sex.³ The simple fact that
such paintings were created beyond the time of Aboriginal oral history,
and hence have been placed into the mythic world of the Mimi people,
suggests great antiquity. Christopher Chippindale and Paul Taçon,
archaeologists from Cambridge University and the Australian Museum in
Sydney, have attempted to identify exactly how old.

To begin with, the Dynamic Figures are not the first art style in Arnhem
Land; below the painted figures one finds faint engraved lines of an
older art: depictions of giant kangaroos, wallabies, snakes, crocodiles
and fish. We also know such engravings cannot be more than 60,000 years
old, as that marks the arrival of people in the Australian continent.
But beyond this, things get difficult.

The use of boomerangs as weapons is significant, as all the historically
known Aborigines of Arnhem Land have used them as musical instruments
alone – clapping boards. The depicted animals are also chronologically
suggestive as some are now extinct, such as the thylacine – or Tasmanian
tiger – whose striped flanks can be seen in several paintings. This
animal had disappeared from Arnhem Land by 5000 BC. A few paintings
appear to depict extinct animals of a much earlier time, such as a giant
wombat known as Palorchestes that became extinct before the Pleistocene
had ended. In addition, the absence of certain animals is also helpful;
there are few depictions of fish, and when present they are relatively
small freshwater varieties. In the later art styles of Arnhem Land, fish
become very prominent and this is thought to reflect the rising sea
level, development of swamps and changing diet of the Aboriginal people
after the ice age had reached its end.

Chippindale and Taçon have taken these few strands of evidence, woven
them together and concluded that the Dynamic Figures depict people in
the arid landscapes of Arnhem Land before the final spurt of global
warming at 9600 BC.

Another hint as to the age of the paintings comes from fragments of red
ochre in rockshelter deposits which also contain the stone artefacts
left by Pleistocene Australians.⁴ The Dynamic Figures were created with
the same type of pigment, although this has since turned to a rich
mulberry colour and seems to have become embedded within the rock
itself. At about 12,000 BC there is a marked increase in the quantity of
red ochre in the rockshelter deposits, suggesting the start of intense
artistic activity; Paul Taçon believes that this is when the Dynamic
Figures were first created.⁵

It seems most likely, therefore, that Lubbock is in Arnhem Land at some
date between 20,000 and 9600 BC – I will follow Taçon and place Lubbock
close to the end of this period, say at 10,000 BC. But while we know
that he has been visiting the painted rocks, and watching the artists at
work, has he also seen the fighting in real life? Do the paintings
depict the reality of life during the final stage of the ice age in
Arnhem Land? They might be a true historical record of public contests
by men fighting for access to precious resources, perhaps over the few
water-holes that were jealously owned and guarded in the arid
landscapes. The fights may have been either bloody and to the death or
largely ritualised in nature. Alternatively, they may have been no more
than fantasy: depictions of mythical beings, engaged in imaginary
battles while wearing costumes quite unlike any seen in the real world.
Indeed, the Aboriginal artists of Arnhem Land may have been a peaceful
people, who dressed in plain clothing and ensured that all food and
water was evenly shared.

Chippindale and Taçon favour the ‘art as historical record’
interpretation.⁶ And hence, on his travels through Arnhem Land, Lubbock
has seen not only the fighting men painted in red, but the fighting men
themselves.

Lubbock now sits in the shade of a eucalyptus on the banks of a shallow
stream. Its course has been his pathway from a deep gorge within the
escarpment, past rockshelters where people were chipping at quartz and
on to a tree-scattered plain. The stream continues as far as he can see,
meandering away for at least another 500 kilometres before it meets the
ocean. He intends to follow it to the estuary and then the coastline,
until he reaches the snow-covered mountains that lie 1,000 kilometres to
the north in today’s Papua New Guinea.

But for now it is too hot and Lubbock is tired. And so he rests by a
tree and checks a passage in Prehistoric Times that he recalls had
mentioned Aboriginal art. ‘In a cave on the north-eastern coast’, his
namesake had written in AD 1865, ‘Mr Cunningham observed certain
“tolerable figures of sharks, porpoises, turtles, lizards, trepang,
starfish, clubs, canoes, water-gourds, and some quadrupeds which were
probably intended to represent kangaroos and dogs”. It is, however,
doubtful whether these are the work of the present natives.’⁷ Modern
John Lubbock thinks how the paintings he saw on the escarpment had
lacked any figures such as these.

He closes the book and begins to doze by the shallow waters of what will
one day become the East Alligator River of Arnhem Land. Dreamy memories
arrive of his travels elsewhere at this date in human history: watching
the reburial of the long-time dead at ‘Ain Mallaha by the Late Natufian
people who had been forced on the move by the droughts of the Younger
Dryas; arriving in southwest France to find that the painted caves are
deserted and forgotten; fishing with the people of Quebrada Jaguay of
Peru.

He sleeps deeply, not just for the rest of the day but for the rest of
the ice age and beyond. New types of dreams: droplets of water from
icicles that suddenly balloon in size; melt-water lakes that burst their
banks; rivers in spate carrying huge boulders and trees; cliffs of ice
collapsing into the sea. That one wakes him with a crash.

Instead of the clear blue sky and eucalyptus shade that sent Lubbock to
sleep, he wakes in a gloomy, cavernous world, seated upon a muddy island
and surrounded by swamp.⁸ Four thousand years have passed since he began
to doze, and it is now 6000 BC. Gnarled and knotted trunks on either
side send out contorted and threatening mud-stained boughs. Above, a
thick canopy of leaves. The air is stifling, permeated with a hot
miasmatic vapour. There is an intense silence, broken only by the quiet
gasping of shellfish that lie in the mud or cling to the roots and
trunks of the mangroves.

As Lubbock slept, the tide had come in; not the daily tides that lapped
the shores of Pleistocene Greater Australia but the tide of post-glacial
sea-level rise.⁹ As glaciers collapsed, ice sheets melted, and lakes
drained, the southern oceans swelled. Sea levels rose relentlessly, at
times flooding 45 metres a year of the plain across which Lubbock had
planned to travel. By 6500 BC, the low land between northern Australia
and New Guinea was entirely submerged under the Arafura Sea. As the
waters inundated Arnhem Land, small interior streams were transformed
into wide estuaries; levees developed leading to freshwater wetlands;
the mangroves took over.

Lubbock traverses the edge of the swamp, clambering over massive roots
and disturbing the turtles that had been resting on sandbanks. For a
while the swamps seem endless and threatening, especially the crocodiles
that lurk in the shallows. Relief arrives as the canopy is pierced by
tiny patches of blue; they grow in number and size. The air freshens,
the gloom recedes. Quite suddenly the mangroves end and he steps into
sunlight and on to dry, solid ground.

Others have emerged just a few moments before. A few metres away a group
of Aborigines have seated themselves on the ground and lit a fire.
Lubbock joins them and finds that they have been collecting shellfish
from the mangroves. A few will be eaten while they rest before returning
to their camping site in the narrow fringe of woodland between the end
of the mangroves and the start of the escarpment. When they rise and
leave, Lubbock follows.

The next few weeks are spent with these people – fishing, hunting
turtles, gathering yams, collecting more shellfish. They have a rich
assortment of foods to choose between; middens are accumulating by the
riversides, soon to be buried by the mangrove mud as the swamps
expand.¹⁰ Lubbock makes a two-day trip with them to the seashore to
collect shellfish and salt. On the way a thunderstorm strikes; howling
winds and rain cause the party to shelter within a cave and then to find
unexpected novelties on the shore. There are great masses of seaweed
within which jellyfish and urchins lurk, while the little bodies of
seahorses and pipefish are scattered across the sand.

Although such foraging within the mangrove swamps and on the seashore is
a new way of Aboriginal life, their stone tools remain little changed
from those of their ice-age forebears, principally simple flakes of
quartz. Some new types have appeared, such as bone points, and they have
an array of artefacts made from organic materials such as woven baskets
and wooden spears. But only the stone flakes will survive in the debris
left behind for archaeologists to find.¹¹

Lubbock returns to the escarpment, the plateau and crags where he had
once encountered the Dynamic fighting men. The violence continues, but
now takes the form of pitched battles rather than one-to-one contests.
In one such battle, two groups are facing each other – perhaps fifty to
sixty people in all – armed with barbed spears and hafted axes. Except
for a head-dressed man that leads each group, the men are simply clad,
if clothed at all. A volley of spears has been launched and one of the
leaders receives a fatal strike to his abdomen.¹²

He continues to fall but is destined never to reach the ground, just as
the spears are to remain in flight; this battle is another painting
found on the rock-faces of Arnhem Land. Chippindale and Taçon think that
this and other battle scenes were painted at about 6000 BC. The new
paintings are much simpler than the pairs of Dynamic men; many are no
more than stick-figures with circles for their heads.

The new artists have done more than bringing whole groups into battle;
they have also changed the animals and adopted new artistic styles.
Fish, snakes and turtles – animals of the wetlands – are now common in
the art; a few are painted in an X-ray fashion which shows their
internal organs. Another new feature is the Yam figures – people and
animals painted with tuberous-like bodies.

This range of imagery replaces the Dynamic Figures and reflects the
animal and plant foods being collected in the wetter and warmer
environments of the Holocene. The switch from individual skirmishes to
battle scenes suggests that society has also changed. When
archaeologists look at these paintings of warriors, spears and death
from 6000 BC, they find a remarkable resonance with the
twentieth-century warfare practices of Aboriginal groups.

Such warfare was recorded by Lloyd Warner, an anthropologist who lived
among the Murngin Aborigines of northeast Arnhem Land in the 1920s.¹³
The Murngin had lived by hunting and gathering in a not dissimilar
landscape to that reconstructed for 6000 BC. Violence and warfare were
endemic in their society; Lloyd Warner estimated that this caused about
two hundred deaths of young men each year. He described several types,
ranging from nirimaoi yolno, one-to-one fights between men seldom
resulting in any casualties, to milwerangel, a pitched battle between
members of several clans arranged to take place at a specified time and
place, usually ending in a violent brawl with several fatalities.

A great deal of this fighting originated from disputes over women.
Nirimaoi yolno usually arose when a man from one camp accused one in
another of having been – or at least trying to become – his wife’s
lover. The two men rarely ever got further than hurling insults at each
other, happy at being ‘restrained’ by their friends so they could feign
much bravado without risking getting hurt.¹⁴ In another form of combat –
narrup – a man will be physically attacked while sleeping. The whole
clan of the attacker will be held responsible and the incident may
easily escalate into maringo, an expedition to revenge the killing of a
relative or even milwerangel.

Lloyd Warner argued that warfare and killing within the Murngin was a
consequence of their marriage system. This was polygyny, which allowed
men to have several wives; most middle-aged Murngin men had at least
three. As the number of Murngin men and women were approximately equal,
and as women married just before puberty, there were simply too few
women for the young men to marry. And so, in Lloyd Warner’s words, there
was a ‘seasonal slaying’ of young men who had passed into adolescence
and were ready to find their first wife.¹⁵ This culling of the young and
eligible was presumably in the interests of the older members of society
who were happy to encourage the younger men to fight.

There is no direct evidence that the 6000 BC battle-scene paintings of
Arnhem Land depicted real life; even if they did so, there is nothing to
prove that the battles corresponded to those described for the Murngin
or were undertaken for the same reasons. Chippindale and Taçon are
confident, however, that this change from paintings of fighting men to
battle scenes is indeed a historical record and is ultimately explained
by the changing environments of Arnhem Land brought about by global
warming.

Exactly how the environmental, social and artistic changes may be
related remains unclear. One scenario is that the appearance of wetlands
created a new diversity and abundance of plant and animal foods. With
better nutrition, the population grew. But the sources of food were not
evenly dispersed across the landscape. Instead, the particularly
profitable stretches of river, groves of trees, water-holes and animal
haunts were highly localised. And so groups became concerned with
establishing and defending territories that encompassed these locales.
They did so partly through ceremony and partly through warfare. It may
have been at this time that the historically known territorial patterns
and linguistic divides of Aboriginal groups in Arnhem Land began to
emerge: those between-groups known as the Jawoyn, Gundjeibmi, Kunwinjku
and the Murngin.¹⁶ Moreover, the modern-day Dreamtime ideology might
also find its origins in this time of adjustment to the Holocene world,
as Lubbock will discover with his next encounter on the Arnhem Land
plateau.

Lubbock has already seen a variety of new paintings on the escarpment in
addition to the battle scenes. These included depictions of lizards,
turtles and gourds, reminiscent of those described in Prehistoric Times.
But now he is face to face with something quite new: a strange creature
with an elongated body, a head like that of a kangaroo, or perhaps a
crocodile, and a pointed tail similar to a snake. It has strange
appendages hanging from its body: perhaps other animals or a combination
of these, yams and waterlilies. The creature winds it way over the rock
surface, having been brightly painted in red and destined to survive for
many millennia. Eventually it will be described by archaeologists and
recognised as the earliest-known depiction of the mythical Rainbow
Serpent from the Aboriginal Dreamtime.

The Rainbow Serpent is one of the key Ancestral Beings, known to
Aborigines throughout the continent. It is believed to have played a
fundamental role in creating the Australian landscape and is described
by Paul Taçon as being among the world’s most powerful mythological
creatures. As with other Ancestral Beings, its form was not fixed; it
could change between that of a snake, a kangaroo and a crocodile and was
often depicted as a combination of all three. During the founding days,
this serpent wound its way through the country, creating all the
water-holes and creeks, stocking them with creatures and placing people
in the landscape, each clan in a designated area. Rainbows in the sky
were thought to be the soul of the serpent; when these disappeared the
Being had returned to the permanent water-holes where it liked to
dwell.¹⁷

Taçon and his colleagues believe that the idea of the Rainbow Serpent
was inspired by the pipefish washed up on the newly formed shores by the
turbulent seas of the Early Holocene. As these were being found, the
Aborigines were also watching snakes slithering away from drowning
landscapes and rainbows overhead that followed lightning and thunder.
Water-holes were now remaining permanently full and previously dry creek
beds had become swift-flowing rivers. And so the Rainbow Serpent and its
stories were adopted to make sense of this changing world, of the new
landscapes and the astonishing nature of human experience in the first
few millennia of the Holocene.

Josephine Flood, a distinguished Australian archaeologist, believes that
many other Aboriginal myths also relate to the environmental events at
the end of the ice age. The mythological accounts of a great flood are
often so detailed and specific that she cannot doubt that they are
recalling actual events that occurred thousands of years earlier. Many
myths tell how hills were severed from the mainland and turned into
islands: Mornington Island in today’s Gulf of Carpentaria was created by
Garnguur, the seagull woman who pulled her raft backwards and forwards
across what had been a peninsula to form a channel for the sea. Elcho
Island, now off the north coast of Arnhem Land, was the result of an
Ancestral Being tripping and accidentally pushing his stick into the
sand, causing the sea to rush in.¹⁸

In southern Australia there is a widespread myth about the creation of
Kangaroo Island, known as Nar-oong-owie by the Aborigines. This tells
about Ngurunderi, a great Ancestral figure who became angry when his
wives ran away from him. Having found them wading across the shallow
channel that divided Nar-oong-owie from the mainland, Ngurunderi ‘was
determined to punish his wives and angrily ordered the water to rise up
and drown them. With a terrific rush the waters roared and the women
were carried back towards the mainland. Although they tried frantically
to swim against the tidal wave they were powerless to do so and were
drowned. Their bodies turned to stone and are seen as rocks off the
coast of Cape Jervis, called The Pages or the Two Sisters.’¹⁹

Other events occurring at the end of the ice age might also be
remembered in the Dreamtime myths. One such story begins as follows:

Long ago, many people were camped at the confluence of the Lachlan and
Murrumbidgee Rivers. The day was very hot and a haze rose from the
windless plain so that the horizon danced, and mirages distorted the
landscape. Everyone lay motionless, resting in the heat. Suddenly, a
tribe of giant kangaroos were seen away in the distance and the headman
leapt to his feet with a galvanising cry. The camp became a scene of
wild excitement and fear. Children were quickly seized and everyone
dispersed into the bush. In those days, however, the men had no weapons
and were defenceless against the enemy. The kangaroos relentlessly
advanced on them through the bush and without mercy crushed their
victims with their powerful arms. When the animals were finished, few of
the tribe survived.²⁰

The story continues with the headman devising weapons and camouflage,
and using fire to drive the kangaroos away. Josephine Flood wonders
whether such stories about giant kangaroos enshrine memories of extinct
animals that might have once been feared and hunted. A further story
tells how fertile inland lakes dried up and became barren salt-pans –
another widespread event occurring at the end of the ice age.²¹

If Josephine Flood is correct, the Aborigines have passed down stories
from generation to generation about sea-level change, mega-fauna and the
desiccation of inland lakes for ten, perhaps even twenty, thousand
years. Such stories may have begun as factual accounts and gradually
became embedded within the Dreamtime mythology. Or perhaps – as the
pipefish suggests – the environmental transformations that occurred as
the ice age came to an end gave birth not only to Rainbow Serpents but
to the Dreamtime itself.

By 6000 BC, Greater Australia is no more; one seventh of its land, about
2.5 million square kilometres, has been drowned by the sea. Tasmania,
once a southern peninsula, is now an island whose Aborigines have lost
all contact with those on the mainland, divided from them by the
ferocious waters of the Bass Strait. The people of New Guinea will,
however, remain in contact with those of Australia across the more
benign and island-spotted Torres Strait.

To approach New Guinea, John Lubbock travels eastwards and then
northwards along the edge of the Gulf of Carpentaria and on to the Cape
York peninsula. This journey takes him along a coastline of mangrove
swamps, freshwater lagoons, estuaries and shallow waters.²² He departs
as the dry season begins in May, a time when the rivers and lagoons are
drying up and the people he meets are living in small, nomadic groups.
When the drought takes hold, they congregate around the few sources of
permanent water. Lubbock finds that they collect many plant foods,
notably the seeds and tubers of waterlilies, and hunt wallabies by
flushing them out from the edges of the woodland that spreads inland. As
the year passes, the climate becomes increasingly hot and stifling.
Trees lose all their leaves and undergrowth is burned by the Aborigines.
Finally the weather breaks with lightning and thunderstorms, which occur
every day for several weeks.

By now it is October. The ground and bare branches erupt with new
shoots; dry river-beds fill with water and soon burst their banks to
flood much of the low-lying ground. The Aborigines Lubbock meets have
already established substantial campsites on high ground. They had
waited for the first rains and then collected great sheets of bark from
the eucalyptus trees, which had become free once the sap began to run.
From these sheets of bark, draped over branches, they built conical
huts. They also used the bark for building canoes, essential for travel
now that so much of the landscape is flooded. Like the Aborigines,
Lubbock’s diet changes as crabs, shellfish and birds’ eggs become
available. Hunting continues but the groups undertaking wallaby drives
are replaced by individuals who attempt to stalk and kill kangaroos.
They know that if they fail – which is usually the case – there will be
plenty of plant foods and small game available at the camp, whereas
success will bring much praise and status.

By the following March plant foods have become abundant. On his way
Lubbock helps to gather yams, tubers and a multitude of seeds into bark
trays, and then to construct weirs and traps for fish as the flood
waters begin to recede. As the wet season comes to its end, the camps
break up and people disperse by canoes along the waterways, knowing that
within weeks the rains will have ended for another year. By then Lubbock
has reached the tip of Cape York and is ready to cross the Torres
Strait.

