18 Two Villages in Southeast Europe

Sedentary hunter-gatherers and immigrant farmers, 6500–6200 BC

Fishing trips, barbecues, and pine forests after rain – jumbled memories
recalled by the lingering smell of wood smoke. John Lubbock wakes upon a
hard plaster floor at the narrow end of a tent-like dwelling. Sitting up
and looking out, he sees a broad river with steeply wooded slopes below
limestone cliffs. The sun has just risen. There are footsteps and
voices.

The brushwood walls of the dwelling pitch towards a long ridge-pole from
which wicker baskets and bone harpoons are hanging. Blocks of limestone
surround a pit in the floor containing the still warm ashes of pine logs
where parcels of fish had been baked the night before. Wooden bowls
holding water and herbs sit upon paving slabs by the entrance. Lubbock
turns and meets the silent gaze of a rounded river boulder, sculptured
with bulging eyes, swollen lips and a scaly body. It is of the owner of
the house.

Stepping outside, Lubbock finds that his is just one of twenty such huts
arranged upon a terrace above the river. A hunter-gatherer village – the
first of his European travels. It initially reminds him of ‘Ain Mallaha
and Abu Hureyra in western Asia at 12,500 BC. But a second glance shows
it to be quite different – canoes are moored and nets are hanging out to
dry. This is a fishermen’s village, one that is flourishing just as the
town of ‘Ain Ghazal in western Asia is suffering economic collapse.

Some people work while others idly stand or sit in small groups,
enjoying the early sunshine. They chat about the weather, about fishing
plans, about their children. Behind the village small trails climb
steeply though scrubby hazel trees into woodland of oak, elm and lime,
leading towards the pine trees and high cliffs. An eagle soars within a
pale blue sky, while cormorants fly low across the water. It is daybreak
at Lepenski Vir, 6400 BC.¹

Sitting by the river, Lubbock recalls the journey from La Riera in
northern Spain – a momentous walk across southern Europe. Several of the
campsites he shared with Mesolithic occupants have become known as
archaeological sites. Many others will never be found – perhaps
destroyed by later settlements or buried below deep alluvium of the
Rhône delta and Po basin. Still others wait to be discovered.

Lubbock had climbed into the Pyrenees and found rounded grassy summits
giving way to splintered stone, the skyline becoming ever taller and
more fractured with every day of eastern progress. In the central
Pyrenees he had camped with ibex hunters at 1,000 metres, in the base of
a great natural amphitheatre known today as Balma Margineda.² Having
caught ibex with the men, Lubbock joined the women fishing for trout and
picking blackberries. Another 200 kilometres of hiking brought him to
Roc del Migdia, a cave at the base of a cliff within thick oak woodland,
in what is today Catalonia.³ After having helped fill its occupants’
baskets with acorns, hazelnuts and sloes, he sat with them to watch
vultures circling lazily on the thermals.⁴

Lubbock’s journey across southern France involved walks along sandy
beaches, hitchhikes on canoes through the marshes of the Rhône delta,
detours inland when the sea washed against the base of cliffs of
creamy-white limestone or fiery red porphyry. There was an immense
variety of trees and plants but none of those that strike the visitor
today – the lemons and oranges, olives, the palms and mimosas. Such
trees are all late arrivals to the Riviera. Lubbock was pleased by their
absence as it gave space for swathes of wild lilac and honeysuckle that
grew within the limestone ravines, in which he listened to thunderous
torrents and springs bursting from the earth.⁵

After crossing the marshy lowlands of northern Italy, the haunts of
people setting fish-traps and catching waterfowl, Lubbock once again
climbed into mountains, the pine-clad peaks of the Italian Dolomites. He
did so following the tracks of hunters, who in turn were following red
deer to summer pastures. At 2,000 metres he joined their camp below the
overhang of a massive boulder – erratically placed by a long-gone
glacier. That site is now known as Mondeval de Sora. When excavated in
1986, the burial of a man was found – a hunter laid to rest with an
assortment of stone tools and jewellery carved from boar tusks and deer
teeth.⁶ From the Dolomites Lubbock headed southeast into the rolling
hills and deep valleys of Croatia. There he shared small caves with
hunting parties who watched the valley bottoms for game and chipped new
stone points for their hunting weapons.⁷

Leaving the mountains and hills, Lubbock travelled to the southern
margins of the Hungarian plain and then relieved his tired legs by
adopting a new means of transport: a dugout canoe. He found one
drifting; it had presumably escaped a mooring downstream. For 800
kilometres he travelled along the rivers of southeast Europe, taking
short sojourns into surrounding woodlands with hunters after wild boar
and helping passing fishermen to haul in their nets.

At some point on this waterway journey Lubbock’s canoe entered the
Danube. The river lazily unwound between tree-covered hills, sometimes
looping away for a kilometre or two and then meandering back through
willows and aspens. Eventually it passed between steep cliffs and
Lubbock entered the first of the great canyon-like gorges known today as
the Iron Gates. It was now that clusters of dwellings appeared,
sprawling along the terraces above the river. These looked quite
different to the brushwood huts that Lubbock had seen elsewhere in
Mesolithic Europe and so, late one evening, he moored and climbed the
bank. It was a cloudy, moonless night and the dwellings appeared as
curious shadows, unnatural in their man-made geometry. As he stumbled
over fireplaces still warm with ash, and startled rats and mice, Lubbock
realised that the entire village was asleep.

The sleeping occupants of Lepenski Vir are hunter-gatherers who have
‘settled down’ to a sedentary lifestyle. Woodland had survived in the
Danube valley throughout the LGM, principally juniper and willow, but
also small stands of oak, elm and lime that would help seed the rest of
Europe. Ice-age hunters made periodic visits to the valley to stalk ibex
and fish for salmon, but they never stayed for very long. As the climate
became warmer and the rains more frequent, the broad leaves flourished.
The trees climbed the mountain slopes and produced thick woodland
containing an abundance of game and edible plants. Red deer and wild
boar, otters and beavers, ducks and geese became additions to the
ice-age diet. And so people came to the Iron Gates more often and were
less inclined to leave. They arrived at their supposedly winter
campsites in early autumn and remained until the late spring. Such
settlements began to merge with what had once been short-term summer
fishing camps. By 6500 BC people found no need to leave the river at
all; what had been temporary campsites became the first permanent
villages on the banks of the Danube.

John Lubbock wanders around Lepenski Vir, in and out of the dwellings.
Although varying in size, they share the same design and furnishings.
Carved stone boulders with faces that seem to be part fish and part
human, sit looking rather melancholy within each hut. Frequently they
are placed beside stone structures that look like altars, supported by
pebbles incised with geometric designs. Within the largest hut, located
centrally in the village, a few bone amulets and a flute rest upon a
slab.⁸ This hut is next to an open space, one where the ground seems
beaten smooth from dancing feet. Although ritual, religion and
performance are always integral parts of hunter-gatherer lives, they
have a more pervasive presence than at any other European settlement
that Lubbock has visited. Wherever he looks there are stacks of
stone-tipped arrows, antler harpoons, net floats and weights, wicker
baskets, stone pestles and mortars.

This range of equipment testifies to the varied and abundant foods
available to the people of Lepenski Vir – not just meat and fish but
nuts, fungi, berries and seeds. Yet despite such gastronomic diversity,
several of the children playing in the river shallows appear
undernourished. Rickets is prevalent in the village and some children
carry horizontal ridges on their teeth – lines where the enamel has
failed to grow owing to ill-health. The reality is that the
architectural and artistic creativity at Lepenski Vir goes hand in hand
with periodic shortages of food.⁹

Three women are halfway through the construction of a dwelling. They
have formed a compact, trapeze-shaped platform from a mixture of baked
crushed limestone, sand and gravel around stone blocks positioned to
form the central hearth. As Lubbock watches, they pause to unwrap a hide
bundle, revealing the decayed body of a young infant. Its bones dangle
from each other, loosely joined by ligaments and fragments of dried
yellow skin.

The body is buried and sealed within the floor. An adult’s jawbone is
withdrawn from another wrapping and placed between two stones of the
hearth.¹⁰ After no more than a tiny pause the practicalities of building
work resume: posts are secured within holes to support the ridge-pole
that will soon be lifted into place. To Lubbock, the women seem to have
switched from the secular to the religious and then back again; but for
them such divisions have no meaning. They just get on with life, a life
in which every act, every artefact and every aspect of the natural world
is just as sacred as it is profane.

Life at Lepenski Vir revolved around the river. It provided food, it was
the Mesolithic highway, its flow symbolised the passage from birth to
death. At least, that is the belief of Ivana Radovanović, an
archaeologist from Belgrade who has undertaken the task of trying to
read the symbolic code that was woven as much into day-to-day life as
into the ceremonial burials and seasonal celebrations of Lepenski Vir.¹¹

Radovanović was a student of Dragoslav Srejović, the Yugoslavian
archaeologist who discovered and then excavated Lepenski Vir between
1966 and 1971.¹² He found the site while surveying the banks of the
Danube prior to the construction of a dam in 1970 – one that would drown
the banks and all that was hidden upon them. It is just one of several
sites on both riverbanks that share similar art and architecture –
others include Hajdučka, Vodenica, Padina and Vlasac. Some may have been
seasonal encampments rather than permanent villages; Lepenski Vir may
even have been a ceremonial centre.¹³

Srejović excavated many burials at Lepenski Vir. Those of children were
usually placed within the dwellings, either buried under the floor or
within the stone hearths and structures Srejović thought were altars.
Adults, normally men, were buried between the dwellings. The skulls and
jawbones of wild ox, deer or other humans were sometimes placed with the
dead, together with tools and necklaces made from snail-shell beads.

Most of the adult burials had their heads pointing downstream so that
the river could carry their spirit away – or so Radovanović believes.
She thinks the river had also symbolised rebirth, as each spring beluga
– the giant sturgeons still revered today as producers of the very best
caviar – came upstream to spawn. Their arrival must have been striking,
a procession of river monsters growing up to 9 metres long: the spirits
of the dead reborn, according to Radovanović, made real by the stone
sculptures that blended fish and human into one being.

Lubbock leaves Lepenski Vir on a summer’s afternoon, to the sound of
nets being hauled from water, of posts being hammered into the ground
and human voices chatting. He heads south through the lush woodland of
the Balkan hills, walking upon a matted carpet of leaves, cones and
acorns, oak-apples, beechmast and the split caskets of chestnuts. He
encounters does grazing in sunny glades; catching his scent, they turn
in a flurry of white rumps for the underbrush. A stag with candelabra
antlers stares severely before following at a stately trot upon his neat
and shiny hoofs.

Lubbock is now adept at reading the signs of game, quite unlike when he
had begun his European travels across the tundra towards Creswell Crags,
illiterate in the language of footprints and turds. He tests himself at
tracking deer and calculating where the wild boar will come to feed. He
knows where to find nests for collecting eggs, which fungi to take and
which to leave. Indeed, he feels quite confident of being able to live
by hunting and gathering within these woods and wonders why no one else
has chosen to do so: there is a complete absence of people or signs of
their presence. At no other time in his European travels can he recall
having gone for so long without encountering a single campsite or
occupied cave.¹⁴

This paucity of Mesolithic sites in Southeast Europe, all the way from
the Danube to the Mediterranean Sea, has been of considerable worry to
archaeologists. Was there a genuine absence of settlements? Have
Mesolithic sites been destroyed, or do some remain to be discovered? In
Greece, for instance, there are barely a dozen Mesolithic but many
hundreds of Neolithic sites, thousands from later periods and a great
many from much earlier periods of human evolution. Catherine Perlès, the
leading scholar of early prehistoric Greece, recently evaluated all
possible reasons for the rarity of Mesolithic sites and concluded that
this must genuinely reflect a very small population, one that was almost
entirely based on the coast.¹⁵

After a trek of some 400 kilometres from Lepenski Vir, Lubbock reaches
the Macedonian plain of northern Greece. He arrives in the year of 6300
BC, and sits on the branch of a sturdy oak to watch the comings and
goings of quite a different kind of village. A cluster of dwellings lie
within a clearing upon a small knoll; the ground to one side is marshy,
to the other it is divided by criss-crossing paths and fences which
define small gardens whose plants have just begun to sprout. The
dwellings, ten or twelve in number, are rectangular with thatched roofs
and overhanging eaves.

One is under construction: bundles of reeds are being tied between
uprights of cut saplings. Although these houses are far larger and of
more substance than the dwellings of Lepenski Vir, it is the simple
wooden pens attached to their outside walls that attract Lubbock’s
interest – or rather, what the pens contain. Jumping down, he approaches
the village along a pathway that runs from the woods to a gap in a low
mud wall that surrounds it. He stoops to examine the plants sprouting in
the gardens. Some – wheat or barley – have pointed leaves just beginning
to unfurl around the stem; others – peas or lentils – have wispy stems
with pale rounded leaves. Women and children are also stooping, weeding
around the shoots. Lubbock pulls a few handfuls of grass – not as a
gesture of help but so that he can feed the sheep, which look more like
goats, that stand idly within the wooden pens.

Lubbock is about to enter one of the first farming villages of Europe,
that which archaeologists will call Nea Nikomedeia.¹⁶ Several
generations of farmers have already lived and died at this village. Its
founders may have come from other farming settlements in Greece, or
those of Turkey or Cyprus – perhaps all the way from western Asia
itself.

It was from western Asia that the very first farmers to arrive in Europe
had once embarked, after loading their small boats with baskets of
seed-corn and suitably shackled sheep and goats.¹⁷ Some had crossed the
Aegean to the eastern lowlands of Greece; others went to Crete and
southern Italy.¹⁸ They cleared woodlands, set their sheep and goats to
browse, built their houses and began a new chapter in European
prehistory.¹⁹

The first farmers arrived in Greece at around 7500 BC and found a
largely uninhabited landscape.²⁰ Only in the vicinity of Franchthi Cave
in the southern Argolid was there a substantial Mesolithic presence.
This is the cave where Thomas Jacobsen found evidence for a diet rich in
plant and coastal foods, especially after the seashore had all but
reached the entrance of the cave. In the upper layers of Franchthi Cave,
those contemporary with the first farming settlements, Jacobsen found a
few seeds of domesticated wheat, barley and lentils, but these were
vastly outnumbered by the remains of wild plants. Sheep, goat and pig
bones had, however, become prevalent, suggesting that the Mesolithic
people had begun poaching from the farmers’ settlements or were rustling
to create flocks and herds of their own. But this made little impact
upon their way of life: stone tools, burial practices, hunting and
gathering activities continued at Franchthi Cave with hardly any
change.²¹

The farmers and hunter-gatherers lived side by side for a whole
millennium at least. They had little to do with each other; the flood
plains, which provided fertile soils for the farmers, were of little
interest to the hunter-gatherers who relied upon the woodlands and the
seashore.²²

Yet this co-habitation of southern Greece could not survive. Around 7000
BC many new farming settlements appeared – one of which was Nea
Nikomedeia. Whether these were built by a burgeoning local population or
by a new wave of immigrants remains unclear. The latter is perhaps more
likely as fine pottery appears – something not found in Greece before
this date.

The final deposits at Franchthi Cave contain pottery and stone tools
more similar to those found in the farming settlements than those in the
lower levels of the cave. Dwellings were constructed outside the
entrance and plots created for cultivating crops. The farming culture
had finally overwhelmed the Mesolithic hunter-gatherers of Franchthi.

They might have abandoned the cave to the new farmers, gradually
dwindling in number and becoming extinct. Perhaps they chose to become
farmers themselves. Or the two populations may have become so closely
linked by marriage and interbreeding that even they could no longer tell
which was which. In this confusion of what happened to the Mesolithic
people of Franchthi Cave we find the future history of the European
continent as a whole.

The interior of the house that Lubbock has entered at Nea Nikomedeia is
dark and quiet, the air stale and smoky – quite different from the
light, fresh dwelling at Lepenski Vir. While walking through the village
he had paused to help members of a family plaster clay over the reed
bundles and oak saplings forming the walls of their new home. Now he
discovers how effective such walls can be, creating a space that is
isolated from the outside world.

Pottery vessels and wicker baskets are stacked against the walls, rush
mats and hides lie upon the floor. A raised plaster platform, about ten
or twenty centimetres off the ground, has a shallow basin with a
smouldering fire. The smoke seeps through the thatch, killing off pests
and waterproofing the reeds. A woman sits by the fire, twisting fibres
to make a ball of twine. She pauses to prod the ashes and then to
scratch. The bone buckle that fastens her belt looks familiar – Lubbock
remembers seeing one similar in design at Çatalhöyük.²³

Finding pottery is another ‘first’ for his European journey – all
previous vessels had been made from wood, stone or wickerwork. The pots
he sees at Nea Nikomedeia come in a variety of shapes and sizes, ranging
from open bowls to large storage jars with narrow mouths. Some are
plain; others are painted white with geometric designs in red. A few
have finger impressions or even human faces in the clay: the noses are
shaped by pinching and the eyes are small ovals. Many are large and
elaborate; Lubbock guesses they are used for entertaining.

There is one larger building, more than 10 metres square, located in a
central position. It is gloomy inside, with no evidence of domestic life
and quite empty of people. Clay figurines sit upon wooden tables. Most
are of women – moulded to have thin cylindrical heads, pointed noses and
slit eyes. Arms are folded, with each hand grasping a breast made from a
tiny knob of clay. Their diminutive size is compensated for by enormous,
near-spherical thighs. Alongside these figurines are a few crude models
of sheep and goats, and, in stark contrast, three polished effigies of
frogs, beautifully carved from green and blue serpentine.

Lubbock leaves the village, returning to his lofty seat in the woods,
choosing to watch village life from a distance. Within a few days he
begins to understand how the village works. Each household is
self-sufficient; families tend their own gardens, manage their own
livestock, and make their own pottery and tools. At the same time, this
household independence is balanced by a culture of hospitality, the
outside fireplaces being used for communal meals.

Time begins to move more quickly: the oak comes into full leaf as the
crops ripen; the leaves turn brown and fall as the harvest occurs.
During the winter Lubbock sits through rain while the marsh becomes a
lake and then spills its water across the gardens, depositing a layer of
fine silt to fertilise next year’s crops. When the oak buds appear, the
people of Nea Nikomedeia return to their gardens with spades and hoes,
turning the soil before they plant again.

Lubbock watches as visitors arrive bringing stone, shells and elaborate
pottery to trade. He sees the dead of the village being buried in
shallow unmarked graves or within the debris of abandoned dwellings. It
seems a pragmatic affair – getting rid of a body with as limited
ceremony as possible, with no graveside ritual or offerings buried with
the dead. But people regularly enter and leave the central building
which contains the clay figurines and seems to be a shrine. Sometimes
many arrive together and Lubbock hears muffled singing and chanting from
inside. He suspects that new figurines are taken in, and others are
removed or smashed – but from his distant view he gains little insight
into the religious life of Nea Nikomedeia.²⁴

Acorns drop, seedlings sprout only to have their life snubbed out by the
nibbling teeth of deer; any saplings that survive are soon cut and taken
to the village. As time passes, Lubbock watches a complete harvest fail
owing to a dry winter with late frosts, and the people reluctantly
slaughter sheep and goats to survive. The friendships between
households, maintained by the constant hospitality, help in times of
need: when one household is short of food they can rely on gaining a
share of another’s.²⁵

The overriding impression from his woodland seat is that life at Nea
Nikomedeia is hard: tilling fields, weeding, watering, grinding seed,
digging clay, clearing woodland. Labour appears to be in short supply as
even young children are pressed into weeding and spreading muck. Lubbock
recalls the hunter-gatherers of Lepenski Vir, those of La Riera,
Gönnersdorf and Creswell Crags, none of whom seemed to work for more
than a few hours on any one day. For them, the key to a full stomach had
been knowledge, not labour: where the game would be, when the fruit
would ripen, how to hunt wild boar and catch shoals of fish.

As the years pass by, Lubbock watches the construction of new houses and
the number of gardens increase. Villages throughout the Macedonian plain
are similarly increasing in size and soon population limits are reached.
The available soils around Nea Nikomedeia cannot support more people and
so a group of families leave to find new land. With a herd of goats and
a straggle of piglets they head northwards, aiming to create a new
settlement on the first suitable flood plain they locate.

The farmers ‘leap-frogged’ their way from one fertile plain to the next,
through the Balkans and on to the Hungarian plain where new farming
cultures would develop.²⁶ Farming settlements were made no more than 50
kilometres from Lepenski Vir, their presence leading to an initial
florescence and then to the collapse of its Mesolithic culture. Some of
the Lepenski Vir people, most likely the old, elaborated their artistic
traditions as a means to resist the new farmers and their way of life.
New stone sculptures were made, even larger and more striking than those
that Lubbock had seen. They were positioned close to the doorsteps of
their dwellings rather than hidden away inside.

But for others, most likely the young, farming settlements provided new
ideas and opportunities for trade.²⁷ Lepenski Vir’s fate was inevitable:
an increasing number of pottery vessels appeared amidst the hunting
weapons and fishing nets; its people became seduced by the farming way
of life. There were some good reasons for this: sheep, cattle and wheat
could fill the dietary gaps created by the periodic shortages of wild
food that had left children undernourished. But very soon the culinary
tables had turned – the wild foods became the supplements to a diet of
cereals and peas.

Lubbock also leaves Nea Nikomedeia. He travels to the shores of the
Black Sea, recently flooded after the Bosphorus had burst. There are
vast acres of drowned forests, swathes of silt, fields of great boulders
and uprooted trunks.²⁸ Lubbock continues northwards into the valleys of
the Dniester and Dnieper, still untouched by the new farming way of
life. There he finds hunter-gatherer villages amid thick woodland and
the first cemeteries of his European journey – a sign of what is to
come.²⁹ Buried beneath the river sediments of these valleys are the
remnants of mammoth-bone dwellings that had been occupied at the LGM
when the landscape was barren tundra.

As Lubbock travels further north, the landscape begins to change.
Broad-leafed woodlands with lush understoreys of shrubs give way to dark
coniferous forests quite barren below the trees. Elk replace red deer
and bear replace the wild boar. Permanent hunter-gatherer villages give
way to the more familiar transient campsites of people whose sense of
place is a whole forest, a mountain range, a string of lakes or even all
three combined, rather than any one culturally demarcated patch of
ground. Lubbock continues on foot and by boat through endless marshy
lowlands as the seasons turn and turn again until, 2000 kilometres due
north of Lepenski Vir, he arrives at a lakeshore from which canoes are
embarking to a little island. He steals a ride.

Nea Nikomedeia was entirely abandoned at around 5000 BC – perhaps due to
the exhaustion of surrounding soil or endemic disease caused by
overwhelming quantities of human waste. Once deserted, the final
buildings collapsed; their timbers decayed, the clay plaster was washed
or blown away, or simply became compacted on the ground. The pits filled
up with silt; blown sand buried fireplaces, post holes and rubbish
dumps.

As nature reclaimed its own, Nea Nikomedeia became a small tell; once
covered by scrubland and scoured by the sun, wind and rain, it looked
little different from the many natural small mounds on the Macedonian
plain. By the twentieth century the mound of Nea Nikomedeia was
surrounded by orchards and fields growing cotton and sugar beet. In
1953, as a bulldozer began to flatten the land for road construction,
fragments of pottery came tumbling from a cutting in the mound, causing
the Greek Archaeological Service to halt the work. In 1961 they embarked
upon a joint excavation with Cambridge University, led by Robert Rodden.
He was assisted by Grahame Clark, whose heart, one suspects, had always
remained with the Mesolithic hunters of Star Carr while he excavated in
the heat of the Mediterranean sun.

19 Islands of the Dead

Mesolithic burial and society in northern Europe, 6200–5000 BC

The canoe glides across still waters, shattering mirror images of
spruce, larch and a steel-blue sky. Water sprayed from the paddles is
icy cold; the sun is at its zenith. The woodlands are left behind as the
canoe approaches the island. There the body, which the canoe is carrying
and Lubbock is squeezed behind, will be buried. It is of a man, clothed
as when alive in furs, an elk-tooth necklace, a bear-tusk pendant, a
slate knife attached to his belt. This is the last of his many journeys
upon the waterways and through the woodlands of northern Europe. He must
now join his ancestors, those who inhabit the island of the dead.

Lubbock is heading towards Oleneostrovski Mogilnik – Deer Island
cemetery – in the middle of what is today Lake Onega in northwest
Russia. The date is 6200 BC.¹ The canoe is paddled by the dead man’s
sons and is one of many approaching the island. The burial provides an
excuse for people to gather after a hard winter in the northern forest,
and they come from all directions. They need to catch up on gossip,
exchange flints and furs, swap stories and discuss future plans: who
will be going where for the summer, for how long and with whom. They
must also ensure that the deceased passes safely into the world of
spirits and ancestors.

In 1939 Vladislav Iosifovich Ravdonikas, head of the State Institute for
the History and Material Culture of Stalinist Russia,² received the
results of excavations undertaken on Oleneostrovski Mogilnik by his
assistant and protégé, I. I. Gurina. She had begun work in June 1936,
finding the island covered by spruce and larch. Between the trees were
large pits where local people had recently quarried sand and gravel,
once deposited by the great glaciers of the north. They had known it as
‘the island of the dead’ owing to the human bones that their quarrying
exposed. Many graves had been dug up out of curiosity and in the search
for treasure. But hopes for gold and silver were rapidly dashed. Gurina
found archaeological treasures of a quite different kind. Associated
with the human burials was jewellery made from animal teeth and bones,
carved figurines of elk and snake, slate knives, bone points and flint
implements.³

During three seasons of fieldwork she excavated 170 burials. Some
contained well-preserved skeletons; others mere fragments of human bone.
Some had large quantities of ornaments and tools while others had few or
none. Men, women and children had been buried on the island. Eighteen
graves had contained two individuals and a few had three. Gurina
estimated that the cemetery contained 500 burials in total. She would
have excavated more if her fieldwork had not been terminated by state
security in 1938 as plans for the Soviet invasion of Finland were being
finalised – Lake Onega was en route.

The results of Gurina’s work caused a dilemma for Ravdonikas. The size
and wealth of the Oleneostrovski Mogilnik cemetery implied that its
people had been farmers – at least, it did so if one followed the
Marxist theory of social evolution and material culture. As he worked in
Stalin’s Russia and archaeological observations were made to confirm the
pattern of social evolution as laid out by Frederick Engels, Ravdonikas
had to just that. Primitive communism had supposedly gone through two
stages: the Early Clan phase of fully nomadic hunter-gatherers and the
Late Clan phase of sedentary farmers and animal herders when people
first lived in large communities and acquired material possessions.
Where did Oleneostrovski Mogilnik fit in? Its social complexity
suggested the Late Clan phase that Ravdonikas dated to 2000 BC. But
where, therefore, were the obligatory pottery and the domestic animals?

His solution – and the one still favoured by so many archaeologists
today when lost for an explanation – was ‘ritual’. The Oleneostrovski
Mogilnik people must have had ritual prohibitions about placing pottery
and the bones of domestic animals into the graves of their dead. So the
problem was solved, and Engels’ view of history remained intact.

Ravdonikas was quite wrong. The people in Lubbock’s canoe have never
heard of pottery and had no conception of a domestic animal. They lived
at least 4,000 years earlier than Ravdonikas had proposed, using the
island as a cemetery between 6700 and 6000 BC.

The canoes arrive and are pulled ashore. The island is very small, a
mere 2.5 kilometres long and less than one kilometre wide, and covered
in spruce and larch. The body is placed upon a stretcher and without a
word the people proceed along a path between the trees. Lubbock follows,
arriving at a clearing where about fifty people have already gathered.
This is the cemetery. Low mounds of sandy soil indicate previous
burials; some appear fresh while others are overgrown by shoots and
seedlings. A new grave has been dug; like the others, it is quite
shallow and orientated east–west. The burial rites begin and Lubbock
stands within the group of onlookers, watching the shaman at work.

The body is secured within the grave, its head at the eastern end and
the deceased man’s possessions positioned by his side: a slate knife,
bone points, flint implements.⁴ The people now disperse to fireplaces at
the margins of the cemetery to engage in small talk. Lubbock remains by
the graveside, wondering about the dead man’s life. In a little over
8,000 years, long after his clothes and flesh have decayed to nothing,
Gurina excavated his body. She meticulously drew each bone and artefact;
she too wondered who that man had been.

Almost fifty years after Ravdonikas had interpreted Gurina’s results, a
second attempt was made. This time it was by a pair of archaeologists
quite unswayed by the canons of Marxist theory: John O’Shea from the
University of Michigan, a specialist in the analysis of cemeteries, and
Marek Zvelebil, from the University of Sheffield, the leading expert on
the Mesolithic hunter-gatherers of northern Europe.⁵

They took Gurina’s information and used sophisticated statistical
methods to place the graves into a series of overlapping groups. These
groups, they argued, reflected social distinctions within the past
society of the Oleneostrovski Mogilnik people. They claimed that the
society had been divided into two lineages, one marked by the use of elk
effigies and the other by those of snakes.⁶ These effigies were only
found in certain graves, possibly those who were the hereditary leaders
of the lineage.

As some implements were exclusively buried with the men – bone points,
harpoons, slate knives and daggers – O’Shea and Zvelebil proposed that a
strong sexual division of labour had existed. The women had no specific
tools for themselves and were more frequently buried with beads made
from beaver teeth. The archaeologists decided that pendants of elk,
beaver and bear teeth were indicators of wealth because, when these were
plentiful in a grave, so too were artefacts such as knives and points.
Those buried with bear tusks were the wealthiest – predominantly young
adult males. This suggested that acquiring wealth was dependent upon
physical health and, most likely, hunting prowess – the loss of one’s
vigour with age meant the loss of prestige and power. For women, the
pathway to wealth appeared to be either by marriage or from blood ties
to males.

Four burials were quite different to the others. Many grave-goods had
been placed in the graves and the bodies had been interred in an almost
vertical position so that the dead appeared to be still standing on the
ground. O’Shea and Zvelebil thought that these were shamans, as Gurina
herself had proposed. Finally, eleven graves of older men contained bone
points alone – possibly a special group of hunters who were prohibited
from accumulating their own possessions and wealth.

O’Shea and Zvelebil concluded that those who buried their dead at
Oleneostrovski Mogilnik had more complex social lives than the vast
majority of hunter-gatherers both past and present. As such, they had
most likely lived all year round in as yet undiscovered villages, away
from the island of the dead that appears to have been the provenance of
ancestors alone. O’Shea and Zvelebil suggested that the Oleneostrovski
Mogilnik people had gained their wealth by acting as ‘middlemen’ in the
trading networks for flint and slate that covered northern Russia and
eastern Finland.

Whereas it had taken nearly half a century for Ravdonikas’s
interpretation of Oleneostrovski Mogilnik to be substantially
challenged, that of O’Shea and Zvelebil had less than a decade of grace.
In 1995 their conclusions were questioned by Ken Jacobs from the
University of Montreal and the cemetery of Oleneostrovski Mogilnik was
reinterpreted once again.⁷

Jacobs considered that the similarities between the graves were more
significant than the differences. He argued that the island had acted as
the ‘ritual centre’ for many small groups of hunter-gatherers who lived,
widely dispersed, along the shorelines and adjacent woodlands of Lake
Onega. He thought that this had been a society of equals, attributing
differences between the graves in the numbers of beads, pendants and
artefacts to variable preservation rather than wealth and status. To
Jacobs, Oleneostrovski Mogilnik resembled the sacred places of the Saami
people who lived in the region until the nineteenth century. They too
had buried their dead on islands within lakes. They did so to prevent
spirits returning to settlements, in the belief that they would attempt
to take relatives and possessions to the afterworld. By being restricted
to an island, the spirits would also leave favoured hunting and fishing
grounds undisturbed. Perhaps those who buried their dead at
Oleneostrovski Mogilnik had thought likewise – perhaps they were the
direct ancestors of the Saami.

As darkness falls, Lubbock watches dancing shadows in the moonlight; he
listens to singing but cannot understand the words. And so he would have
been in sympathy with the archaeologists of today, with Vladislav
Iosifovich Ravdonikas, with John O’Shea, Marek Zvelebil and Ken Jacobs.
They, too, are chasing the shadows of past lives and lack translators
for the language they attempt to read – that of bear tusks, elk teeth
and bone points. As the moon climbs and shooting stars arrive, Lubbock
borrows a canoe and paddles into the night.

From the western shore of Lake Onega he travels to the Baltic coast. At
times the canoe must be dragged from river to river; there are many
woodland floods to negotiate, all created by the dams of beavers –
animals that seem far more intent on redesigning nature than does any
human being within the northern forest.⁸ Lubbock catches glimpses of
elk, he lives on fish and berries, and sleeps under the stars – when not
woken by screech owls and howling wolves. Were it not for permanently
sodden feet, an aching body and unremitting insect attacks, his nomadic
lifestyle would be idyllic.

After paddling across the vast Lake Ladoga he enters the Gulf of Finland
by the estuary of the River Neva, arriving where St Petersburg will one
day flourish. A journey southwards begins.⁹ He crosses large
river-mouths, weaving between a multitude of tiny islands, and sometimes
heads for open water. Porpoises often trail behind and occasionally lead
the way; seals are ever vigilant while gulls swoop low over the strange
canoeist in their midst. Lubbock passes many coastal encampments, some
with wigwam-like tents, others with timber huts. People are sitting
beside their canoes and smouldering fires; they mend fishing nets and
harpoons, prepare food, tell stories to each other.¹⁰ Lubbock travels
for more than 1,500 kilometres south on the Baltic Sea. The date becomes
5000 BC and winter approaches. On the shore great flocks of starlings
have appeared, the leaves have turned and the nights are growing long.
And so a sprawling settlement around the mouth of a lagoon at the tip of
southern Sweden looks most inviting, spirals of smoke suggesting a warm
fire and roasted meat.

This settlement is known today as Skateholm, one of the largest
Mesolithic sites in the whole of northern Europe. Today’s quiet farmland
of Skateholm provides no hint of its lively prehistoric past. The sea
level has fallen by a few metres since that time, leaving what were once
small islands in the lagoon as low knolls in otherwise flat fields. If
the soil is scraped or blown away, sand from the prehistoric beach
appears. Ploughs drag the debris of Mesolithic life to the surface.

It was indeed during ploughing in the late 1970s that the first traces
of Mesolithic Skateholm were found in the form of stone tools.¹¹ Lars
Larsson, Professor of Archaeology at Lund University, investigated. His
trial trenches of 1980 recovered not only abundant artefacts, but many
animal bones, including those from tiny fish, which indicated excellent
preservation. There was more. Just where this Mesolithic debris was
becoming sparse, suggesting the edge of the living area, a trial trench
exposed a dark patch of sediment amidst the clean yellow sand of the
underlying beach. When the top few centimetres were scraped away, a
human skull appeared; it was a grave, the first of sixty-four that Lars
Larsson would excavate at Skateholm.

Within a few years, he had exposed more than 3,000 square metres of this
prehistoric settlement, discovered not one but three cemeteries, and
recovered a remarkable collection of tools and animal bones.

At 5000 BC the lagoon entrance is half a kilometre across and
interrupted by two small islands, one of which barely clears the water.
That had been the cemetery before becoming flooded; now the larger
island has been adopted and will be the burial ground that Larsson
excavates in its entirety: fifty-three graves. Behind the lagoon thick
reeds border the shore, brown and beaten by the winter weather, threaded
by winding rivers. Beyond, there is thick woodland, not of pine as in
the north but of deciduous trees – Lubbock is back in the world of oak,
elm, lime, alder and willow.¹² From his viewpoint, bobbing on the sea a
kilometre offshore, he sees people gathered around fires and small
brushwood huts. Canoes are moored within the reeds and nets hung out to
dry.

The Skateholm people have been attracted to the lagoon by its immense
diversity of plants and animals. During the winter months they stalk
wild boar and deer within the adjacent woodland, set fish-traps for pike
and perch, and net the great shoals of sticklebacks that flourish in the
rivers, which they mash for oil. Nets are also used for catching sea
birds along rocky promontories: guillemot, razorbill and eider duck.
When the sea is calm, they go fishing for herring or harpooning for
dolphin and porpoise. Some evenings are spent stalking seals that gather
upon the shore.

All such activities were evident from the collection of animal bones
that Lars Larsson recovered: the bones of eighty-seven different
species. With such an immense range, he thought that people had lived at
Skateholm all year round. But then Peter Rowley-Conwy got hold of the
bones and analysed them with his intimate knowledge of animal anatomy,
reproduction and behaviour.¹³

Rowley-Conwy found that the bones of wild boar told a different story
about life at Skateholm to that envisaged by Lars Larsson – or rather
their piglets did. Wild boar is an ideal animal for an archaeo-zoologist
because of the rapidity of its growth from tiny newborn piglet to large
full-grown adult. Consequently, an animal’s size is an accurate
indicator of its age, not in years but in months since birth. Mesolithic
piglets were most likely born in the spring, just like piglets today. By
estimating their age when killed, one can establish in what month
hunting had occurred. Of course, one cannot measure the actual piglet
because only individual bones survive; but some of these – such as the
phalanges or foot bones – give a very accurate estimate of the complete
piglet. So Rowley-Conwy measured the bones at Skateholm and found that
all the wild boar had been killed during the winter months.

The same season was suggested by the study of deer jaws and seal bones.
Of the birds, almost all were winter visitors; there were just two bones
from possible summer migrants to the Swedish coast: the Dalmatian
pelican and the shoveller. Just as telling was the absence of species
that would have been caught if people had been at Skateholm during the
summer months. Cod, mackerel and garfish, for instance, would surely
have been caught in large quantities when they came inshore to breed;
but they were represented by only fifteen out of 2425 identified
fishbones. This suggests that people were only fishing in the winter, a
time when such fish were far away in the Baltic Sea.

From his canoe, Lubbock can see several clusters of huts along the
Skateholm shore; some have wigwam-like tents covered with hide, others
are dome-shaped brushwood dwellings or rather shaky timber-framed huts.
Looking closer, he finds that the people within each cluster are also
dressed quite differently – some with long shawls, others with furs.
Faces might be painted or plain, necks and waists strung with beads or
left quite bare. There seems little contact between each cluster, simply
a grudging acknowledgement that they too have a right to camp by the
lagoon.¹⁴

Just as Lubbock raises his paddle to approach the shore, a dog barks. A
second joins in, along with a pack on the western headland of the
lagoon. Big dogs, rather like German shepherd dogs today. Fierce dogs.
Lubbock decides to remain watching from a distance.

The Skateholm cemeteries excavated by Larsson suggest families who were
only loosely bound together into a single community, owing to the
immense variety of burial practices. This contrasts greatly with the
uniformity found at Oleneostrovski Mogilnik. When Larsson had completed
his excavations he found that the human graves had been randomly
positioned in their cemeteries, with no consistent pattern.¹⁵ People
were buried lying on their back, on their front, crouching, sitting,
partly reclining, with some limbs bent and others outstretched.

Most graves were of single individuals, about an equal number of males
and females, although a few multiple burials were found. Some people had
been cremated while others had wooden structures burned over their
graves as part of the burial ritual. Some had their bones rearranged or
partly removed at a later date.

The range of artefacts and animal bones found within the graves matched
the diversity in burial practices – almost every imaginable combination
of tools, pendants and antlers. The bones, teeth, tusks and antlers of
the large terrestrial game – those coming from red deer, roe-deer and
wild boar – were the favoured burial items. But one female body had a
container of fish placed by her lower leg; another had the skull of an
otter. The impression is of separate families choosing how to bury their
dead, only loosely constrained by community-wide convention and ritual
practice.

There were few clear patterns between the type of burial and type of
person, in terms of age and sex.¹⁶ As at Oleneostrovski Mogilnik, the
wealthiest individuals appeared to be those in the prime of life. So
power and prestige were again largely a matter of personal achievement
rather than inheritance. There were limited differences between men and
women, the former more frequently buried with the flint blades and axes,
while elk-and auroch- (wild cattle) teeth pendants seem to have been for
females alone. There are no examples of individuals with inordinate
amounts of wealth or who may have been shamans or chiefs.¹⁷

The presence of domesticated dogs at Skateholm was one of Lars Larsson’s
most important discoveries. Some bones were scattered within the
household rubbish but proof of domestication came when dog burials were
found. In the earliest cemetery, dogs had been sacrificed when their
owners had died, joining them in both the grave and the afterworld. But
in the second cemetery – that which is in use during Lubbock’s visit –
the dogs had their own graves and were accorded the same burial
treatment as humans. One had an antler placed along its back, three
flint blades next to its hip and a decorated antler hammer, and was
strewn with red ochre.¹⁸

Stones are thrown, the dogs yelp and disappear from sight. Once again
Lubbock lifts his paddle and now approaches a little closer to the
shore. But as he gains a clearer view of those seated and standing by
the fires, he again halts his canoe. One of the men hobbles on a crutch;
two others have heavily scarred faces; one may well be blind. Lubbock
decides to forsake a visit to this particular settlement, a place of
evident social tension and violence. He turns his canoe and heads east
towards the Danish coast.

Lars Larsson found disturbing evidence that the Skateholm people had
fought aggressively either amongst themselves or with others. Indeed,
the accumulation of evidence from cemeteries and isolated burials has
shown that violence was endemic within the Mesolithic communities
throughout northern Europe.¹⁹

At Skateholm four individuals were found with depressed skull fractures
– at some time they had been hit on the head with a blunt instrument
that left a permanent dent. Such blows may have simply rendered the
victims unconscious, but they could well have been fatal. Flint
arrowheads had hit two others from Skateholm and still lay amid their
bones when excavated by Larsson: one had been hit in the stomach, the
other in the chest.

These might have been innocent hunting accidents – but that would hardly
explain the fractured skulls. Some of the violence may have been
ritualistic in nature. At Skateholm, a young adult female had been
killed by a blow to the temple and then laid beside an older male within
a single grave – perhaps a sacrifice to join her partner, perhaps the
ultimate punishment for some unknown crime. But the most likely
explanation for the violence is that these Mesolithic communities were
fighting to defend their land.

Skateholm must have been highly desirable for hunter-gatherers, with
abundant supplies of food in the woodland, the marshes, the rivers, the
lagoon, and the sea. When the people dispersed in the summer they would
not have wished to relinquish the lagoon to unexpected strangers, or to
those who lived in adjacent but less productive regions.

The majority of the head injuries had come from blows to the front and
left side – the outcome of face-to-face combat with a right-handed
opponent. Males were more involved in fighting than the females, having
three times as many head-wounds and four times those from arrows. One
can easily imagine groups returning to the lagoon as summer ended,
finding uninvited occupants already present and fighting for their land.

When seeking to explain the violence at Skateholm and elsewhere in
Mesolithic Europe it is useful to consider the Yanomamö people who lived
in the Amazonian forest. Living in villages and having a substantial
reliance on wild foods, the Yanomamö have been studied in detail by the
anthropologist Napolean Chagnon.²⁰ Like those of the Mesolithic,
violence is endemic within their society, both within and between
villages. It ranges from ritualistic duels involving chest-pounding
contests, to club fights, raids between villages and outright warfare.
Men are responsible for most of the violence, and much of it is about
women and sex.

Duels often start when one man catches another in flagrante with his
wife. In Chagnon’s words, ‘the enraged husband challenges his opponent
to strike him on the head with a club. He holds his own club vertically,
leans against it, and exposes his head for the opponent to strike. After
he has sustained a blow on the head, he can then deliver one on the
culprit’s skull. But as soon as the blood starts to flow, almost
everybody rips a pole out of the house frame and joins in the fighting,
supporting one or other of the contestants.’²¹ The tops of most men’s
heads are covered with deep, ugly scars of which they are immensely
proud. In fact, some men display their scars by shaving and rubbing in
red pigments to ensure these are clearly defined.

Many raids between villages were in order to abduct women, even if it
was claimed that their purpose was to end sorcery being undertaken by
members of one village against another. Chagnon describes extremely
violent conflicts, especially those that involve nomohori – treachery –
in which people visit another village on false pretences and then
brutally kill the welcoming residents and flee with their women. A
captured woman is typically raped by all members of the raiding party,
and then by any other man in the village who so chooses. One of the men
then takes her as a wife.

Yanomamö warfare provides an appealing analogy to what might have
occurred in the Mesolithic of northern Europe. It is, however, always
dangerous in archaeology to take descriptions of living people and
impose them on to the past, especially when the two societies come from
such different environments – the South American tropics and coastlands
of Mesolithic Scandinavia could hardly be more different. And there can
be no question that the Yanomamö lived in much larger communities and in
more permanent settlements than those of the Mesolithic. Nevertheless,
ritualistic club fights and raiding parties are attractive explanations
of those fractured skulls and pierced bodies in Mesolithic cemeteries.
And men fighting over women is no doubt one of the oldest and most
pervasive features of human society.

A raiding party might explain the most dramatic sign of violence from
Mesolithic Europe: the skull ‘nests’ from the cave of Ofnet in
Germany.²² Two shallow pits were found containing carefully arranged
human skulls, all apparently cut from newly dead bodies at some date
around 6400 BC. One pit had twenty-seven, the other six, and a large
majority had come from women and children. Several displayed
head-wounds, especially those of the males, one of which had been
assaulted with six or seven massive axe-blows. Almost all had been
elaborately decorated with ornamental mollusc shells, the pierced teeth
of red deer and red ochre. The mollusc shells are remarkable in that
they include species coming from far away – eastern central Europe, the
Swabian alb, and even the Mediterranean.

These skull ‘nests’ suggest a raid upon a Mesolithic settlement similar
to those undertaken by the Yanomamö. Whether the heads were cut from
already dead bodies or the ‘prisoners’ were executed remains a point of
gruesome speculation, especially as so many women and children were
involved. Similarly, one can speculate that the careful burial had been
undertaken either by the survivors, as an act of mourning and
remembrance, or by the victors to appease their spirits. Whatever the
case, Mesolithic Europe evidently had its moments of brutal violence and
bloody slaughter.

The common explanation among archaeologists for the growth of violence
in the Mesolithic societies of northern Europe after 5500 BC concerns
population pressure on diminishing resources.²³ Ever since 9600 BC the
woodlands, lagoons, rivers, estuaries and seashores of northern Europe
had provided abundant wild resources. The populations of the first
settlers after the ice age and those of the Early Holocene would have
expanded rapidly – they were in a Mesolithic Garden of Eden. But by 7000
BC those living in the lands of modern-day Sweden and Denmark were
losing substantial areas of land to the rising sea. People were
increasingly crammed into smaller and smaller territories, leading to
intense competition for the best hunting, plant-gathering and –
especially – fishing locations.

The economic and social problems caused by environmental change had been
exacerbated, however, by a new force that had entered these people’s
lives. It was one that had already overwhelmed the occupants of
Franchthi Cave and Lepenski Vir and which had originated far away in
western Asia. By 5500 BC, farmers had arrived in central Europe and made
contact with the indigenous people, either in person or via traded
goods. The farmers’ desire for land, for women, for furs and wild game
fitted neatly with the Mesolithic people’s need for new items of
prestige such as polished axes in order to pursue their own internal
social competition.²⁴ They began to trade across a frontier – farmers to
the south in what is now Poland and Germany, hunter-gatherers to the
north in Denmark and Sweden. But whereas the farming settlements
flourished by such contact, it caused further social disruption and
economic stress for the Mesolithic people. And it would eventually lead
to complete cultural collapse.

20 At the Frontier

The spread of farming in Central Europe and its impact on Mesolithic society, 6000–4400 BC

By 6000 BC the Mesolithic people of northern Europe were listening to
fireside stories from visitors about a new people in the east, people
who lived in great wooden houses and controlled the game. Soon they
found their own Mesolithic neighbours using polished stone axes,
moulding cooking vessels from clay and herding cattle for themselves.
When farming villages arrived within their own hunting lands, Mesolithic
eyes peered from behind trees at the timber long houses, the tethered
cattle and the sprouting crops with mixed emotions – fear, awe, dismay,
disgust.

The older generation must have struggled to understand what they saw.
Although they had felled trees and built dwellings themselves, the new
farmsteads were quite beyond their comprehension.¹ The farmers appeared
intent on controlling, dominating and transforming nature. Mesolithic
culture had been no more than an extension of the natural world. Its
chipped stone axes were merely an elaboration of nature’s work, her use
of rivers and frosts to break stone nodules apart and make sharp edges.
Wicker baskets and woven mats were merely extravagant forms of spiders’
webs and birds’ nests made by human hands.

The pottery of the farmers – a product of mixing clay and sand, firing,
decorating and painting – had no precedent within the natural world.
When the farmers ground and polished their axes smooth, they appeared
intent on denying the natural angularity of stone. Building a Mesolithic
dwelling required no more than promoting and combining the existing
suppleness of hazel, the stringiness of willow and the sheets of birch
bark that grew ready-made; a timber-framed long house, on the other
hand, required nature to be torn apart and the world constructed anew.

The older men and women are likely to have retreated from the forests of
central Europe, relinquishing their hunting grounds and insisting that
ever more time be spent celebrating the natural world. But they sang and
danced against the tide of history: the younger generation had quite
different ideas. Many were born into a world where farmers, pottery,
cattle and wheat were as natural as wild boar and the annual harvests of
nuts and berries. And so they made contact with the new arrivals. They
worked for the farmers as labourers, trackers and hunters. They engaged
in trade, learned to make pottery, to plough the land. Their daughters
married the farmers and soon their sons became farmers themselves.

Those who continued with their Mesolithic culture in the northern
forests had to adjust their traditional hunting-and-gathering patterns.
Furs, game, honey and other forest products had to be procured for
trade; the wild resources were fought over and further depleted. And as
increasing numbers of women joined the farmers, perceiving agriculture
as providing greater economic security for themselves and their
children, there were fewer to maintain the Mesolithic populations. Both
land and women became sources of tension that often boiled over into the
violence so vividly documented within the Mesolithic graves.

By 5500 BC a new type of farming culture had emerged from the fringes of
the Hungarian plain: the Linearbandkeramik, which archaeologists
thankfully abbreviate to the LBK.² It spread with astonishing speed both
east and west, into the Ukraine and into central Europe. While Lubbock
was canoeing towards Skateholm, the LBK farmers were crossing and
clearing the deciduous woodlands of Poland, Germany, the Low Countries
and eastern France.

This was a quite different type of Neolithic to that which had appeared
in Greece and spread northwards through the Balkans to reach the
Hungarian plain. As their LBK name implies, these farmers decorated
their pottery with bands of narrow lines; they constructed timber long
houses and relied on cattle rather than sheep and goats. Nevertheless,
archaeologists have traditionally assumed that the LBK farmers were
direct descendants of the original immigrants from western Asia and
represented a new phase of their migration across Europe.

Their identity has now been challenged. Marek Zvelebil argues that the
local Mesolithic people who lived on the peripheries of the Hungarian
plain adopted farming practices for themselves – watching and learning
from the new immigrants, bartering for domestic stock and grain.³ There
is likely to have been some mixing of the populations, perhaps through
marriage, perhaps through the theft of women Yanomamö-style. But the
Mesolithic people did far more than simply copy the immigrants. They
adapted the farming lifestyle to suit the soils, climate and woodlands
of central Europe – they themselves created the LBK. And when their own
new farming populations began to expand they spread both east and west,
maintaining a remarkable consistency in all aspects of their new culture
– the architecture of their houses, the layout of their villages, their
social organisation and economy. And so, according to Zvelebil, the LBK
Neolithic farmers of Europe were the direct descendants of indigenous
Mesolithic hunter-gatherers rather than of the immigrants who had
originally arrived in Greece.

Whatever their ancestry, the new farmers travelled westwards at a
remarkable rate, covering 25 kilometres a generation. Just like the
original immigrant farmers of Southeast Europe, they filled up each new
region of fertile soils with farmsteads and villages and then
leap-frogged across less favourable soils to establish a new frontier.
Such speed reflects more than the success of their lifestyle – it
implies an ideology of colonisation, an attraction to ‘frontier life’,
similar, some have suggested, to that of the Trekboers of South Africa
and the pioneers of the American West.

A ‘frontier’ mentality may also explain the cultural uniformity of the
LBK farmers. A house from the village of Cuiry-les-Chaudardes in the
Paris basin will appear near-identical to one from Miskovice in the
Czech Republic, constructed almost 1,000 kilometres away and several
hundred years before. Those at the frontier stuck to a settlement
‘ideal’ remembered from their homeland, even if that ‘homeland’ had
begun to change – just as the farming colonists on Cyprus had done by
persevering with their small circular dwellings while rectangular
architecture became ubiquitous in western Asia.

The new farmers of central Europe cleared small patches of woodland and
built long houses, usually about 12 metres in length, sometimes three or
four times this size. Wheat and barley were grown within small plots,
sometimes with peas and lentils. Their cattle browsed within the lush
woodlands as their pigs rooted in the leaf litter below the trees. As
had been the case at Nea Nikomedeia, the household was the key social
unit; it made its own decisions and sought to maintain its independence,
while remaining ultimately reliant upon others in times of need.

The long houses were substantial, constructed with three columns of
interior timbers, flanked by rows of posts that supported the
wattle-and-daub walls. The daubing clay was often dug from immediately
outside the walls themselves, creating convenient ditches for dumping
domestic refuse. Inside, the long houses were frequently divided into
three sections, possibly used for storage, for cooking and eating, and
for sleeping. It has to be ‘possibly’ because all generations of later
farmers, including those of modern times, have been attracted to exactly
the same fertile soils as those favoured by the LBK. The long-house
floors have been destroyed by modern ploughs, leaving archaeologists
with no more than the rings of blackened earth which mark where timber
posts had once supported roofs and walls.

Some long houses had stood alone within the woodlands; elsewhere twenty
or thirty were neatly aligned, each with their door-ends facing east.
Within such villages the houses were in various states of repair. When
the last member of a household died, their long house was abandoned even
if structurally sound. It was simply left to collapse within the
village, ending up as a long low mound – a ‘dead’ house to match the
‘dead’ family.⁴

The people themselves were buried in cemeteries adjacent to their
village. Bone preservation is generally so poor that rarely anything
more than faint traces of durable tooth enamel survives within each
grave. When bones are found, they suggest that all members of the
community were buried together – men and women, the old and the young.
Axes, adzes, arrow-heads and shell ornaments were often placed with the
men, grinding stones and awls with the women. There are no traces of
very wealthy or powerful individuals, little evidence for religious
belief and ritual practices.⁵

John Lubbock has yet to encounter any of these farmers himself as he
explores the slowly disintegrating Mesolithic world of Denmark. But his
journey will soon bring him face to face with the new arrivals.

From the bay at Skateholm, he has crossed to the Danish coast and then
travelled northwards and has now reached a narrow inlet that will
eventually become boggy land behind the town of Vedbaek, about 20
kilometres north of Copenhagen. At 4800 BC the inlet is much like the
Skateholm lagoon – a prized locality for hunting, fishing and fowling,
one that people are prepared to fight and die for, one where they will
reside long after death. Many small settlements are scattered around its
shore; Lubbock chooses one to visit and finds it recently deserted –
fireplaces are still smouldering and a tethered dog has just been fed.

Its people are gathered in a cemetery on a low knoll behind their
cluster of brushwood huts. Squeezing between them, Lubbock watches a
tiny baby boy being lowered into a grave next to his young mother.⁶ She
looks no more than eighteen years of age; it had most probably been the
first as well as the last child she carried. Lying on her back, she
looks resplendent – her dress has ringlets of snail-shell beads and a
host of pretty pendants. A robe, similarly decorated, has been folded to
make a pillow across which her blond hair is splayed. Her checks burn
brightly, having been dusted with red ochre; her pelvis has also been
made red – perhaps a reminder of the blood that flowed.

The little blue body is laid beside her, not on the ground but in the
ultimate soft embrace of a swan’s encircling wing. A large flint blade
is placed on the body, just as it would have been had the baby boy grown
up and died as a man. Lubbock watches as powdered red pigment is blown
from a wooden bowl to float down upon the child’s dead body.

When excavated in 1975, this burial was simply designated as ‘Grave 8’
of the Bøgebakken cemetery, located while a car park was being built.
Sixteen other graves were excavated; almost all the bodies had been
identically positioned – on their backs with feet close together and
hands by their sides. The graves were in neat parallel rows, quite
unlike the random scattering of bodies in assorted positions at
Skateholm.

The swan’s wing within Grave 8 may have been much more than a
comfortable resting place for the nearly-child. Among the
nineteenth-century Saami people of northern Europe, swans and wildfowl
were the messengers of the gods.⁷ Such birds could, after all, walk on
the land, swim on the water and fly in the air – adept at moving between
different worlds. Perhaps the Mesolithic people had similarly revered
their swans and let one fly that poor child away to their afterworld
where he could have the life denied to him on earth.

From Vedbaek Lubbock travels south, keeping close to the shore and
passing dense reed-beds that flourish below the alders which fringe
woodland in summer leaf. A deep mulchy aroma of rotting debris wafts
from the shallows, yet all around there is the vibrant buzz of life –
fish jumping, frogs plopping, dragonflies, ducks and a seemingly
continuous trail of villages and fishing camps along the shore.

Although the people Lubbock meets revere the red deer and wild boar of
the woodlands, such animals are infrequently hunted and contribute
little to the diet when compared to the constant supply of sea and
freshwater foods: fish, shellfish, birds, eels, crabs and the occasional
seal or porpoise. Fortunately for archaeologists, this Mesolithic diet
will leave a chemical trace within their bones.⁸ Had it not been for
this, and the scientific techniques to analyse the chemistry of bone,
archaeologists could easily have thought that the Mesolithic people
depended more on hunting than fishing in view of their preference for
ornaments made from deer teeth and pig’s tusk.⁹

The heavy marine diet might account for the people that Lubbock meets
who seem unwell: bloated stomachs, pale faces, diarrhoea and sickness.
Copious quantities of fish can lead to an infestation of parasites,
which in turn impairs the functioning of kidneys and intestines. An
archaeological trace is only left when such infestation becomes severe –
skull bones can thicken, as has been found on some Mesolithic specimens
from Denmark.¹⁰

At the settlement of Tybrind Vig, on the west coast of Zealand, Lubbock
squeezes into the rear of a canoe as it departs for the shallow waters
of a muddy-bottomed bay for night-time fishing.¹¹ When darkness arrives,
a fire is lit upon a bed of sand in the canoe itself and soon a tangle
of eels are darting around the boat, drawn to the light. The fishermen
stand upright to spear the eels with leister prongs. Lubbock sits tight,
watching the moths around the flames and admiring the fine canoe made
from a single log of lime – and more particularly the heart-shaped
paddles.¹² Each has been carved from ash and then decorated with an
intricate geometric design, cut into its surface and filled with dark
brown pigment.

Lubbock had seen similar paddles being used while walking on the shore;
his Mesolithic companions knew immediately, from their design, where the
canoe had come from and where it was likely to be going. Lubbock soon
realised that the Mesolithic people were just as intent on monitoring
the whereabouts of each other as of fish shoals and animals.

From the islands, Lubbock crosses over to Jutland and the open woodland
of its sandy soils. Jutland’s northern end is deeply indented with
fjords and he finds people creating enormous mounds of mollusc shells,
fishbones and other domestic refuse. He had already read about such
sites in Prehistoric Times.¹³ In the 1860s his Victorian namesake made
two visits to the shell mounds, or Køkkenmøddinger as the
nineteenth-century Danish archaeologists called them. During the course
of one visit, Victorian John Lubbock dug his own small section through a
mound and collected flint tools.

Modern Lubbock has arrived at what we call today the Ertebølle midden: a
continuous mass of shells about 20 metres wide, several metres thick and
stretching for more than 100 metres along the shore.¹⁴ One end is boggy
and close to the spring which had first drawn people to the site. The
vast banks of oysters, mussels, cockles and periwinkles found just
offshore had also been attractive – a product of the salty,
nutrient-rich and sheltered waters. He sits upon the pile of discarded
shells and bones close to where clusters of people are at work. The
rubbish-mound stench is almost overpowering, but only Lubbock seems to
notice. Some people are working stone; others cluster around fires or
gut fish. Lubbock’s attention is drawn, however, to an activity he has
never seen a hunter-gatherer perform: a woman is moulding a lump of clay
into a pottery vessel.

All those who worked on the midden in 4400 BC left traces for Søren
Andersen of Aarhus University to find when he excavated Ertebølle in
1983: scatters of flint flakes, animal bones clustered around
charcoal-filled pits, thick piles of fishbones. Andersen wasn’t the
first to excavate the site. Almost a hundred years before, the National
Museum had investigated the great shell mound and used its name for the
last of the Mesolithic peoples of Denmark: the Ertebølle culture. Modern
John Lubbock had read about the Museum’s work in Prehistoric Times. A
committee composed of a biologist (Professor Steenstrup), a geologist
(Professor Forchhammer) and an archaeologist (Professor Worsaae) had
been formed to examine the Køkkenmøddinger – interdisciplinary research
has always been recognised as necessary to investigate the past. As
Victorian John Lubbock had written: ‘Much was naturally expected of such
a triumvirate, and the most sanguine hopes have been fulfilled.’

Søren Andersen, working with his own interdisciplinary team, excavated
both within and around the midden as he searched for dwellings and
burials. Victorian John Lubbock had assumed that the shells accumulated
around ‘tents and huts’, the mounds being ‘sites of ancient villages’.
But Andersen found no such dwellings; modern John Lubbock could have
told him why. Only flimsy shelters were erected around the midden and,
as it expanded, the scant traces of their presence – the holes for
supporting posts – were buried by new layers of shell. But modern John
Lubbock had seen no signs of a cemetery and remained as ignorant as
Søren Andersen as to what happened to the dead.

Like all hunter-gatherers, the Ertebølle people knew just where, when
and how to exploit differing animals and plants as the seasons changed.
In winter they went to the northern tip of Jutland to catch the whooper
swans that arrived as migrants on the Danish coast – leaving a scatter
of butchered swan bones and artefacts now known as the site of
Aggersund.¹⁵ Some would go to Vaengo Sø, a small island on the east
coast and close to the shore of a shallow bay. That was perfect for
stranding whales. During the autumn months the small island of Dyrholm
was regularly visited. There they caught eels that flourished in the
shallows and skinned them with bone-bladed knives.¹⁶

Such seasonal movements along the coast were identified by a detailed
analysis of animal bones by Peter Rowley-Conwy during the 1980s, using
the latest techniques of ‘archaeo-zoology’, and pointed to the
likelihood that some people lived permanently at Ertebølle midden. He
was, however, merely building on the insights of Victorian John Lubbock,
who had already decided that it was ‘highly probable that the “mound
builders” resided on the Danish coast all year round’ on the basis of
the traces of swan bones, antlers and the bones of young mammals
discovered in the middens. The first indicated winter occupation, as
swans were cold-season migrants; the second suggested autumn, when deer
shed their antlers; and the third springtime, when the young are born.
Victorian John Lubbock was an archaeo-zoologist before the term was
known.

He was also attentive to botanical remains, remarking that the absence
of grain suggested that ‘the men of the Køkkenmøddinger’ lacked any
knowledge of agriculture. Neither did the shells escape his enquiring
mind; Victorian John Lubbock had noted that those in the middens were
much larger than can be found on the Danish coast today, and that the
oysters had completely disappeared. He put this down to changing
concentrations of salt in the water – anticipating by a century Peter
Rowley-Conwy’s argument that decreasing salinity had caused the
abandonment of the shell mounds and the switch to a farming economy.¹⁷

The Mesolithic pottery made at Ertebølle was quite different to that
which Lubbock had seen at Nea Nikomedeia; it was plain, with thick,
uneven walls and fashioned by inexperienced hands. Such pottery had not
been unexpected since, in Prehistoric Times, Victorian John Lubbock
describes finding ‘small pieces of a very coarse pottery’ during his
visit of 1863. Modern John Lubbock saw the complete vessels: bowls with
pointed bottoms and flat dishes. They were mainly used for cooking, a
great advantage over those made from wood and wickerwork.

The sight of hunter-gatherers making pottery is just one of several
signs of change that Lubbock encounters as his journey through
Mesolithic Denmark continues. Another is young men with ground stone
axes ostentatiously tucked into their belts¹⁸ – tall, handsome figures,
quite different to the ‘race of small men, with overhanging brows’ that
Victorian John Lubbock had imagined living in Mesolithic Denmark.

The source of these axes begins to become evident at the last of the
settlements that Lubbock visits in Mesolithic Denmark: Ringkloster.¹⁹
Surprisingly, this is inland, located beside a lake-edge in northeast
Jutland – Victorian John Lubbock had thought it ‘evident that a nation
which subsisted principally on marine molluscs would never form any
large inland settlements’. On this he had been wrong. But only just, as
after 150 years of research, Ringkloster is still the only inland
settlement of Mesolithic Denmark currently known. Modern John Lubbock
finds the settlement amidst a staggeringly beautiful landscape, one with
steeply forested hills, wide valleys, bogs and lakes. Many of the
woodland trees – oak, elm, lime and hazel – are covered in thick ivy,
while dense alder carr flourishes by the lakeside.

Lubbock arrives at Ringkloster at dusk in the middle of winter, finding
a cluster of snow-covered brushwood huts. The woodland has been opened
up by the felling of lime and elm – the favoured wood for canoes and
bows. People are busy around their huts, all finely dressed and
decorated with beads. Both men and women are having their hair plaited
and their faces painted. Within the huts he sees the now familiar
implements of Mesolithic life: bows and arrows, stone axes and wicker
baskets. In one, however, there is something new: bundles of thick furs,
tied with twine and ready to be carried away. Lubbock watches as baskets
of rubbish are taken and dumped into the lake and dogs are tethered to
posts. At the centre of the settlement a huge boar is being
spit-roasted; the ground around it has been swept of snow and laid with
bark mats. Visitors are evidently expected. Lubbock climbs a tree to
watch from a distance.

Within an hour Ringkloster is the scene of a great feast; visitors have
arrived from the coast and brought many items to trade – baskets of
oysters, salted dolphin steaks, beads made from golden amber. These are
exchanged for the luxurious winter furs that Ringkloster is renowned to
provide. For two months its people have been trapping pine marten, wild
cats, badgers and otters. They have accumulated a great store of pelts
in readiness for the traders who will arrive throughout the winter and
into the spring.

The roasted boar is eaten and liquid refreshment served in strikingly
decorated ceramic vessels – a contrast to the plain and drab Mesolithic
pottery that Lubbock had seen elsewhere. Some have a chequerboard
pattern, others meandering lines of dots made by stabbing the wet clay
with a point. Some vessels have parallel lines and appear to be of
higher quality – smooth, even surfaces, with thin walls and an elegant
form.

The feast continues long into the night and is followed by
story-telling, singing and dance. The following morning the traders
leave loaded with furs and with Lubbock in tow. Those at Ringkloster
continue their trapping and hunting, and will do so long after the first
farmers are present in Denmark itself. Søren Andersen excavated the
settlement during the 1970s; Peter Rowley-Conwy analysed the animal
bones and found evidence for hunting wild boar and intensive trapping of
furry animals. He once described Ringkloster as ‘the finest site of
all’.²⁰

Lubbock remains with the pine-marten furs as they are traded from group
to group down the east coast of Jutland, across Zealand and Aerø and
finally into northern Germany. As he travels south, the Mesolithic
people seem increasingly concerned with identity and territorial
boundary: each group can be identified by their distinctive clothes and
hairstyles, and by the manner in which they make their tools. Some have
made their harpoons straight and others curved; some have made their
stone axes with parallel sides while others produce axes with a flared
cutting edge.²¹ Lubbock recalls the time when the Mesolithic had begun,
the time of Star Carr – when a virtual identity in human culture had
existed across the whole of northern Europe. The old Mesolithic order
had become fractured and would soon be gone.

The bundles of furs gradually diminish in number and increase in value.
Finally, no more than a small basket of pine-marten pelts are left.
Lubbock watches as these are carried into a forest clearing somewhere in
northern Germany at 4400 BC. A hunter, accompanied by his two sons and
young daughter, lays them on the ground. A man steps from the trees
opposite and lays a polished stone axe next to the furs. Unable to
communicate with words, the two men – one Mesolithic and one LBK
Neolithic – use subtle nods, narrowed eyes and raised eyebrows to ensure
that their views are known. Once the exchange is made, each backs away
before raising a hand in farewell. As the hunter-gatherer departs with
his daughter and sons, he hears the farmer call. Turning, the farmer
points to the girl. The hunter-gatherer pauses and then agrees – next
time they meet she can become his wife. The hunter-gatherer takes her
still tiny hand for the homeward trek and imagines the axes and cereal
grain that the union will bring.²²

Lubbock is at the frontier – that between the LBK farmers and the
remaining indigenous hunter-gatherers of the forests. The clearing is a
known meeting-place, but as yet quite unmarked by human structures.
Within a few generations, the farmers will build houses and surround
them by a ditch. Archaeologists will eventually know their settlement as
Esbeck. Some will argue that the ditch was made for defence against the
remaining hunter-gatherers who had turned hostile after their Mesolithic
culture had almost entirely disappeared.²³

21 A Mesolithic Legacy

The Neolithic in southern Europe, 6000–4000 BC; debates in historical linguistics and genetics

The final canoe trip of John Lubbock’s European travels takes him past
islands that sit like giant stepping-stones between the Low Countries
and southern England. These, and a larger island off the Yorkshire
coast, are all that remain of Doggerland – the lowlands that Lubbock had
walked across after leaving Creswell Crags in 12,700 BC. Britain is an
island again – for the first time in 100,000 years.¹

Lubbock has no time to return to Gough’s Cave, to walk through the thick
oak woodland that now grows where he had trapped arctic hares in the
tundra and watched snowy owls. His European journey is nearly at an end.
On a black night in the year of 4500 BC, he approaches a settlement now
known to archaeologists as Téviec and located on the coast of northern
France.² His destination is marked by firelight and song. A feast and
burial are under way, with perhaps a hundred people focused intently on
swaying figures silhouetted by the flames.

The dancing and singing comes to a sudden halt and the elements take
over: the crackle of flames, the distant crash of Atlantic breakers, and
the howling wind. Lubbock looks at the corpse lying by the fire: a man
with bushy beard and thick black hair, his body clothed, decorated with
beads and sprinkled with red ochre.

A costumed figure – half man, half antlered deer – leaps across the
flames while beating a drum. He addresses the dead man and orders stone
slabs to be levered from the ground. Two women step forward and lift
them to expose another body within a stone-lined grave. Lubbock leans
forward and sees its bones sharply defined beneath a taut yellow skin.
The shaman kneels beside the grave and shifts the desiccated corpse to
the side – it falls apart, its bones becoming jumbled with yet older
bones already stacked inside.³ The new body is laid to rest. One by one
the deceased man’s belongings are placed by his side and a collection of
fine flint blades are laid upon his chest. After a further dusting with
red ochre, the slabs are replaced. A small fire is then lit upon the
tomb, into which the jawbones of a deer and wild boar are solemnly
placed. When the flames die down, the singing, dancing and feasting
resume.⁴ John Lubbock joins in – the last dance of his European travels.

The Mesolithic settlement-cemetery of Téviec was discovered and
excavated by the French archaeologists M. and S.-J. Péquart in the late
1920s and 1930s, along with a nearby cemetery known as Hoëdic. These
sites had once been located on low knolls in an extensive coastal plain,
but the rising sea level has left them on small islands off the coast of
Brittany.

Study of the burials, skeletons and domestic debris showed that the
Mesolithic inhabitants of the Atlantic seaboard shared many features
with those of the Scandinavian lands. They had a diverse diet – large
mammals, waterfowl, shellfish, fruits and nuts – and fought to protect
their territory and women. They too used clothing to announce their
identity: the cloak-pins used by those buried at Téviec were made from
the bones of wild boar, while the pins of Hoëdic people were made from
the bones of deer. Few of us today could tell such cloak-pins apart, but
the differences would have been glaring to Mesolithic eyes.

The items that the Téviec people valued and placed within their graves
were much as Lubbock had seen elsewhere: flint blades, deer teeth, boar
tusks and bone daggers. The wealthiest were once again the younger
adults, gaining their wealth by physical strength and mental agility,
and then losing it as old age slowed them down. As at Oleneostrovski
Mogilnik, the men were buried with more utilitarian items than the
women, and the sexes had their own distinctive jewellery: cowries for
the men and periwinkle beads for the women.

Multiple burials are one of the most striking features of the Téviec and
Hoëdic cemeteries. We must assume – just as the Péquarts and later
archaeologists have assumed – that those placed within each stone-lined
tomb were members of a single family; blood ties seem to have been
particularly important to these people. But not all burials were of this
type. Many were of lone individuals and some were covered by tent-like
structures made from antlers.

We should not be surprised by the abundant evidence for ritual and
feasting at Téviec and Hoëdic: their inhabitants must have felt insecure
and needed to appease their gods. Not only did they face the impact of
the LBK farmers who were living no more than 50 kilometres to the east,
they also faced similar disruption coming from the south.

While the LBK was spreading through central Europe, Neolithic sites were
appearing around the Mediterranean coast. Some archaeologists believe
that these arose from the arrival of immigrants, the direct descendants
of farmers in western Asia whose recent ancestors had made settlements
in Greece and southern Italy, such as Nea Nikomedeia. Other
archaeologists reject this idea; they believe that the indigenous
Mesolithic people of the central and western Mediterranean adopted
Neolithic culture themselves after having made contact with farmers in
the east.

What is agreed upon is that the Mediterranean Neolithic between 6000 and
4500 BC looks quite different to that of central Europe. In that region
there is a clear separation between sites that have the complete
Neolithic ‘package’, on the one hand – those of the LBK with
timber-framed houses, cattle, sheep, crops, pottery and polished stone
axes – and Mesolithic sites, with microliths, deer and wild boar bones,
on the other. In the Mediterranean, however, Neolithic and Mesolithic
elements are mixed together at single sites, appearing to have been used
by the same people at the same time. These are predominantly cave sites
and, to archaeologists such as James Lewthwaite of the University of
Bradford, and Peter Rowley-Conwy, they suggest that the indigenous
hunter-gatherers choose selectively from the Neolithic package, having
no wish to become fully-fledged farmers themselves.

Lewthwaite has argued that the Mesolithic inhabitants of Corsica and
Sardinia adopted sheep and goats to compensate for their lack of game –
red deer never having colonised those islands. Having done so, they
eschewed cereals and timber-framed houses in order to continue their
traditional hunter-gatherer lifestyle, one now made more secure by the
small flocks they tended.⁵

Other hunter-gatherers picked out pottery from the Neolithic package as
something both useful for cooking food and effective for social display.
They pressed shells into the soft clay to make vessels of a distinctive
design, quite unlike any others made in Europe.⁶ Some chose to adopt
cereal cultivation to plug seasonal gaps in the availability of wild
foods: seed was sown, people dispersed to hunt or gather and returned
months later to harvest the wheat or barley just as if it were another
wild plant. As a result of this piecemeal and partial adoption of the
Neolithic package, people who were neither strictly Mesolithic
hunter-gatherers nor Neolithic farmers occupied the Mediterranean.

Those who used the cave of Arene Candide in the landscape of steep
cliffs and narrow valleys of northwestern Italy typified the hybrid type
of lifestyles that arose. Excavations in the decade following 1946
revealed a long sequence of layers of occupation, beginning with the
debris from hunter-gatherers and finishing with that from fully-fledged
farmers. Between the two extremes was the debris from people who lived
by hunting pigs Mesolithic-style and herding sheep Neolithic-style.⁷

This was Peter Rowley-Conwy’s conclusion after studying the animal
bones. He could tell that the pigs had been wild and hunted by the large
size of their bones. Equally, he could tell that the sheep were kept for
milking because so many young lambs had been killed. By that means, the
milk from the adult females was available for human use. Just like those
on Corsica, the Mesolithic people of Arene Candide had merged elements
of Neolithic culture with their traditional Mesolithic lifestyle.

In the 1980s, this type of indigenous piecemeal adoption of Neolithic
culture was widely believed to have been responsible for the gradual
spread of farming across the central and western Mediterranean, and then
along the Atlantic façade of Portugal and France and through the major
valleys of the Rhône and Garonne. But João Zilhão of Lisbon University
has since challenged this belief.⁸ He thinks we should return to the
ideas popularised by Gordon Childe in the 1930s about immigrant farmers
bringing the complete Neolithic package to Mediterranean shores.

According to Zilhão, the evidence from the cave sites, which supposedly
show pottery and sheep side by side with hunted animals and Mesolithic
tools, has been misinterpreted. These associations, he argues, are
caused by burrowing animals that made a complete mess of any
stratigraphy that might have survived. He suggests that bones of wild
ibex have at times been mistaken for domesticated sheep, and that
radiocarbon dates are either plain wrong, having been contaminated, or
misinterpreted; also that they have been used to date fragments of
pottery with which they have no real association.

Zilhão stresses that the final rise of sea level flooded the coast where
the first farmsteads of Neolithic colonists would have been established.
The cave sites that have survived were probably no more than occasional
campsites used by those farmers either on hunting trips, or when taking
their flocks to pastures.

To support his case, Zilhão cites evidence from Gruta do Caldeirão. The
finds from this Portuguese cave suggest that one or more boatloads of
Neolithic colonists arrived at about 5700 BC and established a farming
settlement, while the indigenous Mesolithic people continued hunting and
gathering quite undisturbed. By 6200 BC, large thriving communities of
hunter-gatherers had arisen within the Tagus and Sado river estuaries of
central Portugal. They created shell middens equivalent in size to that
at Ertebølle in Denmark.⁹ Surveys elsewhere in Portugal have failed to
find any other traces of a Mesolithic presence after 6200 BC – the
entire population, it seems, had come to live within these estuaries.

The Portuguese middens were used as burial grounds as well as rubbish
dumps – much like those in Britanny. The graves are predominantly found
below the midden layers and appear to have been arranged in discrete
clusters, perhaps in family groups. Some graves were lined with large
stone slabs, recalling the tombs at Téviec and Hoëdic. Such similarities
should not be surprising. Although we lack any direct evidence from the
Atlantic seaboard, its Mesolithic communities must have possessed large
canoes and used them to travel long distances around the coast,
establishing contacts from southern Portugal to northern France.

Between 1979 and 1988 Zilhão excavated Gruta do Caldeirão, located in a
region to the north of the shell middens and one with no known
Mesolithic sites.¹⁰ Neolithic debris, including pottery and stone tools,
was found directly above that of ice-age hunters, along with many bones
from domesticated sheep and wild boar. Shepherds who liked to engage in
some occasional hunting had evidently used the cave.

Gruta do Caldeirão was also used as a mortuary. At about 5200 BC, the
bodies of three men, a woman and a child had been laid on the cave
floor, their heads against the wall, for scavenging animals and the
elements to decompose, scatter and bury. Two or three hundred years
later, at least another fourteen individuals were left within the cave.

According to Zilhão, these bodies were of farmers whose forebears had
arrived by boat on the Portuguese coast. Their farmstead, he speculates,
was in the valley, its archaeological traces now deeply buried below
river sediments. For several hundred years they continued farming while
the Mesolithic people continued hunting and gathering within the river
estuaries further south, just as they did further north in Spain. Zilhão
implies that similar communities of immigrant farmers, forming enclaves
quite separate from the indigenous Mesolithic people, were spread
throughout the coastal regions of southern Europe. While those using
Gruta do Caldeirão flourished, by 5000 BC the Mesolithic middens in the
Sado and Tagus estuaries had been abandoned. What happened to their
former inhabitants is unknown; they may have died out or simply gave up
on the hunting and gathering lifestyle to become farmers themselves.¹¹

The dispute between those who favour colonisation by immigrant farmers
such as Zilhão, and those such as Lewthwaite and Rowley-Conwy who
believe that the indigenous Mesolithic people adopted Neolithic culture,
might be resolved by a completely new type of evidence that has recently
become available for studying the past: the genetics of those alive
today. This new field of study is known as historical genetics and its
influence on our study of the past is bound to become ever more
widespread and profound. As we will also turn to historical genetics
when considering the peopling of the Americas, a brief introduction to
this field will be useful before considering its impact on the European
question.

The possibility of tracking population history through human genes
arises from the fact that although we are all members of a single
species, Homo sapiens, and have a high degree of genetic similarity, we
vary in specific details. The similarity is present because all people
in the world today originated from the same small population that lived
in Africa no more than 130,000 years ago. The severe environmental
conditions of the last but one glacial maximum had caused that
population to fall to no more than 10,000 individuals. This reduced the
amount of genetic variation present, being known as a population
bottleneck. When global warming occurred at 125,000 years ago, that
population expanded. Its people dispersed from Africa and the first Homo
sapiens entered Europe, Asia and eventually the Americas. Any existing
populations, such as those of H. neanderthalensis in Europe, were
entirely replaced without making any contribution to the modern gene
pool.

As a result of this evolutionary history, people who are today found at
the opposite ends of the earth are very similar in their genetic
constitution. But not identical. Random mutations are constantly
occurring, most of which have neither positive nor negative effects on
our behaviour and physiology. The likelihood that exactly the same
mutation could happen independently in two different people is extremely
remote. So if two people have the same mutation, it is likely that they
shared a recent ancestor within whom this mutation had occurred. And, of
course, if those two people are now living in different parts of the
world, this enables geneticists to trace the pattern of human dispersal.

There is more. The rate of genetic mutation can be considered to be
constant – although whether this is actually the case remains to be
established. By measuring the extent of genetic variability between two
human populations, and by having an estimate for the rate at which
mutations occur, one can calculate the amount of time that has elapsed
since the two populations became isolated from each other.

These stark facts have provided the basis for a completely new method of
studying the human past – one that has no need for history books or even
archaeological excavations. One simply needs to document, and then
interpret, the genetic variability found in living humans throughout the
world, and then the patterns and dates of past dispersals, migrations,
and colonisations can be established. At least that is the theory when
stripped of numerous complicating factors. But, as in all areas of
science, putting theory into practice is often far harder than
anticipated.¹²

Luca Cavalli-Sforza has championed historical genetics. His 1994 book
The History and Geography of Human Genes, co-written with two
collaborators, is one of the key academic landmarks in the development
of our approaches to human history.¹³ Within that book, Cavalli-Sforza
argued that the modern-day genetic map of Europe shows a gradient of
gene frequencies from the southeast to the northwest.¹⁴ This could only,
he claimed, be a legacy of Neolithic immigrants who spread from Greece,
through eastern, central and southern Europe until they reached the far
northwest. This became known as the ‘wave of advance’ model, one that
gave the indigenous Mesolithic people no role at all in the development
of the European Neolithic. According to this view, the LBK people had to
be descended from West Asian immigrants and not from the local
Mesolithic people, as Zvelebil has more recently proposed; Zilhão’s
interpretation of the Mediterranean region has to be preferred over that
of Lewthwaite and Rowley-Conwy.

The ‘wave of advance’ model gained further support in 1987 from another
source of non-archaeological evidence: language. Colin Renfrew – Grahame
Clark’s successor as Disney Professor of Archaeology at Cambridge –
tackled one of the key problems in historical linguistics: the origin of
the Indo-European family of languages. This family includes almost all
of the languages spoken in Europe today and linguists have long argued
when and where the original language from which they evolved was
spoken.¹⁵

Renfrew provided a compelling answer: proto-Indo-European, as that
original language is known, was spoken by the Neolithic people of
Anatolia – modern-day Turkey – and/or western Asia in 7500 BC. It spread
across the whole of Europe, and some parts of central and southern Asia,
as Neolithic migrant farmers colonised these lands. According to
Renfrew, the modern-day non-Indo-European languages, such as Basque and
Finnish, reflect the regions where Mesolithic populations survived and
contributed to the Neolithic, and ultimately modern-day, cultural and
linguistic diversity. But these were few and far between: Renfrew’s
arguments fitted neatly with Cavalli-Sforza’s genetic data indicating a
‘wave of advance’ of immigrant Neolithic farmers across Europe.¹⁶

Renfrew’s claims came in for immediate attack from both linguists and
archaeologists¹⁷ – the key problem being that languages can spread quite
independently of people. In 1996 the genetic evidence was also
questioned. A challenge to Cavalli-Sforza’s claims came from Bryan Sykes
and his colleagues at Oxford University. They had studied a different
type of DNA to the nuclear DNA relied upon by Cavalli-Sforza –
mitochondrial DNA – and reached a very different conclusion.¹⁸

Most of our DNA is found in the nucleus of each cell and is inherited in
equal proportions from our mother and father by a process known as
‘recombination’. This involves an unpredictable mixing of genes from
both parents, and when repeated in generation after generation the
possibility of tracing evolutionary history becomes extremely difficult.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is found within the cell body rather than the
nucleus and is inherited from one’s mother alone. I acquired my entire
mtDNA from my mother, and none of this has been passed on to my
children. Without the complexities of recombination, the genetic
relatedness between people is much easier to establish and generally
thought to be more accurate.

Mitochondrial DNA also has a much higher mutation rate than nuclear DNA,
and a much higher frequency of those mutations is quite neutral, neither
benefiting nor detracting from the health of the individual. The value
of this is simply that there is the potential for gaining a far more
detailed picture of human history than from nuclear DNA simply because,
as time goes by, more evidence is being laid down by the random
mutations that occur. By this means, lineage groups can be identified –
groups of people who all descended from the same female, in effect from
the same molecule of mtDNA.

When Sykes and his colleagues examined the mtDNA from 821 individuals
distributed across Europe, they found that there were six clear lineage
groups; this immediately indicated that Europeans are more genetically
diverse than the ‘wave of advance’ model would suggest. By making the
best guess-estimate for the rate at which mtDNA mutations occur, Sykes
and his colleagues calculated the date at which each European lineage
group had arisen. Just one of these was sufficiently recent to relate to
the immigration of farmers from western Asia, and this did indeed have
some clear genetic markers that pointed to a West Asian origin.
Moreover, its geographical distribution in Europe matched the two
archaeologically recognised routes of colonisation: central Europe and
the Mediterranean coast. But this group only constituted 15 per cent of
the total number of lineages within the six groups. All other lineages
dated to between 23,000 and 50,000 years ago, indicating that 85 per
cent of the existing mtDNA lineages were already present in the
Mesolithic, having originated during the preceding ice age.¹⁹ The wave
of advance had been nothing but a tiny ripple.

This was a startling conclusion and led to a lively academic debate
between Cavalli-Sforza and Sykes, both questioning the validity of each
other’s methods.²⁰ A key problem for the mtDNA evidence is that it only
tracks the female line. If West Asian immigrants chose to take
indigenous Mesolithic women for their wives – as is quite likely – the
mtDNA record will soon have failed to register the presence of the
immigrants at all.²¹ Nevertheless, Sykes’s conclusion strengthened the
hand of archaeologists such as Zvelebil, Rowley-Conwy and Lewthwaite. If
Zilhão really has identified an enclave of immigrant farmers in Portugal
at 5700 BC, then they made little contribution to the overall
development of the Neolithic in Iberia. For that we must thank the
Mesolithic people, whose forebears had occupied the middens in the Sado
and Tagus estuaries.

Sykes and Cavalli-Sforza remain in dispute today, but their most recent
results have converged and some archaeologists – such as Colin Renfrew –
now find their conclusions quite compatible. While Cavalli-Sforza has
reduced the contribution of immigrant farmers to the modern European
gene pool to 28 per cent, Sykes has increased his estimate of this to a
little over 20 per cent. These figures seem too close for any
controversy to be sustained and we must conclude that the indigenous
Mesolithic people played a role at least as great as that of immigrant
farmers in the development of the European Neolithic.²²

The genes of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers may be dominant among modern
Europeans today, but their way of life failed to survive much beyond
4000 BC. Only in the far north of Europe did hunting and gathering have
a longer life, continuing until at least 1000 BC, after which
pastoralism took over.²³ For the temperate regions, those who feasted,
danced and buried their dead in stone-lined tombs at Téviec and Hoëdic
were some of the last Mesolithic people in Europe.

The Mesolithic communities of Sweden and Denmark, those who had lived at
sites such as Skateholm, Vedbaek, Tybrind Vig and Ertebølle, eventually
collapsed under the new ethic of competition introduced by contact with
the LBK. The slow and steady seepage of young women as wives and young
men as labourers left their communities depleted. Those who remained no
longer continued their kinship with the red deer and wild boar; they too
wished for material wealth, social power and control of the natural
world. They wished to become farmers themselves, and did so at around
3900 BC.

As farmers, they were quite unlike those of the LBK. They herded cattle,
used ephemeral Mesolithic-like dwellings and occupied the same shell
middens as their Mesolithic forebears. As if to compensate for the
absence of domestic architecture, they built huge burial monuments that
we call long barrows – choosing to erect houses for the dead rather than
for the living. Their inspiration came from the LBK long houses. The
long barrows were an attempt by the new farmers to align themselves with
the farmers who had originally come from the east, and to deny their own
Mesolithic past.²⁴

Much the same happened along the Atlantic seaboard when the
hunter-gatherers of Téviec and Hoëdic became engulfed by the new farming
way of life.²⁵ Yet another type of Neolithic arose, one in which people
constructed tombs from boulders and great slabs of stone. Rather than
alluding to the ancestral farmers of the east, these megalithic tombs
recalled the Mesolithic past – the stone-slabbed graves within the
Portuguese shell middens and the family tombs of Téviec.²⁶ In the far
northwest of Europe, especially Britain, both long barrows and
megalithic tombs were integral parts of the new Neolithic culture. By
4000 BC, Europe was almost entirely inhabited by farmers of one sort or
another. A new chapter in its history had begun, one that would remove
any remaining vestiges of the Mesolithic world. At least, that is what
we thought until an unexpected Mesolithic legacy was found within our
genes.

22 A Scottish Envoi

Colonisation, Mesolithic lifestyles and the transition to the Neolithic in western Scotland, 20,000–4300 BC

My account of European history, from the paintings of Pech Merle to the
origin of megalithic tombs, has neglected many regions of the continent,
ranging from the far south of Italy to northern Norway, and from the
Swiss Alps to the Spanish Meseta. Although these regions lacked the
cultural drama that occurred elsewhere, they are nevertheless part of
the European story and their archaeology provides further insights into
how people responded to global warming and the spread of farming.

Unfortunately, all but one must remain neglected, as this history must
soon cross the Atlantic to address the beginnings of American history.
The one exception is a region where I have myself spent many years
searching for the Mesolithic past: Scotland. Not the whole of Scotland,
but two offshore islands at the southernmost end of the Hebridean island
chain off the west coast. These are Islay and Colonsay which, together
with the adjacent islands of Jura and Oronsay, form a small archipelago
known as the southern Hebrides. Although lying on the geographical
periphery of Europe and lacking any sites as spectacular as Lepenski Vir
or Skateholm, these islands have their own history that contributes to
our understanding of Europe as a whole. So, in this envoi for Europe, I
will briefly recount their history from the ice age to the Neolithic,
via the story of my own excavations on these islands.

The four southern Hebridean islands share many characteristics that are
typical of western Scotland, and yet are quite different from each
other. They are largely treeless, with rugged coastlines indented with
sandy bays. Their populations peaked in the nineteenth century and have
slowly declined ever since; sheep farming predominates but is quite
uneconomical to pursue. Islay, covering more than 600 square kilometres,
is the largest and most diverse, with extensive heather moorlands and
sand dunes, a substantial main town, several villages and the highest
density of whisky distilleries in Scotland. Colonsay is far smaller, no
more than 13 kilometres long and 5 kilometres wide, while Oronsay –
connected to Colonsay at low tide – is a tiny speck of land, less than 5
square kilometres in extent. Jura is another large island and much more
rugged than Islay, its landscape dominated by three conical peaks known
as the Paps.

At 20,000 BC these islands were almost entirely covered by the ice sheet
that extended as far south as the English midlands. There was just one
ice-free zone – a hill, known today as Beinn Tart a’Mhill, and its
surrounding lowlands that now form ‘the Rinns’, the westernmost
peninsula of Islay. The fact that this escaped the ice is crucial for
the later history of human occupation. It left flint-rich sediments
intact that would eventually supply raw materials to the first
inhabitants of Islay and influence where they chose to live.

For five thousand years the slopes of Beinn Tart a’Mhill rose above
surrounding landscapes and seascapes of snow and ice. Fifty kilometres
to the east the Paps of Jura pierced the ice and looked like smouldering
volcanoes when surrounded by cloud. A sea channel cut the Rinns off from
the rest of Islay, turning it into a tiny offshore island.

By 15,000 BC the ice had begun to melt; the glacier front retreated
eastwards until, by 12,000 BC, the southern Hebrides were completely
free of ice. The lowlands of the Rinns were now smothered by great
swathes of sand and gravel. To the east there were bare hillocks of rock
and sediment – moraines – that marked where the glaciers had once
reached, this having been bulldozed into position by the ice. Further
east there was a broken jigsaw of bogs, bare rock, sands, silts and
gravels before more sea was reached, the stretch of water which still
separates Islay from the Scottish mainland.

Within another thousand years a blanket of soil had formed, supporting a
mix of grasses and small shrubs – arctic-like tundra. Relieved of its
ice mass, the land had elevated in height, making the sea level fall.
The channel that had once flowed between the Rinns and the glacier front
became shallow and often dry at low tide.

By this date – 11,000 BC – much of England had been recolonised by
people following in the footsteps of the pioneers who had butchered
their dead at Gough’s Cave and caught arctic hares at Creswell Crags.
Scotland, however, remained entirely free of settlement until 8500 BC.¹
But exploratory visits had been made from the south; an ice-age hunting
party had come to Islay and lost at least one Ahrensburgian arrow-head –
a flint point designed in just the same fashion as those used to hunt
reindeer at Stellmoor in 10,800 BC.

One of my students found this point on an August afternoon in 1993 as we
collected flint artefacts from a ploughed field near the village of
Bridgend on Islay.² It was placed in a bag along with a number of
undistinguished pieces likely to be Neolithic or Bronze Age in date. I
didn’t find it until a few days later, after it had been washed and left
out to dry in our field laboratory. My colleagues, Bill Finlayson and
Nyree Finlay, both from the University of Edinburgh and experts on stone
tools, agreed that it might be an Ahrensburgian point. But none of us
could be sure. If true, it meant that people had been in Scotland two
thousand years before any known settlement.

The Bridgend point wasn’t the first possible Ahrensburgian arrow-head
found in Scotland; five others of a similar design had previously been
discovered – two in the Orkney Islands, two in Jura and one in Tiree,
another Hebridean island.³ But these were either broken, of questionable
design, or could not be pinpointed to an exact location, having been
found long before modern recording methods were adopted. The new
specimen was complete, looked identical to an Ahrensburgian point, and
we knew exactly where it had been found. And so we immediately went back
to the field and made a more intensive collection of its flint, hoping
to find the first ice-age settlement in Scotland. But the only artefacts
we found were evidently Neolithic or Bronze Age in date.

The field at Bridgend was just one of many that my survey team searched
for prehistoric settlements as part of the project I directed on Islay
and Colonsay between 1987 and 1995.⁴ Although we recorded sites of
Neolithic and later periods, my interest lay in finding those of a
Mesolithic and – ideally – an ice-age date. The former were relatively
easy to discover. We found more than twenty scatters of distinctively
Mesolithic artefacts – tools and the debris from their manufacture.

When on Islay I often left my students working in the fields or washing
flints and met up with Alistair Dawson from the University of Coventry,
a specialist on reconstructing sea-level change in Scotland. Both he and
Kevin Edwards, now of the University of Aberdeen, who was studying
pollen grains from Islay peat,⁵ were attempting to discover what the
island had looked like to its former Mesolithic inhabitants.

Alistair is a Scot who seems more at home in the hills or on wild
Atlantic beaches than in the laboratory or conference room. He had his
own team on the island and extracted long columns of sediment from
Gruinart – the lowest-lying part of the island through which the sea
channel that once isolated the Rinns had flowed. As his columns went
further down, he found that the sediment changed from the modern-day
peat to silt and clay laid down by sea water; below this was more peat,
a return to dry land, before the sediments became marine deposits once
again. In his university laboratory, Alistair extracted diatoms –
fossilised plankton – from the sediments; the succession of different
types told him about the subtle changes from dry land, to brackish
water, marine water and then back again, in the same manner that pollen
grains inform about vegetation history. Alistair also removed tiny twigs
and other plant material. These were radiocarbon dated to establish
exactly when the flooding events had occurred.⁶

By examining the sediments, diatoms and radiocarbon dates, Alistair
reconstructed how the sea level around the Hebrides had fallen
immediately after the ice sheets disappeared at c. 13,000 BC, to reach a
level similar to that of today by 8500 BC. He discovered that within
another two millennia the sea level had risen again, flooding the
Gruinart channel to isolate the Rinns from the rest of Islay. But
western Scotland had not finished rebounding after having been relieved
of the great weight of ice and eventually overtook the rising sea. And
so, at about two thousand years ago, the channel once again became dry
land and has remained so until the present day.

Alistair could also ‘read’ the modern landscape in order to understand
its ice-age past. There were, for instance, the heather-covered hillocks
of rock and gravel that marked the furthest westward extent of the
glacier. Near by there was a longitudinal mound of sand and gravel that
he described as an esker. It marked where there had once been a tunnel
of water flowing below the ice itself, which had become choked full with
gravel; when the ice melted, what had once been a tunnel was left as its
mirror image, a longitudinal, rounded mound. We walked along the beaches
and examined ridges of pebbles several metres above the current
high-tide mark that showed how the sea level had once been higher than
it is today.

When in the uplands of the Rinns, Alistair showed me a thick orange clay
that lay below the heather and would have been washed away if the ice
sheet had covered the whole of Islay. This clay had been created many
thousands of years before the LGM when the whole island lay below a
floating ice sheet during an earlier glaciation. Its interest for me lay
in the large nodules of flint it contained, carried by a very ancient
glacier from deposits of chalk now below the Irish Sea. For many
thousands of years the orange sediment had been eroding into the sea;
its angular flint nodules were returned to the beaches of the Rinns as
perfectly smooth rounded pebbles.⁷

Nowhere else in Scotland could so many and such large and fine-quality
flint pebbles be found. As flint was a key raw material for prehistoric
hunter-gatherers, I was sure that if ice-age pioneers had come to
Scotland they would soon have discovered the Rinns and remained hunting
in their vicinity. But alas, almost a decade of survey and excavation on
Islay produced no more evidence of ice-age hunters than the single flint
point from Bridgend.

The first people to settle in Scotland arrived in 8500 BC, travelling
from the north of England and leaving us their earliest-known site at
Cramond, near Edinburgh. No sites are known in the southern Hebrides
until 7000 BC. When people finally did arrive they were attracted to the
Rinns with its rich deposits of flint pebbles. One of their settlements
had been located no more than a hundred metres from a flint-rich beach;
it had been a Mesolithic workshop where pebbles were first broken apart.

This site became known as Coulererach, having been discovered by Sue
Campbell who farms a small croft of the same name on the western coast
of Islay. Over a period of several years Sue had collected flint blades,
flakes and fractured pebbles from her drainage ditches and handed them
to the island museum in a shoebox. When seeing them in 1993, I
immediately knew that she had discovered a Mesolithic site. We dug many
small ‘test-pits’ across her pasture to locate the site and then
excavated a long trench, having to dig through two metres of peat before
reaching the Mesolithic ground surface. It was scattered with tools and
tool-making debris, their edges as fresh as the day they had been made.⁸

Nyree Finlay – now of Glasgow University – examined the collection and
found some very skilfully worked pebbles along with others that had been
simply bashed about. Some pebbles were so small and had so many
crystalline inclusions that no experienced flint knapper would have
chosen to work them. Nyree suggested that Coulererach had been where
children learned to make stone tools, often using the pebbles rejected
by the expert flint knappers or finding their own on the beach. It was
the Scottish equivalent of Etiolles in France.

Unlike the excavators at Etiolles, however, we were unable to expose
large areas of the Mesolithic ground surface in Sue Campbell’s pasture
as excavation led to permanent water-logging. So although we found
fragments of charcoal we never discovered the Mesolithic fireplaces or
learned whether huts had been built at Coulererach. All we acquired was
a collection of stone artefacts and we had to guess whether activities
other than tool-making had once occurred. I suspect they had, as
Coulererach is located close to Loch Gorm which is the largest inland
lake on Islay. I frequently saw otters and deer around its margins and
suspect that the people who camped at Coulererach in 6500 BC had hunted
such animals.

At that time the Islay landscape was quite different to the bleak
heather-covered peat bogs of today. The pollen grains sealed within and
below the Coulererach peat told us that willow and alder had grown in
Mesolithic times, together with birch and oak on the higher and drier
ground. The peat also contained tiny fragments of charcoal. Some may
have been blown from cooking hearths but its quantity suggested the
deliberate burning of trees and reeds around the lake – just as had
occurred at Star Carr in 9500 BC.⁹

Coulererach was just one of several Mesolithic sites on Islay that we
examined. They all produced vast numbers of flint artefacts but
unfortunately no bones (animal or human) as these had been destroyed by
the acidic soils of the island. Animal bones would have helped us to
discover which sites had been used in which season as Peter Rowley-Conwy
has done at Skateholm, Ringkloster and many other Mesolithic sites in
Europe. Nevertheless, the stone tools and surroundings of each site
suggested what activities had taken place there.

In contrast to those from Coulererach, the artefacts we excavated at
Gleann Mor, a site located in the uplands and several kilometres from a
pebble beach, consisted of many tiny flint cores that had been thrown
away at the end of their useful life.¹⁰ This appears to have been a
hunting camp used on just one or two occasions when people had been
searching for deer within the Rinns. Some of the tools had been made
from tiny flakes, most likely the last of a supply that had been carried
around the island. From Gleann Mor the hunter-gatherers must have
returned to a site like Coulererach to replenish their toolbags.

We found a site on the eastern edge of Gruinart estuary that we called
Aoradh after a nearby farm. This was practically adjacent to a
bird-watching hide and we guessed that the Mesolithic people had been
doing the same as the modern visitors.¹¹ Gruinart estuary is famed today
for its over-wintering flocks of geese that spend each summer in the
Arctic – a migratory pattern that probably reaches back to the start of
the Holocene. Just like those of the Mesolithic, the modern-day
bird-watchers at Gruinart see far more than geese. Seals frequently
congregate on the sandbanks within the estuary and otters play in the
shallows; wading birds probe in the mud; kestrels and peregrine falcons
swoop down to take rodents in the dunes, while red deer can often be
seen among the scattered trees. With no signs of the modern world in
sight, one can sit at Gruinart and feel close to what Mesolithic eyes
had seen.

The quantity of artefacts at Aoradh also suggested that this site had
been used on no more than a few occasions; there are probably many
similar scatters of artefacts along the banks of the estuary. But
another site we excavated, Bolsay, had evidently been a greatly favoured
spot, one repeatedly used over several thousand years. Today this site
is located in open pasture and close to a boggy marsh known as Loch
a’Bhogaidh; in the Mesolithic it had been in woodland, adjacent to a
spring, and Loch a’Bhogaidh had been a freshwater lake. The excavation
at Bolsay was the largest I undertook, recovering more than 250,000
flint artefacts, which were but a small fraction of those buried in the
ground.

At first we thought that Bolsay had been a Mesolithic base camp, but
when the tools were analysed we found them dominated by microliths, many
of which had been used as arrow-heads.¹² There were few signs of
domestic activity, such as tools for cleaning skins and post holes for
dwellings. The microliths had apparently accumulated from a multitude of
short visits by hunters who had sat by the spring while repairing
hunting equipment, enjoying one of the most favoured places on the
island.¹³

Excavations at Coulererach, Gleann Mor, Aoradh and Bolsay provided
insights into how different locations on Islay had been used for
different activities during the Mesolithic. But people had not
restricted themselves to one island alone. During the 1960s and 1970s
several scatters of microliths had been found on Jura by a dedicated
amateur archaeologist called John Mercer.¹⁴ It was on the much smaller
island of Colonsay, however, that we gained a quite unexpected insight
into Mesolithic life.

Searching for Mesolithic sites on Colonsay is rather like looking for
needles in a haystack as it involves looking for microliths in peat bogs
and sand dunes. When we began work there were hardly any ploughed fields
to examine as almost all farming had already turned from arable to
pasture – a transformation that has occurred throughout the Scottish
highlands and islands since the 1960s. We spent many weeks digging
test-pits through turf, peat and blown sand to reach the Mesolithic
ground surface at locations where we guessed a settlement might be
found. A few sparse scatters of flint artefacts were recovered, but none
contained microliths and all were most likely Neolithic or Bronze Age in
date. It began to look as if Colonsay had been completely deserted
during Mesolithic times.¹⁵ That would not have been surprising. Owing to
its distance from the mainland many mammals had never colonised the
island; without red deer, roe-deer and fur-bearers such as fox to hunt,
Mesolithic people would have had little incentive to paddle their canoes
the twenty kilometres from Islay or Jura to Colonsay.

Our first impressions were quite wrong however. There had been one very
good reason to visit the island – as our excavations at Staosnaig, a
small bay on the east coast of Colonsay, would show.

I first saw this narrow bay with its sandy beach from the ferry that
makes the three-hour sea-crossing from the Scottish mainland. It arrives
north of Staosnaig where the tiny settlement of Scalasaig, with its
single shop and luxurious hotel, have grown up around the pier. Within a
couple of days I had left my student team digging test-pits in the hotel
garden to visit Staosnaig where there was one of the few ploughed fields
on the island. ‘Ploughed field’ is perhaps an exaggeration as the soil
was thin and sandy; it had been little more than scratched for planting
grass seed. The sand came from the Mesolithic beach that now lay
directly below the soil and several metres higher than that of the
present day. From the ferry, Staosnaig had looked the ideal place for
Mesolithic canoes to arrive and I pictured a thriving campsite upon its
shore. So I spent a couple of hours searching the plough, confident that
I would find flint artefacts. But there were none.¹⁶

That was in 1988. I spent three weeks on the island with my students
inspecting other scanty patches of ploughed land and digging test-pits
at likely settlement locations. On our last day I returned to Staosnaig
and searched the field again – this time finding a single flint nodule
that had evidently been struck by a hammer-stone.

That find led to three more visits to Staosnaig, in the summers of 1989,
1991 and 1992, during which we excavated test-trenches throughout the
field in an endeavour to find the settlement that I believed must be
there. The first two visits yielded no more than ephemeral traces of
washed-out fireplaces and flimsy windbreaks. But perseverance ultimately
brought rewards.

In 1994 we opened a large trench that exposed a 4-metre-wide, circular
pit packed full of charred hazelnut shells and stone artefacts. It was a
remarkable find – nothing like it had ever been found in Scotland.
Surrounding this deposit were a series of smaller and deeper pits, every
one of them just missed by all of our previous trenches – appalling bad
luck. The new excavation took the whole summer, an idyllic time as
Colonsay experienced a heat wave and we swam during lunch breaks and by
moonlight after barbecues on the beach.

It took another five years to analyse the material we recovered,
requiring a variety of specialists to examine the sediments, plant
remains and stone artefacts. The large pit had contained not only burnt
fragments of hazelnut shell but also the remnants of apple cores and
other plants, especially the lesser celandine. This is a member of the
buttercup family, the roots and stems of which have been eaten by many
traditional peoples, some of whom believed the plant had medicinal
properties – one of its other names is pilewort.¹⁷ The large pit itself
seemed likely to have once been a hut floor, although there was a
frustrating lack of post holes; but it had been primarily used as a
rubbish dump. The small pits that surrounded it had once been ovens for
the roasting of hazelnuts – the nuts had been sealed below ground and a
fire lit above. Both their shells and the nuts that became accidentally
burnt were discarded in the dump, along with other plant waste and
toolmaking debris.¹⁸

We estimated that the shells of more than 100,000 nuts had been
discarded on to the rubbish dump, probably from several annual visits
around 6700 BC. Although scatters of charred hazelnut shells are known
from sites throughout Mesolithic Europe, they had never been found in
such large quantities as at Staosnaig. Hazelnut harvesting and roasting
had been undertaken on an almost industrial scale,¹⁹ the hazel woodland
having been decimated for its nuts and firewood. Pollen evidence from a
loch close to Staosnaig indicates an almost complete collapse of the
woodland just after the intense hazelnut harvests had taken place.²⁰ So
these hunter-gatherers were certainly not living ‘in balance’ with
nature. The destruction of woodland on Colonsay which they began was
completed by the arrival of its first farmers.

No hazel trees grow on Colonsay today, but its past is recalled in its
name. ‘Coll’ is the Gaelic word for hazel, so the Mesolithic people must
have thought of Colonsay as ‘hazelnut island’.

The peripatetic lifestyle of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers in the southern
Hebrides, moving between settlements on Islay, Jura and Colonsay,
continued for more than a thousand years. Our understanding of how it
came to an end is intimately tied up with sites on the fourth island –
Oronsay. Although minuscule in size, Oronsay contains no fewer than five
Mesolithic shell middens. None are known on the other islands. Although
originally explored at the end of the nineteenth century, Paul Mellars
of Cambridge University undertook the most extensive excavations during
the 1970s.²¹ He found that the middens had accumulated between 5300 BC
and 4300 BC, just before the arrival of the first farmers.

Mesolithic people had come to Oronsay and gathered a variety of
shellfish to use as food and fishing bait; they had caught saithe – a
type of cod – from their canoes and trapped a great variety of sea
birds; seals were hunted and would have been easy prey if the island had
been a breeding ground in the Mesolithic, as it is today. Periwinkle
shells had been turned into necklaces and, in light of the bone awls
that Mellars found – tools suitable for piercing leather – clothing was
manufactured. Jumbled among the animal bones, shells, fireplaces and
broken artefacts of the middens were fragments of human skeletons,
confirming that people had also died on Oronsay. Whether these were the
remnants of ceremonially buried bodies or merely another type of
discarded rubbish remains unclear.

Some of the smallest finds were the most important, such as the
‘otoliths’, or ear bones, from saithe. The size of each otolith was a
direct reflection of the size of the fish it came from; that in turn
indicated the time of year it had been caught. From this evidence,
Mellars revealed that different middens on the island had been occupied
at different times and at all seasons of the year. He also suggested
that people had lived on the island all year round – sedentary
hunter-gatherers.²²

Mellars published the results of his excavations in 1987. At that time I
was a graduate student in Cambridge and highly sceptical of his claims.
I was sure that Mesolithic Oronsay would have had little to offer
hunter-gatherers in comparison to the wealth of resources on the larger
Hebridean islands, and that no more than very short and periodic visits
would have been made there. One or two visits each year over the course
of a millennium could easily have created the shell middens, these being
much smaller than those found in Denmark, such as at Ertebølle. And so
when I began working on Islay and Colonsay I was confident that I would
find settlements contemporary with the Oronsay middens and prove Mellars
wrong.

However, as the radiocarbon dates accumulated from my excavations, not
one of them fell in the 1,000-year period of the Oronsay middens.
Neither did any of the dated Mesolithic sites on Jura. By 1995 I had
more than thirty dates, half of which came before 5300 BC and half after
4300 BC. The gap between was completely empty and this was precisely
when the middens had accumulated. I soon had to admit that Mellars had
probably been right all along.²³ It seems that after having spent almost
two thousand years on Islay, Colonsay and Jura, these productive islands
were abandoned for the impoverished, windswept speck of Oronsay. Even if
visits had been made to the larger islands, these had been so brief and
insubstantial that they left no archaeological trace. In 1998, further
confirmation of permanent occupation on Oronsay was published by
Mellars: the chemical composition of the human bones indicated an
entirely marine diet, one of fish, seals, crabs, sea birds and
shellfish.²⁴

For hunter-gatherers to swap Islay for Oronsay defies ecological sense.
Why would they have done this? When searching for a solution I found
myself grasping at the archaeologists’ last resort: Oronsay must have
been preferred for some ideological reason that remains quite unknown to
us.

Although we have no rock paintings or carvings, the Mesolithic
inhabitants of Scotland are likely to have had a mythology as complex as
any other human society. When climbing the Paps of Jura and Beinn Tart
a’Mhill, visiting Loch Gorm and the estuary of Gruinart, sitting in the
relict oak woodland on Colonsay and walking on its beaches, I always
thought that these were as much the haunts of Mesolithic spirits, ghosts
and gods as of its people. The landscape was, I am sure, steeped in
origin myths and creation stories; these may have been the inspiration
for what seems to be an irrational decision about where to live and what
to eat.

After 4300 BC people were again living on the larger islands. The
hunting camp of Bolsay was in use once more, with microliths being made
and discarded. But the new occupants of Bolsay were also discarding
broken pottery vessels and ground stone axes. And as if to replace the
shell middens of Oronsay, new types of mounds had appeared on Islay:
megalithic tombs.

By 4500 BC, immigrant farmers had arrived in the east of Scotland. They
built stone houses that foreshadowed the famous village of Skara Brae on
Orkney and timber buildings elsewhere that looked like continental LBK
long houses.²⁵ They herded cattle and sheep, grew fields of wheat and
barley. Any Mesolithic hunter-gatherers disappeared without trace.

In the west of Scotland the new farming and old hunter-gatherer
lifestyles seem to have blended together, just as they had done in the
Mediterranean. While distinctive Neolithic burial tombs were made on
Islay, Mesolithic sites such as Bolsay continued to be used in much the
same way as before.²⁶ Only scant traces have been found of any crop
cultivation so this must have been on a very small scale; there are no
Neolithic houses or villages to compare with those from the east.
Scatters of Neolithic chipped stone are sparse, rarely having more than
a few hundred pieces – a dramatic contrast to the many thousands of
artefacts found at almost any Mesolithic site.

The Neolithic people in the southern Hebrides and elsewhere in western
Scotland were nomadic sheep and cattle herders who continued to hunt
wild game and collect plant foods. But as if to distinguish themselves
from Mesolithic hunter-gatherers, they refused to eat marine foods. At
least, that is the indication from the chemistry of the few Neolithic
bones that have been recovered from burial tombs.²⁷ The resources of
shellfish, marine mammals and fish that had sustained people on Oronsay
were simply ignored. As with the decision of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers
to live on Oronsay, this seems to defy economic sense.

What had happened to those Mesolithic people of Oronsay? Had their
populations simply withered away? Or had they mixed with new Hebridean
arrivals by exchanging goods, providing labour, and by marriage? Both
are possibilities, but I suspect a third. My guess is that the people on
Oronsay became the Neolithic farmers themselves; they acquired new
ideas, new tools and new animals from people in the east and returned to
the larger islands. Just like their ancestors had done, they sat by the
spring at Bolsay and chipped stone into microliths; but this time there
were cattle browsing near by.

