EUROPE

[images]

13 Pioneers in Northern Lands

The recolonisation of northwest Europe, 20,000–12,700 BC

The butchery of human bodies. A flint blade slices through flesh and
tendons, first removing the lower jaw and then the tongue of a young
man. Another has been scalped. A third body lies naked, face down in a
pool of blood, the back split open and gouged by stone tools. Moonlight
shines into the cave, illuminating the fur-clad and bloodstained hunters
who wield the tools. Crouched within a dark recess, John Lubbock is as
fearful to be inside as he is to leave.

This is Gough’s Cave in southern England on an autumn night in 12,700
BC. Outside, the limestone cliffs of the future Cheddar Gorge and beyond
a windswept landscape with birch trees sparkling in the frosty night
air. The men are ice-age hunters – pioneers in the northern lands of
Europe after the great ice-age freeze had come to its end. Lubbock
creeps by unnoticed by the hunters, whose weathered faces are hidden
behind long hair and matted beards.

As he steps into the gorge he shivers in the freezing night air; the
grass crunches, a cloud appears with every breath. It is quite silent,
the air scented with pine. Now he must resume his travels, for another
slice of history awaits, a period of momentous change as Europe is
transformed into a continent of forests and farmers.

After my own last visit to Gough’s Cave in the spring of AD 2000 I had
left along a concrete path below hot electric lights which led to a gift
shop selling plastic mammoths and dinosaurs. Outside, further visitors
were paying their money and clanking through a turnstile into the cave.
They were eager to see stalactites and underground rivers; some hoped to
see the resident horseshoe bats. Few were aware of the human carnage
that had once occurred within the cave.

For me, Gough’s Cave had been a place of historical as well as
archaeological interest – it was one of the first localities where
archaeologists of the nineteenth century found traces of an ice-age
past. By today’s standards the first excavations were quite appalling,
and probably destroyed more evidence than they recovered. Those early
digs left no more than small morsels of sediment for today’s
archaeologists, who now complement their spades and shovels with a
battery of scientific techniques. In 1986 Roger Jacobi, a specialist on
ice-age occupation in Britain, excavated one such morsel.¹ Within a
small deposit near to the entrance of the cave he found discarded tools,
butchered animal remains, and 120 pieces of human bone.

Jill Cook from the British Museum examined the bones and found them
heavily incised. Under a high-powered microscope these grooves proved to
contain tell-tale parallel scratches – conclusive evidence that they had
been made by stone tools. The position and direction of each cut
indicated which muscles had been severed and precisely how the bodies of
four adults and one adolescent had been systematically taken apart.²

Cannibalism seems the most likely explanation. Some of the cut-marked
bones were burnt, suggesting that human flesh had been roasted and
eaten. They had been discarded in the debris of occupation, among animal
bones and broken tools. We can do no more than guess whether the victims
had been deliberately killed or had died from natural causes. The animal
bones from Gough’s Cave tell us that another activity had also occurred:
the removal of sinews from horse bones, probably to be used as cords and
threads for sewing shoes and clothing. And so we find a picture of
mundane domesticity side by side with human carnage.³

Gough’s Cave is just one of many archaeological sites in Europe which
provides evidence for the recolonisation of northern landscapes as the
ice age drew to its close. Those landscapes had become polar deserts
when the ice age reached its peak at the LGM, abandoned by people and
all but the very hardiest animals and plants. It is with the
recolonisation of such lands that this history of Europe must begin, a
history of 15,000 years that lasts until a second wave of migrants
arrive – the first farmers. But those farmers remain far away in time as
we begin at the LGM, when agriculture remained quite unknown throughout
the world and northern Europe was a land of glaciers, polar desert and
tundra.

The story of how this was returned to the domain of human experience
begins in the south, where people survived the ice-age extremes. They
had settled in the valleys of southern France and Spain to live by
hunting reindeer, horse and bison. Their winters were harsh, with
temperatures falling to minus 20°C. Although some remarkable art was
created, such as the paintings within Pech Merle, the people were often
desperate for food and had to crack open even the smallest bones of
reindeer to remove the morsels of marrow inside.⁴

Victorian John Lubbock had visited several caves in southern France and
written about them within Prehistoric Times. He had travelled with his
two friends and colleagues, the great French archaeologist Edouard
Lartet and the English banker Henry Christy, who supported Lartet’s
work.⁵ In 1865 many still questioned human antiquity and refused to
believe that Europeans had lived as ‘savages’. Victorian Lubbock
recognised that the reindeer bones found by Lartet provided crucial
evidence. Not only were they mixed with stone artefacts, but many still
bore cut-marks from flint knives.

Victorian Lubbock had enthused about the beauty of the French landscape,
especially the Vézère valley where several caves were found. The
residents of the ice-age tundra must also have found generous
compensation for winter hardships in the beauty of their world with its
herds of bison, horse and deer, with its roving mammoth and woolly
rhino, with glimpses of bears and lions, flights of geese and swans.
François Bordes, another pivotal figure in French archaeology, one who
built upon Lartet’s pioneering work during the 1950s and 1960s, had been
quite right to describe that tundra as an ice-age Serengeti. After the
demands of winter came the annual spectacle of spring.

The first signs of the annual thaw would have been watched for keenly
and were celebrated within their art. On one day around 15,000 BC an
unknown person carved a host of images on to the surface of a bone – a
spawning salmon, a pair of seals, eels emerging from hibernation, flower
buds: an invocation of spring that was later lost or discarded at the
site of Montgaudier in France.⁶

Although none of the ice-age cave paintings had been discovered by 1865,
Victorian John Lubbock was able to describe some ice-age carvings in the
pages of Prehistoric Times. Ice-age art was a challenge to those who
believed that prehistoric men were savages with child-like minds.
Victorian Lubbock was more generous than most; he wrote how it is
‘natural to feel some surprise at finding these works of art’ and went
on to state, grudgingly, that ‘we must give them full credit for their
love of art, such as it was’.⁷ Yet statements immediately followed that
the cave men were nevertheless quite ignorant of agriculture, domestic
animals and metallurgy. The paradox with which he wrestled, the savage
with exquisite artistic skill, would reach breaking point within a
matter of years: in 1879 a little girl ran shouting to her father about
bulls – it was the discovery of paintings in Altamira Cave.

The world of ice-age artists began to change soon after 18,000 BC.
Global temperatures began to rise and the northern ice sheets began to
melt. By 14,000 BC the glaciers had disappeared from northern Germany
and were retreating across Scandinavia and Britain. The artists and
hunters in the south felt and saw the effects of global warming at first
hand, unaware that the changes they observed – a lusher growth of the
grass, earlier nesting times for birds, reduced snowfall – were the
harbingers of a new era of climatic, and indeed human, history.

We look back at those ice-age people with knowledge of what their future
held – 10,000 years of dramatic climate change. Although the trend was
towards warmer conditions it was a roller-coaster ride with huge ups and
downs in temperature. But of course those jigs and jags, peaks and
troughs of changing temperature that we see recorded in the ice cores
taken from Greenland and the Antarctic tell us little about how
landscapes evolved and even less about the nature of human experience.
For these we need to turn to evidence from Europe itself, especially
from the sediments trapped within its caves and deposited within its
ancient lakes.

We have seen the value of pollen grains when following the history of
changing landscapes of western Asia as recorded by evidence from the
Hula basin core. In Europe the tiny pollen grains record the history of
plant migration and the development of woodlands across what had once
been the barren tundra close to the glaciers themselves. It is a history
created by the seeds and spores of plants carried northwards upon the
wind, in the feathers and fur, on the feet and in the faeces, of birds
and animals. Some of these plants – those most tolerant of conditions
that remained cold and dry – found that they could survive, and even
flourish, where not long before they would have lain frozen and useless
upon the ground.

As these plant pioneers became established they encouraged further birds
and animals to venture north. They also helped new soil to develop, soil
that was eagerly used by a new set of plants, able to colonise because
of increasing warmth and rain. These new arrivals competed fiercely for
the sunlight and nutrients, gradually pushing the original settlers
northwards, to further lands just released from grip of the ice-age
freeze.

By 15,000 BC herbs and shrubs had taken hold of the rolling hills of
central Europe, notably artemisia (a spiky knee-high shrub), dwarf
willow and mugwort. An acceleration in their northward spread marks the
onset of the first major warm phase in the history of global warming,
the Bølling. This is the dramatic peak seen in the ice-core record at
12,500 BC and marks the date when those Early Natufian hunter-gatherers
in the warmer, lusher world of western Asia were settling down to a
sedentary lifestyle. In Europe the Bølling resulted in a scattering of
birch trees across the northern tundra and the development of pine and
birch woodland further south and within sheltered valleys.

The pollen grains show that there followed a hiatus, and in some areas a
reversal, in the spread of woodland. By 11,500 BC, however, full
woodland of birch, poplar and pine had penetrated northern Germany,
Britain and southern Scandinavia. In some regions, this is identified
with a second particularly warm phase called the Allerød, the final peak
of climate change before the Younger Dryas began at 10,800 BC.

The pollen grains record that 1,000-year relapse to Arctic conditions by
a renewed dominance of grasses, shrubs and only the most resilient of
trees – the northern landscapes had once again become open tundra, with
copses of birch and pine struggling for survival against the odds. The
grasslands would have been dotted with the delicate white flowers of
mountain avens, known to botanists as Dryas octopetala – from which the
name Younger Dryas is derived. And then quite suddenly, at 9600 BC, tree
pollen appears once again; it soon becomes abundant as northern Europe
is clothed by thick woodland when dramatic global warming brings the ice
age to its close.

Pollen grains can tell us a great deal: how landscapes changed, what
plants and trees the people had seen and burned on their fires as they
ventured north. But to truly appreciate how cold these ice-age hunters
and gatherers may have felt, archaeologists must turn to another type of
pioneer: beetles.

Beetles largely stopped evolving more than one million years ago.
Consequently we can be confident that the species identified from the
particularities of legs, wings and antennae in ancient deposits are
precisely the same as those which live today. This is important because
many species are highly sensitive to air temperature and live in very
specific types of climate. Consider, for instance, the beetle known as
Boreaphilus henningianus. Today it is restricted to northern Norway and
Finland as it can only survive in extreme cold. But its remains are
found in ice-age deposits throughout Britain, indicating temperatures as
cold as those of the Arctic today.

The beetle remains from Britain are the best studied of anywhere in the
world.⁸ More than 350 species are known, from which accurate estimates
of past temperatures have been gleaned. The beetles tell us, for
instance, that at the LGM winter temperatures in southern Britain
routinely reached minus 16°C, and rose to 10°C in the summer. When the
warm phase of the Bølling arrived at 12,500 BC, the beetles in Britain
were much the same as they are today, indicating that winter and summer
temperatures were also similar, 0–1°C and 17°C respectively. But then
cold species rose to prominence, indicating a substantial drop of winter
temperatures to minus 5°C at 12,000 and minus 17°C at 10,500 BC, the
last fitting neatly with the period of the Younger Dryas as seen within
the ice cores from Antarctica and Greenland.

Beetles may be precious but they hardly enable us to envision the
prehistoric landscapes of ice-age Europe. For that, animal bones are
much more useful – for, as soon as mammoths, reindeer and wild boar are
invoked those landscapes become alive. Animal bones are principally
found within cave deposits, like the hippo bones from Aetokremnos Cave,
Cyprus. Some are from the animals that lived and died within the caves,
such as hyenas and bears. Others are the prey of carnivores – food taken
to feed their young or to be eaten in safety – while the bones of many
small mammals arrived via the pellets deposited by roosting owls. Once
humans were present they used caves for shelter and discarded within
them the bones of animals they killed or had scavenged from frozen
carcasses.

Animal bones – whatever their origin – tell us a great deal about the
changing environments of Europe. As with beetles, mammals are known to
favour different types of habitats – reindeer enjoy cold tundra, red
deer prefer more temperate woodland. And so, by arranging the
collections of bones in an ordered sequence through time we can
reconstruct the changing animal communities, and hence environments, of
Europe.

Very few caves, however, have long sequences of deposits. For this
reason, collections of bones from different caves must be placed
together if we are to reconstruct several thousand years of climate
change. Jean-Marie Cordy of the University of Liège conducted one such
study.⁹ He examined the animal bones recovered during more than a
hundred years of excavation from caves in the limestone region of the
Meuse basin in Belgium.

Cordy constructed a jigsaw sequence of deposits from 15,000 to 9000 BC,
finding that in those dated before 14,500 BC the bones of reindeer and
musk ox were dominant – animals of the tundra. From 14,500 BC onwards,
they were joined by the remains of grassland and woodland species, such
as horse, red deer and wild boar. These came to dominate the collections
of bones from 12,500 BC, which coincides with the Bølling phase – a time
when reindeer had been forced to travel north to find their favoured
lichen and moss-covered tundra.

In the next set of bone collections from the Belgium caves, reindeer
once again become abundant, reflecting a drop in temperature and the
re-emergence of tundra. Such see-sawing between warm- and cold-loving
animals continued as the global climate moved through the Allerød,
Younger Dryas, and finally the global warming that brought the ice age
to a close 9600 years ago.

Using the bones of large mammals to map the changing environments of
Europe is sometimes problematic. They are often found in small numbers
and some species, such as red deer, are known to be very adaptable – at
home on both open grassland and thick woodland. Moreover, some of these
bones may have travelled considerable distances before becoming
discarded within a cave: both carnivores and humans can have large
hunting territories and bring home animals that are quite different to
those in the immediate vicinity of their den or campsite. Consequently,
the bones of the small mammals found within cave sediments provide a
better index of climate change – for these are generally more numerous,
the species more sensitive to environmental conditions, and few travel
very far within their short lives.

One of the most useful is the Arctic lemming – the peaks and troughs in
the quantity of its bones are almost as good as a temperature gauge
itself. Take the cave of Chaleux in the Meuse valley, Belgium, as an
example.¹⁰ Before 13,000 BC practically all the small mammal bones in
the deposits are those from Arctic lemmings and this denotes a very cold
tundra landscape. These are replaced by other rodent species – the
northern birch mouse, the bank vole, and even the common hamster – that
require much warmer and wetter conditions, and usually inhabit woodland.
Their abundance in the sediments at Chaleux marks the start of the
Bølling. During the next thousand years the lemmings and the warm-loving
rodents keep exchanging places as the most abundant species – a direct
reflection of the climatic fluctuations just prior to the environmental
crash of the Younger Dryas, marked by the disappearance of all woodland
rodents.

Pollen grains, beetles’ legs, animal bones – it is from the study of
these that the environments of the northern lands are reconstructed.
Scientists working within sterile laboratories, writing technical
reports on specific aspects of the past, do this work. The challenge we
face when writing history, however, is not just to combine these sources
of evidence so that we can imagine actual communities of plants, animals
and insects, but also to gain an understanding of the experience of
those who first entered and then became part of those communities. The
lists of plants and animals are a poor substitute for the smell of pine
needles and the taste of venison roasted under the stars; a report on
insect remains cannot evoke the buzz and sting of a horsefly; estimates
of winter temperatures fail to convey the numbing pain of fur-clad
frozen feet that have walked through snow and waded across icy rivers.
Fortunately such sensations are within our grasp: to be a good
prehistorian one should not just read the technical reports that emanate
from archaeological science, but actually go walking and immerse oneself
in the natural world, edging a little closer to the hunter-gatherer
experience.

This is precisely what John Lubbock has been doing since leaving Gough’s
Cave. He headed north, crossing 150 kilometres of rolling hills and
plain; the trees became sparse and the wind persistent as he approached
the great ice sheet itself. Few people were seen as he crossed the
tundra – a party of reindeer hunters in the distance disappearing into
the mist, a few families heading south, perhaps to Gough’s Cave itself.

When Lubbock rests, or is forced to shelter, he reads Prehistoric Times
to discover what his 1865 namesake had known about using animal bones
and plant remains to reconstruct past environments. Victorian Lubbock
evidently knew that certain animals were indicators of past climatic
conditions, commenting how reindeer bones provided a clear indicator of
a cold climate and even picking out the lemming as a particularly
telling species when found in cave or river deposits.¹¹ There was no
mention of pollen grains,¹² but he described how peat bogs in Denmark
often have layers of pine near the base, followed by oak and birch, and
then beech – trees that he assumed had grown around the edge and fallen
in. ‘For one species of tree thus to displace another,’ he had written,
‘and in its turn to be supplemented by a third, would evidently require
a great lapse of time, but one which, as yet, we have no means of
measuring.’¹³

Elsewhere, Victorian John Lubbock had been just as cautious about
estimates of past temperature. Commenting on the proposal from a Mr
Prestwich¹⁴ that temperatures had once been up to 29 degrees below that
of the present, he had written: ‘we are hardly yet in a condition to
estimate with any degree of probability the actual amount of change
which has taken place.’¹⁵ As with radiocarbon dating, so useful for
establishing the lapse of time between one vegetation type and another,
palaeoentomology – the study of beetles and other insects from ancient
deposits – had yet to be developed.

When not reading, modern John Lubbock watches for people, and is in turn
watched by animals of the tundra. As he crunches across the frozen
ground, a snowy owl seated upon a tussock pivots its head to fix him in
its stare. As it does so, an arctic hare rises and does likewise. Within
a moment the tension breaks – the owl silently departs its perch to
sweep low across the grass, the hare drops again and disappears from
sight. Lubbock walks on.

When no more than a day’s walk from the glaciers themselves, he arrives
at another limestone gorge, known today as Creswell Crags. It is
daybreak on a winter’s day in 12,700 BC and he stands upon the edge of
its southern cliff looking down among pine and birch that have found
shelter in the gorge. Its sides are peppered with fissures and caves.
Wisps of smoke wind their way between the trees; tracing back to their
source, Lubbock spots a fireplace that smoulders at the entrance to a
cave.

A shout draws his gaze away to a man and a boy entering the gorge. Clad
in furs, they each have a pair of snow-white hares slung across their
shoulders; a spring in their step suggests they are pleased with their
kill. Lubbock watches as they climb across the scree-slope towards the
cave and dump their catch by the fire. Women and children appear
excitedly from within the cave; they admire the hares, stroking their
fur and pinching their thighs to feel the meat.

By the time that Lubbock has descended the shallow cliff, crossed the
gorge and joined them by the fire, a stone blade has removed the front
feet and slit the belly of the biggest hare. Its skin is peeled back,
and the front legs eased out, before being drawn over the animal’s head.
A few minutes later the carcass is on a spit across the fire, its pelt
hanging with the other hares inside the cave.

Once roasted, the hare is cut into joints to be shared between all
present – except, of course, John Lubbock. Nevertheless he manages to
eat some scraps that provide a deeply satisfying breakfast. When all the
bones have been chewed quite clean they are gathered and buried in a
shallow pit just within the entrance of the cave; if left exposed, they
would attract scavenging hyenas and foxes.

Lubbock remains with these people for the next few days, anticipating a
chance to hunt big game – some of the reindeer, horse and even mammoths
he had seen while travelling north. But no such hunting occurs, as hare
is the only game they take. And so, instead of learning how to slay
mighty beasts, he acquires some less macho but far more important
survival skills: how to extract sinews from a hare to use as sewing
thread, how to turn its leg bones into awls and needles, how to make
socks, mittens and coat lining from the fur.

One evening he follows a man and a youth to a thicket of stunted willow
where the hares are known to feed. The man inspects which leaves have
been chewed and which grass stems broken by the resting hares. A branch
is torn off, stripped and inserted into the ground. A loop of sinew is
then attached just where the man suspects the next feeding bout will
occur.¹⁶ At dawn the party returns to find a gleaming white hare caught
within the noose, lying exhausted from its struggle but still alive. The
man lifts it gently, strokes its fur and whispers kind words in its ear.
And then he breaks its neck.

Lubbock leaves what will become known as Robin Hood Cave in Creswell
Crags. He heads east; a journey across tundra-covered lowlands awaits.
It will take him through the gently rolling hills and valleys of a land
that no longer exists – Doggerland, now drowned by the waters of the
North Sea.¹⁷ Beyond that, he will arrive in northern Germany and there
his wish to see ice-age hunters at work with larger game will be
fulfilled.

Creswell Crags is found today amidst a decaying industrial conurbation,
a landscape that could hardly be more different from the beauty of
ice-age tundra. The gorge is no more than 100 metres long and 20 metres
wide; its caves have marvellous names: Robin Hood Cave, Mother Grundy’s
Parlour, Pin Hole Cave. Once they were full of sediments containing the
remains of animals that had lived and died on the tundra. Wolves,
hyenas, foxes and bears had used the caves for denning, dragging home
the remnants of their prey: reindeer, horse, red deer, lemmings and a
vast array of birds. Smaller mammals, bats and owls had also lived and
died within these crags, making them a treasure trove for those who wish
to reconstruct animal communities of the ancient world.

As at Gough’s Cave, the first excavations at Creswell occurred in the
late nineteenth century, by the Rev. J. Magens Mello, and then continued
periodically until the present day. In 1977 John Campbell synthesised
all the data that had accumulated and attributed the presence of animal
bones to human activity, principally to those people who came to the
crags during the last few thousand years of the ice age. He thought that
those pioneers of the north had not only hunted reindeer and horse, but
had also slain mammoth and rhino.¹⁸ Recent, meticulous studies, however,
have identified which bones carry the tell-tale cut marks of stone tools
and which the gnawing of carnivore teeth. This work has downsized human
activity to the more modest pursuit of trapping arctic hares.¹⁹

All of the cut-marked bones dated to a narrow window of time at around
12,700 BC – with radiocarbon dates so similar to those from Gough’s Cave
that we could be dealing with the very same party of pioneers.²⁰

Cut-marked bones can tell us far more than merely what people had once
eaten and which animals had once lived in ice-age Europe: they can tell
us precisely when people began to spread north from their refuges in the
south. The tools themselves are little help – being made of stone they
lack the crucial carbon from which an exact date can be acquired.
Consequently, archaeologists are reliant upon establishing the age of
the animal bones found lying with the artefacts, and then assuming that
each is contemporary with the other. Unfortunately this is often not the
case.

As happened at Creswell Crags, animal bones can become embedded in cave
sediments from a variety of sources and then further muddled together.
Stone tools can become intermingled with such bones. So when a
radiocarbon date is acquired on, say, the leg bone of a reindeer found
next to a spear point, that date would not necessarily tell us when the
spear point was discarded or lost within the cave. It might simply tell
us when a hyena had used the cave for its den many centuries or even
millennia either before or after the human presence.²¹

Victorian John Lubbock, writing in the 1860s, was quite aware of this
problem. Indeed, in Prehistoric Times he used cut-marks to counter
arguments from a certain Monsieur Desnoyers that the bones of extinct
animals had lain in caves for thousands of years before the appearance
of man, their remains simply becoming mixed together. The association
between stone artefacts and the bones of mammoth, cave bear and woolly
rhino was crucial to those who argued for an age of human antiquity
greater than the few thousand years spanned by the Bible. Victorian John
Lubbock did exactly what any modern archaeologist would do: he looked
for cut-marks on the bones and provided examples for cave lion, woolly
rhinoceros and reindeer.²² In fact, he anticipated almost all the
techniques used by archaeo-zoologists today. He discussed the impact of
gnawing and scavenging by dogs on the bone collections which
archaeologists have to study,²³ used different degrees of skeleton
fragmentation to assess relative dates of burial,²⁴ and assessed the
seasons in which hunting had taken place by the animals present and a
knowledge of their modern counterparts’ behaviour.²⁵

Today, when the age of human antiquity is no longer in doubt, cut-marked
bones remain just as crucial for archaeological study. They provide
ideal specimens for radiocarbon dating, as the cut-marked bones are by
definition contemporary with a human presence. The possibility of dating
what are often small fragments has only arisen by the advent of a new
technique of radiocarbon dating known as ‘accelerator mass spectrometry’
or AMS. This can date samples no more than 1/1000th of the size required
by the older, ‘conventional’ technique, as it is now called.²⁶

In 1997 Rupert Housley and his colleagues published the results of more
than a hundred new AMS radiocarbon dates obtained from forty-five sites
distributed across northern Europe, from eastern Germany to the British
Isles.²⁷ Housley is one of the leading experts on radiocarbon dating and
had carefully selected specimens that provided unequivocal evidence for
human presence.²⁸ For the first time, archaeologists had the chance to
develop a precise understanding of when and how people expanded
northwards from their ice-age refuge in Southwest Europe.

The northern limits of that refuge were the valleys which act as
tributaries to the Loire. It was only after 15,000 BC that settlement
pushed further north, initially into the upper Rhine and then by 14,500
BC into the middle Rhine, Belgium and southern Germany. This was after
grasses and shrubs had travelled north, these closely followed by herds
of reindeer and horses eager to expand their range. We can tell that the
ice-age pioneers moved at an average rate of one kilometre per annum
and, in another four hundred years, had made settlements in northern
France, northern Germany and Denmark. At around 12,700 BC the first
people returned to Britain after an absence of almost 10,000 years. Not
surprisingly, this final big push northwards coincides with the warm
period of the Bølling. At that time Britain was just the most
northwesterly corner of Europe – several thousand more years had to pass
before it became an island.

The recolonisation of any one specific region was a two-stage process.
First came the pioneers. In this phase the archaeological sites are
small, usually no more than a scatter of stone tools. Such sites were
most likely the overnight camps of hunting parties exploring lands that
had lacked any human settlement during the great glacial freeze. The
pioneers are likely to have travelled north in the summer, returning to
southern base camps to report on what they had seen. Knowledge about
topography, the distribution of animals and plants, the sources of raw
materials, had to be gradually acquired by these pioneers so that mental
maps of the new territory could be constructed. This must have been
challenging. Because both the weather and the climate remained so
variable, bodies of knowledge built up in one generation of explorers
may have been of little value to the next.

The phase of pioneering lasted for about five hundred years, or twenty
generations. Only after this had occurred did a shift in human
settlement take place – initiating what Housley and his colleagues call
the residential phase. At this stage, families and other groups
relocated their base camps to live permanently in the north, exploiting
the herds of reindeer and horses that had become established on the
tundras.

Why did people go exploring in northern lands and then take up residence
there? The spores and seeds of plants were carried by the wind; the
insects and animals that followed in their wake were unable to resist
the ecological imperative to breed and exploit new niches as soon as
such opportunities arose. Were the ice-age hunters just as helplessly
driven as the beetles, the rodents and the deer? When the thaw arrived,
did human populations simply swell just as the rivers had done until
they were forced to find new sources of food?

There can be little doubt that human populations did indeed expand. The
brilliance of ice-age cave paintings hide the sore truth that life at
LGM had been appallingly hard. Winter would have been fatal for many of
the babies, children and the infirm as frozen ground and blizzards
destroyed food supply and human health. Quite what happened to the
bodies we do not know as there are no cemeteries, and individual burials
are few and far between.

With even a slight increase in average temperatures, populations would
have grown, perhaps rapidly: babies surviving into infancy instead of
dying of cold and hunger; women giving birth to a third or fourth child;
the elderly surviving the winter while telling tales to the new
generation of ice-age hunters.

But factors other than an increase in numbers may have driven people
into northern lands. Ambitious young men and women may have left to
search for new resources, those that provided prestige and items for
exchange rather than food and drink. Hence, as the ice sheets retreated,
entrepreneurs may have followed in their wake, searching for mammoth
ivory, luxurious pelts, seashells and exotic stone. Social tensions may
have been the incentive for others to travel north. As new lands became
available, an opportunity arose for young men and women to establish
communities of their own rather than remaining under the authority of
elders and traditions no longer to their liking.

I doubt if any or all of these explanations are quite sufficient to
explain the great northward trek after the ice had gone. There is
another driving force that must be invoked, one that we will find behind
human dispersal throughout the world as Lubbock’s travels take him
across the Americas, Australia, Asia and Africa. It is the curiosity of
the human spirit: the drive to explore new lands for the sake of
exploration itself.

14 With Reindeer Hunters

Economy, technology and society, 12,700–9600 BC

Silence – other than the rhythmic deep breathing of anxious hunters and
the thunderous beating of his adrenalin-fuelled heart. Some hunters are
crouching behind boulders; others hide among tussocks of grass from the
approaching herd. John Lubbock lies flat on the ground, ready to observe
the annual reindeer slaughter in the Ahrensburg valley of
Schleswig-Holstein.

Through the grass stalks he sees a path winding between two small lakes
within the valley bottom. Reindeer use this route every autumn when
making their annual northward migration towards new grazing. An icy wind
blows the hunters’ scent away as the ground begins to vibrate with the
pounding of a multitude of hoofs. The ambush is set.

The leading group of deer pass by the boulders and funnel along the
narrow path. A signal is made and spears are thrown, striking the
animals from behind. More spears come from across the valley – the deer
are trapped. Terrorised, they flee into the water and swim for their
lives. Within a few minutes eight or nine animals lie upon the ground;
some quiver before a final blow to the head. A few carcasses are
floating within the lake; they are left to sink, as those on land will
provide more than enough food, hides and antlers. The spears are
carefully collected – not so much for their points as for their wooden
hafts that are precious within the largely treeless landscape of
northern Europe.

Alfred Rust excavated the site of Meiendorf in the Ahrensburg valley in
the 1930s.¹ In the muddy sediments of the valley bottom he found
thousands of reindeer bones, and a great number of stone points that had
once been attached to spears. They had been lethal hunting weapons, most
likely propelled with the aid of an atlatl – a stick that hooked around
the end of the spear – to provide extra power.

These date from 12,600 BC, which was almost at the end of the period
Edouard Lartet christened ‘l’âge du renne’. Lartet, the French
archaeologist so admired by Victorian John Lubbock, had been impressed
by the vast quantities of reindeer bones in the caves of southern
France. We now know that these had been accumulating since 30,000 BC at
least.² But Lartet lacked any notion of their age and conceived of L’âge
du renne as following L’âge du grand ours des cavernes (cave bear) and
L’âge de l’éléphant et du rhinocéros, but preceding L’âge de l’aurochs
(wild cattle).

To divide what Victorian John Lubbock had called the Palaeolithic into
four phases of this type was a ground-breaking idea in 1865 and yet
subject to some criticism in Prehistoric Times because of the
chronological overlaps of the named species.³ Of the four phases, L’âge
du renne persisted in archaeological thought far longer than the others
because many ice-age communities were indeed dependent upon reindeer for
their livelihood.

After the ice had retreated, reindeer rapidly began to use the
Ahrensburg valley as a major route-way on their annual migrations across
treeless tundra to winter pastures in southern Sweden. The tundra
landscape was far milder than those we know today: summer temperatures
reached 13°C, and fell to a mere minus 5°C in winter. When the pioneers
first arrived in this region they must have watched in awe as herds of
reindeer passed along the narrow valley – it was a hunting opportunity
second to none.

Some of the sites that Rust found, such as Meiendorf, dated to the
Bølling, while others were 2,000 years younger, falling within the
period of the Younger Dryas. By then subarctic temperatures had returned
to northern Germany, although the tundra was now supporting scattered
woodlands of pine and birch. The most famous Younger Dryas site
discovered by Rust is that of Stellmoor, located on the eastern edge of
the valley. Here more than 18,000 reindeer bones and antlers were
recovered, together with a vast number of flint tools, and more than a
hundred arrow shafts of pinewood, preserved within the waterlogged
sediments.

The site had evidently been one of mass slaughter, most likely turning
the lake red with blood. The German archaeologist Bodil Bratlund has
reconstructed the scene by a meticulous study of the reindeer bones from
Rust’s collections, concentrating on those within which flint arrow
points were still embedded. He identified which parts of the body had
been struck and the direction from which the arrows had come.

Hunters had fired their first arrows horizontally into the deer, aiming
for the heart to make a direct kill. The deer fled into the lake,
terrorised and swimming for their lives – just as their ancestors had
done when the spear-throwers of Meiendorf had struck. Other shots
followed, from behind and above – flint arrow points have been found
embedded in shoulder bones and in the back of the neck – but many arrows
clearly missed their mark and sank into the mud. After the carcasses
were hauled to the shore and butchered, there is likely to have been
feasting among the groups that had gathered for the annual slaughter.

The Stellmoor hunters killed the deer on a far larger scale than those
at Meiendorf. Their technology was more effective: spears had been
replaced by bows and arrows tipped with the distinctive triangular and
tanged points. In fact, archaeologists now call them ‘Ahrensburgian’
points, and find them across northern Europe during the Younger Dryas.
They were most likely a creative response to the severity of the climate
and constituted a leap forward in technology.

So far, the campsites where the hunters of Meiendorf and Stellmoor made
their atlatls, pine arrows, and planned their ambush have not been
found. About 1,000 kilometres to the southwest, however, in the Paris
basin – that area bounded by the mountains of the Ardennes in the
northeast and the Vosges in the east, the Morvan in the southwest and
the Massif Central in the south – the opposite is true.

More than fifty sites have been discovered, mostly consisting of no more
than scatters of flint artefacts – any organic materials such as animal
bones and wooden arrow shafts having decayed long ago. Three are
particularly well-preserved, Pincevent, Verberie and Etiolles, each of
which was occupied during the Bølling and its immediate aftermath.⁴ They
had been located so close to rivers, tributaries of the Seine, that they
became covered with fine silts each time a flood occurred – probably
every spring. Consequently the stone artefacts, animal bones and
fireplaces were sealed and so preserved just as they had been abandoned.
They have been meticulously excavated and fastidiously studied, notably
by the French archaeologists Françoise Audouze and Nicole Pigeot, and
provide vivid snapshots into the lives of pioneers and settlers in
Northwest Europe.

John Lubbock steps into one of those snapshots after having left
Meiendorf and reaching what will become the archaeological site of
Verberie in the Oise valley in the Paris basin. Today this site is
located amidst a rich agricultural landscape but Lubbock’s visit
required a journey across tundra and through scattered pine and birch
trees in valley bottoms, trees that provided welcome relief from the
biting wind. It is an autumn afternoon and the light is already
beginning to fade. He stands on the edge of the campsite and sees people
clustered around a fire. They do not live at Verberie; they merely use
it for one or two days each year to butcher reindeer ambushed and killed
when attempting to ford the nearby river.

Three carcasses have already been brought here and dumped a few metres
apart from each other. The hunters have joined their friends around the
fire – a short rest before the work begins. Lubbock also sits, taking up
a good viewing position so as not to miss this new and vital lesson in
ice-age life: how to turn a reindeer carcass into venison steak.

Three or four of them – men and women – begin to cut swiftly and
expertly with their stone tools, frequently stopping work to find a
better stone knife or a new chopper from a pile of flint flakes prepared
while the hunting was under way. Lubbock focuses on the nearest group,
eager to learn this hunter’s craft.⁵ First the animal’s head is removed
and then the whole body is skinned. Cuts are made around each hoof and
along the inside of each leg. The hide is then virtually peeled away –
albeit with a lot of tugging and cutting of sinews. It is laid out flat
upon the ground. The belly is sliced open from the sternum to the
crotch; a mass of innards spills upon the ground and is shoved to one
side.

The carcass is taken apart: legs, pelvis, and slabs of ribs, together
with the liver and kidneys, are removed and stacked upon the skin. The
heart, lungs and bronchial tubes are removed as a single unit, and then
separated – the heart added to the pile of meat, the rest put with the
guts. As a penultimate act, the cheek of the severed head is sliced open
to expose the base of the tongue. This is cut and removed with a sharp
tug. Finally the antlers are removed and they crown the pile of meat and
organs.

Each party works around their carcass, circling it to make the next cut
through the hide or to detach a limb. A couple of larger joints are
carried a few metres away to a pair of women who remove fillets of meat.
As the reindeer butchers work, they casually toss over their shoulders
the bones that have insufficient meat or marrow, littering the floor
with short sections of vertebrae, bones from the lower legs and feet,
fragments of the rib-cage.

When the work is finished, there is another break during which the
fillets, together with some kidneys and liver, are roasted on the fire
and eaten. Sledges are then loaded with the reindeer meat, dirt is
kicked across the ashes, and the hunters depart, heaving on ropes of
twisted hide as dusk descends. Lubbock remains seated. Within a few
minutes wolves come to scavenge upon the waste. They have a feast,
chewing bones, licking blood and eagerly devouring the innards.

They too move on and leave the butchery site much as archaeologists will
one day find it. There is a patch of ash where the fire had once burned;
a concentration of flint flakes and broken nodules where tools had been
prepared; a light scatter of chewed bone fragments and discarded tools.
Three empty circular patches mark where the carcasses had once been
dumped and around which the agile butchers had worked. The remaining
morsels of meat, skin, tendons and marrow on the discarded bones soon
disappear, consumed by birds, beetles and maggots. In the spring the
river will burst its banks and deposit fine sediment across the site,
leaving all but the smallest chips of flint and fragments of bone
undisturbed.

Lubbock visits another settlement, one that will become Pincevent. It
lies 125 kilometres due south, but he takes a winding route along the
valleys of the Oise and the Seine to its confluence with the Yonne. On
arrival, he sees a group of tents made from wooden frames draped with
reindeer hide around which people are tending fires and cleaning skins.
These are tightly staked and being scraped to remove fat and sinews.
Lifting a flap, he looks inside a tent: a small fire is burning next to
a baby lying in a canoe-shaped cradle made from animal skins. Another
child, a boy aged four or five, plays on the floor dressed in no more
than a pair of leggings.

Outside, several of the older men and women are in a cluster discussing
whether it is time to leave Pincevent and return to their winter
campsites in the south. It is now late autumn and the reindeer have all
but gone – mere stragglers are left from the vast herds that have long
since passed on their northward journey.

Five families, each of which has its own fireplace built within a hollow
in the ground, are using Pincevent. Some men arrive pulling a sledge
loaded with joints of reindeer meat and stacked with antlers – much like
that which Lubbock had watched leaving Verberie. Everybody crowds round;
joints are split apart and the meat is shared. An evening feast takes
place – the last before the campsite is abandoned for another year.

When the great French archaeologist André Leroi-Gourhan excavated
Pincevent in the 1960s, many fragmented reindeer bones were found
clustered around the hollow fireplaces where the meat had been roasted
and eaten.⁶ Two decades later, the American archaeologist James Enloe
found that fragments from different fireplaces could be fitted together,
showing how one single joint had been shared.⁷ Whole carcasses had been
divided in this fashion – the left forelimb of one animal was found
beside one hearth, the right forelimb of the same animal at another.
Food sharing was at the centre of social life for those who camped at
Pincevent – as indeed it has been with all hunter-gatherers throughout
human history.

Heading 40 kilometres back north along the Seine valley, Lubbock arrives
at a settlement that will become known Etiolles.⁸ Here, a quite
different activity is under way: tool manufacture. The predictable
migrations of reindeer herds had been just one of the attractions of the
valleys of northern France to the ice-age hunters. Another was the
availability of the massive, fine-quality flint nodules that were
exposed within the chalk and limestone outcrops of the valley sides.
Flint was the most valuable raw material throughout the Stone Age
because it could be worked into flakes and razor-sharp elongated blades
by striking the nodules with hammer-stones. From the blades a great
variety of tools could be made by delicate chipping: points for spears,
scrapers for cleaning hide, chisels (‘burins’) for engraving bone and
ivory, awls for piercing hide. The pioneers who spread into the northern
lands would have been on the lookout for sources of flint – the ice-age
hardware store. Those found in the valleys of northern France are likely
to have been the best they had ever come across.

Lubbock watches large nodules of flint arriving at the site in deerskin
bags after having been dug from chalky sediments just a few hundred
metres away. Some of these are really large, weighing 50 kilograms and
more than 80 centimetres in length, making those Lubbock had seen being
worked at Azraq in western Asia seem quite diminutive in size. Many of
these massive nodules are also flawless inside, containing none of the
hidden fossils, crystals or internal cracks caused by frost that bedevil
poorer-quality stone.

The work appears casual, intermingled with chatter and snacking, and yet
it is deadly serious: each strike of the nodule is carefully planned.
Such fine nodules provide experienced craftsmen with an opportunity to
show off their skills, while the abundance of flint allows novices to
work with fresh stone rather than with that discarded by the experts.
The nodules – or cores as archaeologists name them – are clasped between
their knees and struck with hammers made from stone and antler. Thin
flakes are systematically detached; most are left where they fall to the
ground, but a few are selected and placed to one side. These will either
be turned into tools by delicate chipping of the edge to create a
specific shape or angle, or more likely used just as they are – nothing
could be sharper. Having acquired a nodule and hammer-stone himself,
having bruised his thumb and failed to detach a single flake, Lubbock
appreciates once again the knowledge and skill that is being
effortlessly displayed. At least this time he manages to avoid a
bleeding finger and so some progress appears to have been made since his
days at Azraq.

The shape and size of each detached flake depends precisely on what type
of hammer is used, where the nodule is struck, the speed and the angle
of the blow. Tiny flakes are often removed by chipping or grinding the
edge before the nodule is struck so that the force of a blow is not
deflected. The knappers aim to produce long, thin ‘blades’ of flint.⁹

The production of blades might appear a rather bland, mechanistic
exercise – and that is indeed how archaeologists often describe the
work. But from watching the action itself, Lubbock’s impression is quite
different. The cores are caressed by fingers that enjoy the texture of
the stone; the crack from each blow and the tinkle of flakes falling
upon flakes upon the ground are listened to intently; the core is
constantly turned, inspected, explored, as if it were a new landscape in
which to hunt. To call such work ‘flint knapping’ or ‘tool production’
seems derisive.

Of course knapping does not always go to plan. Some nodules that seem
perfect from the outside have hidden internal flaws and are discarded as
soon as they are tapped – they provide a dull thud rather than the
resounding ‘ping’ that comes from the perfect stone. More problematic
are the mishits and wrong decisions about which flakes to remove in
order to shape the core. As Lubbock watches the knappers at work he
hears the odd curse uttered as a core breaks in two, or when a flake is
only partly detached, leaving a ‘step’ on the nodule. Sometimes the core
is discarded, simply dropped into the pile of flakes that have
accumulated on the floor.

Twenty-five piles of such waste were excavated at Etiolles. Just as
James Enloe had rejoined broken animal bones at Pincevent, the French
archaeologist Nicole Pigeot rejoined the flakes and nodules from each
cluster. She reconstructed the second-to-second decisions and actions
made by the individual ice-age flint knappers who worked at Etiolles
close to 12,500 BC. Pigeot found that those knappers who had sat nearest
the fire had been the most skilful, for their reconstructed nodules had
shown the least errors. Progressively less skilful knappers had worked
at increasing distances from the fireplace, with the most distant ones
making tentative and clumsy attempts to remove blades.¹⁰

Elsewhere in Europe – such as in the valleys of the Meuse and Lesse
rivers of southern Belgium – flint was a far more precious commodity and
could not have been wasted on the inexperienced. These valleys were
probably first visited by hunters from the Paris basin, making
exploratory trips across the Ardennes around 16,000 BC.¹¹ They found
numerous caves that were used as campsites; their fires had burned the
wood from small thickets of alder, hazel and walnut. Just as in France
and Germany, reindeer were sometimes killed by ambush in natural ‘traps’
– when the animals were fording rivers or passing through a narrow
gorge. At other times the hunters were more opportunistic, stalking and
killing a wide range of animals such as wild horses, ibex, chamois and
red deer.

The Meuse and Lesse valleys must have been productive landscapes because
soon after 13,000 BC the hunter-gatherers began to remain there all year
round. We know this from the microscopic examination of seasonal
growth-lines within the teeth of the animals they killed. Just as
Lieberman had done when studying the gazelle from the Early Natufian
site of Hayonim, archaeologists have identified whether the last bout of
tooth growth on slaughtered reindeer in ice-age Belgium was made in
summer or winter.

As both were found in equal proportions it became evident that the
hunters within southern Belgium killed animals throughout the year. They
moved between the valleys and may have also hunted on the intervening
tundra-covered plateaux. But they had no flint immediately to hand; it
had to be collected from sources 35 kilometres to the north or 65
kilometres to the west – a few days’ walk at least.

One of the ice-age campsites is now called Bois Laiterie.¹² This is a
small north-facing cave situated above a steep gorge and by all accounts
draughty, cold and dark. It had been used as a summer camp by the
ice-age hunters, probably occupied for no more than a few days while
hunting and fishing for salmon and pike in its vicinity. Partially
butchered carcasses had been taken there; a bird-bone flute had been
played and then either lost or discarded; bone needles suggest that
clothing had been sewn. Foxes took up residence when the hunters
departed, perhaps initially attracted by the rubbish left behind.

Other cave sites, such as Chaleux located close to the confluence of the
Meuse and Lesse, are much larger, south facing, and contain substantial
fireplaces lined with stone slabs. These seem to have been the major
base camps from which small parties had set out on different tasks –
hunting, collecting flint, gathering firewood and going fishing.

While no site was occupied all year round, the valleys of the Meuse and
Lesse provided an annual territory for groups of hunter-gatherers who no
longer travelled back south to the homelands of past generations. Quite
how many people lived within those valleys is almost impossible to say,
but a figure of five hundred people is usually taken to be the minimum
to ensure that a population remains viable. This figure, derived from
mathematical models of dispersed hunter-gatherer groups who periodically
meet up to exchange members, corresponds with historically documented
hunter-gatherers of North America and Canada.¹³ Such gatherings may have
happened only once or twice a year; for the most part the
hunter-gatherers of the Meuse and Lesse valleys are likely to have lived
in groups of between twenty-five and fifty individuals, divided into
four or five families.

Although all of Europe other than the far north was habitable at 12,500
BC, much of it is likely to have remained quite empty of people. Ice-age
conditions would still have inhibited the rate of population growth and
caused severe difficulties during the winter seasons. Additionally,
people’s dependence on reindeer for food may also have caused problems,
for, as we know from modern times, reindeer populations can go through
periods of boom and bust.¹⁴ The latter would have left many ice-age
hunters desperate for food and cancelled out any population growth that
had been made. In such conditions it was essential that groups of people
remained in contact with each other – not only those within the same
region, but those who may have lived hundreds, even thousands, of
kilometres away. The key to survival was information – information about
food supplies, environmental conditions, possible marriage partners, and
new inventions, such as the bows and arrows used at Stellmoor.

We can guess that people must have travelled many miles to visit their
friends and relations, bringing news and gossip, discussing their future
plans, what animals and plants they had seen, when the migratory birds
had flown, and what had been heard from other groups. Archaeologists
have found traces of those journeys in the trail of items that were
carried and sometimes lost across large expanses of Europe. A prime
example of these are the fossilised seashells brought to, and
subsequently found within, the caves of southern Belgium – objects of no
utilitarian value but which could have been used to adorn clothes or
worn as beads. These shells have been traced to two geological strata,
one close to Paris and the other within the Loire valley, distances of
150 and 350 kilometres.

Similar journeys were being made by the hunter-gatherers in western
central Europe between the Elbe and the Rhine in the north, and the Alps
and the Danube in the south. Flint, quartz, amber and jet, as well as
fossil shells, have been found at sites more than 100 kilometres from
their sources.

This region of modern-day Germany provides one of the best insights into
the communities which had taken up permanent residence in lands that had
been polar desert during the glacial maximum.¹⁵ The majority of ice-age
sites found within its rolling hills and river valleys date once again
to the Bølling period, a time when its landscapes were still quite open,
and on which horse and reindeer were the available prey. In the middle
Rhine area, several groups of hunters appear to have combined their
efforts every autumn and winter to hunt the large numbers of horses that
clustered together within the valleys; during the summer they dispersed
to hunt reindeer in the adjacent uplands.

The most striking evidence for communal hunts during autumn and winter
are the sites of Gönnersdorf and Andernach, found directly opposite each
other on either side of the middle Rhine, both dating to between
c.13,000 and 11,000 BC. It is at the former that Lubbock now arrives –
having practised his reindeer-hunting, butchery and flint-knapping
skills while travelling across Europe from Etiolles.¹⁶

He finds the settlement located upon a terrace above the valley floor.
Winter has set in; the sky is dark and snow is upon the ground. Here he
finds neither a damp, dark cave like Bois Laiterie, nor a site of flimsy
shelters as at Pincevent. Instead there are several substantial circular
dwellings, 6 or 8 metres in diameter, built with solid wooden posts and
covered with sods of turf and thick hide. An icy wind blows across the
tundra and smoke ekes its way from every roof. From a distant dwelling
there is the faint sound of song; from one near by, human chatter.

Lubbock bends low, pushes aside the hides across the door and enters.
Ten or twelve people sit on thick furs laid upon a pavement of slate. It
is warm inside and the occupants, both men and women, are bare-chested;
the smoke-filled air is intoxicating as aromatic herbs smoulder upon the
fire. The people surround a central fireplace, over which slabs of
horsemeat are roasting, supported on a mammoth-bone grill.

A group of shells is being passed from hand to hand around the circle.
They are small, creamy-white hollow tubes, just a few centimetres long.
Some have a smooth surface while others are heavily ribbed. The
villagers have not seen such shells before; they are dentaliums that
originated from the Mediterranean shore and have been brought by a
winter visitor to the settlement. Lubbock, of course, has seen such
shells around the necks of people at ‘Ain Mallaha – a village that is
thriving in the oak woodlands of the Fertile Crescent at this very
moment.

Night descends, the meat is eaten and candles are lit. One of the men
appears older than the others and wears a necklace of pierced fox teeth
around his neck. Throughout the evening he has been lowering his face
close to the smouldering herbs and inhaling deeply. He now takes a flat
slab of slate and draws upon the surface, cutting into it with a flint
point. As he does so the other people gently chant. Within a few minutes
he has finished, and the engraved slate is passed around the circle. He
has drawn a horse; it has been carefully depicted and proportioned quite
correctly. The slate is placed to one side. The old man – a shaman –
starts again: a deep intake of the intoxicating smoke, a few minutes of
intense concentration amid more chanting, another slate to pass around
the circle. That too has the figure of a horse. And so this continues
for many hours – eventually the old man will collapse upon the floor.¹⁷

Since 1954, the excavations conducted by Gerhard Bosinski at Gönnersdorf
have produced the largest and finest collection of art objects from
central Europe. More than 150 slabs have been found with engravings of
animals and women. Horses were most frequently depicted, often with a
naturalism quite similar to that found in the cave paintings of the
Dordogne. The interest in the horse may not be surprising as it was the
inhabitants’ key food supply; but such economic arguments cannot explain
why the mammoth was also frequently depicted with a similar level of
naturalism.¹⁸ These drawings demonstrate considerable anatomical
knowledge in the detailed depiction of eyes, trunks and tails, even
though mammoths would have been very rare or even completely absent from
the middle Rhine at this time. Birds, seals, woolly rhinos and lions
were also depicted.

Lubbock remains at Gönnersdorf for a few days. On each of these, male
hunting parties go searching for horses within the valley. As they do so
Lubbock comes to appreciate another key fact of ice-age society, one
that has been sorely neglected by archaeologists throughout the last
century. It is the pivotal role of women. With such an emphasis on
hunting and butchery – tasks assumed to be undertaken by the men and
which create the majority of archaeological remains – the critical work
of women has been overlooked. At Gönnersdorf, Lubbock sees how they
gather firewood, construct and maintain the dwellings, tend the hearths,
prepare clothing, make stone, wood and antler tools, cook the food and
look after the young, the old and the infirm. At night it is the women
who sing and dance around the communal fires. It is they who bear and
nurse the newborn. And the women also go hunting.

One evening Lubbock searched the pages of Prehistoric Times to discover
what his Victorian namesake had written about the role of women in
‘savage society’. Very little; they were hardly mentioned at all. On one
page he had noted that ‘the chastity of women is not, as a general rule,
much regarded among savages’, although he went on to argue that ‘we must
not too severely condemn them on this account’;¹⁹ elsewhere he casually
remarked on how cannibals prefer the flesh of women to that of men,²⁰
and that women will be preferably eaten to dogs during times of
shortage.²¹ So the only women’s role that Victorian Lubbock appreciated
was that of satisfying the hunger, gastronomic and otherwise, of their
men.

Modern John Lubbock had found this to be quite wrong; their key role in
all aspects of ice-age society may have been the reason why women were
the principal subjects depicted by the Gönnersdorf artists. Although
never displaying the naturalism of the animals, such images range from
near-complete depictions in which heads, bodies, arms and breasts are
drawn, to a virtual abstraction in which a single line traces that of
the back and the buttocks. Sometimes women were depicted singly, at
others in groups of three or four, and in some cases in lines of ten or
more with their bodies appearing to sway in a way that is suggestive of
dance. In one image a line of women appear to be walking together; one
carries an infant on her back, her breasts clearly swollen with milk.
The same stylised female form is widely found on sites throughout
western central Europe, sometimes engraved on slabs and sometimes carved
from antler, but never in such profusion as at Gönnersdorf.²²

Archaeologists – typically male archaeologists – have traditionally
interpreted any female image from the ice age as a fertility symbol,
describing many as ‘Venus figurines’. But there is nothing overtly
sexual about the Gönnersdorf images; indeed, they seem more likely to
celebrate the role of women as mothers, carers, providers and workers
within ice-age society, rather than only as the bearers of children, let
alone as objects of sexual desire.

Throughout the winter people remain at Gönnersdorf; new arrivals swell
their numbers to more than one hundred. Much time is spent telling
stories and discussing plans for the spring – where each group will go
to hunt, which – if any – will remain at the village. The same is
happening at winter campsites throughout central and northern Europe.
But it will not last. Lubbock sits in the warmth of a dwelling, as he
had once done on the steppe close to Abu Hureyra. Just as on that
occasion, his companions are quite unaware that the Younger Dryas is
about to arrive. This will bring the curtain down for a millennium at
least on any singing and dancing in the valley of the Rhine.

At around 10,800 BC the climate of Europe did indeed take a sharp dive
back to the most severe of ice-age conditions. This decimated the horse
herds that had wintered in the valleys of central Europe and which had
sustained large groups of hunter-gatherers. Rather than simply being
temporarily deserted for the summer season, Gönnersdorf was abandoned
for good.

Throughout Europe the vegetation and animal communities were
transformed: areas of woodland returned to barren tundra. Just like the
Early Natufian people of western Asia, the ice-age hunters of northern
Europe had to adjust to the new conditions and their populations were
pushed to the brink of extinction. They lacked any wild cereals to
cultivate but exploited the resumption of annual reindeer migrations
through the Ahrensburgian valley – this time by using bows and arrows.²³

With the hindsight of history we know that better times would once again
arrive. At 9600 BC, dramatic global warming killed off the bitterly cold
winters and provided the thickest covering of woodland that Europe has
known for more than 100,000 years. And it is into those woods that we
must now travel, skipping over the Younger Dryas. We will leave Lubbock
to make a journey into southern Europe and return to the northwest, to
that which is today the British Isles.

15 At Star Carr

Adaptations to early Holocene woodlands in northern Europe, 9600–8500 BC

To visit Star Carr in Yorkshire is to visit one of the key
archaeological sites in Europe. It has been rightly compared in
significance to the painted cave of Lascaux and the tomb of Tutankhamun.
Yet when one arrives, there are neither tourist coaches fouling the air
nor guides eager for cash. No heritage centres, no gift shops; no
signposts, monuments or plaques; just a near perfect corner of the
English countryside.

My last visit was on a tranquil summer’s afternoon in 1998. I had found
the way down an unmarked country lane and through a farmyard, pausing to
watch the aerobatics of swallows and house martins. A footpath took me
through pasture grazed by cows, and along a hedgerow where my only
companions were butterflies and goldfinches flitting between the purple
thistles. When this path met the Hertford River, a gentle-flowing stream
upon which swans and cygnets were idling, I knew from words exchanged
with the farmer that I had arrived.

The site lay to my left, but there was no archaeology to be seen, no
tumbled walls or grassy humps to denote a bygone age. Before me there
was a field of pasture like any other; behind, a flower-strewn riverbank
where bees were working the brambles, buttercups and dog-rose. Looking
both east and west, the flat pasture of the Vale of Pickering stretched
as far as I could see, interrupted by occasional ditches and small
plantations. To the north the land began to climb towards the Yorkshire
moors, and to the south the rolling hills of the Wolds. The air was
scented with meadowsweet; I was first tempted to swim, and then to
snooze.

How could this unmarked corner of Yorkshire be sensibly compared with
Lascaux and Tutankhamun? It was surely an absurd comparison. Yet it was
made by no less a figure than the late Sir Grahame Clark, Disney
Professor of Archaeology at Cambridge University, Master of Peterhouse,
Fellow of the British Academy.¹ He was certainly not a rash man; but
neither was he modest and Star Carr was his prize excavation.

Just as Tutankhamun’s tomb and the paintings of Lascaux are symbolic of
lost and ancient worlds, so too is the site of Star Carr – the lost
world of forest-dwelling hunter-gatherers of Europe who lived within the
period which archaeologists call the Mesolithic. That was the new world
of European culture. It was one forged by the descendants of the
Stellmoor reindeer hunters and Gönnersdorf dancers after the Younger
Dryas had ended as suddenly as it had begun and the ice sheets of Europe
had finally melted away.

There are many hundreds, probably thousands, of Mesolithic sites in
Europe – an archaeological record quite different to those ephemeral
traces of ice-age people who had come before. Some have exotic burials;
others striking art. But Star Carr has neither. So why is that site so
special?

The answer is simple. Star Carr is where the Mesolithic effectively
began. It began here in a literal sense – it is one of the
earliest-known Mesolithic settlements in the whole of Europe. It began
here for me personally – Star Carr was the first Mesolithic site I ever
heard about and was central to my decision to become an archaeologist.
And it began here in a historical sense: before Grahame Clark made his
excavations of 1949–51 the Mesolithic period was all but ignored in
comparison to the Paleolithic, which came before, and the Neolithic,
which followed.² It was the first site in Europe, of any period, to be
radiocarbon dated.

In 1865 Victorian John Lubbock had no inkling of this critical phase of
European prehistory. He had written in Prehistoric Times: ‘from the
careful study of the remains which have come down to us, it would appear
that Pre-historic Archaeology may be divided into four great epochs.’³
He went on to describe the Palaeolithic period – ‘when man shared
possession of Europe with the Mammoth, the Cave bear, the Woolly-haired
rhinoceros and other extinct animals’;⁴ the Neolithic period – ‘a period
characterized by beautiful weapons and instruments made of flint and
other kinds of stone’;⁵ the Bronze Age and the Iron Age.⁶ No mention of
the Mesolithic; it simply did not exist in 1865.

Later in the volume, Victorian Lubbock had described how the Danish
archaeologist Professor Worsaae wanted to divide the Palaeolithic age
into two phases. The first involved stone implements associated with
extinct animals, and the second concerned finds from the Danish coast,
notably large shell mounds that also contained fishbones, animal bones
and artefacts, called Køkkenmøddinger (kitchen middens, or waste dumps).
Another Danish archaeologist, Professor Steenstrup, believed the middens
belonged in Lubbock’s Neolithic, the New Stone Age. Having weighed up
the scanty evidence either way, Victorian John Lubbock sided with
Steenstrup: although he thought the Kjökkenmöddings represented a
definite period of Danish history, this probably came within the
Neolithic itself.⁷

We now know that Worsaae had been correct and Steenstrup entirely wrong;
the Mesolithic is quite distinct from both the Palaeolithic and the
Neolithic periods of European prehistory. It is the period of Holocene
hunter-gatherers in Europe, those living in thick forests before the
arrival of the first farmers. Grahame Clark pioneered Mesolithic studies
in Britain during the 1930s by compiling a catalogue and classification
of the stone tools of the period.⁸ But it was only with the excavation
of Star Carr that his interests turned to the Mesolithic lifestyle and
environment. By doing so he was merely catching up with Danish
archaeology, which had been tackling such issues ever since the
Kjökkenmöddings were first excavated in the 1850s – even though Worsaae
and Steenstrup disagreed about their age.⁹

On that peaceful summer afternoon I imagined the activity of the young
Cambridge lecturer and his team arriving at Star Carr, setting up camp,
and beginning the task of excavation. Clark had chosen Star Carr after
stone tools were discovered in a drainage ditch. It turned out to be a
shrewd choice. Within the waterlogged peat of that Yorkshire field he
found the remains of a hunter-gatherer campsite with an unprecedented
degree of preservation, not just of animal bones but of antler and
wooden tools. No other Mesolithic site in Britain, found either before
or since, has remotely approached its level of preservation.

The Mesolithic inhabitants would have sat precisely where I sat on that
delightful afternoon. But the hills they saw to the north and south
lacked the Yorkshire field walls and stone-built farmhouses; they looked
towards slopes covered with birch woodland and a thick undergrowth of
fern. And before them lay not pasture but an extensive lake, the edge
marked today by that shallow slope on which I had dozed.

Their campsite had been a base for hunting within the birch woods and
along the lakeshore. Red deer was their favoured quarry, but wild boar,
roe deer, elk and aurochs (wild oxen) were also taken. They had gathered
plants, caught ducks, grebes and divers, and most likely fished from
canoes. They came to Star Carr each summer, and one of their key tasks
was to burn the dense stands of reeds that fringed the lake. At the
campsite toolkits had been made and repaired – new stone points and
barbs were fitted to arrows, animal skins were cleaned and then sewn for
clothing, antler harpoons were manufactured.

The antlers had been gathered in the autumn and winter, cached at the
site ready for this visit. Carving the harpoons was both a skilful and a
laborious craft. The antler was worked with stone tools fashioned like
chisels. Long parallel grooves were made the length of the antler, and
then a flat segment eased out; this was cut, shaped and ground smooth.
Some chose to make antler points with many fine barbs, others carved
just a few, crudely shaped; perhaps these were designs for catching
different types of game or perhaps they were experiments because no one
knew which design was the most effective for hunting.

So while sitting within that Yorkshire field I had to imagine the
Mesolithic scene: flames crackling through the dry reeds, eyes watering
from the smoke, excited children chasing the flushed-out wildfowl, hares
and voles. The reeds had burned well, the flames catching overhanging
branches so that catkins blossomed in vivid orange, were carried on the
breeze and then momentarily floated on the lake before sinking. The
reeds were burned to provide a view across the lake and improve access
to their canoes. It also encouraged the growth of new shoots so that
grazing deer could be relied upon when they returned once again to hunt
along the shoreline. Elsewhere in the prehistoric world at this date of
9000 BC, others were also encouraging new shoots – those of wheat and
barley in the fields of Jericho.

That night the people may have danced and sung, full of venison and
intoxicated with herbal drugs. I could imagine some dressed in hides and
antler masks, moving their bodies sensuously, deer-like, to the music of
chants, drums and flutes made from reed. The dancers would suddenly
halt, sniff the air, dart in panic; then they would die with the
hunters’ arrow, be thanked and celebrated for giving up their life.

I imagined the people departing the next day after sleeping below the
stars – some walking towards the hills, others travelling by canoe,
heading eastwards towards the coast. The deer masks were discarded with
the butchered animal bones, the rubbish from making the harpoons and
stone tools. And there they would remain, quickly forgotten – buried
beneath the dead reeds that turned into peat, until their discovery
changed our understanding of the European past.

Clark’s excavations produced much of the evidence upon which my
imagination had worked.¹⁰ He found the deer masks – but they may have
been used as hunting disguise rather than as dancing costumes. He also
found many different shapes and sizes of barbed antler points and the
remains of food plants, although none are known to have had intoxicating
properties. There was a wooden paddle, but no canoe.

He finished his excavations in 1951. That, however, was just the
beginning of a constant re-analysis and re-evaluation of the Star Carr
evidence that has continued to the present day.¹¹ Clark had thought the
settlement was a winter base camp owing to the large amount of antlers –
something only present on hunted animals during the latter part of the
year. But when in 1985 the archaeo-zoologists, Peter Rowley-Conwy and
Tony Legge, reanalysed the animal bones they found nothing to suggest a
winter occupation.¹² In contrast there were many indicators of early
summer, of which deer teeth were the most telling. By examining which
teeth had erupted, and comparing these with known patterns of tooth
development in modern deer, Legge and Rowley-Conwy were confident that
most animals had been killed between May and June.

The reed-burning was not identified until the mid-1990s. This was by
Petra Dark, an archaeologist who specialises in environmental
reconstruction and is a colleague of mine at Reading University.¹³ She
took new samples of the peat from the edge and centre of the former lake
and made a remarkably detailed microscopic study of the pollen grains,
charcoal particles and plant fragments in a succession of razor-thin
slices. The first of these came from a time before people had arrived in
the Vale of Pickering and showed that the vegetation had been quite
typical of ice-age landscapes – herbs, grasses, scattered dwarf willow,
pine and birch.

After 9600 BC the pollen grains within the slivers of peat had changed
to include those of poplar and juniper, and then to be dominated by
birch. Soon after 9000 BC charcoal particles appear within the peat,
blown from the first campfires made close to the lake. A sudden increase
in the quantity of charcoal, together with fragments of burnt reed and
catkins, reflect the onset of intense activity; an annual clearance of
the lakeside vegetation by fire continued for eighty years. People then
ignored the lake for one or two generations, to return at about 8750 BC
and continue the same activities as before for at least another century.
By that time willow and aspen were encroaching upon the lake, turning
much of it into ‘carr’ – dense stands of trees in pools of water. By
8500 BC hazel had taken a hold on the landscape, and after one last
burning episode, the people gave up on Star Carr and went to hunt and
gather elsewhere. The lake had virtually disappeared.

Trees such as hazel, birch, willow, pine and aspen had re-emerged from
their ice-age hide-outs soon after the end of the Younger Dryas, rapidly
expanding into extensive swathes of woodland and resuming their
northward march.¹⁴

Once established, the new woodlands had little peace. For coming hard on
the heels of those hardy, pioneering species, were the trees that
favoured warmer and wetter conditions, their needs provided by ongoing
global warming. These included oak and elm, lime and alder which
survived within the valleys of southern Europe and whose northward
dispersal had been cut short by the Younger Dryas.

As these species travelled from their southern ice-age shelters, they
left behind a trail of pollen grains as a record of their journey. Oak
trees, for instance, were already found throughout Portugal, Spain,
Italy and Greece when the Younger Dryas came to its sudden end. By 8000
BC they had edged up the west coast of France and had reached the far
southwest of Britain; by 6000 BC they were across the whole of mainland
Europe and the southernmost parts of Scandinavia. By 4000 BC they had
reached the northern tip of Scotland and the western coast of Norway. By
that time, however, oak trees further south were being felled by farmers
who were clearing land to grow crops. Lime made a different journey,
beginning in the southeast, having survived the great freeze in northern
Italy and the Balkans. It edged its way into eastern and central Europe,
and only reached the southeast of England at around 6000 BC. Hazel, elm
and alder made similar treks across the continent. The resulting
woodland was a rich mix of species, not just of trees but of a vast
range of under-storey shrubs and plants, fungi, mosses, and lichens. It
engulfed the whole of Europe.

Animals either had to adapt or migrate to survive. Some didn’t make it.
Mammoths, woolly rhino and giant deer went extinct, perhaps nudged into
the abyss by stone-tipped spears. Others, such as reindeer and elk,
survived by moving to the far north or to high mountains where thick
woodland was unable to prevail. The great beneficiaries of global
warming were the red deer, roe-deer and wild boar that soon became the
favoured prey for the Mesolithic hunters. Whereas the red deer had lived
in large herds on the tundras and in the parkland of southern Europe,
the roe-deer and wild boar had survived the LGM and Younger Dryas within
the sheltered valleys, amidst the stunted oak and elm.

As the landscape and animal communities evolved, so too did people’s
lives. For the hunters, changes in animal behaviour were as important as
changes in the species themselves. Those who had camped at Etiolles and
hunted at Meiendorf were reliant on migratory herds of reindeer. They
had waited and watched for the animals to travel well-worn paths, and
then slaughtered great numbers at ambushes in narrow valleys or at river
crossings. But in the new woodlands the deer lived in small and
scattered herds, in family groups and sometimes just in ones and twos.
So bloody slaughter by brute force had to be replaced by stealth –
stalking lone animals, shooting arrows through thick undergrowth, more
tracking as the prey fled while trailing blood.¹⁵

Not surprisingly, such changes in the environment and hunting practices
were accompanied by the development of new technology. Chunky spear
points and arrow-heads were replaced by microliths: small chipped blades
of stone, usually flint, that rapidly became the most important element
of stone-tool technology throughout Europe.

In this regard the people of Europe reached the same decision as had
been made by the Kebaran people of western Asia at least 10,000 years
earlier – that making small blades and chipping these into a series of
distinctive shapes was the most effective use of their stone resources.
What the resulting weapons lost in terms of brute power and penetrating
capacity was amply compensated for by their diversity and flexibility.

Microliths were employed not only as the tips and barbs for arrows, but
also as the points for drills and awls for piercing leather, bark and
wood. In addition, they made effective knife blades, could be used in
leisters for spearing fish and embedded in wooden plaques for vegetable
graters. They provided a plug-in pull-out technology – a Stone Age
equivalent of the latest DIY or food-processing gadget today with its
seemingly endless parts and uses. Nothing could have been better suited
to the needs of the Mesolithic people: so many different opportunities
arose for its use in any one season, day or even hunting trip – sights
of unexpected game, chance encounters with early-ripening nuts, shelter
for an overnight camp, a chance to fish.¹⁶

Microliths are usually found scattered within the domestic rubbish of
settlements. Very occasionally they have been recovered still hafted on
an arrow shaft, attached with pine resin. And in equally rare cases they
have been found still embedded within the animals they killed. At the
Danish sites of Vig and Prejlerup, both approximately contemporary with
Star Carr, almost complete skeletons of aurochs have been excavated.¹⁷
These had been attacked but escaped capture. The Vig specimen had two
stone arrow tips embedded in its ribs, and two further lesions on its
bones. One of these had healed – the bone had begun to grow around the
wound, showing that this was not the first time the bull had been hit
and escaped. The second lesion, which had not healed, was evidently one
of the fatal shots that killed the animal. The Prejlerup bull was
similar; although arrow tips were only found in its rear end, one must
assume that it had also been struck in soft tissue and bled to death.
Both finds create images of hunters creeping through undergrowth,
striking at the bulls and then stalking the wounded animals – in both
cases without success.

Microliths may have been involved in some impressive action, but in
themselves they are some of the least striking and complex of
prehistoric tools. To find the cutting edge of Mesolithic technology we
must look not towards stone, but to those tools made from wood and plant
fibres. For the first time in European history these are reasonably
abundant in the archaeological record; they seem to testify to a
technological revolution.

The presence of these new tools may reflect no more than the wider
opportunities available to craftsmen and women in the lush woodland of
the Mesolithic, or may even be due to the fact that these people
frequently camped next to lakes, leaving their rubbish in the muddy
shallows. As invading vegetation turned those lakes into peat bogs,
there it remained, quite waterlogged and hence resistant to decay. But
while both opportunity and preservation are no doubt important, I
suspect there is another critical factor: a new channelling of creative
energies into the arts of whittling, binding, twisting, carving and
knotting, just as these had once been channelled into painting and
sculpture.

The delight of such tools is that they appear to seep from nature
itself; they tell of an intimacy with the natural world that is lost
today and are the handiwork of people who loved their craft.
Archaeologists have found, for instance, the remnants of wicker cages
used to catch eels. Some were made from branches of cherry wood and
alder, woven together with pine roots – a work of art, natural science
and practical need twisted and knotted into one.¹⁸ Willow bark was
braided and tied to make fishing nets, used with pine-bark floats and
stone sinkers.¹⁹ Such nets were thrown from canoes hollowed from trunks
of lime and paddled with heart-shaped blades carved from ash.²⁰ Hazel
rods were used to make fences to divert fish into traps and birch bark
was folded and sewn into bags for carrying flint blades.²¹

Not all the tool-making had been successful. There were many fine
craftsmen throughout the Mesolithic who could make bows, but this art
had to be learned. In one case an elm tree had been felled and the trunk
roughly shaped into a bow. The wood was left to season, and then the
shaping completed. But perhaps from inexperience, perhaps from knots in
the wood, the bow had split during use and was then broken in half,
presumably snapped across a knee in frustration.²²

I fear that the impression so far might be that the Mesolithic diet was
all beefsteak and venison, eels and grilled fish. Not true. Remember
that we are dealing with people living in vibrant woodlands, surrounded
by trees and plants suitable not just for hiding behind when stalking
game or for cutting, carving, twisting and knotting when making tools.
The woodlands of the Mesolithic provided a feast for the taking: nuts,
seeds, fruits, leaves, tubers, shoots. And take they certainly did,
sometimes in enormous quantities²³ – as is evident from Franchthi Cave,
a site as far from Star Carr as Europe will allow.

While deer were being stalked and reeds burned in the far northwest, the
Mesolithic people 4,000 kilometres away in southern Greece were
collecting wild lentils, oats and barley; picking pears, gathering
pistachios, almonds and walnuts. Excavated between 1967 and 1979 by
Thomas W. Jacobsen of Indiana University²⁴, Franchthi Cave was found to
contain a vast number of seeds in the levels belonging to the Mesolithic
people, especially those who had lived between 9500 and 9000 BC. In fact
he found more than 28,000 seeds coming from twenty-seven different
species of plants. The Mesolithic people at Franchthi collected a
similar array of plant foods to those who had lived a few thousand years
earlier at ‘Ain Mallaha and Hayonim in western Asia. Perhaps the Greek
coastal lands also supported wild gardens nurtured with care by
hunter-gatherers.

Back in northern Europe the key plant foods were hazelnuts and water
chestnuts, often exploited in vast quantities. In 1994 I myself found
one of the greatest concentrations of waste discarded in a Mesolithic
rubbish pit at the settlement of Staosnaig on the tiny island of
Colonsay, 40 kilometres off the west coast of Scotland – the remnants of
more than 100,000 hazelnuts collected and roasted on the island.²⁵

As I left Star Carr, I thought once again about Grahame Clark laying out
his trenches, Peter Rowley-Conwy and Tony Legge measuring teeth in their
laboratory, and the endless hours that Petra Dark had spent peering down
her microscope. A curlew shrieked as I walked across the pasture, just
as they had shrieked in the Mesolithic. When approaching the farm I
noticed willow, aspen and birch growing in the wet ditches, interspersed
with reeds. I stepped among them for a moment and crouched down low. A
rich, peaty aroma engulfed me, water oozed from the ground; I touched
the reeds and those deer-masked hunters once again danced and sang their
way around my imagination.

16 Last of the Cave Painters

Economic, social and cultural change in southern Europe, 9600–8500 BC

The date is 9500 BC. Somewhere in southern Europe the last of the
ice-age cave artists is at work. He or she is mixing pigments and
painting upon a wall, perhaps a horse or a bison, perhaps a line of dots
or merely touching up a painting made long ago. And that will be it:
more than 20,000 years of cave painting – perhaps the greatest art
tradition humankind has ever known – will have come to an end.¹

John Lubbock left Gönnersdorf at 11,000 BC and travelled south along the
Rhine and then across the hills of eastern France to the limestone
valleys of the Dordogne. For a thousand years he watched the landscapes
freeze as the Younger Dryas arrived – the retreat of woodland and return
of reindeer to the valleys of central and southern Europe. But such
conditions were not to last: as Lubbock crossed the Massif Central,
global warming returned with a vengeance. And so, instead of joining
fur-clad hunters waiting in ambush, Lubbock now trod quietly with those
stalking wild boar, helped to gather baskets of acorns and berries,
stood upon rocks to spear salmon as they swam upstream to spawn.²

Pech Merle – the cave in which spotted horses were painted at the LGM –
was no longer used for art, indeed it was no longer used at all. While
sitting by its entrance Lubbock watched some children scratch their way
through brambles, squeeze between boulders and drop to the floor with
muddy, bleeding knees. They had come prepared with a brushwood torch. A
flint was struck, the twigs flared and for a few moments the cave walls
came alive with bison, horse and mammoth. The children fled in terror,
leaving the torch to burn out upon the floor – 10,000 years would have
to pass before Pech Merle’s spotted horses were illuminated once again.³

Lubbock continued to travel south and entered the foothills of the
Pyrenees. Here he visited what had been one of the great ice-age
meeting-places: a vast tunnel running through a limestone cliff that we
know today as Mas d’Azil.⁴ A river flowed through the tunnel and people
were camped on its left bank. On the right there were entrances to
caverns whose walls were decorated with paintings and engravings. When
the ice age was at its height, people had largely camped on the right
bank where they either lost or discarded some of the finest ice-age
carvings ever made: depictions of a braying horse, sprightly ibex, and
waterfowl with their young. Groups had gathered at Mas d’Azil during the
winter months, often coming from afar and bringing seashells, marine
fish, and fine stone as gifts and items to exchange. They decorated
their bodies with paint, pendants and necklaces; they may even have been
tattooed.⁵ It was at Mas d’Azil that initiation ceremonies, marriages
and rituals had taken place. Archaeologists describe it as an ice-age
‘super-site’.⁶

But when Lubbock arrived in 9000 BC, the heyday of Mas d’Azil had
passed. A few family groups were seated on the riverbank near to the
vast upstream entrance of the tunnel, quite uninterested in the painted
walls near by. Lubbock peered over their shoulders, hoping to see fine
animal carvings being made; but they were doing no more than gutting
fish that had been caught with very plain and small flat antler
harpoons.⁷ All except for one man, who was indeed making some art. But
this involved no more than the daubing of pebbles. Some got a single
blob of paint, others two or three, occasionally a few more. Some blobs
were red, some black, some were round and some were striped.

The River Arize still flows through the tunnel at Mas d’Azil and is now
joined by the D119 that leads from Pamiers to Saint-Girons, its
construction having destroyed some of the archaeology on the right bank.
Like Star Carr, Mas d’Azil is a site to which any would-be archaeologist
must come as a pilgrim, owing not only to its remarkable ice-age art
works but also to its crucial role in the history of archaeology. My own
visit was more than two decades ago when I was just embarking on my
undergraduate studies, and I have far stronger memories of lying in the
glorious French sunshine outside the tunnel, with a bottle of wine and
my girlfriend, than whatever I had seen inside the cave. Moreover, at
that time I wasn’t aware of Mas d’Azil’s historical significance: it was
here that in 1887 the great French archaeologist Edouard Piette found
material that linked the Old and New Stone Ages – the Palaeolithic and
Neolithic.

Both his and later excavations revealed a remarkable array of
Palaeolithic art objects and occupation debris: stone tools, harpoons,
animal bones from reindeer, horse, bison and red deer. The majority of
these dated to the final few millennia of the ice age. But lying above
this material were layers containing painted pebbles, short flat
harpoons and new types of stone artefacts that Piette designated the
‘Azilian culture’, which is now recognised as the Mesolithic across much
of southern Europe.

In 1887 the authenticity of the painted pebbles was questioned by the
academic establishment. At that date the only known examples of early
prehistoric art were the paintings in Altamira Cave, discovered in 1879.
Most French archaeologists were still virulently opposed to the idea
that such paintings could have been made by ice-age hunter-gatherers –
savages. Piette, however, had never been in any doubt. By the end of the
century he had been vindicated: further discoveries made the acceptance
of both the Altamira paintings and Mas d’Azil pebbles unavoidable.

From the excavations of Piette and later ones at Mas d’Azil, more than
1,500 painted pebbles were found, while at least another five hundred
are known from other sites in France, Spain and Italy. Although these
may lack the beauty of the ice-age art they are every bit as mysterious,
perhaps more so. Like all Mesolithic art, that of the Azilian is subtle
and complex, one that has kept its secrets closely guarded. A study by
the French archaeologist Claude Couraud showed that rather than having
been randomly applied, the blobs of paint most likely constituted a
symbolic code: specific shapes and sizes of pebbles had been chosen;
particular combinations and numbers of different motifs had been
preferred.⁸ Couraud identified 16 different signs but of the possible
246 binary combinations, only 41 were ever used. Numbers of dots between
1 and 4 accounted for 85 per cent of the pebbles, and pairs of dots for
44 per cent. For higher numbers, there appears to have been a preference
for numbers between 21 and 29. He suggests that these numbers might
refer to lunar phases, but neither Couraud nor any other archaeologists
have been able to read the messages on the painted pebbles of Mas
d’Azil.

From Mas d’Azil Lubbock headed west, across the rolling, wooded
landscapes that bordered the Pyrenees, across rivers that gushed with
melt waters from the mountain glaciers that could no longer hold their
ice. In northern Spain he visited people camping along wide estuaries
that dissected the coastal plain.

As elsewhere in Mesolithic Europe, and indeed the world, these
hunter-gatherers had been attracted to estuaries by the abundance and
diversity of wild foods to be found there. Its ultimate source lies in
detritus – rotting organic matter that arrives within the freshwater
rivers on the one hand, and from the sea on the other. This provides
food for a host of tiny creatures such as shrimps and snails, which in
turn provide rich pickings for crabs and bigger fish and birds, along
with mammals such as otters and seals. Migratory birds favour estuaries,
their arrival often coinciding with the feeding bonanza of a spawning
season. So it is not surprising that hunter-gatherers have been drawn to
estuaries – to hunt and fish, gather shellfish and crabs, net birds and
collect their eggs.

Despite this bounty, those in northern Spain at 9000 BC regularly went
to hunt red deer and wild boar in the foothills of the mountains some
ten kilometres from the shore.⁹ Sometimes they continued into the crags,
cliffs and peaks to search for mountain goats. Lubbock also made a foray
inland, not to hunt but to visit the great painted cave of Altamira.

After scrambling through the tangled branches that hid its entrance, he
broke through great spider’s webs to enter the chamber of the bulls
painted by ice-age artists at 15,000 BC. Although quite dim inside,
Lubbock could now see the great panorama of bulls – the Sistine chapel
of prehistory, as it would later be described. But its heyday had also
passed; now only bats and owls came and went, the cave itself home to no
more than spiders, beetles and mice.¹⁰ Lubbock wondered whether those
living in the surrounding woodlands even knew that the cave was there.
With that thought he continued his journey westwards for another 25
kilometres until reaching another cave, one much smaller but evidently
still in use: there was debris all over the floor and a stinking rubbish
dump of mollusc shells. He settled himself in the shadows, waiting for
the occupants to return.

This cave is known today as La Riera, and although lacking spectacular
art works its excavation has provided us with the greatest insight into
how human lifestyles in southern Europe changed when the ice age drew to
a close. Perhaps more than any other individual site, La Riera helps us
understand why the tradition of painting caves and carving animals in
ivory and bone came to a sudden end.

La Riera was discovered in AD 1916 by Ricardo Duque de Estrada y
Martínez de Morentín, the Conde de la Vega del Sella.¹¹ Already
established as a pioneer of Spanish archaeology, he was working on a
hunch – that somewhere in a thicket of trees between the towns of
Santander and Oviedo he would discover the entrance to a cave.

A crevice was found which became a near-vertical and narrow passage. He
squeezed through and entered the rear of a small dark chamber, finding
himself right behind a huge mound of limpet and periwinkle shells that
had blocked the proper entrance to the cave – a Mesolithic rubbish dump.

Following his discovery, the Conde excavated La Riera and found that the
mound of shells capped many layers of occupation that stretched back to
the depths of the ice age and beyond. After he had finished, the cave
suffered the fate of so many archaeological sites – looted by
treasure-hunters and dug out by farmers wanting the shell-rich sediment
to fertilise their land. La Riera even became a hideout for soldiers
during the Spanish Civil War. Archaeological interest returned in 1968
when a group of paintings was found on one wall, and in 1969 when
Geoffrey Clark from the University of Arizona dug a small trench to
examine what had survived. In spite of its history, he found that intact
deposits remained within the cave.

Between 1976 and 1982 Clark teamed up with Lawrence Straus from the
University of New Mexico and conducted a very fine and important
excavation.¹² They found no fewer than thirty layers of human rubbish,
one on top of another, covering a period of more than 20,000 years. At
its base were the stone artefacts and animal bones discarded by some of
the first modern humans to live in Spain 30,000 years ago. On top of
their rubbish was that of the ice-age hunters of the LGM, which in turn
was buried by the debris of those who lived through global warming
until, at 5500 BC, the cave entrance became entirely blocked by the
quantity of human waste.

La Riera had only ever been a temporary camping place, used for short
visits, ranging from a few days to a few weeks. In some years it had
been used in the spring, in others during the summer, autumn or winter.
Straus and Clark’s meticulous work, together with that of an army of
specialists who studied their finds, recreated how human lives adapted
to dramatic environmental change and revealed another incentive for a
new way of life: an ever-enlarging population.¹³

At 20,000 BC, those who used La Riera inhabited a largely treeless
landscape. They hunted ibex and red deer with stone-tipped spears and
slaughtered herds after trapping them in thick snow or behind brushwood
fences positioned to block off narrow valleys.¹⁴ By 15,000 BC, the La
Riera occupants had begun to visit the seashore where they collected
limpets, periwinkles and urchins, and speared sea bream from rocky
promontories. On their return to La Riera they would have walked through
pine and birch woodland, visited hazel thickets to collect nuts, and may
have glimpsed new woodland occupants such as wild boar. Over the next
7,000 years the rising sea level brought the shoreline closer and closer
to La Riera Cave – today it is no more than two kilometres away. Its
occupants made ever greater use of its products and a great mound of
limpet shells began to accumulate inside. While the mound grew, the
limpets themselves became smaller as the intensity of gathering
outstripped their rate of growth.

Those who used La Riera were still hunting red deer, but were now
stalking them as individuals and using arrows tipped with microliths
rather than large stone points. Wild boar and roe-deer were also hunted,
wildfowl and other birds were trapped. Although plant remains were
scarce within the cave, the appearance of chunky stone picks suggests
that roots were dug up, while pitted stones indicate that many nuts were
cracked.

After the last dump of shells, fish and animal bones had been made
inside the cave, La Riera was abandoned. Its entrance became hidden
behind trees and brambles, lost from human memory. Beneath the shell
midden there was layer upon layer of human rubbish waiting to be
excavated. Geoff Clark and Lawrence Straus dismiss the idea that the
changes in diet that this rubbish revealed can be entirely explained by
the rising sea level and spread of woodland. The gradual increase in the
diversity of foodstuffs, and the intensity with which animals were
hunted, and plant foods and shellfish were gathered, suggests that there
was an ever-increasing number of mouths to feed.

The animal bones excavated from La Riera, and indeed at sites throughout
southern Europe, indicate a gradual evolution rather than a revolution
in the lives of people who inhabited southern Europe. Red deer had
always been the prime target for hunters, whether the animals were
living in large herds upon LGM tundra or in scattered groups within
Holocene woodland. The tundra of southern Europe had never been quite as
treeless and windswept as those of the north; when temperatures rose and
rainfall increased, the woodland had simply to creep out from the
shelter of the valleys where trees had survived even the harshest of
ice-age winters. Wild boar and roe-deer came with them, providing
competition for the red deer and new opportunities for the now
woodland-living hunter-gatherers.¹⁵

Although those using La Riera after 10,000 BC followed the millennia-old
tradition of hunting deer, their social and religious lives had changed
beyond all recognition. The people who used La Riera at the LGM and
15,000 BC had also travelled to the great painted caves to sing, dance
and worship their ice-age deities.¹⁶ But those who hunted wild boar and
filled the cave with a mound of shells, had no such obligations to
fulfil.

The tradition of painting and carving animals, especially horse and
bison, together with abstract signs and human figures, had lasted for
more than 20,000 years. It had extended from the Urals to southern
Spain, and produced masterpieces by the score: the painted bison of
Altamira, the lions of Chauvet, the horses of Lascaux, the carved ibex
from Mas d’Azil.¹⁷ For more than 800 generations, artists had inherited
the same concerns and the same techniques. It was by far the
longest-lived art tradition known to humankind, and yet it virtually
disappeared overnight with global warming.

Had the closed woodlands also closed people’s minds to artistic
expression? Was the Mesolithic a time when ancient knowledge was
forgotten – ‘the dark age’ of the Stone Age? Well, no, not at all. The
cave art tradition ended simply because there was no longer a need to
make such art. The paintings and carvings had never been mere
decoration; nor had they been the inevitable expression of an inherent
human creative urge. They had been much more than this – a tool for
survival, one as essential as tools of stone, clothes of fur, and the
fires that crackled within the caves.¹⁸

The ice age had been an information age – the carvings and paintings the
equivalent of our CD-ROMs today.¹⁹ Ambush and bloody slaughter had been
easy: as long as the right people were in the right place at the right
time, ample supplies of food could be acquired. Rules were then required
to ensure distribution without conflict. An abundance of food in one
region had meant scarcity elsewhere – groups had to be willing to join
together and then to split apart; to do so they needed to know which
group was where, and to have friends and relations that could be relied
upon in times of need. Because herds of animals are prone to
unpredictable extinctions the hunters required alternative hunting
plans, always ready to put into practice.

To solve such problems, information was crucial – knowledge about the
location and movements of animals, about who was living and hunting
where, about future plans, about what to do in times of crisis. The art,
the mythology and the religious ritual served to maintain the constant
acquisition and flow of information.

When groups joined together once or twice a year for ceremony, painting
and ritual, such as at Pech Merle, Mas d’Azil and Altamira, they also
exchanged vital information about animal movements. Such groups would
have spent the previous year living apart, some in the uplands, some on
the coastal plains; some had made long treks to visit distant relations,
others had watched for the arrival of migratory birds. There was a lot
to tell and even more to find out. The religious beliefs of the
hunter-gatherers provided sets of rules for the sharing of food when
necessary. Cave paintings had not only depicted the tracks of animals,
but had shown them in the act of defecating, and with their antlers and
fatty parts exaggerated.²⁰ Such pictures were the stimulus for accounts
of what had been seen, for teaching the children; they contained the
signs that a hunter must look for when searching for prey and selecting
a victim in the months to come. The mythological stories contained
survival strategies for those inevitable but unpredictable years of
hardship.²¹

So, for as long as the annual ceremonies and rituals were performed, and
people had opportunities to gossip, to swap ideas and observations, to
recount tales of hunters’ exploits, to reaffirm social bonds, to learn
yet more about the animals around them, information flowed and society
flourished – as far as it could under the constraints of an ice-age
climate.

Life in thick woodland after 9600 BC did not exact the same demands.
Animals were now largely hunted on a one-to-one basis; with no mass
kills there were no surpluses to manage. Narrow valleys and river
crossings no longer had the same significance; there was no longer a
need to have people in precisely the right place at the right time.
Neither was there the need to know what was happening many miles away,
either in the natural or in the social world. Hunting could effectively
take place anywhere, any time, by anyone. And if animals could not be
found, there were plenty of plant foods to gather and limpets to
collect. Just like the red deer, people began to live in smaller, more
scattered groups, becoming increasingly self-sufficient.

Periodic gatherings still took place but these were to solve problems of
maintaining social ties, to allow people to marry, to exchange raw
materials and food, to learn and teach new techniques of basketry and
weaving. There was no longer the need for these group activities to be
conducted under the gaze of painted beasts.

The ending of the cave-art tradition should not be attributed to
cultural disintegration, social collapse, or the arrival of a dark age
when minds were closed to the arts. The cessation of cave painting is a
remarkable testament to the ability of people to rewrite the rules of
their society when the need arises. It is one that we must recall as
global warming threatens our planet today.

17 Coastal Catastrophe

Sea-level change and its consequences, 10,500–6400 BC

Forty millimetres. Perhaps 33 millimetres, or even no more than 23
millimetres. About the thickness of a small pebble on the beach or the
depth of a shallow rock pool. Had the people of the Mesolithic been told
that these were the best guesses for the average yearly increase in sea
level during the century following 7500 BC, I doubt if they would have
shown much concern.¹ After all, such statistics are practically
identical to the estimated rise in our own global sea level during the
next hundred years and none of our governments seem too bothered.

These figures are estimates made in the last few years by scientists who
struggle with the imprecision of radiocarbon dates and the sheer
complexity of sea-level change in northern Europe. Although they sound
small, the implications of such figures for Mesolithic times were
extraordinary: coastal catastrophe. Its ultimate cause was the final
melting of the great ice sheets, especially those of North America.
Millions upon millions of gallons of water poured into the oceans and
touched the lives of many thousands of people – sometimes quite
literally.²

At 7500 BC the coast of northern Europe ran directly from eastern
England to Denmark. It was deeply incised with estuaries that led into
narrow-sided valleys that in turn wound their way between gently rolling
hills. Doggerland – the region now submerged below the North Sea – had a
coastline of lagoons, marshes, mud-flats and beaches. It was probably
the richest hunting, fowling and fishing grounds in the whole of
Europe.³ Grahame Clark, the excavator of Star Carr, believed that
Doggerland had been the heartland of the Mesolithic culture.⁴

The first awareness of this lost Mesolithic world came in 1931. The
Colinda, a trawler, was fishing at night about twenty-five miles east of
the Norfolk coast near the Ower bank. Its skipper, Pilgrim E. Lockwood,
hauled up a lump of peat and broke it open with a spade. He struck
something hard – not a piece of rusty metal but an elegant barbed antler
point.⁵

In the same year Dr Harry Godwin, a botanist from Cambridge University
and a colleague of Clark, was about to begin applying the new science of
pollen analysis to peat deposits in Britain. Godwin took further samples
of the North Sea peat from close to where the Colinda had sunk its nets.
He found that woodland had once grown there, of a type almost identical
to that which grew in east Yorkshire, in Denmark and in the Baltic
States, immediately after the ice age came to an end. In effect, Godwin
established that these were part of a continuous land mass, one in which
people had hunted deer and collected plant foods in mixed oak woodland;
one in which they occasionally lost their barbed antler points.

For almost sixty years the harpoon found by the Colinda stood as a
symbol of a Mesolithic world drowned by rising sea level. But
archaeologists got a shock in 1989 when a minute sample of antler was
removed from it for radiocarbon dating. To their surprise it proved not
to be contemporary with almost identical harpoons from Star Carr, but
two thousand years older.⁶ Reindeer hunters had lost the harpoon when
Doggerland was Arctic tundra – that which Lubbock himself had crossed
when travelling from Creswell Crags to the Ahrensburg valley.

The Mesolithic coastal dwellers of Doggerland began to see their
landscape change – sometimes within a single day, sometimes within their
lifetime, sometimes only when they recalled what parents and
grandparents had told them about lagoons and marshes now permanently
drowned by the sea. An early sign of change was when the ground became
boggy, when pools of water and then lakes appeared in hollows as the
water table rose. Trees began to drown while the sea remained quite
distant. Oak and lime were often the first to go, alder normally the
last, surviving until sea water was splashing upon its roots and
spraying upon its leaves.⁷

High tides became higher and then refused to retreat. Sandy beaches were
washed away. Coastal grasslands and woodland became salt marsh – land
washed daily by the sea which saturated the soil with salt. Only
specialised plants could survive, such as the edible samphire and
cordgrass that provided a home for an assortment of fleas, bugs and
midges. Herons, avocets and spoonbills soon came to feed where, not long
before, woodland birds had flourished.

The North Sea invaded Doggerland. Marine waters worked their way into
the valleys and around the hills; new peninsulas appeared, became
offshore islands and then disappeared for ever. So, too, in the
Mediterranean where the sea edged its way closer and closer to Franchthi
Cave,⁸ where so many plant foods had been collected by hunter-gatherers
in Greece. By 7500 BC the seashore was little more than an afternoon
stroll away for the occupants of Franchthi; their forebears had required
a whole day’s hike to reach the coast. Layers of buried food waste
within the cave show how the Franchthi people first began to gather
limpets and periwinkles and then became sea-going fishermen. They
started to visit islands, such as Melos 120 kilometres away where they
found obsidian and brought it back to their cave. This new lifestyle
favoured exploration and colonisation: Corsica, Sardinia and the
Balearic islands were settled for the very first time.⁹

The experience of those who dwelt along the coastlines of Europe varied
with time and place. For some, the environmental changes were so gradual
as to go unnoticed: minute year-by-year shifts in diet, technology and
knowledge – a subtle, unconscious moulding of lifestyle. Others would
have stared in amazement as they watched the sea race inland after a
shingle ridge or dunes had been breached. Still others – such as the
inhabitants of what would one day become the town of Inverness in
eastern Scotland – faced catastrophe.

In the 1980s the Scottish archaeologist Jonathan Wordsworth excavated
part of the medieval town after the modern houses at nos. 13–24 Castle
Street had been demolished.¹⁰ Below were the foundations of
thirteenth-century medieval buildings and outhouses that had been built
overlooking the estuary of the River Ness. Underneath a layer of stony
white marine sand, sandwiched between those worked by the medieval
masons, he found a scatter of almost 5,000 flint artefacts, bone
fragments and traces of a fireplace – the remains of a Mesolithic
hunting

On some day close to 7000 BC a small group of Mesolithic people had
nestled themselves into a natural hollow within the dunes overlooking
the estuary and most likely with a view out to sea. Perhaps they were
waiting for dusk before setting out to hunt seal; perhaps they had spent
the day collecting tern’s eggs and samphire and were ready for sleep,
except for one or two who chipped at beach pebbles, replenishing the
store of microliths and scrapers that they carried inside their
otter-skin bags. A scene probably repeated a thousand times throughout
the coastlands of northern Europe – another normal Mesolithic day in a
normal Mesolithic hunter-gatherer’s life.

It was not to last. A few hours earlier a massive sub-marine landslide
had occurred almost 1,000 kilometres to the north, within the Arctic
Ocean midway between the coast of Norway and Iceland. This was the
Storrega slide and it created a tsunami, an immense tidal wave.¹¹ Those
who were at the site of the future 13–24 Castle Street, Inverness, are
likely to have been startled by the sudden shrieking of gulls; they
heard a distant grumbling that turned into a roar. One assumes they
first stared in disbelief, and then panic, as 8-metre-high waves
approached the estuary mouth. I guess they ran for their lives.

Whether they made it to safety, we cannot know. If they did, and then
returned after the water had subsided, they would have found a vast
expanse of white, stony sand burying not just their picnic spot but
everything as far north and south as they could see. More than 17,000
cubic kilometres of sediment was dumped across the east coast of
Scotland and remains buried below farmland, dunes and town houses as a
record of a Mesolithic catastrophe.

The impact of this tsunami across the low-lying coast of Doggerland must
have been devastating. Many kilometres of coastline are likely to have
been destroyed within a few hours, perhaps minutes, and many lives lost:
those hauling up nets from canoes, those collecting seaweed and limpets,
children playing on the beach, the babies sleeping within bark-wood
cots. Communities of crabs, fish, birds and mammals were wiped out;
coastal settlements obliterated – the huts, canoes and eel-traps, the
baskets of nuts and racks of drying fish, all crushed and swept away.

Another catastrophe happened on the other side of Europe, 3500
kilometres away. The victims were those who lived upon the lowlands
around the freshwater lake that was the Black Sea.¹² These provided
flat, fertile soils, covered with oak woodland in which people had
hunted and gathered for many thousands of years. By the date of this
event, however, a new people had arrived: Neolithic farmers. They had
travelled from communities in Turkey, settling upon rich alluvial soils;
felling trees to make way for fields of wheat and barley and to provide
wood for their houses, fences and pens for their cattle and goats. The
story of their journey and their reception by the native Mesolithic
people is one for the following chapter. Here our concern is with their
tragic end.

The Black Sea had become a freshwater lake during the ice age. The level
of the Mediterranean had fallen to below the base of the Bosphorus
channel, its link to the Black Sea through which seawater had once
flowed. The channel became blocked with silt. Then, when global warming
began to melt the ice, the Mediterranean Sea began to rise again. As it
did so, the level of the Black Sea was doing the precise opposite – it
was falling, due to evaporation and reduced run-off from rivers. As the
sea level rose above the base of the channel, the plug of silt held
firm. It held, and it held, as a gigantic wall of marine water built up
on its western face. And then it began to seep. Then it burst.

So, one fateful day about 6400 BC, a cascade of salty water crashed with
the force of two hundred Niagara Falls into the placid waters of the
lake – and continued to do so for many months. The roar would have been
heard 100 kilometres away – echoing in the ears of those hunting within
the hills of Turkey and those who fished around Mediterranean shores.
Fifty cubic kilometres of water thundered into the lake each day until
the Black Sea and the Mediterranean were one again. Within a matter of
months, a staggering 100,000 square kilometres of lakeside woodland,
marshland and arable fields had been submerged – an area equivalent to
the whole of Austria.

Victorian John Lubbock had not known a great deal about the history of
sea-level change. Prehistoric Times contains no more than a few comments
about how, on the Danish coast, there is ‘good reason for supposing that
the land has encroached upon the sea’, whereas elsewhere the absence of
the Køkkenmøddinger (shell mounds) ‘is no doubt occasioned by the waves
having to a certain extent eaten away the shore’.¹³

For his general understanding of sea-level change Victorian John Lubbock
had been dependent upon the views of Sir Charles Lyell, the geologist
whose seminal Principles of Geology had been published between 1830 and
1833¹⁴ and Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man in 1863. He
quoted Lyell at length from the latter volume about a period when the
land was thought to have been at least 500 feet above its present level,
followed by one of submergence with ‘only the tops of the mountains
being left above water’ and then by a further period of elevated land
when the bed of the glacial sea ‘with its marine shells and erratic
blocks, was laid dry’. Lyell had suggested that the ‘grand oscillation’
of submergence and re-emergence had most likely taken 224,000 years.

Victorian John Lubbock didn’t add much himself – Prehistoric Times came
just too early for a more informed view. Had he been writing at the end
of the nineteenth century, he may well have quoted Joseph Prestwich,
whose estimates of past temperatures he had already commented upon. In
1893 Prestwich published evidence for a major flooding event throughout
Europe at the end of the glacial and immediately preceding the
Neolithic.¹⁵ Eduard Suess, Professor of Geology at Vienna University,
might also have been cited since, in 1885, he had introduced the idea of
a worldwide uniform and simultaneous rise in sea level.

It wasn’t until the 1930s, however, that the changes in sea level at the
end of the ice age began to be well documented.¹⁶ Today they are known
to have been extraordinarily complex in some parts of the world,
occurring much more rapidly than the maximum figure of 6 feet per
century that Charles Lyell was prepared to consider. Victorian John
Lubbock would, I suspect, have been astonished had he known about the
sequence of sea-level change in the far north of Europe between 10,500
and 8000 BC.

The people who lived to the north of Doggerland, in those regions we now
call Scotland, Norway and Sweden, also lost the coastline that their
parents, grandparents and earlier generations had so much enjoyed. But
instead of becoming the sea floor, their coastal lands became
permanently dry; they had quite literally gone up in the world.¹⁷

The glaciers had weighed heavily upon the land and forced it downwards –
causing the land to the immediate south to bulge upwards, just like the
unoccupied end of a sofa. And consequently, when the ice got up and
left, the land evened out; the bulge fell and the dent rose. Much of
Doggerland had been within the bulge, and hence the impact of a rising
sea level was exacerbated: just as the bulge was dying away, millions of
gallons of meltwater was entering the oceans.

Further north, where the glaciers had once sat heavily, a race was on.
Which would rise the quickest, the sea or the land? If the former, then
people saw their coastlines flooded; if the latter, the beaches were
raised – and ‘raised beaches’ is precisely the term used to explain
expanses of sand and pebbles found around the coastlines of northern
Europe today at levels never reached by the sea.

In the far north the land was an easy victor. At the former centre of
the ice sheet, somewhere north of Stockholm on the eastern coast of
Sweden, the land has risen more than 800 metres since the ice age – and
still it hasn’t finished. Every year a few more millimetres is added –
although that may soon change with renewed global warming and sea-level
rise during the century to come.

Further south, along the coastlines of southern Sweden, the Baltic
States, Poland and Germany, the sea and the land had a neck-and-neck
race, periodically swapping the lead. This caused repeated havoc to all
the communities – plant, animal and human, land and water – that managed
to establish themselves just before the lead changed again. We know this
in part from the work of Svante Björck from the Danish Institute of
Geology, who has studied the shells found buried at the bottom of the
Baltic Sea, together with the sediments, raised beaches and drowned
forests of that region’s coastline. The story that they have revealed is
a remarkable one of dramatic geographical change, of which only the
barest highlights can now be retold.

At the height of the Younger Dryas, 10,500 BC, the Baltic Sea was not a
sea at all but a lake, the Baltic ice lake. Its waters were close to
freezing; its shores bare rock or arctic tundra. Had anyone visited
them, they would have found reindeer and lemming, but would be unlikely
to have remained for long. A glacier in the north and solid land in the
south blocked any potential exit routes to the North Sea for the Baltic
waters. The glacier formed a dam across the low-lying lands of today’s
central Sweden, while the route taken in the present by the
interchanging waters of the North and Baltic Seas, that through the
‘Storebaelt’ – the island-dotted seascape between Sweden and Denmark –
was high and dry, a continuous land mass. Those countries were no more
than the eastern end of Doggerland.

By 9600 BC the Baltic ice lake was held by a wall of ice to a depth of
25 metres. This was the precise opposite of what happened in the Black
Sea 3,000 years later, when waters strained to get into, rather than out
of, a dammed lake. But here, as there, the dam burst, in this case as
global warming melted the ice and weakened the wall. The Baltic ice lake
drained across central Sweden into the North Sea, leaving boulders,
gravels, sand and silt in its path. Within a few years at most, perhaps
no more than months, the 25-metre drop in water level produced a vast
new expanse of shoreline around the modern-day coasts of northern
Germany, Poland and the Baltic States. It was a shoreline composed of
muddy clays and silts that had so recently formed the bottom of the
lake.

As marine waters began to flow eastwards, the lake became an inland sea.
It has been named after a marine mollusc, Yoldia, whose shells are found
deeply buried within its sediments, indicating that salty waters now
lapped the shores of the future Baltic States. It is likely that people
came to live on the shores of the Yoldia Sea as soon as its soils had
been stabilised by the roots of birch and pine. Rich lagoons and marshes
developed around the mouths of the new river estuaries. Mesolithic
people crept in and felt at home.

And yet no sooner had they established their communities than the world
began to change again. Those living on the southern shores were flooded
out by the rising sea level; those on the northern shores saw the sea
recede as the land rebounded. It receded by about 10 metres each century
– a rate quite noticeable within a human lifetime. At some point midway
between those who were flooded out in the south and elevated in the
north, there must have been an area of stability, the fulcrum for this
see-saw between land and sea.

This continued for twenty-five generations, each of which made subtle
alterations to their lifestyle in order to adapt to the ever-changing
world. And then, at about 9300 BC, the flooding in the south became more
severe. Settlements drowned before people could relocate, and we must
imagine them wading to rescue prized possessions. By now, the water was
moving inland at an average rate of 3 metres in every generation – a
rate that implies periodic catastrophe to people’s lives. In the north,
where over the decades people had watched the sea recede, it now started
to encroach upon the land. They too had to learn how to cope with
waterlogged land and flooding.

The cause of the new influx of waters was the rebounding land; that of
middle Sweden had now risen so much that it blocked the flow between the
Yoldia and the North Seas. Once again the Baltic had a lake, water with
no route to escape. As its volume rose with the influx from the many
inflowing rivers, its salt was diluted and soon the water became fresh.
Another mollusc, Ancylus fluviatli, has been honoured by lending its
name to this lake – the Ancylus Lake – its shells found within Baltic
sediments above the level of Yoldia. Once again all living things had to
adapt, migrate or die – including human communities, which now went
fowling among the reeds rather than fishing for cod from kayaks.

They had about three hundred years – perhaps ten generations – to make
the change before there was yet another turnaround. As from c. 9000 BC
they began to watch the wetlands and lagoons dry out, the shore recede
from the lakeside fishing platforms. New expanses of silt and sand were
exposed, and new opportunities arose for pioneering plants and insects.

The Ancylus Lake had found an outflow into the North Sea. It certainly
needed one, as its level had become 10 metres higher than that of the
sea. This outlet was not so much found as forced, in the form of the
River Dana, which cut its way through the low-lying land of the
Storebaelt, in some places creating a veritable canyon through soft
sediments up to 70 metres deep. Riverside woodland, peats and human
settlements were washed away or buried by sands and gravels carried by a
torrent of water. For two hundred years the outflow continued apace
until the Ancylus Lake became level with the sea. And then meanders
began, as smaller rivers and streams wound themselves through the woods
and around headlands of the Storebaelt.

The final event in this remarkable history was the flooding of the
Storebaelt. This began at 7200 BC and was caused by the final stages of
the rise in sea level that brought it to its present level, creating the
familiar geography of Scandinavia and the Baltic. The inland sea that
was created this time is named after the mollusc Littorina, whose shells
are not only found in sediments above that of Ancylus fluviatli, but
also continue to adorn the coasts of the Baltic Sea today. Another round
of readaptation followed as waterlogging and flooding returned – but the
new floods were of such a gradual nature as to be hardly noticeable.
Human lifestyles were slowly remoulded once again to those of people who
live by the sea.

