           6
           Changing environments




The stereotypic notion of Pacific Islands as ecologically monotonous,
with the same reefs, lagoons, and jungle-clad hills could not be farther
from the truth. As we saw in Chapter 2, the island ecosystems of
Polynesia exhibit a remarkable range of environmental variability, with
significant consequences for technological and behavioural adap¬
tation. Colonizing fishermen arriving in the Marquesas, for example,
were constrained to modify their fishing strategies from those pre¬
viously used in the tropical lagoons of West Polynesia. More dramatic
yet were the adaptations required of the tropical agriculturalists who
settled temperate New Zealand. These and other changes in environ¬
ment faced by colonizing groups of Polynesians were significant in
initiating processes leading to differentiation of the region’s chiefdoms.
The role of environments in culture change is, however, more complex
than that of geographic variability between islands. Increasingly,
archaeologists in Polynesia have come to realize the dynamic aspect of
island ecosystems, and it is on such changes over time that I will focus in
this chapter.
   Environmental dynamics in Polynesia resulted as much, or more,
from man’s own actions as from natural processes. In certain academic
as well as popular circles, the thesis has arisen that prehistoric Oceanic
peoples avidly practised a ‘conservation ethic’ towards their island
habitats, and that major ecological changes did not occur until after the
advent of Europeans. Recent evidence shows this view to be false, and
one suspects that the true scale of prehistoric human impact on the
Pacific Islands is not yet fully grasped either by prehistorians or natural
scientists (Kirch 1982a; 1982b; 1983b; Spriggs 1981). As the French
geographer Ravault has said with regard to Tahiti: ‘le milieu physique
est plus ou moins doue, plus ou moins fragile, mais dans une large
mesure, ce sont les hommes qui en decident’ (1980:52). In this chapter,
archaeological and palaeo-environmental data are marshalled to
demonstrate that the Polynesians actively manipulated, modified, and,
at times, degraded their island habitats, producing ecological changes
which were fraught with major consequences for the evolutionary
direction of the Polynesian chiefdoms.

            123
124       Process

Directional change in island environments

Given the brief period of time - in geological terms - that humans have
occupied Polynesia, one tends to assume that island landscapes may be
taken as a relative constant. Yet, even disregarding for the moment
human-induced modification of landscapes, we now have evidence for
first-order transformations of environment wrought by natural pro¬
cesses that take place over a time-scale measured in centuries. Consider
the case of Niuatoputapu, a small volcanic island situated along the
edge of the deep Tonga Trench, an active tectonic zone where the
Pacific Plate is subducting beneath the Fiji Plate. Archaeological inves¬
tigations on the Tongan island of Niuatoputapu (Kirch 1978a) revealed
that Lapita sites were restricted to a narrow zone or band, situated
immediately inland of a former shoreline (Fig. 33). This shoreline is
now as much as 2 km inland of the present beach, the intervening




            33. Geomorphic map of Niuatoputapu, Tonga, showing the
            distribution of Lapitoid sites in a concentric zone at the base ol
            the central volcanic ridge. The land seaward of the pottery¬
            bearing zone consists of former reef and lagoon tectonically
            uplifted since the time of initial human colonization (c. 800
            BC).
            Changing environments                                       125

terrain consisting of low-lying, uplifted coral reef platform and sandy
flats (former lagoon floors). Thus, at the time of initial human settle¬
ment, c. 800 BC, Niuatoputapu was considerably smaller than at
present and surrounded by a much more extensive reef-lagoon eco¬
system than today. Gradual tectonic uplift (which continues today)
elevated these reefs and lagoons, more than doubling the terrestial
area. Since the uplifted, ‘new’ land, lacking in soil development, is
virtually worthless for subsistence agriculture, the adaptive consequences
of this environmental change were largely negative; the island’s marine
resources were vastly reduced, without a concomitant increase in the
potential for terrestrial production.
  Tikopia provides evidence of a similar transformation of environ¬
ment (Kirch and Yen 1982). In this case, changes in the island’s
shoreline may have been initiated by tectonic uplift, major storm-wave
activity, or a combination of these forces. Whatever the ultimate causes,
the modifications of landscape were striking (Fig. 34), with gradual
accretion of calcareous lowlands amounting to a 41 per cent increase in
total land area. Furthermore, accretion of a sand spit or tombolo
resulted in the conversion of a salt-water bay to a brackish lake. This
closure of the bay, a rather recent event (post AD 1400) in Tikopia pre¬
history, had serious adaptive consequences for the former bay shore
occupants, as major shellfish and fish resources of the former bay were
extirpated due to salinity changes. As argued by Kirch and Yen
(1982:365-8), these environmental transformations were a major factor
in the inter-district rivalry and warfare related by Tikopia oral traditions
(Firth 1961).
  Parallel instances of long-term landscape change will likely be
revealed in the course of additional archaeological work in the Pacific.
In Hawai'i, for example, the large Kawainui Marsh on 0‘ahu was an
open marine embayment about 1500 years ago (Kraft, personal com¬
munication, 1980), which would explain the presence of early Poly¬
nesian sites along its inland margins (Kelly and Clark 1980). Certainly,
it is incumbent upon Polynesian prehistorians to actively seek the
evidence for major landscape change, and not to accept a static view of
environment simply because man has occupied these islands for only a
few millennia.
  Long-term climatic change is another kind of gradual environmental
transformation of potential significance to Polynesian prehistory, but
one that has been largely ignored outside of New Zealand. In the large
temperate islands of New Zealand, the physical evidence for climatic
change is more evident, and the relevance of even minor climatic shifts
for Polynesian adaptation were recognized early by prehistorians. In a
seminal article, Yen (1961) advanced the hypothesis that a slightly warmer
climate in the period prior to AD 1200, as suggested by Raeside (1948)
and Holloway (1954), might have permitted the initial introduction of
126   Process




                                                  0     HILLY TERRAIN (Volcanic)




                                                  [S3   LOWLAND   (Calcareous)




                                                  B     SWAMP




                                                  0     REEF




                                                  a     SETTLEMENT AREA




       34. Palacogeographic maps of Tikopia Island at three points in
       time; note the expansion of the calcareous lowlands and
       closure of the marine embavment (from Kirch and Yen 1982).
            Changing environments                                     127

the sweet potato from tropical East Polynesia to New Zealand. ‘The
subsequent deterioration of climate would have provided the stimulus
and time for the Maori to invent the technical methods to preserve his
plants’ (Yen 1961:342), that is, to adapt the cultivation of the sweet
potato from a perennial to an annual basis, with over-winter storage of
the tubers. Yen’s climatic model was subsequently adopted by several
prehistorians (e.g.. Green 1963), and a debate has ensued over the
degree and role of climatic change in New Zealand prehistory
(Cumberland 1962a; Holloway 1964; Gorbey 1967). Recently, Leach
and Leach (1979b), drawing heavily on the work ofWardle (1973) and
other natural scientists, have argued that a‘climatic optimum’ between
c. AD 900 and 1500 allowed the successful cultivation of kumara and
gourds in the Wairarapa region (North Island). Subsequent ‘climatic
deterioration was a prime cause of virtual abandonment of the Palliser
Bay settlements’ (Leach and Leach 1979b:238). This position is not
accepted by all New Zealand archaeologists, however, and we may
expect the debate to continue.
  Unfortunately, we know virtually nothing of possible climatic shifts
on other Polynesian islands during the past two or three thousand
years. The glacial record of Mauna Kea, Hawai'i (Porter 1975) indicates
significant climatic cycles on the order of thousands of years, and it is
entirely possible that higher-order frequency cycles existed as well.
Even a minor increase in winter rainfall in arid, leeward portions of
Hawai‘i would make the difference between one or no crops of sweet
potato, and could account for the presence of agricultural features
recorded by archaeologists in presently marginal lands (e.g., the flood-
water irrigation features recorded by Rosendahl [1972b] in South
Kohala, or certain ephemeral agricultural features at Kawela, Moloka'i
[Weisler and Kirch 1981]). Certainly, the problem of long-term climatic
change in the Pacific Islands deserves more attention than it has
hitherto received.


The significance of environmental hazards

Those who have not experienced the Pacific Islands at first hand, may
find the concept of‘environmental hazards’ incongruous in a region
popularly stereotyped as a tropical paradise. Recurrent environmental
perturbations or oscillations are indeed a fact of life throughout most of
 Polynesia, and posed significant challenges of adaptation for pre¬
 historic island populations. The distribution and frequency of major
 hazards is given for the different islands and archipelagos in Table
 17.
   The most     pervasive and    significant   envionmental   hazards   in
 Polynesia are drought and tropical cyclones. The major impact of both
 of these is on agricultural production, with famine a likely consequence,
128         Process

Table 17. Incidence of environmental hazards in the principal islands and
archipelagos of Polynesia


Island/group           Cvclone   Drought   Tsunami     Volcanic    Valiev
                                                       eruption    Hoods


Tonga                       F       F          R          —          —
Samoa                       F       F          R          C          C
Futuna                      F       F          R          —          F
‘Uvea                       F       F          R          —          —
Cook Islands                C       C          R          —          C
Societv Islands             C       C          C          —          c
Marquesas Islands           R       F          C          —          c
Hawaiian Islands            R       C          C          F*         c
New Zealand                         C          R          R          c
Tuamotu Islands             C       C          C          —          —
Mangareva                   C       C          C          —          —
Easter                      R       F          C          —          —
Tikopia                     F       F          R          —          —
Anuta                       F       F          R



Key: F, frequent; C, common; R, rare; —, absent.
*Hawai‘i Island only.




though cyclones also are destructive of property, and at times, human
lives. Pronounced wet and dry seasons characterize many Polynesian
islands, and when the low rainfall period is drier or more extended than
usual, the consequences for indigenous agricultural systems can be dis¬
astrous. In 1976, I witnessed the effects of a three-month drought on
Niuatoputapu, from late July through October. Hardest hit were the
aroid cultivations, especially taro (Colocasia esculenta); what had been
luxuriant gardens in July had turned to fields of brown, withered stalks
(Fig. 35) three months later. Pig herds were affected as well - wallows
dried up, and the yearlings died of heat exhaustion. By October, the
drought had become a topic of serious discussion and concern. For¬
tunately, a supply of flour sent by the government from Tongatapu
averted disaster, but traditionally, the island would have had to rely
upon its own resources.
  The Marquesas were especially prone to drought, and in Handy’s
view, ‘the uncertainty of rainfall and these occasional droughts have
affected directly the native culture’ (1923:8). Adamson (1936:17) notes
that drought results in ‘extreme aridity’ in the lower elevations, and
agricultural crops doubtless suffered immensely. Drought-induced
famine served as a check on population growth, and Suggs relates that a
famine between 1803 and 1813 is reputed to have ‘wiped out two-thirds
of the population’ of Nukuhiva (1961:191). The beachcomber Robarts
             Changing environments                                            129


experienced this famine directly, noting that its ‘dreadfull effects’ were
‘severely felt in all parts of the Island’ (Dening 1974:121). Robarts
calculated that during his residence in a single valley over the course of
one year, 200-300 persons perished (Dening 1974:273-5). Not sur¬
prisingly, therefore, it was in the Marquesas that a major Polynesian
method of buffering against famine - the pit-ensilage of breadfruit -
was developed to an apogee.
  Tropical cyclones in Polynesia have a more restricted geographic
occurrence than drought, with the area of greatest frequency (about 2
per year, on the average) being the Tonga-Samoa archipelagos (Visher
1925:27).   Farther east, the Society and Tuamotu groups receive
cyclones less frequently (about 0.2/yr on the average), and these storms
are quite infrequent in the peripheral parts of Polynesia. In Tonga and
Samoa, however, as well as among the Outliers such as Tikopia and
Anuta, cyclones are greatly feared for their destructive power. The
French missionary Pere Chanel witnessed the fury of a tropical cyclone
that struck Futuna in 1840:

The night of the second or third of February, a tempest, announced for several
days by a dark sky and a strong eastern wind, broke suddenlv with furor. The
lightening, the thunder, the torrents of rain, an incredible noise from the sea,
the cries of the islanders who invoked their gods, such was the scene which con¬
fronted us throughout the night. . . The coconut palms, the banana plants, the
breadfruit trees, all the productions of the island were so maltreated, that after
this great disaster, we were once again menaced by famine (Chanel 1960:301-2).




             35. A withered taro plant in a drought-affected garden on
             Niuatoputapu Island. If adequate rainfall had been available,
             the plant would be 2-3 times this size.
130        Process

  Whether a drought or cyclone induces famine or merely disrupts
production is closely related to the timing of these hazards in relation to
local cropping cycles (Currey 1980:451). Throughout West Polynesia,
the period of seasonally low rainfall also coincides with a phase of
minimal production in the agricultural calendar. Yams and breadfruit
are out of season, and subsistence may depend upon aroids, the crops
most susceptible to drought. This cropping cycle-ecological rhythm
relationship is illustrated in Figure 36 for ‘Uvea Island. Even in a good
year, the months from August through October are relatively lean. If a
drought affects the growth of the new yam crop, then famine may carry
over into the new year. Should a cyclone also hit the island, generally in
the period between November to April, this potential for disaster is
compounded. Firth (1939:73-7, fig. 2) provides a similar analysis of
seasonal variations in Tikopia food production, noting‘a marked scarcity
of almost every kind of food’ during May-June. ‘I gathered from native
opinion that such scarcity is not uncommon at this time owing to an
interval between crops, assisted by a lower rainfall’ (1939:75).
  While drought and cyclone were the dominant environmental
hazards faced by the prehistoric Polynesians, several other perturb¬
ations also posed adaptive challenges at various times and places.

                                               Potential
                                             Food Shortage
                                                 Period




                                                                          r84%
                                                                                 UJ>-
                                                                          -
                                                                                 >K

                                                                          -82

                                                                          _      j5
                                                                                 UJ3
                                                                                 <r x
                                                                          - 80




           ______ Planting                            Relative Humidity
            _ . _ _ _ Growth      - YAMS     _Temperature (*C)
            • •• •••••• Harvest

                       I Breadfruit Season


            36. Annual ecological rhythms and agricultural production in
            ‘Uvea Island, showing the period of potential food shortage
            (from Kirch 1975).
            Changing environments                                     131


Tsunami certainly struck various islands in the past, as they have in his¬
toric times, with considerable destruction of coastal habitations, fish¬
ponds, and gardens. In some areas such as the windward valleys of
Kohala, Hawai'i, periodic flooding due to exceptionally heavy rains
destroyed irrigated fields constructed on alluvial terrain. Volcanic
eruptions were important in a few regions, such as Kilauea, Hawai‘i,
where the entire surface of the shield volcano has been inundated with
lava flows at least once since Polynesian colonization. Handy and
Handy (1972:274) report that a‘volcanic upheaval’ in Ka‘u, Hawai'i in
1868 resulted in famine. In temperate New Zealand, a unique hazard
for tropical Polynesian agriculture was posed by annual frosts, requiring
major adaptation of agronomic practice (Yen 1961, 1974a).
  Thus, contrary to the popular image of the Pacific Islands as an abun¬
dant paradise, a combination of annual seasonality in crop production,
with stochastically recurrent hazards, render famine a significant
challenge to island life. Currey (1980:447-8) notes that the recurrence
interval for famines in Hawai'i is about twenty-one years, an intervaTno
less frequent than the historical record of famines in Bangladesh’. Cer¬
tainly, the theme of famine pervades Polynesian mythology, as in
Mangareva (Buck 1938a:24, 34, 39, 40, 44). In Hawai‘i, ‘the theme of
mythical lands rich in foods reflects the constant anxiety in the native
mind in those early times arising from the ever-present specter of
famine’ (Handy and Handy 1972:273). The term for famine in many
Polynesian islands - onge (Mangareva, Samoa, Futuna, Tikopia), honge
(Tonga, ‘Uvea) - reflects an ancient concept, with cognates in many
Melanesian and Micronesian languages (e.g., songe, Rotuma; songe,
Roviana; rongo, Gilberts; kwole, Marshalls). The significance of famine in
the development of Polynesian societies is clear. Famines served as a
critical natural check or control on population increase (see Chapter 5).
Once the population of any island had reached relatively high density
levels, moreover, famines may have triggered competition and conflict
between social groups. In the political traditions of Futuna, for example,
the protohistoric conquest of neighbouring Alofi Island by the
paramount chief Veliteki is attributed to food shortages resulting from
a cyclone (Burrows 1936:36; Kirch 1975:346).
   War was generally an ultimate recourse, often utilized only after a
series of other cultural buffering mechanisms had failed to return a
famine-ridden island back to normal subsistence production. During
the period following an environmental disaster, when intensive efforts
were devoted to re-establishing the agricultural system, food con¬
sumption often depended upon a range of wild or famine foods (see
Currey 1980:table3 for a list of the more noted famine plants). Many of
these famine plants were not elements of the indigenous flora, but
rather adventive species introduced by Polynesians, and maintained in
a feral state throughout large tracts of secondary vegetation. Of par-
132         Process

ticular note are the bitter yam (Dioscorea bulbifera), the ti plant (Cordyline
fruticosa), and the aka (Pueraria lobata). In ‘Uvea, these species are dis¬
tributed throughout a large tract of edaphically degraded land in the
island’s centre (the toafa, Kirch 1978b: 160), land which will not support
regular cultivations. During honge periods, this toafa is burned over to
induce the sprouting of feral arrowroot and yams, facilitating the
collection of the subterranean tubers (Kirch 1978b: 179). Needless to
say, such an adaptation to famine conditions had both positive and
negative effects - positive in providing the needed feral tubers, but
negative in that it maintained the anthropogenic toafa in a degraded
condition through repeated burning.
   The most important and sophisticated Polynesian methods of
buffering against famine were several techniques of preserving and
storing staple starch foods (Barrau and Peeters 1972; Yen 1975). One
method involved the grating of arrowroot (Tacca leontopetaloides) tubers,
and in some western islands, sago pith (Metroxylon spp.), filtering out the
starch grains in fresh or sea water, with the result after decanting and
drying being a storable flour (Fig. 37). More widespread and significant
in tropical Polynesia was the technique of pit-ensilage and semi-
anaerobic fermentation of starchy food pastes (Table 18), especially
breadfruit (Cox 1980; Kirch 1979c:303). In a tropical environment,
where the edible products of the dominant crop plants are generally




            37. A work group on Niuatoputapu Island filters starch from
            mahoa (Tacca leontopetaloides) tubers, using sea-water. The starch
            is carried in solution into the canoe hull; water is then decanted
            and the flour dried for storage.
             Changing environments                                             133


Table 18. Pit-storage of starch staples in Polynesian societies


Island/group      Name of                             Crops stored
                  stored product

                                                              a
                                      3
                                                 03           £           -3    u
                                                        •S                      _o
                                      "3                t-s   ■Sh
                                      rt    o
                                            u
                                                 o3
                                                 c
                                                        S3
                                                        Sj
                                                               o     O
                                                                     be
                                      V                 o                       o3
                                                                     o3
                                      (5   H     CQ           <o     cn   cq    S

Anuta              ma                 X    X     X      X     X      X    X     X
Tikopia            masi               X    X     X                        X     X
Tonga              ma                 X    X     X      X                       X
Samoa              masi               X          X
Futuna             masi               X    X     X            X
‘Uvea              mahi               X          X
Society Is.        mahi               X
Marquesas Is.      ma                 X
Mangareva          ma                 X



* An American cultigen adapted to pit-storage after European contact.


tubers, corms, or fruit (rather than easily stored seeds), storage of staple
starches posed a real problem of technological adaptation. The
ingenious Polynesian solution was to take advantage of natural fermen¬
tation, using a sort of ‘controlled rotting1. Breadfruit (and other
starches, including taro, banana, and certain fruits, e.g., Burckella) was
placed, uncooked, in leaf-lined underground silos (Fig. 38). Bacterial
fermentation in these silos created waste alcoholic by-products,
gradually resulting in a steady-state system. Renewal of the leaf-linings
every year or two permitted the fermented farinaceous contents to be
stored for periods of a decade or more. The fermented product is called
ma, masi, or mahi, and the term is reconstructable to Proto-Polynesian
language. As noted in Chapter 3, archaeological evidence of fermen¬
tation pits has been reported in Capita contexts (see Fig. 15).
   Storage of ma reached a developmental peak in the Marquesas
Islands, a reflection of the severity of drought and consequent need for
a reliable buffering mechanism against famine. Robarts, who par¬
ticipated in the preparation of ma, gives a clear description of the pro¬
cess, and notes that ‘the large pitts are Kept against a scarce time, as is
frequent the case in these Isles’ (Dening 1974:272-3). Fie was told that
with proper care and replacement of the pit linings, ma could be kept in
storage for as long as forty years. Storage pits with volume as great as
216 m3 are reported (in Taipivai, Nukuhiva; Linton 1925:103). Ma pits
are frequently found on the Marquesan ridge-top fortifications (Suggs
1961), and the association between famine, storage of surplus, and war¬
fare is obvious.
134         Process

  The practice of ma storage and its role in Polynesian economies, offer
some further clues regarding the relationships between household pro¬
duction and the chieftainship. As Yen (1975:162) pointed out, ma prep¬
aration and storage is one form of intensification of production (see also
Chapter 7). ‘Centralization, or at least concentration of these resources,
and partability are factors contributing to the possibilities of distri¬
bution along communal lines, but the agency of leadership is implied
in such organization’ (1975:156). In the Anutan case described by Yen
(1975:159-61; see also Yen 1973b), ma is prepared in individual
households, as part of the ‘domestic mode of production’ (Sahlins
1972). However, in the distribution of the fermented product to
alleviate famine,‘direct control of. . . distribution passes into the hands
of the chiefs’ (Yen 1975:161).
  In many Polynesian societies, particularly those of the larger high
islands, the preparation and distribution of ma formed a part of the
economic intensification ‘deployed to political organization’ (Sahlins
1972:147). Such deployment took the form of distribution of ma for
alleviation of famine as already noted, or at times, for feasts accom¬
panying major ceremonies. In Mangareva, Buck comments that:

large pits were owned by the chiefs of districts commanding a large quantity of
fruit. In seasons of plenty ( ow), people contributed to the contents of the district
pits to build up a reserve for important social occasions. The district pits had
proper names applied to them, and their full utilization depended on abun¬
dant seasons    (1938a:207).




               38. A woman on Tikopia refills a masi storage silo after renewing
               the leaf lining.
             Changing environments                                             135

Handy (1923:188) reports that large Marquesan ma pits were constructed
and filled as a ‘tribal’ operation. Linton adds that:

many of the great communal pits were built in the village and were placed as a
rule in or near the tribal assembly place. Additional pits were built high up in
the hills, in secluded places, where they would be safe from an enemy and
could provide food for the tribe if it were driven out of the valley (1925:103).

  One of the clearest accounts of the relationship between ma pro¬
duction and chiefly power is that of James Morrison, boatswain’s mate
on the infamous Bounty, in Tahiti in 1788:

if a Chief wants a Supply [of breadfruit] for the purpose of Making Mahee [mahi]
he sends a Bit of Cocoa Nut leaf to all, or as Many of the Inhabitants of his dis¬
trict as he shall think proper, and on the appointed dy they Bring each a load,
which is generally accompanied with a hog and some fish by others according
to their several abilitys . . . when supplys are raised this Way the people bring it
in such a Manner as bespeaks at once their regard for their Chiefs & fear of dis¬
pleasing them . . .    (quoted in Oliver 1974:238).

   In sum, environmental catastrophes, a recurrent part of island life,
played a significant role in the evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms.
Famine resulting from natural disasters such as cyclones, drought, or
volcanic activity was a powerful control on large populations. On the
other hand, Polynesians developed a variety of cultural buffering
mechanisms to alleviate the more severe effects of such disasters. Most
technologically ingenious and developed of these mechanisms was the
fermentation and storage of starch pastes, especially that made from
breadfruit. In the application of this buffering mechanism, we see the
critical   interplay    between    environment,       economy,     and    political
organization. Polynesian chiefs not only organized the production and
distribution of ma for the welfare of their people, but in the process
enhanced their own status and power. In Chapter 7 we shall explore
further the mobilization of the productive forces of society in the ser¬
vice of a greater political economy.


Man’s transported landscapes

The valleys and plains of any Polynesian island, as viewed by the early
European explorers, were already, in Edgar Anderson’s delightful
 phrase, ‘transported landscapes’. Anderson developed his bold con¬
 cept based upon research with the adventive, ruderal floras of North
America: ‘unconsciously as well as deliberately man carries whole
 floras about the globe with him ... he now lives surrounded by
 transported landscapes’ (1952:9). Although Anderson was concerned
 primarily with weeds and cultigens,             his concept of transported
 landscapes epitomizes the effects of human colonization of natural
 ecosystems. By means of both purposeful and accidental transport of
 adventive plants and animals, man transforms the biota of his new
136         Process

habitats, creating a new, and in many respects, artificial landscape. On
Oceanic islands, the introduction of highly competitive weeds and
predators had drastic effects on the vulnerable endemic biota (cf.
Fosberg 1963a:5). Murdock expounded on the consequences of man’s
actions in the transport of artificial landscapes:

Transplanted to islands where their respective ecological niches were either
unfilled or filled by weaker indigenous forms, and where the forms on which
they preyed were unprotected and vulnerable, the introduced species must
repeatedly have wrought havoc on the native fauna and flora, extinguishing
many species and greatly restricting the distribution of others. The resulting
changes in the island ecosystems must often have been substantial and not
infrequently spectacular (1963:150).

  Direct archaeological evidence for the introduction of several animal
species with initial Polynesian colonizers has come from a variety of
sites. Skeletal remains of domestic dog, pig, and fowl have been
recovered in Lapita contexts, as well as in early East Polynesian sites. Of
this domestic triad, the pig- which frequently went feral on Polynesian
islands - had the most significant impact on native vegetation. Of course,
a range of crop plants also accompanied the Polynesians as purposeful
introductions.
  Just as significant as these purposeful introductions - and perhaps
with a greater impact on the native biota - were a variety of inadvertent
stowaways transmitted across the Pacific in Polynesian voyaging
canoes. Skeletal remains of a small rat (Rattus exulans) are ubiquitous in
Polynesian archaeological sites. Concerning this species, Tate wrote: ‘It
regularly enters houses and lives in the thatch of native huts. It was
probably carried about the Pacific in big canoes which it entered at
night while they were loaded with provisions in readiness for long
voyages’ (1951:97). Several species of geckos (Gekkonidae) and skinks
(Scincidae) were likewise stowaways on Polynesian canoes (Stejneger
1899; Adamson 1939:26, 63). Skeletal remains of these diminutive
lizards have not yet been reported from early settlement sites (doubt¬
less because excavators rarely use the 0.5 mm mesh screens necessary
for their recovery!), but gecko and skink mandibles have now been
found in later prehistoric deposits at Barbers Point, O'ahu, and in a
cave deposit at Keopu on Hawai'i Island (A. Schilt, personal com¬
munication 1982). Several species of synanthropic arthropods were
probably    prehistoric   Polynesian    dispersals,   including    centipeds
(Adamson 1932), cockroaches, fleas, and mites (Adamson 1939:26, 39,
59, 61).
  Malacologists have long regarded several widely spread Pacific snails
to be dispersed by prehistoric Oceanic peoples (Pilsbry 1916-18;
Cooke 1926; Cooke and Kondo 1960; Solem 1959). Cooke maintained
that ‘about a dozen species were carried by Polynesians in their
migrations’ (1926:2279). These anthropophilic species ‘are abundant
            Changing environments                                         137

in the native villages and in the plantations’ [ibid.), frequently living on
coconuts, breadfruit, and other economic plants. Such snails were
probably transported by the Polynesians while ‘sticking to native
impedimenta, cocoanuts, or other food materials, in the thousand
years or more of inter-island canoe voyages’ (Pilsbry 1916-18:140-1).
One such species is Lamellidea pusilla, whose typical widespread dis¬
tribution is shown in Figure 39.
  Christensen and I demonstrated that the shells of these anthro-
pophilic snails are recoverable from archaeological contexts, and pro¬
vide evidence relating to early Polynesian transport of the vegetative
and/or edaphic materials on which the snails were carried. For example,
three species, Lamellidea pusilla, Gastrocopta pediculus, and Lamellaxis
gracilis, were established in Tikopia within the first few decades after
colonization, c. 900 BC (Christensen and Kirch 1981a). At the early
Capita site of Yanuca in Fiji, dated toe. 1300 BC, Gastrocopta pediculus and
Lamellaxis gracilis have also been reported (Hunt 1980:192). Christensen
(1981) reports six anthropophilic species, including the above three,
from the Vaito‘otia-Fa‘ahia site on Huahine, in the Societies, while
Kirch (1973) found Lamellidea oblonga, and Gastrocopta pediculus to be
present at the Hane site in the Marquesas. In Hawai‘i,L gracilis has been
recovered from several prehistoric contexts.
  Polynesian dispersal of adventives was by no means limited to the
fauna, and there is evidence that a host of competitive weeds were
transported from island to island (Merrill 1939). These include such
species as Ludivigia octivalvis, a dominant weed in irrigated taro fields,
and Digitaria setigera, which frequents pig pens (Kirch 1982a:3). M.S.
Allen (1981) reported on the preserved seeds of four weedy species
from a prehistoric rockshelter at the Mauna Kea adz quarry site on
Hawai'i Island. The increased use of flotation in archaeological exca¬
vations can be expected to yield considerable data on the distribution
of weeds by the Polynesians (see Clark and Kirch 1983 for a recent
application in Hawai‘i).
  The introduction of all of these adventive species, both purposeful
and inadvertent, amounted to a‘gigantic, unplanned ecological experi¬
ment’ (Bates 1956:796), with important consequences for the native
biota of islands. Most of the species introduced by man were highly
competitive, and would have rapidly made inroads on the endemic,
vulnerable fauna and flora of Oceanic islands, particularly in the
lowland elevations, where man’s activities were concentrated. As
Fosberg maintained, ‘perhaps the thing that most distinguishes islands,
at least oceanic islands... is their extreme vulnerability, or susceptibility,
to disturbance’ (1963b:559).
  The impact of Polynesian colonization on island biota went beyond
the transport of a large associated group of domestic, synanthropic,
and anthropophilic species, and their ecological impact upon the
39. The distribution of the anthropophilic land snail Lamellidea
pusilla (adapted from Cooke and Kondo 1960). Such wide¬
spread distribution patterns are characteristic of land snails
transported by human agency.
            Changing environments                                       139


native biota.   Anderson’s concept of transported landscapes can
logically be extended, for humans carry with them a cultural concept of
landscape, and actively modify new environments according to that
mould. As Sahlins (1976:209) maintains, ‘nature is to culture as the con¬
stituted is to the constituting’. Thus, the ‘action of nature is mediated by
a conceptual scheme’ (1976:210), a cognitive ‘map’ of how the world -
or an island - was to be ordered. For the Polynesians, this scheme
included such concepts as the efficacy of fire in clearing forest for garden
land, the diversion of streams to feed irrigated pondfields, and even
such notions as a ‘proper^ political division of the landscape (into
radial, segmentary units, see Chapter 2). Thus, having arrived in a par¬
ticular island group, Polynesians did not simply adapt passively to its
constraints and limitations. They actively modified and moulded their
insular world, with - as we shall see - often dramatic consequences for
their own mode of existence.


Human impact on island ecosystems
Vegetation change and erosion
The transport and introduction of a variety ol cultigens and weeds
resulted in a radical replacement of the lowland vegetation of nearly
every Polynesian island. More far-reaching in its implications was the
action of Polynesians in clearing - primarily with the aid of lire - large
tracts of native forest. Prior to man’s arrival, Oceanic islands were as a
rule reasonably well forested; by the time of European discovery, these
forests had been greatly reduced, and were frequently replaced with
degraded fern—grassland savannahs. Since the scale ol such defores¬
tation and its probable significance for human adaptation have not
been widely recognized bv Polynesian prehistorians, it may be well to
review some of the relevant evidence for a variety of islands.
   A large number of the tropical Polynesian islands are distinguished by
a highly characteristic vegetative association (termed toafa on several),
of which the dominant species is a fern, Dicranopteris linearis. The toafa of
Futuna Island (Kirch 1975) is tvpical, and covers a large percentage of
the interior plateaux and ridges of that high island (Fig. 40). Along with
the Dicranopteris fern are abundant terrestrial orchids (Spathoglottis
pacifica), and scattered scrub Pandanus, with an occasional ironwood
tree (Casuarina equistifolia). This toafa was created, and is being main¬
tained and continually expanded, by the use of fire. Clearing of native
forest for swidden gardens is a major impetus, though fires are lit for
 other purposes as well (e.g., to flush birds or wild pigs, and simply for
 the fun of watching the conflagrations).
   The development and spread of toafa is related to the thin, easily
 eroded volcanic soils of most Polynesian tropical high islands. These
 soils frequently consist of little more than an organic A horizon
 developed over weathered basalt or andesite (saprolite). When native
140   Process




      40. Degraded ternland savannah (toafa) on the interior ridges of
      Futuna Island, with remnant patches of indigenous forest.




      41. View of Mangareva Island, showing the totally deforested
      interior ridges. The fertile alluvial plains, to which cultivation is
      largely confined, have probablv been enriched bv the deposition
      ol soil eroded from the ridges (photo courtesy Bishop Museum).
            Changing environments                                        141


forest is fired and the thin soil exposed to sheet wash, especially for
more than one season, the A horizon may be removed, resulting in a
laterized oxisol. The Dicranopteris fern is one of the few species that will
successfully colonize such terrain.
  Geomorphic evidence for the clearance of native forest, subsequent
erosion of ridges, and creation of toafa was obtained at the Late Eastern
Lapita site of Tavai on Futuna (Kirch 1975; 1981a). Here, a former
village site at the foot of a bluff, inland of which is a large toafa-covered
plateau, is buried under up to 2.5 metres of erosional debris. Radio¬
carbon dating indicates that erosion began as early as the first few cen¬
turies AD.
  Dicranopteris-fern savannah is found on the interiors of many other
tropical Polynesian islands (I have already mentioned the toafa which
covers much of the interior of‘Uvea Island). On Mangaia, in the Cook
Islands, most of the interior ridges are covered with this vegetation
(Buck 1934:5). Fernland is characteristic of large areas in the Society
Islands, where it is again found on degraded, lateritic soils (Papy 1954-
5:154, 207). Regarding Dicranopteris savannah in the Papeari District of
Tahiti, Ravault remarked that ‘I’homme est partout responsable de cette
radicale transformation du paysage vegetal’ (1980:51). The fires,
purposeful or accidental, that maintain this degraded vegetation were
described by several early European visitors to Tahiti, such as Davies, in
1807: ‘For several days and nights past there has been a strong great fire
in the lower hills of Matavae, which consumed almost every tree and
shrub before it . . .’ (quoted in Oliver 1974:43).
  The island of Mangareva exhibits an extreme degree of human-
induced deforestation, with the entire interior covered in grassland
savannah (Fig. 41). As described by C.M. Cooke: ‘Nearly all the islands
have been continuously burned over for years. The ridges are entirely
bare of trees and are covered with coarse grass. . . Probably the dis¬
appearance of the native fauna [and flora] has been caused chiefly by
fire’ (1935:41). Many of the Marquesas Islands also have large tracts of
fern and grass savannah,       such as the Tovii Plateau of Nukuhiva
(Adamson 1936:59).
  The consequences of this widespread process of savannah creation
on many Polynesian islands cannot be overestimated. Most important
was the reduction in total arable land, for these degraded tracts were no
longer suitable for cultivation. Since the savannahs were probably
expanding at the same time that the human populations of the islands
were burgeoning, the potential for population pressure was greatly
heightened. In particular, the degradation of ridges and plateaux
indirectly placed a higher value on the increasingly important valley
lands and coastal plains, upon which agricultural production was
dependent. Not that the degradation of the uplands was entirely nega¬
tive, however. As Spriggs (1981) has shown for the Melanesian island of
142        Process

Aneityum, erosion of the interior volcanic slopes of a high island may
significantly add to alluvial deposition in valley bottoms, thus enriching
and increasing the prime arable land. A similar process of erosion adding
to fertile lowland agricultural soils has been documented for Tikopia
(Kirch and Yen 1982:147-60). Nevertheless, the gains from increased
alluvial deposition did not always outweigh the negative consequences
of environmental degradation.
  Easter Island provides another example of drastic vegetation change
induced by a Polynesian population. As McCoy notes, ‘beginning with
the explorers’ descriptions in the eighteenth century, observers have
consistently commented on the almost treeless landscape of Easter
Island’ (1976:7). Whether this ‘oceanic steppe-like meadow or grass
heath’, as Skottsberg (1956:422) described it, was natural or anthropo¬
genic has been the subject of some debate. Intriguing evidence for for¬
mer forest was provided by numerous root casts or moulds revealed by
Mulloy and Figueroa’s excavations under the large temple site of Ahu-
a-Kivi (1978:22). The excavators concluded that ‘the area was once
covered with significantly more vegetation than has been reported in
historic times. Some of this vegetation must have been quite large’
(1978:22). Recently, Flenley’s (1979, 1981) palynological investigations
of cores from Rano Raraku, Rano Aroi, and Rano Kau crater lakes have
provided conclusive evidence that the pre-human vegetation of Easter
comprised a ‘scrubby rainforest’. Although Flenley’s analyses are not
yet complete, the Polynesian occupants of Easter Island are clearly
implicated in the radical conversion of the island’s flora (1979:39).
  McCoy (1976:145-6) has discussed the probable adaptive conse¬
quences of the ‘hypothesized deterioration of the [Easter Island]
landscape through radical reduction of forest, shrub, and grassland
communities, following over-exploitation and misuse by man’. Among
these were erosion of the precious soil mantle, and loss of wood for con¬
struction. Chapter 11 will explore in greater detail the close relationships
between environmental change,         demography,     and socio-political
development in Easter Island.
  Vegetation change resulting from Polynesian actions was no less pro¬
nounced in sub-tropical Hawai'i than in the tropical archipelagos
(Kirch 1982a). Early European visitors to Hawai'i frequently remarked
on the barren and unwooded character of the lowlands. Vancouver,
visiting Kaua‘i Island, noted that ‘a space comprehending at least one
half of the island, appeared to produce nothing but a coarse spiry grass
[probably Heteropogon contortus] from an argillaceous soil, which had the
appearance of having undergone the action of fire’ (1798, vol. 1:170).
Archaeological and geomorphic studies have begun to demonstrate
that these barren lowlands were, in fact, the consequence of extensive
forest removal by Polynesians. In the Halawa Valiev on Moloka'i, a
large colluvial fan with stratified erosional deposits containing endemic
            Changing environments                                         143

subfossil land snails and abundant charcoal, is silent witness to a cycle
of slope erosion set off by firing of an original native forest cover (Kirch
and Kelly 1975:55-64).       In the upper Makaha Valley on 0‘ahu,
clearance of steep hillsides led to erosion and slumping that partially
buried a valley-bottom taro irrigation system (Yen etal. 1972). Dramatic
evidence of vegetation removal by fire, and subsequent erosion, has
also been claimed for Kaho‘olawe Island (Hommon 1980).
   Nowhere in Polynesia was the destruction of native forests so exten¬
sive and consequential as in New Zealand. As late as the 1950s,
scholarly doctrine held that extensive areas of grassland savannah, par¬
ticularly in the South Island, resulted from post-glacial climatic change.
This picture was soon reversed, however, through detailed studies of
subfossil evidence for former forests (Molloy ei al. 1963; Molloy 1967;
Molloy 1969). This evidence consists of ‘surface logs and forest
windthrow hummocks and hollows in now-treeless areas; buried
wood, charcoal, and other plant remains; buried soil profiles; and a
number of relic plants and soils’ (Molloy 1969:341). Most importantly,
a large series of subfossil wood and charcoal samples were radiocarbon
dated, with the resultant ages almost always falling within the period of
prehistoric Polynesian occupation (Molloy et al. 1963: table 1; Molloy
1969: table 1). These studies allowed both a reconstruction of the for¬
mer composition and distribution of forest, and of the sequence of its
destruction — through fire - by the Polynesian occupants of New
Zealand.
  More recently, our understanding of the Polynesian deforestation of
New Zealand has been amplified by pollen sequences obtained and
analysed by McGlone (1983) from various parts of both North and
South Islands. The sequences from Porter’s Pass and Longwood Range,
 shown in Figure 42, are both typical, with a rapid decrease in the local
 forest tree dominants (Nothofagus, Podocarpus), and concomitant increase
 in grasses and Ptendium fern. McGlone notes that ‘at most sites when the
 main forest clearance phase began it proceeded very rapidly indeed;
 (ibid.), and ‘between 800 and 500 yr BP there is abundant evidence from
 both North and South Island for the beginning of forest clearance on a
 grand scale’ (ibid.).
   In general terms, prior to Polynesian colonization, New Zealand was
 ‘essentially a forested land’, with the largely endemic forest ‘consisting
 of mixed podocarp-dicotyledonous (subtropical) or Nothofagus (sub-
 antarctic) species’ (Cumberland 1961:139). Destruction of this forest
 mantle began with the arrival of Polynesians, from fires ignited prob¬
 ably for a variety of purposes (to flush game, especially moa birds; for
 agricultural clearance, and so forth). By the time of European arrival,
 some    thousand    years   later,   the   results   of this   Brandwirtschaft
 (Cumberland      1962a: 163)   were    dramatic      indeed.   According    to
 Cumberland’s estimate, ‘not less than eight million acres of forest had
144            Process

been replaced by grass and scrub and many more acres had been dis¬
turbed and diversified’ (1961:142). The approximate extent of this
forest destruction is conveyed in Figure 43.
  Such massive vegetation change had serious consequences for soils
and erosion. Molloy described the effects of Polynesian burning of
about 75 per cent of the Waimakariri catchment in central South
Island:

The destruction of the forest and grassland mantle changed the dynamic soil
system from a dominant wasting regime to an active ‘drift regime’ ... in
dramatic fashion . . . the soils of the steeplands were removed wholly or in part,
screes were extended to lower altitudes, and fans and flood plains were
rejuvenated by a fresh supply of detritus... It is no coincidence that the most
spectacular examples of soil erosion and scree development lie within the
boundary of Polynesian burning (1967:66).


      M     Nothofagus fusca type                 Pteridium Gramineae




          M Podocarpus    Pteridium   Gramineae




               42. Pollen profdes from two South Island New Zealand swamp
               sites, showing the impact of prehistoric forest clearance (from
               McGlone 1983). A. Porter’s Pass, inland Canterbury (un¬
               published data of N.T. Moar, DSIR, New Zealand). B. Long-
               wood Range, Southland. In both profiles, note the rapid
               decline in forest trees (Nothofagus, Podocarpus), and relative
               increase in ferns (Pteridium) and grasses (Gramineae).
           Changing environments                                       145

  In the North Island, where milder temperatures permitted the
development o{ kumara agriculture (Best 1925), much of this forest de¬
struction was related to clearance for cultivation. Once cleared and
initially cultivated, the terrain tended to be re-vegetated, not by forest
species, but by the bracken fern (Pteridium esculentum). This pyrophytic
species was, in fact, a major food source for the Maori, having a large,
starchy rhizome (K. Shawcross 1967). Helen Leach (1980) has recently
argued that the succession to bracken fern was largely irreversible, and
that land covered in fern could generally not be reclaimed again for
kumara cultivation. As Leach points out, several ‘important cultural
implications’ follow‘from the progressive and sometimes irreversible
transformation of forest and shrub land into fern’ (1980:144). A seden¬
tary, agricultural community would, over time, be faced with a pro¬
gressive loss of suitable garden land, and ‘might eventually abandon
horticulture entirely and adopt the bracken rhizome as their sole
source of starch’. This is a trend which finds some resonance in the
archaeological record (Leach and Leach 1979a; Houghton 1980).
However, given the high cultural value placed upon kumara (especially




    >                              >'
            43. Prehistoric reduction in indigenous forest cover in New
            Zealand as shown bv estimated extent of forest at the time of
            initial Polynesian colonization (c. AD 750) and just prior to
            European settlement (AD 1840) (after Cumberland 1961).
146        Process

its role in feasting), the loss of status that would accompany such an
economic shift would likely have been unacceptable, at least to a
powerful group. ‘Their alternative would have been to acquire new
areas of lowland forest, initially by migration and later by conquest’
(Leach 1980:144). Leach’s thesis provides an especially clear case of the
complex    interactions   between     land-use    patterns,   environmental
change,   cultural   values,   and   social   conflict,   themes   that   recur
throughout.

Human impact on native fauna

It would be strange indeed if the tremendous impact of the Polynesians
in greatly reducing the native forest cover of the Pacific Islands did not
also have a correspondingly intense effect on island faunas. Oceanic
islands are, after all, noted for the speciation and evolution of endemic
birds, land snails, and insects - species vulnerable to competition and
predation once the barrier of isolation is broken (Fosberg 1963a). Until
recently, archaeological evidence for major human impact on Poly¬
nesian island faunas was largely confined to New Zealand, where the
extinction of the large, flightless moa birds provided a spectacular case
(and one that had inspired nearly a century of scientific debate). The
picture is now rapidly changing, especially due to spectacular extinct
avifaunal discoveries in Hawaifi. Our only certain conclusion at this
stage of research is that we have but scratched the surface with regard to
prehistoric human effects on island biota.
  Although human impact on any landscape is cumulative, the major
effect on island faunas often appears at the earlier end of an occupation
sequence. Lapita colonization in the south-western Pacific left its mark
on local populations of birds, shellfish, turtles, and fish. From several
Lapita sites (Reef Islands, Tikopia, Naigani in Fiji) we now have
osteological evidence for the rapid extinction of the megapode
[Megapodius freycinet, and possibly other spp.), a large galliform bird.
Studies by Swadling (summarized in Green 1976b:256-7) of shellfish
remains in the Reef Islands Lapita sites have demonstrated that initial
human exploitation of these molluscan populations led (1) to a decline
in local species diversity, and (2) to a significant reduction in the maxi¬
mum size attained by individuals of various species.
   The faunal sequence from Tikopia (Kirch and Yen 1982:274-310)
provides an especially clear example of the impact of humans on a pre¬
viously uninhabited oceanic island. SiteTK-4, occupied about 900 BC
and representing initial settlement, is marked by: (1) an extremely high
density of shellfish remains, including large individuals, many at the
upper size limit known for their respective species; (2) the presence of
Megapodius, as well as a possibly extinct species of rail; (3) a high density
of turtle bones; (4) a broad range of terrestrial and sea birds; and (5)
 large numbers of fish bones, from a wide range of taxa. At the time of
            Changing environments                                       147

their initial arrival on Tikopia, the human colonists exploited dense
populations of all these animals. Subsequently, the impact of the first
few decades of human exploitation is reflected in the extirpation of the
megapode, a great reduction in turtle, a decline in the quantity and
sizes of shellfish, and in a reduction in numbers of birds and fish rep¬
resented in later midden sites. The situation from Tikopia is by no
means unique; the faunal sequence of the early Hane site in the
Marquesas Islands exhibits a roughly parallel pattern (Kirch 1973).
  New Zealand has long been famous for its extinct moa (Dinornithi-
formes) and the earliest Polynesian colonizers there have been dubbed
‘moa hunters’ in recognition of the role of moa hunting in their
economies. These flightless birds, with their ‘tubby’ bodies and
massive legs (Fig. 44), ranged in size from the toweringDinomis giganteus,
perhaps 13 ft tall, to Anomalopteryx oweni, about the size of a bush turkey
(Cassels 1979:31). The exact number of species of moa has been a matter
of some controversy, with Archey’s (1941) twenty species reduced by
Cracraft (1976) to thirteen. More controversial has been the cause of
moa extinction, with climatic deterioration and human impact being
the two main contenders (Fleming 1962; Cumberland 1962a; Archey
1941; Cassels 1979; ms., n.d.).
  The weight of scientific evidence now solidly backs the argument that
the Polynesians were the primary agent in the extinction of this mar¬
vellous group of birds. Direct predation was doubtless a factor, but
probably of far greater importance was the widespread destruction of
the native habitats of the moa, due to fire. Ambrose (1968) vividly pre-




            44. Reconstructions of four species of New Zealand moa, left to
            right: Dinomis maximus, Aptomis sp., Euryaptenx gravis, and
            Cnemiomis sp. (from Cumberland 1962a).
148          Process

sented the archaeological evidence for what Jones called a ‘cameo of
man’s destructive march through the countryside’ (1975:31), the rapid
entry of Polynesians into the inland plains of South Island, and the
‘catastrophic’ alteration of the region. As Ambrose states: ‘the only
interpretation necessary is that moas ceased to exist in the area after the
first entry of fire and man ... the first arrival of man marks the last
appearance of moa’ (1968:592). As Cassels (1979; ms., n.d.) notes, there
is ‘a fairly definite and striking absence of moa bones [in sites] later than
the 1600s’ (1979:32), suggesting that human impact had led to the
birds’ extinction within the first 600-800 years of Polynesian occu¬
pation in New Zealand. Moas were by no means the only birds affected
by the arrival in New Zealand of the Polynesians. Some fourteen to six¬
teen other endemic species also went extinct during the early phase of
Polynesian occupation. These include ducks, geese, a crow, an eagle, a
coot, and others (Cassels, 1978-9). In addition, a number of species
were extirpated in local areas.
  Until recently, the New Zealand case appeared to be without parallel
in Polynesia. In the late 1970s, however, investigation of several sand
dune and cave localities in the Hawaiian Islands began to yield skeletal
remains of previously unknown species of extinct, and often flightless
birds (Olson and Wetmore 1976). Particularly rich concentrations of
extinct bones in limestone sinkholes at Barbers Point, O'ahu (A. Sinoto
1978) raised the question of whether these species had coexisted with
Polynesian man, and whether the latter was in any way implicated in
their extinction. Investigations of non-marine molluscs from strati¬
graphic columns in these sinks, by Kirch and Christensen (1980) pro¬
vided tantalizing evidence: massive numbers of extinct bird bones
appeared at the same levels with the Polynesian-transported snail
Lamellaxis gracilis, and with the bones of Rattus exulans and skinks, also
Polynesian-introduced species. Further, these stratigraphic levels also
showed dramatic changes in the relative frequency of the endemic land
snail species, indicative of major environmental change (Fig. 45). The
hypothesis could now be advanced that man was present prior to the
extinction of the birds, and that his activities were possibly responsible
for the changes in habitat.
  Subsequent work at Barbers Point (Davis 1978) and elsewhere in
Hawai'i has now left little doubt that habitation destruction, especially
of lowland dry forests, by the Polynesians, resulted in the extinction of
no less than forty species of birds (Olson and James 1982). One can
only wonder that it took three decades of intensive work in Hawaiian
archaeology before such a significant discovery was made!
      Polynesian impact on island faunas was by no means restricted to
birdlife. The destruction of large tracts of forest certainly resulted in the
extinction of countless species of endemic insects, land snails, and
other invertebrates. In Hawaifi, numerous species of endemic snails
                                                                                             1(=

                                                                                                                                                                                     pj«Z!| p/UO}f3fSQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                          sauoq pjiq jo »uoz Ajeiujjj
                                                                                              Bp mu BBUIUJISSy                                                 juapoj pBij!iusp;un
                                                                                                                                            tn/notnuj snpj r


                                                                                                                                                                                         PUB PI3UIOS ..
                                                                                                                                            .::i
                                                                                                                 sue/nxa tniley r:;:—';'!


                                                                                                                                                               C                                          c




45. Stratigraphic diagram illustrating frequency changes in land snails in a limestone sink at Barbers Point, 0‘ahu Island.
The middle stratigraphic unit contains large numbers of bird bones, including extinct species; changes in the land snail profile
indicate that this was a period of substantial environmental change.
150         Process

were extinct within the period of Polynesian occupation (Kirch 1982a;
1983b). Nor was the impact of humans restricted to terrestrial animals.
Swadling(1976) and A.J. Anderson (1979b, 1981) have both documented
changes in the population structures of marine shellfish due to
exploitation by man, though these changes did not result in extinction.
It is certain that future work in Polynesian archaeology will continue to
add to our knowledge of just how extensively the Polynesians modified,
and often degraded, their island environments.


Overview

The dynamism of island environments operates at several levels, each
with its own consequences for human adaptation. Long-term natural
processes, such as tectonic uplift or climatic change, may radically alter
an island’s configuration or its possibilities for a particular kind of
economic exploitation. Precisely because such processes occur so slowly,
however, they do not invoke sudden stress, and may be countered
through gradual, incremental adaptation. Quite the opposite is true of
natural disasters, which as we have seen, occur repeatedly throughout
Polynesia. These hazards, especially drought and cyclones, figured
prominently in the evolution of Polynesian societies, for two reasons.
First,   they served as   critical regulators for human populations,
especially populations that had reached a relatively high density.
Second, and equally important, such disasters - precisely because they
recur stochastically and are thus in one sense predictable- encouraged
the development of several forms of buffering, such as masi storage. Not
only did these buffering mechanisms serve to offset (in part) the devas¬
tating effects of disasters, but they enhanced the economic, managerial
role of the chiefly class. And, in times of relative abundance, stocks of
preserved food provided a surplus that might well be put to political,
rather than merely subsistence, ends.
   More important than either low- or high-frequency cycles of natural
environmental change, however, were the cumulative impacts wrought
on island ecosystems by the Polynesians themselves. Ramon Margalef
observed that ‘the evolution of man has not been in the direction of
passive adjustment to more mature ecosystems but is actively sustained
through a regression of the rest of the biosphere’ (1968:97). The history
of man in Polynesia certainly lends credence to this proposition. The
extremely high level of exploitation of natural resources by colonizing
populations, which led fairly quickly to the extinction of many species
and had a serious impact on the ecosystem as a whole, may have been a
quite efficient strategy of colonization. It was, however, to have serious
consequences for the colonists’ descendants, who - faced with declining
sources of natural protein, with degraded fernland savannahs, and fre¬
quently serious erosion - were encouraged to develop intensive forms
of agricultural production.
           Changing environments                                   151


  Rhys Jones asserted that the main theme of New Zealand prehistory
was ‘dynamic linkage between economic experimentation and ecological
tolerance, itself driven by the demographic engine of a human popu¬
lation’ occupying a large empty island (1975:32). We may extend
Jones’s assertion, for New Zealand- despite its continental proportions
- is but a mirror of parallel trends common to all of the Polynesian
chiefdoms. Having now explored the demographic and environmental
trends that underlie cultural change in Polynesia, let us turn to an
analysis of the development of production systems in the course of
island evolution.
            7
            Development and
            intensification of
            production

The dual horticultural-marine exploitation subsistence base of Ances¬
tral Polynesian Society, transferred by intrepid colonists to a range of
varied island environments, provided the foundation for indigenous
production systems throughout Polynesia. Initial reassortment and
adaptation of these systems was, however, only the first stage in the
development of each island’s productive base. Far more significant to
an understanding of the evolution of the region’s chiefdoms is the
analysis of the longer-term intensification of production, and the
relationship of such intensification to social and political structures.
  The present chapter examines in greater detail the evidence for the
development of production systems in several Polynesian societies.
The term development must be understood here in a broad sense, as
encompassing three major components: (1) adaptation (2) expansion,
and (3) intensification. Local development of production systems
required adaptation to particular environmental conditions and con¬
straints. As noted in Chapter 4, the adaptive component of develop¬
ment is markedly evident in the colonization phases of most island
sequences, although later adaptation to new or changing conditions
also occurred regularly. Assuming successful adaptation, the develop¬
ment of production systems usually proceeded as a matter of simple
expansion; forest was cleared for shifting cultivation, breadfruit and
coconut groves planted, pig herds enlarged, and so on. Perhaps the
most significant component of production development, however, is
intensification, which unlike expansion, involves an increased labour
input (either for the construction of permanent facilities, such as pond-
fields, or in the daily labour input to agriculture and fishing) to achieve
a relative increase in yields. The intensification of production systems
characterizes all Polynesian developmental sequences, even though
particular forms and emphases vary from place to place. Moreover, this
was ‘intensification of domestic production by political means and for
public purposes’ (Sahlins 1972:148), a critical aspect in the evolution of
Polynesian chiefdoms.

           152
           Development and intensification ofproduction                153


Development of production systems

For many Polynesian societies, the historical development of local pro¬
duction systems is only sketchily known from direct archaeological
evidence, and reconstruction is largely a matter of inference and
speculation. In several cases, however, recent archaeological studies
provide reasonably good data with which to reconstruct the develop¬
ment of production. I will briefly review the evidence for two of these
cases - Tikopia and the Marquesas - with an emphasis on certain
underlying regularities.


Tikopia

A Polynesian Outlier with only 4.6 km2 of land area (plus 1.1 km2 of
brackish lake), Tikopia has been continuously inhabited by descen¬
dants of Lapita potters since about 900 BC. In previous chapters, I
mentioned the dynamic landscape changes witnessed during the
period of human tenure on the island, and examined the ethnographic
evidence for the contact-period population of Tikopia as one close to
carrying capacity, and regulated by a variety of cultural controls. The
island’s rich archaeological record (Kirch and Yen 1982) permitted a
detailed reconstruction of the development of production, from initial
colonization through to recent changes influenced by Western contact.
This evolutionary sequence is graphically portrayed in Figure 46, in
which environmental change, agro-environmental adaptations, and
production system transformations are shown in relation to both
‘absolute’ and cultural time-scales.
  The transference and establishment of an agricultural subsistence
base by the initial colonizers is demonstrated by a range of evidence
from the early TK-4 site, including the skeletal remains of domestic pig,
dog, and fowl, anthropophilic snails, and such implements as vegetable
peelers. It is not possible on archaeological grounds to be more specific
about the nature of the cultigen roster, although we presume that the
dominant Oceanic crops - aroids, yams, bananas, and breadfruit -
were among those transported to the island. We can, however, say
something regarding agronomic practice: excavations in the intensively
cultivated Rakisu tract (Kirch and Yen 1982:147-60) have shown that
fire was an integral part of early agricultural practice on Tikopia, and we
would argue that the primary method of gardening for the first 1500-
2000 years of the Tikopia sequence was shifting cultivation. Restricted
in area at first, shifting cultivations gradually expanded to encompass
virtually the entire island, replacing the natural rainforest. Among the
archaeological signals of this expansion of agriculture is the stratigraphic
evidence for increased rates of hillslope erosion, and deposition of soil
in colluvial fans.
46. The development of the Tikopia production system, shown in relation to major environmental
transformations (after Kirch and Yen 1982)._
           Development and intensification of production                155

  In a pattern common to the colonization phases of most oceanic
islands, the initial subsistence base of Tikopia was marked by heavy
exploitation of indigenous birds and marine fauna. The quantities of
bird, fish, turtle, and shellfish in the early TK-4 site reflect the natural
abundance of an indigenous fauna prior to human exploitation (Fig.
21). Such high resource levels did not long withstand the sustained
pressure of human predation, leading to a dramatic reduction over
time in both the variety and quantity of meat in the Tikopia diet. Most
striking in this regard was the local extinction of the largest land bird, a
megapode. The reduction in wild meat intake was to a degree (though
not totally) offset by the development of animal husbandry, particularly
of pigs. Given the integration of pigs and agriculture throughout
Oceania (Yen 1973a; Kirch 1979c), increasing importance of pig hus¬
bandry can also be regarded as a reflection of the island’s expanding
agricultural base.
  In the final phase of the Tikopia sequence - the Tuakamali - the
island’s production system underwent a series of radical changes, some
relatively sudden in onset, others reflecting trends initiated in preceding
phases. These transformations were played out against a sequence of
dramatic landscape change, including the conversion of a large
saltwater bay to a closed, brackish lake. The previously dominant shifting
cultivation was replaced gradually by a system of permanent orchard
gardening in which tree crops were arrayed in multi-storeyed associ¬
ation (e.g., Cyrtosperma, Antiaris, Artocarpus, Metroxylon, and Cocos forming
ascending levels). This had the further effect of restricting yam-aroid
field cropping to relatively permanent, intensive tracts (such as Rakisu).
Among the adaptive features of this arboricultural system are its ability
to reduce the risk of crop destruction from cyclones (by sheltering the
lower-storey crops,     especially Cyrtosperma)    and     its retardation of
hillslope erosion. A more dramatic change of the Tuakamali Phase was
the sudden extermination of the island’s pig herd, a decision with
obvious social as well as dietary implications. Since pigs are a major
item of group exchange in virtually all Oceanic societies, their elimin¬
ation may also have occasioned a re-ordering of exchange valuables
(today, barkcloth and mats are the principal articles of exchange
between kin groups). The expunging of this high-quality food source,
which had an effect of reducing the overall meat intake in the local diet,
was most likely a response to an intolerable level of human-husbanded
animal competition, itself implying a high human population density
(see Chapter 5).
   While the evolution of the Tikopia production system can be read as
a set of complex interactions between demography, technology, and
 natural resources, it is important to stress that the cultural factor is by
 no means absent in the archaeological reconstruction (Kirch and Yen
 1982:355-9). As we have argued, several changes in local resource use
156        Process

can only be explained with reference to decisions based on cultural
values. The clearest instances of this are the absence, for 1300 years in
theTikopia sequence, of turtles, sharks, and rays, and later in time, the
removal of eels and puffer-fish from the diet. All of these animals have
associations, in contemporary Tikopia or in surrounding islands (e.g.,
the Santa Cruz and Banks Islands groups), with totem and tapu. We
have argued that their long absence from the Tikopia faunal record
cannot be due either to local extinction of the species, or to sampling
error, and must therefore reflect culturally prescribed valuations of
these foods as edible or inedible (cf. Sahlins 1976:171).
  The long-term development of the Tikopia production system was
thus marked by two dominant, gradual trends: an expansion of the
terrestrial, agricultural sector, matched by a reduction in the quantity
as well as diversity of animal food. In agriculture, the initial expansion
of a slash-and-burn cropping mode shifted to an arboricultural
emphasis, with its risk minimization. The addition of pit fermentation
late in the sequence may reflect some intensification of agricultural
production, as does the labour-intensive cultivation of Rakisu. In the
exploitative sector of subsistence, the pressures of continued human
harvesting reduced dramatically initial high yields of wild resources:
birds, fish, turtles, shellfish. This reduction in available protein was
only partially offset by the development of pig husbandry, itself
ultimately eliminated.

The Marquesas

The Marquesas Islands contrast in several important respects with
Tikopia. On the one hand, we have a single, small island - on the other
a large archipelago; whereas Tikopia has broad reef flats and a diverse
tropical fish fauna, the Marquesas lack extensive coral reefs and have
correspondingly depauperate fish resources. In terms of human settle¬
ment, Tikopia was settled at least 600 years earlier than the Marquesas.
Yet, despite these contrasts, the development of production systems
exhibit, in both cases, a number of significant regularities. Figure 47 is a
graphic synthesis of the available data bearing on the temporal
development of Marquesan production systems, drawing largely from
the work of Suggs (1960a, 1961), Sinoto (1966, 1970, 1979a) and
Kirch (1973).
  Sites of the Settlement Period (Hane, Ha‘atuatua) reflect the same
dominant emphasis on exploitation of the abundant wild resources of
land and sea evident in the colonization phase of Tikopia, a pattern
evidently characteristic of Oceanic colonization in general. Several
lines of evidence indicate that the first settlers did establish an
agricultural base, but the importance of agriculture is not evident
archaeologically until near the end of the Settlement Period. Interest¬
ingly, the faunal data from the MUH1 site (Kirch 1973) suggest that
                      O   o


                      O- Wnj                                 9
                                                            _i k£
                      xzct
 oo
                                                            <H<r|
                      ugo                                   “<“it


 <                    £-<r
                      3!t<                                  ol2^
 £C                                                         ztr-jH
                                                            xm-)w
 D                                 £<s
                      oo<
                      Q. U-S
                                                               50
                                                            uo-< <
                                                            UJX
                                                            Kiutoo




            WSn V9INNV0




                                                                         47. The development of the Marquesan production svstem.
                                  S1VWWVW V3S




                    aovaois iid




                aannnomoauv


                                      DNiddoao a laid




        IDISSVHD?
<cc o
    z
                    NOISNVdX3
es
-iDu
   o                               lVlN3Wd013A3Q
U to
                                                        |   1N3W311I3S
158        Process

domestic pig and dog may not have been introduced until later during
this period (we must, however, be cautious of possible sampling error
in this case).
   As in Tikopia, the early emphasis on exploitation of wild resources
led to a reduction in the natural abundance of several species popu¬
lations, notably sea mammals (especially porpoise), birds, and turtles.
By the end of the Settlement Period, both birds and sea mammals had
ceased to be regular items in the Marquesan diet.
  Suggs’s choice of the term ‘Developmental’ for the succeeding
cultural period was apt, for this stage saw the establishment of a basic
production system that was only further elaborated in succeeding
periods. After an early phase of technological experimentation, fishing
gear for the exploitation of deep bays and rocky shorelines characteristic
of the Marquesas had become standardized (Kirch 1980a, b; see Chapter
4). The early heavy reliance on birds and sea mammals had, however,
ceased. In their stead, we now see the evidence of animal husbandry, of
both pigs and dogs. The Marquesan agricultural pattern, with its
emphasis on arboriculture, and especially breadfruit, was firmly
established during the Developmental Period, witnessed archae-
ologically by an increased frequency in peelers of Cypraea shell (Suggs
1961:181-2). Suggs opined that ‘large breadfruit groves, such as those
described in historic sources, were probably in this period first planted
in the valley bottoms’ (1961:182). Arboriculture did not, however,
totally supplant other forms of field cultivation, and small irrigated
terrace   systems    for   Colocasia   culture   are   reported   from   many
Marquesan valleys (Handy 1923;             Kellum-Ottino     1971;   Bellwood
1972a).
  I noted in Chapter 6 that the Marquesan emphasis on tree cropping
of breadfruit, coupled with the local frequency of drought and conse¬
quent famine, led to a remarkable development of ma storage capacity.
Two settlement pattern studies have been carried out in the Marquesas,
in the Hane Valiev of Uahuka (Kellum-Ottino 1971) and in the
Hanatekua Valiev of Hiva Oa (Bellwood 1972a), and these provide
some indication of the scale of ma storage. In Hanatekua, Bellwood
recorded eighteen pits, with a total estimated storage capacity of 67 m3
of preserved breadfruit paste. The Hane Valley has some thirty-three
pits dispersed in clusters throughout the valley (but concentrated in the
interior portions); in addition, there are thirteen pits constructed into
house platforms. The total storage capacity of these forty-six pits may
be estimated at about 292 m3. Both of these valleys are rather small, and
were politicallv unimportant. In the densely settled large valleys which
were centres of political power, such as Taipivai on Nukuhiva, ma
 storage capacities were evidently greater still. Linton reports that a
 single pit in Taipivai had a volume of 216 m3 (1925:103).
   The Expansion and Classic Periods were marked by further expan-
             Development and intensification of production               159

sion of the basic production patterns established during the Develop¬
mental Period, spurred on by a major increase in population and
expansion of settlement into marginal lands. That the archipelago’s
population began to approach some form of limit conditions is suggested
by the proliferation of ridge-top fortifications, and other evidence for
inter-valley warfare and competition.
  One development of the late Expansion and Classic Periods, chilling
in its implications, was cannibalism. In the Hane Dune Site faunal
sequence, the archaeological evidence for consumption of human flesh
is irrefutable: scattered, broken, and often charred human bones were
found in the upper levels of the dune (Kirch 1973). Suggs (1960a: 122;
1961:25) reports the ‘remains of a young child who had been cooked
and partially eaten’ in one of the Uea Valley rockshelters (Site NBM 4),
occupied from Expansion through Classic Periods. Ethnographic
information on cannibalism (Handy 1923:138-40, 218-21) indicates
that the victims (called ika, ‘fish’, as in Fiji) were enemies from warring
tribes, and that revenge - rather than malnutrition - was the principal
motive. Nonetheless, the institutionalization of cannibalism in late pre¬
historic Marquesan society must be taken as a symptom of tensions
which had developed between social groups, exacerbated by dense
populations and recurrent famines.

Comparison

Despite differences in scale, in aspects of local environment, and in
length of human tenure, both the Tikopia and Marquesas sequences
exhibit parallel trends in the development of production. Archaeological
evidence from other Polynesian islands would support the notion that
these two evolutionary trajectories reflect, in their general trends, those
of most Polynesian islands. To be sure, local differences exist and must
be taken into account. The emphasis in Tikopia and the Marquesas on
arboriculture, for example, is replaced in other archipelagos by
drvfield cropping or irrigation, as we shall see further below. In New
Zealand,     harsh   environmental     conditions    necessitated   a greater
readaptation of the agricultural subsistence base than elsewhere. In
spite of these caveats, we can use the Tikopia and Marquesas cases to
illustrate several major trends in the development of Polynesian pro¬
duction systems:
  1. A discrete colonization phase is recognizable, marked by a heaw
exploitation of and dependence on wild resources. The effects of such
heaw predation were to greatly reduce certain food species popu¬
lations within a few centuries of initial settlement. This phase is also
characterized by a high rate of technological experimentation and
adaptation (see Kirch 1980a, b) in both the agricultural and hunting-
fishing components of production.
   2. Once a human population had become permanently established,
160          Process

and initial adaptations to local environmental conditions achieved, an
increasing dominance and expansion of agricultural production was
undertaken, a trend which continues throughout the sequences.
Expansion of agricultural production was further marked by an
increase in animal husbandry.
  3. Despite the above trend, production of domestic animals never
appears to fully replace the protein available from natural resources
during the colonization phase, so that production systems reflect a
gradual reduction in available meat over time.
  4. As the natural vegetation was cleared and wild animals exploited
(some species to the point of local extirpation), and with the expansion
of agriculture, the local ecosystems underwent a successional ‘re¬
gression’ to a simpler form (Margalef 1968; Odum 1969). Thus the
development of production systems reflects increasing management of
the environment, which may include considerable alteration and even
degradation of local landscapes.
  5. Finally, there is evidence for increasing intensification of pro¬
duction later in island developmental sequences. In Tikopia, and more
clearly in the Marquesas, this is exhibited in pit storage of breadfruit.
Local forms of intensification vary from locality to locality, but the
underlying trend appears consistent. Of the several trends that we have
isolated, this is doubtless the most significant for an evolutionary
analysis of the Polynesian chiefdoms.


Production and the chieftainship

The Tikopian and Marquesan sequences reveal an increasing develop¬
ment and intensification of production, and the same general trend can
be demonstrated, to greater or lesser degrees, for all Polynesian
societies. The simple determinist explanation would be to label popu¬
lation growth and ‘pressure’ as the cause for such intensification, seeing
the latter as a direct response to the former. While population growth is
surely one factor in the development of production, this explanation is
unacceptable on several counts. First, elevating population growth to
independent variable status ignores the evidence for cultural regulation
of population throughout Polynesia. Second, and more serious, it takes
no account of the social relations of production, of the dominant struc¬
tures that organize production. A more dynamic model is called for,
one that can incorporate demography, technology, environmental
 conditions and constraints, and the social relations of production into a
 system that does not reduce to simplistic linear causality.
      Ancestral Polynesian Society did not operate at the theoretical
‘domestic mode of production’, or of underproduction as Sahlins (1972)
 has characterized the DMP. Demand of goods for exchange, for meeting
 ritual obligations, and for the maintenance and aggrandizement of the
             Development and intensification of production                 161

chiefly line, impelled production beyond the minimal level sufficient
for reproduction of individual households. Particularly when we con¬
sider the demands of status-conscious and competitive chiefs (dependent
for their prestige upon the successful production and redistribution of
food and status goods), it is evident that we need to analyse production
in terms of both necessary production as well as surplus. As H. Pearson
(1957; see also Harris 1959; Dalton 1960; Orans 1966) pointed out
some time ago, the term ‘surplus’ can only be understood in its
institutional context, and does not imply some superfluous entity with
an inherent capacity to cause the development of social stratification.
Rather, by surplus we mean that portion of production which extends
beyond the sphere of individual households, and which therefore
finances the general public economy, and especially, the political
actions of the chiefs. We should also note that this surplus production is
dominantly agricultural, although non-agricultural products (e.g.,
prestige goods such as mats and barkcloth) are also involved. However,
as indicated in Chapter 2, the production of food was the key to Poly¬
nesian economies, and the control and distribution of surplus food the
key to larger social and political relations. Indeed, it was such surplus
food which (in the larger societies at least) fed the chiefs and their
retainers, who constituted a non-food-producing class.
  The production of an agricultural surplus, and its appropriation and
distribution byariki, was doubtless an important part of the economy of
Ancestral    Polynesian    Society.   We   have   already    noted   the   pan-
Polynesian    practice of first-fruits     tribute,   one of the important
mechanisms for surplus appropriation. Thus, whereas certain earlier
studies (e.g., Sahlins 1958) attributed the appearance of Polynesian
chieftainship to the development of surplus production, the relationship
is ‘at least mutual’, if not largely the other way around (Sahlins
1972:140). ‘Leadership continually generates domestic surplus. The
development of rank and chieftainship becomes, pari passu, develop¬
ment of the productive forces’ (1972:140).
  It is important as well to consider surplus as a dynamic variable, in
relation to changing demands both from the socio-political system, and
from demographic and techno-environmental conditions. The work of
Sachs (1966) and of Friedman (1979) on the notion of the production
function provide a basis for such an analysis. Given the nature of Ances¬
tral Polynesian Society, a constant or increasing level of surplus was
vital to the successful reproduction of the society as structurally con¬
stituted. We can portray this in a simple diagram (Fig. 48) where for any
given labour force or population, Lx, yield (TJ must be sufficient to pro¬
duce not only for necessary consumption (Fv, subsistence production at
the household level), but a surplus (5V), where Y = V + S. Given an
increasing population, production must maintain a positive rate of sur¬
plus increase (dS/di > 0), as well as a positive ratio between yield and
162        Process

labour input (dy/dLL>0)(cf. Harris 1959:198). Further, since the chiefs
were inherently status conscious and competitive, there would have
been a tendency to increase the ratio ofS/F over time (assuming, for the
moment, that no limiting conditions impinged on the development of
the productive apparatus).
  While the continued reproduction ol the society required this con¬
comitant production of a surplus, a variety of limiting conditions
impinged. We can begin to understand these by considering the pro¬
duction function, as developed by Sachs (1966) and elaborated by
Friedman (1979), shown here in Figure 49. Considering a given
technology for production (7(), in a particular environment, the relation
between! and Y takes the form of a curve, indicated in the diagram (the




            48. The production of surplus (S) over subsistence production
            at the household level (V). See text for discussion.
            Development and intensification of production                   163

surplus at any given time is indicated by the shaded zone). For a con¬
stant area of land, an increase in L will produce, at first, a relatively rapid
increase in Y, which, however, gradually tapers off, and ultiiuatelv
declines past a point of diminishing returns. When we analyse the situ¬
ation with respect to time, that is, when increasing L is the result of a
growing population, we see that there are several critical points on the
function 0T. The first critical point (Z.,, T,) is reached when the rate of
increase in surplus relative to yield begins to drop (d^/dF2 < 0). The
second critical point (L2, Y2) occurs later when surplus actually begins to
decline relative to yield (dS/dT < 0). The operational threshold of the
system, of course, is reached when Y = V, at which point no surplus
exists at all. It is most unlikely that any social system will get to this third
point, however, for critical and untolerable pressures will build up
much earlier, as surplus begins to decrease, threatening the existent
social relations of production and authority of the polity.
  Following Friedman (1979:171-4), we can divide the production
function into a series of regions which correspond to a hierarchy of
increasing, additive constraints (Fig. 50). Region I ‘is the sector of maxi¬
mal expansion where surplus is forthcoming at an increasing rate’
(d25/dF2 > 0), and would be characteristic of Polynesian island systems
following initial colonization and adaptation, but prior to the achieve¬
ment of limits in land area or of degradation of resources. Both yield
and surplus increase faster than labour (population), and chiefs are able
to easily appropriate surplus to meet competitive and ritual demands.
In Region II, however, the cost of producing a surplus begins to
increase, even though the ratio of surplus to yield is positive (dS/dT> 0).
At this stage, competition between chiefs for surplus may intensify. In
Region III, the situation becomes acute, for now surplus is declining




            cussion (after Friedman 1979).
164        Process

relative to yield (dS/dT< 0), even though dY/dL> 0. Since the absolute
surplus is now diminishing, even though demand is not, the tension
between chiefs and the cultivators may become critical at this stage.
Finally, in Region IV, we are ‘over the hill’, and the system is in general
decline, since yield is decreasing relative to labour input (dY/dL < 0).
  The above analysis held both the technology of production and the
environment constant, an unrealistic condition. In any real Polynesian
system, steps would have been taken to intensify production well
before the critical Region III was entered; likewise, cultural controls on
population growth may have served as a brake on development. The
effect of intensification of production, such as through irrigation or of
construction of fishponds, can be diagrammed in Figure 51. A shift
from one level of technology (T,) to a more intensive one (T2) will shift
the productive function to a new curve (such a shift being made with a
certain cost in labour input).
  The process of intensification, in short, results both from the
increased demands for necessary consumption posed by a growing
population, and the demands of the chiefs for surplus sufficient to
underwrite their political actions and enhance their prestige. The
proximate cause for intensification frequently lies in the demands of
the prestige or public economy, rather than in direct population pres¬
sure, since the impetus for increased surplus will arise well before Y
approaches T(the limiting condition for population growth being Y= V).
At the same time, population increase provides the dynamic context for
the changing equations between L, Y, and S. Population growth, in
short, is an ultimate rather than proximate cause.
  While intensification of agriculture or of fishing can shift the pro¬
duction function to a new curve, thus meeting the increased demands
for surplus, the role of a dynamic environment cannot be ignored. In
Chapter 6, evidence for environmental change of several kinds was




            degradation (7) in £.,) on a production function; see text for
            discussion.
           Development and intensification of production                165

marshalled, and stochasdc perturbations and longer-term modifi¬
cations of ecosystems were shown to be significant in Polynesia. Figure
51 diagrams the potential effect of environmental degradation (e.g.,
erosion of formerly arable hillslopes) on a particular production sys¬
tem: the production function is lowered once the process of degra¬
dation sets in. Thus, environmental degradation may offset, partially or
wholly, gains made by intensification. Similarly, an environmental
hazard - cyclone, drought, and so on - may have the effect of suddenly
lowering yield and reducing available surplus, throwing the system into
a crisis. Of course, not all environmental changes were deleterious, and
some modifications such as valley-infilling may have enhanced the
potential for further intensification (Spriggs 1981).
  Having argued that the social relations of production and especially
the demands of the ariki for surplus were a major impetus to intensifi¬
cation, some ethnographic data on the economic role of Polynesian
chiefs is in order. Three points are important here: (1) the role of chiefs
in controlling and directing production; (2) the means by which a sur¬
plus product was appropriated; and (3) the particular uses which chiefs
made of surplus production.
  In all Polynesian societies, individual households comprised the
basic units of production, consumption, and exchange, but the larger
economic system was far more than a mere summation of these units,
and the chiefship played a dominant role in the integration of the
whole. We noted in Chapter 2 that religious activity formed an integral
part of Polynesian economic practice, and it was in his control of ritual
that the chief exercised significant power over production. The timing
of agricultural calendars, for example, depended upon a seasonal cycle
of ritual activity, determined by the chief. In Tikopia, for instance, the
‘work of the gods’ (Firth 1967) regulated such economic activities as
yam planting, canoe repair, and turmeric extraction. Not only does‘the
imperative of the ritual’ provide a ‘safeguard to production’, but
economic ritual ‘helps in the perpetuation of the system of production
and distribution in vogue in the society, and in particular, in the main¬
tenance of the economic position of people of rank' (Firth 1939:182, 171, my
italics). In ritually directing production at a certain level of effort, the
chiefs assured the continuance of the established political order.
  The tapu associated with Polynesian ariki was not merely a passive
indicator of rank, it was actively used as an economic tool. By the
imposition of a tapu or interdiction on the use of terrestrial or marine
resources, the chief not only ‘reserved their yield for collective pur¬
poses’; the dual effect was also to raise domestic production levels,
since ‘in the absence of a prohibition on standing crops further labor
would not have been necessary5 (Sahlins 1968:91). The imposition of
chiefly interdictions on the use of resources is ubiquitous in Polynesian
ethnography. Throughout central East Polynesia, such restrictions go
166        Process

under the term rahui or a cognate reflex. Handy (1923:59) reports that
in the Marquesas, chiefs anticipating a large tribal feast might impose
an ahui on a significant portion of the standing crop for as long as one
year. In Mangareva, ‘closed seasons (ra'ui) were declared in connection
with food, and putting them into effect was the ruler’s privilege’ (Buck
1938a: 161). In the Society Islands, rahui were enforced not only by
supernatural sanctions, but by the threat of land dispossession for
those who disobeyed (Oliver 1974:633). Rahui have been interpreted by
some anthropologists as primitive ‘conservation’ measures, and in
some cases thev may have had that effect, but as Oliver points out, they
were‘deliberately imposed for the benefit of the imposers’ (1974:1072),
and such was their primary intention. Tapu allowed the Polynesian chief
‘to take charge of the economic forces ... in the interests of the com¬
munity’ (Firth 1939:212), as well as in the interests of the chiefs.
  The role of Polynesian chiefs in production extended further, to the
development of permanent facilities, as, for example, with the irri¬
gation complexes and fishponds of Hawai'i. Earle (1978:183) observes
that a Hawaiian chief could greatlv increase the productive capacity of
his lands by improving irrigation facilities, and invested surplus
agricultural produce in such works by feeding the large labour force
enlisted to carry out such projects. I‘i (1959:68-9) describes how
Kamehameha, following his conquest of O'ahu, set about expanding
the irrigation facilities of the fertile leeward valleys of Nu'uanu, Manoa,
and at Waikiki (see also Kirch and Sahlins, in preparation). The large
coastal fishponds of Hawaifi were likewise the product of corvee labour,
initiated by chiefs (Summers 1964:2). Even in the less stratified
societies, such as New Zealand Maori, the chief assumed the initiative
in the construction of large public works (Firth 1959a: 133).
  Turning to the chiefly appropriation of surplus (both property and
labour), we again note the religious ideology, summarized by Goldman:
‘The ariki stands to the people as a god. As the deity is the primary
source of food and must therefore receive back a portion of it - a divine
economic circulation - so the chief, the divine exemplar, must occupy a
parallel place as a center of circulation’ (1970:485). The ancestral mode
of appropriation of surplus was probablv that represented by sacrificial
offerings, first fruits, presented to the chief in his ritual capacity as rep¬
resentative of the deities. As Firth (1939) shows for Tikopia, first fruits
(the term, muakai, is literally ‘foremost foods’) are used bv the chiefs to
further their place in the economic hierarchy, recycled in the elaborate
system of group exchange in which the chief is expected to play the
dominant role.
   As the power of the chieftainship expanded in various Polynesian
societies, the ancestral pattern of first fruits and similar ritual tribute
developed into various systems of regular taxation, though still retaining
            Development and intensification of production              167

their ritual guise. ‘In the system of tributes’, Goldman writes, ‘the
transformation was from voluntary giving within a pattern of mutual
honoring to compulsory giving within a pattern of unequal reciprocity'
(1970:511). The Hawaiian makahiki, with its elaborate associated cult of
Lono, and the Tongan ‘inasi, represent peaks within Polynesia of the
transformation of first fruits to regularized taxation. To a lesser degree,
however, the same process occurred in many island societies. In both
Mangareva and Mangaia, for instance, tenant cultivators owed regular
tribute to the landed chiefs and warriors (Buck 1938a, 1934). Nor was
surplus appropriated solely in the form of food or material property,
for in some societies (especially Hawai'i) corvee labour became a for¬
malized institution.
 Finally, we may consider the varied uses to which chiefs put the
appropriated surplus. In the less stratified societies, the majority of
such surplus was returned to the producers by redistribution, whether
by exchanges with chiefly families, or by the sponsorship by chiefs of
large communal feasts. Such was, probably, the pattern in Ancestral
Polynesian Society as well. While feasts served to redistribute the sur¬
plus, they also provided the chief an opportunity to assert his rank and
prestige, and to demonstrate the efficacy of his mana (Firth 1939:222),
which in turn enhanced his ability to direct production and to appro¬
priate surplus. In many societies, accumulated surplus was used to
alleviate famine following natural disasters. Such was one function of
the large communal breadfruit pits of the Marquesas, under chiefly
control (Handy 1923).
  As the degree of social stratification increased in various Polynesian
societies (in part, as a function of the chieflv ability to control pro¬
duction and accumulate surplus), the proportion of surplus actuallv
redistributed to the people at large decreased. Thus, in societies such as
Hawaifi, Tonga, and Tahiti, large quantities of food, and a considerable
degree of corvee labour, were invested in the support of large chiefly
establishments and entourages, in the construction of major public
works (both economic, such as irrigation systems and fishponds, and
ceremonial, such as temples and chiefs’ tombs), and in the support of
craft specialists. Oliver reports that construction of a major temple
(■marae) in the Society Islands might be preceded by a rahui lasting two or
 three years, in order to accumulate the necessary surplus to feed the
 labourers and to ‘provide food for the marae consecration ceremony’
(1974:996). Even in these highly stratified societies, however, chiefs
 were still expected to work for the communal welfare, and an overlv
 bloated chieftainship might raise the spectre of rebellion. While the
 more advanced Polynesian societies pushed the evolution of the chief-
 dom economv to its organizational limits, they never fully divorced the
 svstern from its ancestral kinship ideology.
168         Process

Intensive production: the wet and the dry

Variability in indigenous Polynesian agricultural systems, displayed in
the ethnographic record, is evident in the different emphases of par¬
ticular, intensified systems: one may cite, as examples, the water-
control (irrigation/drainage) cropping systems of Hawai'i, Futuna, or
‘Uvea(Kirch 1976, 1977a, 1978b), the intensive tree cropping of bread¬
fruit with concomitant pit-storage in the Marquesas and Mangareva
(Handy 1923; Buck 1938a), and the dryfield rotational cropping system
of Anuta (Yen 1973b). As Jacques Barrau (1965a) pointed out, Oceanic
agricultures incorporate a fundamental wet/dry dichotomy, evident
not only in crop plants, and in edaphic-hydrologic modifications of
environment, but in ritual and symbolic systems as well. This contrast
between the wet and the dry is inherent in the ecological templates of
the two dominant cultigens of Oceanic agriculture: taro (Colocasia
esculenta) and the greater yam (Dioscorea alata). Taro, while not restricted
to wet   situations,     responds    most favourably under inundation,
specifically by means of pondfield irrigation or in some similar
aqueous environment. The tropophytic yams, on the other hand,
require well-drained soils, inspiring the agronomic mirror-image of
taro cultivation, elaborate mounding or drainage techniques. The
sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), as an additive element in Polynesia (Yen
1974a), has further strengthened the dry half of the contrast, par¬
ticularly in   East     Polynesia,   where its entry can be ascribed to
prehistoric times.
  This wet/dry dichotomy is not merely an operational perspective of
the ethnographer, but forms an essential part of indigenous folk
agronomy. A Hawaiian informant of the nineteenth century began an
account of local agriculture with the statement: ‘Elua ano a ka aina, he
maloo ahevoax. .      ‘of two kinds is the land, the drvand the wet’ (Fornander
1919:160). Because the distinction is so fundamental in Polynesia, it
provides a basis for discussing the archaeological evidence for pre¬
historic cropping systems.


Irrigation and drainage

The taro irrigation systems of Polynesia, and especially those of
Hawai'i, have attracted considerable attention as witnesses of former
agricultural intensification, and have figured in the debate over the
‘hydraulic hypothesis’ (Wittfogel 1957; Goldman 1970; Earle 1978).
Such systems are perhaps more correctly conceived not as irrigation in
the narrow sense, but as water control, incorporating both inundated
pondfields and raised garden beds in naturally swampy terrain.
Technical variation in hydrology, edaphic modification, and agronomic
practice was in fact considerable in Polynesian water-control systems,
           Development and intensification of production                  169


but in all cases the underlying objective was the same: the creation of a
suitable hvdromorphic medium for the production of Colocasia.
  Simplest of all water-control taro cultivation systems was that
developed primarily on atolls, such as in the Cook Islands and the
Tuamotu archipelago (e.g., Chazine 197 7). A pit or trench was
excavated through the coral sand of a large atoll islet, to a depth suf¬
ficient to allow the taro tubers to tap the shallow Ghvben-Herzberg
aquifer of fresh water. Such taro fields were frequently mulched with
organic debris to create a fertile planting medium.
  On many Polynesian high islands, the coastal alluvial plains or
lowlands are in places swampy and, if adequately drained to permit the
flow of water (and to counter stagnation), these naturally hvdromorphic
soils are well adapted to intensive taro culture. The agronomic technique
in these situations is to dig a network of reticulate ditches separating
slightly raised garden beds upon which taro is planted. Such drainage
systems are known ethnographically for ‘Uvea (Kirch 1978b), and the
Society Islands (Handy 1930b), whereas Ishizuki (1974) reports on a
prehistoric drainage system in the Falefa Valley, Samoa. A set of
drained beds in ‘Uvea is illustrated in Figure 52.
  The third category of Polynesian water-control taro systems are those
utilizing true pondfields (generally terraces, though also sunken fields
in some instances), irrigated from a water source such as a spring or




           52. Intensive swamp cultivation of taro (Colocasia esculenta) on
            raised garden beds on ‘Uvea Island.
170        Process

stream. Such irrigated complexes range considerably in their complexity
and scale, and at least four major types may be distinguished: (I) simple
terrace systems situated in stream channels; (II) systems fed by a single
ditch or spring which debauches directly into the uppermost field;
(III) systems with peripheral ditches providing multiple feed into a
number of fields, and sometimes with ditch bifurcations; and (IV) sys¬
tems fed by more than a single ditch or spring(Kirch 1977a:260). These
types are diagrammatically portrayed in Figure 53. Not surprisingly,




           53. A diagrammatic classification of prehistoric Hawaiian
           pondfield irrigation systems; see text for discussion (from Kirch
           1977a).
            Development and intensification of production                 17 1


Table 19. Wet cultivation of taro (Colocasia) in Polynesia


Island/group       Svstem types*   Agricultural      References
                                   significance* *


Futuna             P, G            D                 Kirch 1975
‘Uvea              G               S                 Kirch 1978b
Samoa              G               S/M               Ishizuki 1974
Rarotonga          P, G            S                 Buck 1944; Bellwood
                                                     1978b
Mangaia            P, G            D                 Buck 1934; B. Allen 1971
Society Islands    G, P            S/M               Green 1961; Oliver 1974
Marquesas          P               M                 Handv 1923
Tuamotu Islands    S               S/M               Chazine 197 7
Mangareva          P, s            M                 Buck 1938a
Rapa               p               D                 Stokes ms; Hanson 1970
Rurutu             p               S                 Verin 1969
Tubuai             p               S                 Aitken 1930
Raivavae           p               D
Pitcairn           p?              P
Hawaiian Islands   P, G             S/D              Handv and Handy 1972;
                                                     Kirch 1977a; Earle 1980



*Kev: P, irrigated pondfields; G, drained garden beds; S, sunken pits.
**Kev: D, dominant; S, significant; M, minor.



there tends to be close correlation between type and scale, as we shall
see with regard to the Hawaiian examples.
  The distribution of water-control systems throughout Polynesia is
summarized in Table 19, which also provides data on the scale of
individual systems and on the importance of irrigation/drainage in the
total agricultural production complex. Among the most developed and
intensive irrigation complexes are those of Futuna and Hawai'i. The
Futunan systems (Fig. 54) have been studied both ethnographicallv and
archaeologically (Kirch 1975), though absolute dating has only been
able to project their age back into the late prehistoric period. It is in
Hawai'i that the most detailed archaeological investigations of taro
irrigation have been conducted.
   The geographic distribution of taro irrigation in Hawaifi reflects the
local availability of surface water and, to an extent, the degree of
landform dissection, so that the greatest development of irrigation took
place on the older, western islands of Kaua‘i and 0‘ahu (Handv 1940;
Handy and Handy 1972; Earle 1980). Nevertheless, the windward
zones of all islands supported substantial tracts of irrigated pondfields,
and recent archaeological surveys have demonstrated a remarkable
extension of irrigation practice even on leeward slopes, as at Lalamilo,
 Hawai'i Island (J. Clark 1981; Clark and Kirch 1983).
172        Process

  Intensive archaeological studies of prehistoric and earlv historic
irrigation in Hawai‘i have focussed on five areas: the Halele‘a District of
Kaua'i Island (Earle 1978; Schilt 1980a; Athens 1983); the upper
Makaha Valley, 0‘ahu (Yen et al. 1972); the Anahulu Valiev, O'ahu
(Kirch 1979b; Kirch and Sahlins, in preparation); the Halawa Valiev,
Moloka'i (Kirch and Kelly 1975); and the Kohala valleys, Hawai'i
(Tuggle and Tomonari-Tuggle 1980). As a result of these studies, the
scale, complexity, and agronomy of indigenous Hawaiian irrigation are
now relatively well understood (for summaries, see Kirch 1977a and
Earle 1980). The Hawaiian irrigation systems include all four types listed
above, and range from small sets of a few terraces covering as little as
0.07 hectare to extensive complexes blanketing alluvial floodplains and
covering as much as 53 hectares. The lengths of irrigation ditches
likewise range from as short as 20 metres to one, in Halele'a District, 3.7
km long. The small systems were evidently cultivated by single domestic
units, while the larger systems incorporated landholdings of many
commoners, as well as groups of fields (ko'ele) cultivated for the chiefs
and their stewards (konohiki). The layout of irrigated fields on the lower
floodplains of Halawa Valley, Moloka'i, is shown in Figure 55.
  The concept of water control for taro cultivation was doubtless
introduced to Hawai‘i by the initial Polynesian colonizers, but it is
likely that water-control systems were limited in size and distribution
until population began expanding after about AD 1200. The earliest




            54. Irrigated taro pondfields at Nuku, Futuna Island. The field
            in centre view is partially planted; note the main irrigation
            ditch to the left of the photo.
55. Settlement pattern map of the lower floodplains of Halawa Valiev. Moloka'i Island, showing the
extensive grid of irrigated pondfields (after Kirch and Kelly 1975).
174          Process

securely dated irrigation site is that in the upper valley of Makaha, with
a radiocarbon age of 565 ±110 BP (Yen et al. 1972:89). In Halawa
Valley, Moloka'i, the stratigraphic superposition of a Type III system
over aType II system (Kirch and Kelly 1975) suggested to Riley that the
main floodplain complexes (Types III and IV) may have been constructed
later in time than those utilizing side-stream watercourses. Earle,
however, argued the reverse proposition: ‘the probable sequence
would have been first to construct systems on the alluvial floodplains
and later to use the irregular and more steeply sloping terrain found
inland’ (1978:24). Aside from the stratigraphic evidence from Halawa
(and the relatively early date for the Makaha Type III system), there is
another reason to suspect that the larger floodplain complexes were
relatively late developments. As argued in Chapter 6, much of the
valley-bottom alluvium in Hawaiian valleys may be the result of
human-induced erosion on higher slopes. Initial work by P. Beggerly
(personal communication 1980) in the Kahana Valley, O'ahu, certainlv
suggests this as does the comparison with Spriggs’s research in the New
Hebrides (1981). If so, then some alluvial floodplains may not have
become suitable environments for irrigation until relatively late in the
Hawaiian sequence.
  Recent work in the upper Anahulu Valley, O’ahu (Kirch and Sahlins,
in preparation) suggests that large pondfield complexes found on the
alluvial flats were constructed over a short period of time, in the late
prehistoric-early historic era. In fact, the upper valley may have
undergone a radical shift in settlement pattern and production system
at this time. The probable impetus for this change, and for the con¬
struction of the irrigation systems, was the conquest of the area by
Kamehameha, ruling paramount of Hawai'i, in AD 1 795, and his sub¬
sequent efforts at intensification of production. Kamehameha awarded
Anahulu to Keeaumoku, one of his warrior chiefs, and throughout the
first half of the nineteenth century the valley was subject to heavy
demands for the support of the chiefly establishment on 0‘ahu. The
Anahulu case clearly demonstrates the link between intensive pond-
field agriculture and the demands of chiefs for surplus production.
      Hawaiian and other Polynesian taro irrigation systems reflect
agricultural intensification in two ways, both in the labour require¬
ments of construction and maintenance of the hydrologic facilities, and
in the increased vields per unit of land. Annual yields of irrigated taro
range from 30 to as many as 60 metric tons per hectare, a productivity
level considerably exceeding that of even the more intensive dryfield
cultivation systems. The potential of irrigation to produce higher
yields, and thus respond to the demands of increased population, as
well as those of a political economy, is considerable, a point we shall
explore further below.
  Wittfogel (1957) originally proposed that the construction and main-
           Development and intensification of production                175


tenance of complex irrigation systems necessitated a managerial
apparatus, and thereby stimulated the development of social stratifi¬
cation in irrigation-based societies. The possibility that irrigation was so
linked to the rise of a hierarchical society in Hawai'i was addressed by
Earle (1978), who found the thesis wanting, noting that ‘centralized
management would not have been required by the scale or complexity
of the [Hawaiian] systems’ (1980:22). While Earle’s contention is sound,
there is evidence that the allocation of water was one aspect of Hawaiian
irrigation that did provide an opportunity for chiefly control.
  The Hawaiian lexeme for water is wai. Significantly, the term for
‘wealth, prosperity, ownership, or possession’ is waiwai, the reduplicated
form of wai. More important, the lexeme for ‘law’, kanawai, literally
translates ‘pertaining to water’ (Handy and           Handy (1972:57-8).
Linguistic evidence aside, there is clear evidence that allocation of
limited water resources was necessary at various periods for Hawaiian
irrigation systems. In Halawa Valley, the seven irrigation complexes
would have required about 0.07 m3/sec of water flow. During normal
periods of streamflow, such a volume poses no problem for the
capacity of Halawa Stream. However, during the dry summer months,
stream discharge may drop as low as 0.021 m3/sec, and irrigation
requirements could not be fully met. Managerial control would
obviously need to be instituted during such periods.
  Further evidence for the social and political appropriation of water
supply has been forthcoming from studies in the Anahulu Valley (Kirch
1979b; Kirch and Sahlins, in preparation). As shown in Figure 56, the
arrangement of ditches in two carefully mapped systems closely reflects
social relations. In the one case, direct access to water is provided to the
fields of three kamaaina cultivators of independent status. In the other
ditch structure reflects affinal relationships. In Hawai'i, the old adage
would seem to have been reversed, for water was as thick as blood! A
close relationship between water allocation and social structure is
evidenced for other Polynesian societies as well. In Futuna, ditch layout
is organized to assure the fields of each descent group (kainga) direct
access to the main water channel. For Rarotonga and Mangaia in the
Cook Islands, Buck observed that ‘a good deal of supervision is needed
to ensure the various families on different terraces of their share of
water, and sometimes quarrels break out’ (1944:249-50).
   Despite the relatively low level of managerial control required to
operate Hawaiian irrigation systems, chiefs had a major investment in
irrigation, upon which much of their surplus depended. Earle (1978)
argued that the intensification of irrigation in the Halele'a District of
Kaua‘i was primarilv a function of competition between chiefs. The
earlv ethnohistoric records for all the islands demonstrate the degree to
which chiefs relied upon irrigation to support their political ambitions.
The Halawa Valiev case is illustrative (Fig. 55); approximated one-third
176         Process

of the taro fields were under the control of the konohiki and chiefs.
Labour to cultivate these fields was provided by the common people on
a corvee basis. Commoners in Halawa reported that they worked
regularly on thepo'alima days (one out of every five days), during which
the koele pondfields of the chief were cultivated. Indeed, in both
Halawa and Halele'a, it is clear that ‘the right to hold land relied on an
individual’s ability to work for the konohiki’ (Earle 1978:187).

Dryfield cultivation systems

Counterposed to the intensive wet cultivation of taro and other aroids
in Polynesia is the dryland cultivation of field crops, of which yams
(.Dioscorea alata   and other species,    including D.    esculenta   and D.
pentaphylla) are the archetype. Throughout Oceania including the tropical
Polynesian islands, such dryfield cultivation in its non-intensive form
consists of the well-known ‘slash-and-burn’, ‘swidden’, or ‘shifting
cultivation’ method of agricultural production (Spencer 1966). Forest
or secondary growth is cut, dried, and fired to create a garden clearing.
Generally such a garden undergoes a succession of crops, often begin-


                KEAE-NUI            KAPUAHILUA




                                                      O intake


                                                          BIFURCATION POINT


                                                          INPUT TO FIELDS


                                                      □ FIELD COMPLEX


                                                        = OUTPUT TO STREAM
             A - Nakoana            A - Kahue
             B - Kawahaomaui        B - Konohiki
             C ■ Nalulei            C - Kamakea

             56. The allocation of water in two early historic irrigation
             svstems in the Anahulu Valiev, O'ahu Island. In the Keae-Nui
             svstem, a bv-pass ditch assures direct water feed to Nakoana’s
             brother-in-law Nalulei. At Kapuahilua, three independent
             cultivators each share direct access to the main intake ditch
             (after Kirch 1979b).
              Development and intensification of production                177


ning with mixed vam-aroid plantings, and terminating with bananas
(e.g., the‘Uvean swidden cycle, see Kirch 1978b). The plot reverts, after
three or four years, to secondary growth and a fallow period of any¬
where from three or four years up to twenty or more years. Such non-
intensive forms of dryland cultivation were, and in a few instances still
are (e.g., Futuna, Samoa), practised in tropical Polynesia. In many
island groups, however, this non-intensive mode of integral swidden
cultivation had - by the time of European contact - been transformed
to some degree of permanent, rotational cropping. Such intensified
forms of dryfield cropping reflect the demographic pressure of dense
populations     in circumscribed island ecosystems,           as well as   the
demands made on production by island polities. While the literature
on Polynesian production systems has emphasized irrigation, however,
these intensive dryfield cultivation systems have been largely overlooked.
As we shall see, they had a significance clearly equal to that of
irrigation.
  The isolated Polynesian Outlier of Anuta (Yen and Gordon 1973)
has, up until the last decade, maintained a ‘closed’, indigenous subsist¬
ence production system, providing an ethnographic example of inten¬
sive field cropping. The Anutan agricultural system (Yen 1973b)
integrates components of aroid pit cultivation, arboriculture (par¬
ticularly of breadfruit and coconut), and intensive field cropping. The
latter component is most notable for its intensity, also reflected in the
island’s population density of 432 persons/km2 (in 1971). The excep¬
tional aspect of this field cropping is the almost continuous rotation of
taro and manioc (Fig. 57) on the volcanic hill, an area ofc. 8.6 hectares.
Yen (1973b: 125) describes the crop-rotation sequence as a ‘continuous
planting cycle of taro-manioc-taro without a significant fallow period’.
(Manioc, an American cultigen of post-European introduction to the
Pacific, has replaced yams in the Anutan cropping system. Bananas are
also a minor component of the rotational system.) Yen goes on to stress
that ‘the Anutan crop rotation is one of the most intensive recorded in
Oceania, at least by this investigator. It is rivalled only by the irrigated
terracing systems for taro-growing, e.g. in East Futuna’ (1973b: 125).
Dominant agronomic features in this hilltop system are stone-faced,
slope terraces which serve both as soil retention devices and as social
plot boundaries. Yen observes that these boundaries reflect ‘the inflexi¬
bility of field placement in successive cultivation cycles conferring
definition on land parcels in terms of use rights’ (1973b: 124), not
usually typical of shifting cultivation systems. Also significant in this
rotational cropping scheme is the constant application of mulch, con¬
serving soil moisture and enriching soil nutrients.
  The intensiveness of the Anutan agricultural system is indicated not
only in the reduction of fallow and in agronomic practice (terracing and
mulching), but in labour input. Yen’s analysis suggests a rough labour
178        Process

input of 7,000 man-hours per hectare/year (1973b: 139). This compares
for example, with only 3,000 hours/hectare/year for the non-intensive
Hanunoo swidden system studied by Conklin (1957:151).
  While the Anutan example is perhaps the only surviving ethnographic
instance of intensive drvfield cultivation in Polynesia, recent archae¬
ological work has revealed that similar systems were formerly operative
in various island groups. In New Zealand, work by H. Leach (1979),
Sullivan (1972,       1981),   Lawlor (1980,      1981a,   b)   and   others   has
documented a range of intensive walled-garden complexes throughout
various   parts     of North     Island.   These field-cropping complexes
focussed on the cultivation of sweet potato. Lawlor’s (1980, 1981a)
intensive archaeological investigation of a portion of the prehistoric
field systems at Puhinui (Site N42/17, Ovster Point, South Auckland)
demonstrated remarkably parallel trends in the adaptation of Ipomoea
field cropping in New Zealand and Hawai'i (see below7). In both cases,
old lava substrates were utilized; the principal difference lies in the
harsher climatic regime of the Auckland area, which set more severe
constraints on the possible range of crops, and necessitated a change
from perennial to annual cropping (cf. Yen 1961, 1974a). At Puhinui,
which radiocarbon dates have show n to be intensively cultivated in the
sixteenth century AD (Lawlor 1981b),                the dominant agronomic
features are linear ‘stone row's’, and stone mounds and heaps, wdth




                  57. Intensive drvfield cultivation of taro iColocasia esculenta) on
                  the volcanic hill of Anuta Island. Note the heaw mulch visible
                  between plants in the foreground.
           Development and intensification of production                179


deeper garden soils filling depressions at the junction between
scoriaceous and pahoehoe lava flows.
  In West Polynesia, Kirch (1975) observed that parts of Aloft Island in
the Horne group are characterized by abandoned dryland held sys¬
tems. These are marked by field borders constructed of limestone
cobbles, and presumably indicate former intensive cropping of yams
and associated field crops.
  On Easter Island, large tracts were intensively cultivated, with an
emphasis on the sweet potato. Metraux (1940:151-2) refers to the heavy
use of grass mulch, as in Anuta and Hawaifi. Unfortunately, the Easter
Island dryland fields were not permanently delineated with stone rows
or borders, and so have left no archaeological trace. Another form of
intensive horticultural feature, the walled-garden plot or manavai, is
however, very much in evidence throughout the island (McCoy
1976).


Other aspects of production

In virtually all Polynesian societies, food was classified as starch staples
on the one hand, and certain socially or ritually valued foods on the
other. These latter include special puddings, and especially, the flesh of
either wild or domestic animals. Animal husbandry was an integral and
culturally valued component of the indigenous production systems of
every island group; not surprisingly, many of the intensive irrigation
and dryland field systems described above also supported large num¬
bers of domestic pigs, dogs, and fowl. In Hawaifi, the association of pig
husbandry with dryland field systems is clear, and the journals of Cook
and other early European visitors contain frequent references to the
ability of the Hawaiians to supply large quantities of hogs.
   Easter Island provides an instance of the intensive production of fowl
(pigs and dogs were unknown on the island, apparently not surviving
the initial voyage of colonization). Metraux (1940:19) remarked on the
significance of chickens in Easter Island social and economic life: ‘chickens
were the usual gifts to people who must be honored; they were raised
for feasts and appear as a favorite motif in art. The feathers were used in
making circlets, eyeshades, and hats.’ Fowl were husbanded in unique
 stone houses (hare moa) with interior passageways, the primary function
 of which was thwarting theft (McCoy 1976:23-6, 87). McCoy regards
 thievery of fowl as the result of rather severe population and environ¬
 mental problems that beset Easter Island in the late prehistoric and
 protohistoric periods. ‘The adjustment made by the society was con¬
 tainment of chickens, implying also, intensification of production. The
 hare moa ... are speculated to have been an adaptive response to a
 major change in cultural values imposed earlier by population pres¬
 sure’ (1976:1 46).
180        Process

  Reefs, lagoons, and open pelagic waters were the other great source
of flesh food throughout Polynesia. Generally, fishing remained at the
level of exploitation of natural populations, but in Hawai‘i a significant-
technological advancement was made in aquacultural production. This
was facilitated by the development of fishponds of several types, for the
capture and husbanding of brackish water fish, notably mullet (Mugil
cephalus) and milkfish (Chanos chanos). Such a pond, with its massive
stone enclosing wall constructed on a broad reef flat, is shown in Figure
58. The archaeological remains of at least 449 ponds have been recorded
on all of the major islands (Stokes 1909b; Summers 1964; Kikuchi
1976).
  Kikuchi (1976) stressed the close relationship between Hawaiian fish¬
ponds and the level of socio-political complexity. Not only did ponds
require large, organized labour forces for their construction, but
traditional dates for pond construction suggest that most ponds were
built after the fourteenth century AD, when the Hawaiian chiefdoms
were undergoing rapid political changes (see Chapter 10). ‘Fishponds
became symbols of the chiefly right to conspicuous consumption and
to ownership of the land and its resources. They were manifestations of
the chief’s political power and his ability to control and tap his resources’
(1976:299). Most ponds were under the direct control of konohiki, land
overseers of the chiefs, and their production went directly to feed the
retinue of the chiefly households. Kikuchi (1976:298) estimated the
annual yield of all fishponds in Hawai'i at contact as about 1,052 metric




            58. A loko kuapa tvpe fishpond constructed on the southern reef
            flat of Moloka'i Island [photo courtesy M. Weisler, Bishop Museum).
           Development and intensification of production              181


tons of fish. As status food, used primarily for the support of the chiefly
bureaucracy, such a volume of fish production was a significant
technological achievement of the late prehistoric Hawaiian chiefdoms.
  Yet another significant component of Polynesian production systems
was the storage of starch foods, especially the ensilage of breadfruit
(mast), discussed at length in Chapter 6. Here we need only reiterate the
importance of storage technology in allowing the accumulation of
foodstuffs. While such surpluses were often directly converted to sub¬
sistence needs following natural disasters, they were also frequently put
to political ends. As with Hawaiian fishponds, the storage facilities pro¬
vided a means for the support and aggrandizement of chiefly
establishments.
  Throughout the preceding discussion, I have stressed the agricultural
and subsistence aspects of production, in part because the archaeological
evidence of agricultural intensification is abundant. This emphasis
should not, however, be construed as denigrating the significance of
non-subsistence aspects of production, especially in the more stratified
chiefdoms. Indeed, degree of craft specialization was closely correlated
with the level of socio-political complexity (Sahlins 1958), a reflection of
the ability of chiefs to channel surplus food production toward the sup¬
port of specialists. In Tonga, such skills as tattooing, stonemasonry (for
the construction of chiefly tombs), canoe building, and navigation were
the privileged domains of hereditary groups, themselves under the
aegis of ruling paramounts. A similar situation obtained in Hawai i,
 noted among students of Polynesian art for its range of material
 insignia produced for the chiefly class — feather cloaks and helmets,
 beautifully carved bowls and other implements, and so on (Buck 1957).
 Limitations of space do not allow me to pursue an in-depth analysis of
 status goods in Polynesian societies, but for present purposes it is suf¬
 ficient to note that the relative importance of such goods in any chief-
 dom can be positively correlated with the degree of development and
 intensification of the productive forces, and their control by the
 chiefs.


 Intensification in West Hawaifi: a case study

 The best-known and well-studied dryland field systems of Polynesia are
 situated on the leeward, western side of Hawaifi Island. Within this
 region of relatively undissected flow slopes and lack of streams were
 three extensive zones of dryland cultivation (North Kohala, Lalamilo—
 Waimea, and Kona), corresponding to three areas where soil develop¬
 ment and rainfall were adequate for cropping of taro, sweet potato,
 yams, sugar cane and other cultigens (Fig. 59). The region attracts
 anthropological interest for yet another reason: it was the hearth of the
 most powerful Hawaiian chieftainship, the line of chiefs descended
182         Process

from ‘Umi and Liloa (Kamakau 1961), among whom the famous
Kamehameha was but one descendant. Given that West Hawrai‘i was the
setting for some of the most intensive socio-political development in
Polynesia, the productive basis of these chiefdoms may repay detailed
examination.
  The earliest European explorers to Hawai‘i Island, beginning with
Cook’s 17 78-9 expedition, described agricultural field systems in
operation, displaying admiration for the intensity of cultivation. Typical
of such statements is Archibald Menzies’s (botanist with Vancouver in
1793) concerning the Kona field system:

we soon lost sight of the vessels, and entered their breadfruit plantations . . .
The space between these trees did not lav idle. It was chieflv planted with sweet
potatoes and rows of cloth plant. As we advanced bevond the breadfruit plan¬
tations, the country became more and more fertile, being in a high state of
cultivation. For several miles around us there was not a spot that would admit of
it but what was with great labor and industry cleared of the loose stones and
planted with esculent roots or some useful vegetable or other. In clearing the
ground, the stones are heaped up in ridges between the little fields and planted
on each side, either with a row of sugar cane or the sweet root of these islands
| Cordyline fruticosa].
  The produce of these plantations, besides the above mentioned, are the cloth
plant, taro, and sweet potatoes (1920:75).

  The Kohala field system covers a leeward slope between about 150
and 760 m elevation, writh a total land area of perhaps 57 km2 (Fig. 59).
Menzies viewed this region from the sea, and noted that

it bears every appearance of industrious cultivation bv the number of small
fields into which it is laid out, and if we might judge bv the vast number of
houses we saw along the shore, it is bv far the most populous part we had vet
seen of the island (1920:52).

The entire Kohala field system has yet to be defined archaeologically,
but a segment, the ahupuaa of Lapakahi, was archaeologically inves¬
tigated from 1968-70 (Newman n.d.; R. Pearson 1968; Tuggle and
Griffin 1973), with an emphasis on the prehistoric agricultural system
(Rosendahl 1972a; Choy 1973; Sugiyama 1973; Smith and Schilt 1973;
Umebavashi 1973; and Rosendahl and Yen 1971).
  The prehistoric agricultural zone at Lapakahi is dominated by low,
stone and/or earthen field borders which lie perpendicular to the gentle,
undissected flow slopes. Abutting these field borders are long trails,
defined by parallel stone alignments (c. 1-2 m apart), which run from
the coast to the top of the agricultural zone. These trails facilitated com¬
munication between coast and uplands, and served as boundaries
between continuous socio-political units such as the ahupuaa and ‘Hi
(Cordv and Kaschko 1980). As seen in Figure 60, the field borders and
trails break up the agricultural landscape into a regular grid, with
individual field units of rectangular shape.
59. The West Hawai‘i region. A. Distribution of arable soils. B. Annual rainfall in inches. C. Known
extent of prehistoric field systems (north to south: Kohala field system, Lalamilo field system, Kona field
system). The question mark indicates the probable presence of an as yet unsurveyed field system.
184        Process

  Within this grid of field borders and trails are a plethora of minor
features, both agricultural and residential (and, in some cases, religious
or ceremonial). These include stone mounds, low stone alignments,
agricultural windbreaks,    planting circles,   small clearings,   simple
terraces, and animal enclosures or pens, as well as such residential
features as C- and L-shaped structures and platforms. Rosendahl’s
excavation (1972a) of nine residential sites yielded significant data on
the age and operation of the system, especially the integration of the
upland fields into the larger production system, including marine
exploitation. The residential sites produced direct evidence of crop
plants, including carbonized tubers of Ipomoea batatas (Rosendahl and
Yen 1971), Dioscorea tubers, Cocos, and Lagenaria. The high frequency of
pig, dog, and chicken bone in the faunal components suggested to
Rosendahl that ‘animal husbandry was an important component of the
Lapakahi horticultural complex (1972a:454).
  Rosendahl characterized the Lapakahi and general North Kohala
field complex as a‘modified integral swidden system’ (1972a:502). ‘The
principal cropping scheme involved a system of shifting, slash and
burn cultivation’ (1972a:504), ‘of sweet potato and dryland taro on an
intensive field scale utilizing permanent field units’ (1972a:511). The
system thus derives from the extensive shifting cultivation characteristic
of Malayo-Oceanic agriculture (Spencer 1966; Barrau 1961), but has
been intensified in the direction of permanent cropping units. Such
intensification evidently included a reduction of fallow length (although
not necessarily to the level of permanent crop rotation), and the
application of labour-intensive practices (such as the mulching men¬
tioned in Menzies’s account of Kona), which offset the potentially
deleterious effects of fallow reduction on soil fertility (cf. Nve and
Greenland 1960). Yen (1974a:311-17) similarly portrayed the Lapakahi
system as ‘derivative from a valley cropping pattern, in its extension of
the nonirrigated, swidden portion into dry-land areas’ (1974a:314). Yen
stressed the role of the sweet potato, with its adaptable ecological tem¬
plate, in the intensification of the Kohala system: ‘The impact of the
sweet potato on agriculture was in the phase of dry-land development,
and, in the new environment, was able to show its superiority, in re¬
spect to food-yield in its short-term attainment, and in its propensities
for pig production’ (1974a:315).
  Since Lapakahi reflects the intensification - over some period of time
- of an integral     shifting cultivation regime,   there ought to be
archaeological manifestations of the temporal, as well as spatial, axes of
this process. On the basis of fifty-four age determinations, Rosendahl
(1972a) showed that the field complex developed over a period of about
350 years (AD 1450-1800) followed by decline and eventual abandon¬
ment in the early historic period. Some reflection of the increasing per¬
manency of use is contained in the residential site data: ‘the dominant
           Development and intensification of production                185

occupation pattern throughout the prehistoric period was one of shifting
residence, involving the recurrent extended occupation of residential
features, while the pattern of permanent residential occupation seemed
to be a late development, possibly becoming dominant only during the
historic period’ (1972a:482).
  An analysis of the pattern of field units provides striking evidence for
continued intensification of the system overtime. Rosendahl(1972a:510)
observed that ‘various examples of field border embankments were
constructed before the defined trails’, and that ‘matching and mis¬
matching patterns of trail and field border interactions’ could define a
general sequence of field unit construction (though he neglected to
follow through with the requisite analysis). In Figure 60, utilizing
Rosendahl’s detailed map data, I have separated out three phases of
field-unit border and trail construction for a portion of the Lapakahi
system. Two parallel trends are evident: (1) the breakup of originally
intensive field units into successively smaller parcels; and (2) the division
of one trail-defined unit into two, and later three, sub-units. This sub
division carries certain socio-political implications, since trail-defined
186         Process

units were of sociological significance (Cordy and Kaschko 1980). That
the intensification of the Lapakahi agricultural system was linked to
socio-political changes is a point of inference to which we shall
return shortly.
  A second major agricultural field complex lay in the area of
Lalamilo-Waimea, on the saddle between the Kohala Mountains and
Mauna Kea, at between 750 and 900 m elevation (Fig. 59). Intensive
archaeological study of the Lalamilo-Waimea system began only
recently (Clark and Kirch 1983; J. Clark 1981), and modern land-use
changes in Waimea have obliterated some fields, so that only dis¬
connected portions remain for archaeological study. Some 120 hec¬
tares of the largest intact field complex, between 693 and 753 m ele¬
vation, were mapped photogrammetrically with the use of low-level
false-colour infra-red photography (J. Clark, 1981). Here, the dominant
agricultural features are rectangular fields, either slope-terraces, or
fields bordered by soil-and-rock ridges,        as at Lapakahi.    Unlike
Lapakahi, however, these fields do not form a continuous grid, but are
grouped in swales with deeper soil development. The Lalamilo field
complex contrasts with      Lapakahi    in another significant respect:
throughout the area is a reticulated network of irrigation ditches, feeding
off the Waikoloa and Kahakohau Streams. These ditches differ from
the typical valley irrigation channels discussed earlier, both in the num¬
ber of bifurcations, and in the degree of inter-connectivity. Further¬
more, the field plots do not appear to have been pondfields, since their
surfaces are sloping. Rather, the Lalamilo system represents a type of
intermittent irrigation, not previously reported for Hawai'i. It rep¬
resents the extension and modification of valley-bottom techniques of
water control to a leeward slope environment. An initial series of
radiocarbon age determinations suggests that the system is comparable
in age with Lapakahi.
  The third major system is at Kona, as described by Menzies (above).
Soehren and Newman (1968) used aerial photos to map an area of c.
140 hectares situated on the gentle slope above Kealakekua Bay, and
provided the first archaeological definition of the Kona field svstem.
Long stone-wall segments (kuaiwi) there are oriented with the gentle
slope and not perpendicular to it as in Kohala and Lalamilo. The
cleared strips between these walls (10-15 metres wide) are ‘periodically
cross-sectioned by short field walls connecting two or more major field
boundaries’ (Soehren and Newman 1968:5). The general pattern is one
of‘very narrow and greatly elongated rectangles oriented on an axis
that is both northeast-southwest and sea-mountain’ (1968:5). Soehren
and Newman note that there is no evidence for irrigation of these fields,
the crops evidently depending upon rainfall.
  Unique to the Kona field system was an extensive belt dominated by
breadfruit trees, referred to in the native land claim records of the mid
             Development and intensification of production                 187

nineteenth century as the kaluulu or maloko ulu zone (Barrere and Kelly
1980:36).    This arboricultural component,          absent at     Kohala and
Lalamilo, correlates with higher annual rainfall in the Kona area, meeting
the basic ecological requirements for Artocarpus (rainfall c. 1,320-2,500
mm; Purseglove 1968:380). Above the breadfruit zone were kula lands,
dominated by the field cultivation of taro and sweet potato.
  Schilt (1980b; personal communication) recently completed survey
and excavations at the northern margin of the Kona field system, where
t\\e kuaiwi walls are infrequent and discontinuous, and irregular garden
plots’ dominate the agricultural pattern. Crozier (1971) had earlier
investigated a small section of the field system in the land division of
Kahalu'u (elevation c. 170 metres) where several residential features
(platforms and terraces) were integrated with the agricultural field bor¬
ders. Age determinations for these sites indicate utilization of the area
by c. AD 1350, with intensive use in the sixteenth to seventeenth
centuries.
  Within th eahupua'a of Kealakekua, at an elevation of about 450 metres,
a relatively undisturbed parcel with seven parallel kuaiwi walls and
several     habitation   features   has   been   studied     intensively (Kirch,
unpublished field notes, 1978-82, Bishop Museum). Aside from the
obvious function of the kuaiwi walls (1) for clearing stone from the ad¬
jacent plots, and (2) for demarcation of fields for sociological purposes,
these walls may have served a planting function, especially for Cordyline
 or other perennial species. Feral Cordyline still grows abundantly along
 the kuaiwi walls. Age determinations from residential features at
 Kealakekua indicate use of this part of the Kona field system from about
 AD 1650 to 1725.
  The three field systems described above coincide geographically with
 the areas of West Hawai'i where rainfall and soil development permit
 the cultivation of Oceanic cultigens (Fig. 59). Thus, by late prehistoric
 times, all primary arable land below about 800 metres had been con¬
 verted to agricultural production, and there is evidence of limited
 attempts to extend cultivation even into extremely marginal zones out¬
 side the extensive held systems. Rosendahl (1972b) studied two small
 sites (Complexes A and C) in lower Lalamilo and Waikoloa ahupua a,
 both about 60 metres above sea level and receiving, on the average, less
 than 250 mm rainfall annually. Both sites consist of temporary,
 residential features adjacent to small alluvial basins, the soils of which
 could be cultivated if there were sufficient water, perhaps during the
 October—March season when more than 75 per cent of the precipi¬
 tation occurs. At Complex A, the slopes surrounding the basin had
 been burned, perhaps intentionally, to facilitate the erosion of soil and
 deposition in the alluvial basin, as revealed in a section through the
 basin fill. At Complex C, a substantial wall was constructed across an
 intermittent drainage channel to divert runoff onto an ad jacent allu\ ial
188        Process

basin; otherwise, there is little structural evidence for cultivation. These
complexes represent temporary ‘flood-water farming, or drvland-
irrigation horticulture dependent on intermittent seasonal Hows of sur¬
face water and on the extensive subsurface retention of soil water5
(Rosendahl 1972b:88).
  Such marginal sites would probably not fall within the usual definition
of intensive agriculture, with its connotation of permanence. Yet, when
considered as part of the whole agricultural landscape of West Hawai'i,
these temporary, marginal sites reveal that agricultural intensification
here involves not only development of ecologically favourable areas,
but attempts at expansion to marginal limits. In extreme cases, these
limits obviously lay beyond the ecological templates of even the most
adaptable of the oceanic cultigens.
  Another instance of attempts at expansion into marginal lands is pro¬
vided by Reeve (1983) in his study of agricultural and residential fea¬
tures on the periphery of the Lalamilo-Waimea field system. In this
case, Reeve argues that the attempt at marginal expansion outside of
the zone of optimal rainfall and soil development (and requiring the
construction of an intermittent irrigation channel several kilometres
long) was undertaken between AD 1790 and 1794, as a direct response
to local political events. During this period, Kamehameha established
his base at Kawaihae on the coast, constructed the massive Pu'ukohola
temple site, and maintained a sizeable standing army in preparation for
the conquest of the westerly islands. Reeve believes that the marginal
expansion of agriculture was undertaken by the Waimea chiefs, ‘faced
with this sudden demand for agricultural goods’ precipitated by the
military actions of the paramount (1983:236).
  The evidence from the Hawai'i Island field systems suggest some
general propositions regarding the temporal and spatial axes of
agricultural intensification in the region:
  1. Dating of agricultural fields, and of associated residential sites,
indicates that the inland field systems were begun about AD 1300, even
though coastal settlement in West Hawai'i dates to as early as AD 900.
Most dates fall into the period c. AD 1600-1800, indicating that these
two centuries witnessed the most intensive development of the field
systems. This time period closely matches the region’s period of peak
population growth (see Chapter 5). However, population growth may
not have been uniform with regard to local environment. A lag between
inland and coastal site populations correlates closely with ‘inland
expansion’ (Hommon 1976) and with the development and intensifi¬
cation of the large agricultural field systems.       Despite this close
temporal correspondence between agricultural intensification and
increasing population, we need not assign the latter the status of an
independent variable. For one thing, it is likely that population growth
in the area had reached a plateau, or was actually even on the decline,
prior to European contact.
           Development and intensification of production              189


  2. The development of these dryland field systems involved fairly
rapid lateral expansion, as well as intensification (cf. Hammond 1977,
1978). By the late 1600s, lateral expansion appears to have reached its
limits, with nearly all suitable land having been brought under culti¬
vation. Even the marginal alluvial basins at Waikoloa, described above,
were in use by the mid-to-late 1600s (Rosendahl 1972b: 100). Tuggle
and Tomonari-Tuggle, reporting on their studies of late prehistoric
agricultural systems in the windward valleys of Kohala, state a similar
finding: ‘The extent and intensity of the complexes in Kohala lead to
the conclusion that agricultural growth had reached its limits in the
Kohala-Hamakua region, under the constraints of a simple irrigation
technology and probably a comparable level of dry-field technology’
(1980:31 1).
  3. The overall trend in intensification of all three systems was from an
extensive form of shifting cultivation to an increasingly formalized sys¬
tem of permanently defined fields. This intensification comprised
several parallel processes: (a) A reduction in fallow length probably
took place as the fields became more formalized. Whether or not fallow
was eliminated altogether is debatable, though Menzies (1920:76)
remarked that fields were replanted immediately after harvesting,
(b) An increase in labour input per unit area is also likely, associated
with the increased use of various agronomic techniques such as mulching,
terrace and mound construction, and so on, requiring increased
labour. Both(a) and(b) are aspects of what Hammond (1977, 1978) has
referred to as temporal intensification, (c) The construction of perma¬
nent facilities is abundantly evidenced in the archaeological remains.
These facilities include the permanent field borders, stone mounds,
kuaiwi, dry terraces, and - at Lalamilo - the irrigation networks. Such
facilities reflect both agronomic practice, and attempts at social
delineation of plots as the systems became increasingly permanent and
formalized, (d) A further direction of intensification is suggested for the
Kona field system, where a permanent zone of breadfruit was
developed. Arboricultural intensification was limited to Kona because
the lower rainfall at Lalamilo and Kohala was below the ecological
tolerance of the tree, (e) Concomitant with the intensification of the
agricultural production systems was the development of animal hus¬
bandry, especially of pigs.
  The emphasis on dryland cultivation in Hawai'i Island (and in Maui
Island) was accompanied by a concomitant demand for intensive
labour, and provides a significant contrast to the agricultural systems of
the westerly islands (Kauafi, 0‘ahu, Moloka'i), where taro irrigation
 dominated. Kamakau noted that whereas women never performed
 agricultural labour in the westerly islands, ‘on Maui and Hawaii the
women worked outside as hard as the men . . . tilling the ground’
 (1961:239). This inter-island difference in the role of women in agri¬
 culture corresponds well with the dominance of taro irrigation in
190        Process

Kaua‘i, Olahu, and Moloka'i, and of dryland cultivation in Maui and
Hawai‘i. The major difference in labour requirements between the two
sorts of agricultural system is the much greater need for intensive weeding
and mulching in the dryland systems, work that presumably was per¬
formed largely by women, as is the case in many other parts of
Polynesia (e.g., Anuta, Yen 1973b). Outside of Polynesia, the ab¬
sorption by women of additional labour costs incurred during
agricultural intensification has been noted by Spriggs (1981:32-3, 63,
66, 179) for late prehistoric Aneityum in the New Hebrides.
  4. Finally, the expansion and intensification of these field systems
had permanent effects upon the local ecosystem. For Kohala and
Lalamilo, the evidence of sub-fossil land snail assemblages and of rem¬
nant vegetation indicate widespread clearance of an original mesic
forest/parkland and creation of terminal grasslands over much of the
area (Clark and Kirch 1983). The consequences for microclimate,
runoff, erosion, and so forth are as yet unspecified, and remain import¬
ant questions to be resolved in further investigations.
  It is now possible to relate the process of agricultural intensification
in West Hawai‘i to the production function model presented earlier in
the chapter. Figure 61 diagrams the West Hawai'i case in general terms,
with T, representing the ancestral, integral swidden mode of cropping,
and T2 the developed, permanent-field, rotational-cropping system
witnessed at contact. (The model simplifies the situation, since the
change from 7) to T, was clearly aprocess requiring several centuries, and
not a sudden, qualitative shift.) Intensification permitted the pro¬
duction systems to meet continued demands both for increased
necessary consumption at the household level (occasioned by increasing
population in the region), and for surplus. All of the data reviewed




            61. Diagram representing the effect of agricultural intensifi¬
            cation on the production function for the Lapakahi production
            svstem. 7) represents the initial system of shifting cultivation,
            T, the intensified svstem of drvfleld cultivation with permanent
            plot boundaries and labour-intensive agronomic methods.
           Development and intensification of production              191


above, however, suggest that by the time of European contact, the sys¬
tems had not only reached limits to lateral expansion, but probably
limits to intensification as well.
   The extent of chiefly demands for surplus is indicated by a consider¬
ation of Hawaiian ritual. Competition, including warfare, was not
engaged in without a heavy investment in ritual activity, which itself
translated into real demands on production. The pressure point of
these demands for ritual prestation may have been the husbandry of
pigs, for these were the necessary sacrificial accompaniments to suc¬
cessful supernatural support. Malo (1951:172) records that the conse¬
cration of a luakini type temple (dedicated to the war god, Ku) required
as many as 800 hogs. One part of the elaborate ritual is described as
follows: ‘When the chiefs and the people had finished feasting on the
pork, the king made an offering to his gods of 400 pigs, 400 bushels of
bananas, 400 cocoanuts, 400 red fish, and 400 pieces of oloa cloth’
(1951:174). These figures are probably not exaggerations, for the
capacity of the West Hawai‘i agricultural systems to produce swine was
remarked upon by all the early explorers, who frequently re-supplied
their stores with salt pork. Excavations by Ladd at the large temple of
Pu‘ukohola in Kohala district have yielded the faunal evidence of
numerous pig sacrifices (A. Ziegler, personal communication, 1981).
   It seems, therefore, that West Hawai‘i was somewhere in the Region
II—III area referred to earlier (Fig. 49), in which surplus was diminishing
relative to yield (dS/dT < 0), or, at least, the system was rapidly
approaching this condition. Since the late prehistoric Hawaiian polity
was among the most demanding of all Polynesian societies, what really
counted was the demand for surplus to be appropriated by the
chiefship (Sc). West Hawai‘i may have approached the state where such
demand exceeded the ability of the production base to supply it(dSc/dt
> 0 > dS/dt). As Friedman points out, ‘this is an unbearable political
situauon. While before, the chief was accumulating an increasing portion
of an increasing surplus, he is now accumulating an increasing portion
of a decreasing surplus’ (1979:170). This situation would explain two
aspects of late prehistoric Hawaiian society: (1) the drive toward expan-
 sionistic warfare and conquest of adjacent political (and economic)
 territories; and (2) the cycle of expansion, rebellion, and contraction of
 chiefdoms that characterized Hawaiian political history (see Chapter 10).
   Ethnohistoric and traditional accounts of Hawaiian political history
 leave no doubt that competition between various lines of ruling chiefs
 was a hallmark of late prehistoric Hawaiian society. The pattern is a
 cyclical one, of expansion of one chieflv line, either by peaceful means
 or by conquest, over neighbouring domains: a ‘tendency, on which
 traditions discourse at length, for chiefly domains to enlarge and con¬
 tract, extended once by conquest only to be repartitioned again by
 rebellion’ (Sahlins 1972:144). The incessant demand for surplus pro-
192        Process

duction led chiefs to undertake the conquest of adjacent territories;
ultimately, however, when the burden on the common people became
too great, the opportunity for a junior line to usurp the paramountship
- with the support of the people - was seized, and demand lessened, at
least for a time. As Malo put it: ‘Many kings have been put to death by
the people because of their oppression of the makaamana' (1951:195).
  This intensity of chiefly competition has obvious and significant
implications for agricultural expansion and intensification. As Hommon
(1976:281) states, ‘the prestige and power of the administrators of a
Hawaiian primitive state were funded by a portion of the goods and ser¬
vices produced by the commoners ... of the realm’. The ability to
engage in conquest and other political enterprises was in large measure
dependent upon the productive capacity of the economic infra¬
structure. Earle (1978) has argued that Hawaiian agricultural inten¬
sification ‘was therefore an outcome of political competition, and not of
population pressure’ (1978:183). In West Hawai‘i, although Earle’s
negative view of the role of demographic change may be overstated,
there is no doubt that political competition was a significant driving
force behind the expansion and intensification of the indigenous field
systems. In fact, the traditions suggest that competition may have been
even more intense in the more marginal, leeward regions such as West
Hawai‘i than in the windward valleys studied by Earle (Kirch 1980a).
Sahlins has noted the same point: ‘Competition probably accounts for
a remarkable tendency to invert by culture the ecology of nature: many
of the poorer regions of Polynesian high islands wTere more intensively
exploited’ (1972:141).
  Sahlins (1972:140) rightly observed that ‘the development of rank
and chieftainship becomes, pari passu, development of the productive
forces’. The case of West Hawai‘i bears this out amply. Yet, there were
limits beyond which the economic infrastructure could not be pushed
- limits set by the natural environment itself. Archaeological and
traditional evidence hint that such limits may have been approached by
the mid 1600s. ‘If Hawaiian society discovered limits to its ability to
augment production and polity, this threshold which it had reached
but could not cross was the boundary of primitive society itself’
(Sahlins 1972:148). It may also have been a boundary of a more fun¬
damental sort: a developmental endpoint of Oceanic agriculture.


Overview

The Polynesian islands present the prehistorian with an excellent
opportunity to observe the conversion of natural ecosystems, from
which humans were formerly absent, to managed environments, a
regression of the biological process of succession. This conversion of
 nature into culture took a variety of divergent pathways in different
           Development and intensification of production              193


islands, due to the processes we have isolated: the reassortment of pro¬
duction systems upon transfer from one homeland to a new island, and
adaptation to local constraints. Despite such island-to-island variation,
however, the evolution of Polynesian production systems can be
readily divided into two phases.
  The first phase is best characterized as one of adaptation, whether
occasioned by the failure of particular cultigens or animals to survive
overseas transport, or by new and harsh conditions of local climate,
topography, soils, reefs, or water sources. In all those islands for which
we now possess good archaeological data pertaining to the colonization
phase, a heavy exploitation of naturally abundant wild resources
helped to assure the survival of the human propagule through what
may have been a difficult period of adjusting agronomic practice to
local circumstance.
  The later emphases and particular characteristics of local production
systems were basically formulated and established during this adap-
tational phase. Once established, developmental pathways gradually
entered the second phase, that of expansion and intensification. The par¬
ticular form of intensive production developed in any local system
reflects to a large degree the result of initial adaptation: whether of
arboriculture as in the Marquesas, irrigation as in parts of Hawai'i and
Futuna, or dryfield cultivation as in West Hawai'i and the Auckland
region of New Zealand. The process of intensification itself, however,
must be understood in terms of wider demographic, social, and political
changes in each island situation.
  That population growth was a spur to the intensification of pro¬
duction in all Polynesian islands would seem hardly to require lengthy
argument. The correspondence between population increase and the
expansion and intensification of leeward dryfield systems in West
Hawai‘i provides empirical documentation of the relationship between
human numbers and caloric needs, and Hawai'i may be regarded as
typical in this regard. The issue, therefore, is not whether population
increase or pressure was a factor in the intensification of island pro¬
duction systems, but rather, whether such demographic pressure was
the only significant force leading to the expansion and intensification of
production. Again, the Hawaiian data indicate that the development of
production in Polynesian societies was far more complex than a simple
intensification of agriculture and fishing to meet increased caloric
demands. Aside from necessary consumption, the hierarchical struc¬
ture of Polynesian societies encouraged the production of a surplus, to
support the broader political demands of the chiefs. More importantly,
these complex interrelations between demographic pressure, level of
production, and demands of the political economy were never static.
The intensification process is one in which the variables constantly
 change their values. It was not only population growth that necessitated
194         Process

increased levels of production over time, for the same can be said of the
demands of increasingly political societies. Sahlins remarked that ‘as
the [kinship] structure is politicized, especially as it is centralized in ruling
chiefs, the household economy is mobilized in a larger social cause’
(1972:130). Yet, the production system itself was not without its own
effects, both on population and on the social relations of production. If
intensification meant the construction of a floodplain irrigation system,
the allocation of scarce water resources, the filling of communal bread¬
fruit pits, or the fabrication of village seine nets, the social and political
apparatus for production was itself affected. Starting at an arbitrarily
defined point, the political economy makes demands on production,
only to have intensified production provide further opportunities for
the dominant political group, whether over the control of irrigation
water, the timing of agricultural rituals, the distribution of scarce
resources, or whatever.
   In this manner, Polynesian production systems might appear to have
been capable of an endless progression towards increased intensity,
subject only to the limitations of technology. But the limits to growth in
ancient Polynesia were in fact more immediate, and lay in the cir¬
cumscribed nature of islands, and especially, in the finite quantity of
arable land (and of exploitable reefs and lagoons). To be sure, some sys¬
tems- in particular, those based upon dryfield cultivation - were prone
to a more rapid achievement of limit than others (based on water con¬
trol), and to a greater potential for environmental degradation. In time,
however, the finite nature of islands posed limits to every sort of pro¬
duction system. Thus, we are brought to a consideration of one
additional and highly intrinsic aspect of Polynesian societies: com¬
petition.
