             4
             Dispersal, colonization,
             and adaptation
The westerly archipelagos of Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa- wherein Ances¬
tral Polynesian Society developed from its Lapita ancestor - are but the
threshold of greater Polynesia. In the mid first millennium BC, the
Pacific waters rolling eastward from the ancestral homeland were a
trackless unknown, as intergalactic space is to twentieth-century man.
Having broken away from the inter-visible island arcs of Melanesia,
and with continued improvements in canoe design and navigational
skill, Ancestral Polynesians took the great voyaging leap eastwards (as
well as northwards and southwards) into oceanic space, accomplishing
the greatest purposeful dispersal in human history. Between some time
in the late first millennium BC and the end of the first millennium AD,
the most remote and lonely islands in the world, Easter Island and
Hawai‘i, along with several hundred others, were discovered and
colonized.
  In the previous chapter I reviewed linguistic, ethnobotanical, and
archaeological evidence for the origins and development of Polynesian
culture, and attempted a reconstruction of the broad outlines of Ances¬
tral Polynesian Society. In the evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms,
the first steps toward differentiation from this ancestral society were
those that accompanied dispersal: the inevitable reassortment of
technology and society (‘the founder effect’) and the constraints of pre¬
viously unencountered environments. In the present chapter, we shall
look closely at the processes of adaptation that accompanied dispersal
and colonization, processes that influenced the subsequent courses of
evolution in particular archipelagos.


The Polynesian dispersal

The broad time-and-space framework for the dispersal of Polynesian
peoples out of the Fiji-West Polynesian hearth is reasonably well

             71
72         Process

established thanks to three decades of stratigraphic excavations.
Nevertheless, some enigmas remain, and one of these concerns the
initial eastward movement out of the western homeland. To date, the
earliest known archaeological assemblages in East Polynesia are the
sand dune occupation sites of Ha'atuatua on Nukuhiva, and Hane on
Uahuka of the Marquesas Islands (Table 7). Both sites have yielded
large artifact arrays, including a few Polynesian Plain Ware sherds, the
only ceramics so far reported outside of West Polynesia. Some of these
sherds may be from locally manufactured pots, but others derive from
the Rewa Delta area of Viti Levu, Fiji (Dickinson and Shutler 1974). Also
present at Ha‘atuatua and Hane are adz forms characteristic of Poly¬
nesian Plain Ware contexts in Samoa and Tonga (e.g., Type V plano¬
convex sectioned adzes [Green and Davidson 1969b]), and other items
that relate the early Marquesan sites with the terminal period of pottery
manufacture in West Polynesia (Fig.           17).   On the basis of these




           17. Early East Polynesian artifacts from the Marquesas Islands:
           a, shell chisel; b, bone reel ornament; c, pearl-shell ornament;
           d, three sea-urchin spine abraders; e,f, abraders of Pontes coral;
           g, vegetable peeler of Tonna shell; h, stone plummet sinker;
           i, pearl-shell trolling lure; j,k, one-piece fishhooks of pearl-shell
           (after Suggs 1961).
               Dispersal, colonization and adaptation                               73

materials, Y.      Sinoto (1970,           1979a) proposed that the Marquesas
archipelago was the first to be settled from the west, and subsequently
served as the primary dispersal centre for East Polynesia.
    The dating of the early Marquesan sites is unfortunately in a state of
some confusion. From Ha'atuatua, Suggs (1961) originally obtained
corrected 14C age determinations of 2080 + 150 BP and 1910 ± 180 BP.
Sinoto (1970), however, questioned the precise cultural associations of
Suggs’s samples. For the Hane site, a series of seventeen i4C dates were
processed for the lower stratigraphic levels. Although Sinoto (1970)
based his date of AD 300 for initial colonization of the Marquesas on
this series, his reasons for selection of this age estimate are unclear. The
seventeen determinations range from as early as 1915 ± 200 BP, to less
than 250 years BP (Fig. 18). Upon close scrutiny, some ten dates, all by
the Gakushuin Laboratory, form an overlapping group distinctly later
in time than the cluster of determinations made by the Washington
State University laboratory. It is likely that there were serious problems
of contamination or insufficient pretreatment in the Gakushuin
Laboratory, since their determinations are unacceptably late.
   The above discussion of radiocarbon dates underscores the un¬
certainty of the present temporal framework for early Marquesan settle¬
ment. In my view, it is probable that Suggs’s samples do date in situ
cultural material (as Sinoto himself averred, 1970:1 13), and that an
initial settlement of the Marquesas by the second century BC is likely.


B C-500            0                 500         1000         1500         2000 A. D.
     1-—-1-i--—1---1_I


                          *—                       1                         WSU-490

                                     1— -1                                   WSU-512

          1                    --1                                           WSU-516

                  1--1                                                      WSU-524

                                               I---1                         WSU-525

                   1-<                                                      WSU-491

                                 *-1                                        WSU-492



                                           I-1                              GaK-529

                                                   I-'                      GaK-531

                                                   1-<                      GaK-530

                                                   I-1                      GaK-929

                                                        I-1                 GaK-930

                                                        I-1                 GaK-931

                                                              I-1           GaK-932

                                                         I-1                GaK-934

                                                                     I-1    GaK-935

                                                                     I-1    GaK-936


              18. Radiocarbon age determinations for Lavers V and VI at the
              Hane Dune Site, Ua Huka Island, Marquesas; bars represent
              95 per cent confidence intervals based on Klein et at. (1982).
              See text for discussion.
74                               Process




                                                                                                                    O'-
                                                                                                                    co
                                                                                                                    O'.
                                                                            co
                                                                            r^.
                                                                            O'.
                                                                                                ~      o »o c
                                                                                                       OO           r-
                                                                                                       O'. O'. • —
                                                                     ~ c                        —< ^     CO
                                                                     o u
                                                                      c b               CO       a u —x ■&
                                                                                                   cz
                                                                     *3 2               O'.
                                                                     "C                            U      o


                                                                                                                                         Sinoto ms.
                                            b       CO ^                                o        0   "G t: CQ
                                            b                         03 03                      t/i
                                                                                                 u ?3 o
                                                    Z o               £■ O                       b          £■
                                                     tf. o
                                                     b£ g
                                                                      o O               CO      a. i>. X u
                                                                                                            o
                                            X                                                        X      <—
                                                    CO CO            w CO               <       od * 55 u3 ~S



                                                    o o                                             cO


                                                                                                                                         790 ± 110
                                                    CO Tf            co O               IO      o ■rt- o
                                                                     oo                 OO      cr.    O'.
                                            b
                                            b£      +1 +1            -H +1              +1      +1 +1 +1
                                            <       o o              o O                o       o o o
                                                    OO iO            o'. o              CO      o o OO
                                            U       O                o •—1              CO      co cO CO
                                                    (N —             •—' r—t            •—«         •—




                                                                                         C
                                                                                         b




                                                                                                                                         Rockshelter
                                                                                        T3
                                                                                                                        b
                                                     b     b          b      br         X        b      b     b      b JO
                                                     C/5   C/5        C/5    o           c              C/5   C/5    C/5   f-
                                                                                                 C/5

                                                     b     b                 u                   b
                                            b                                                           C b         Ji J
                                                     r*    e—        X       b
                                                                                         b              b 3




     Table 7. Early East Polynesian sites
                                                                                                                    — b
                                            >1       3     3                 n3          a.      o      a. s        3 0
                                                                      o
                                            H       G Q              CQ     £           O        Q O Q              Q cQ




                                                                          b       _                  CN
                                                    or                   co        be                CO
                                                     o3                      ■    •S                     _s
                                                     a3                   g                          co CO
                                                    I                     i—                         o          oo

                                                                                                                                Henderson Island
                                                        -                 cz                  S3 oo 03 < -DC
                                                    z                             4           S3
                                            -c
                                                    '—' X                "cz
                                                                         Uh                          o c            x .r
                                                        D                 O       -8             5
                                             ?5                                    K          S3 c/5 r      !-Z DD
                                                     5 S           ^      0
                                                                                   a          a          03
                                            -c    a rcl u        .'Ci r> -         C-Q 1          £ o £ <i

                                                                                                                                HEN-1
                                                                  •s 5- o         ^ X         a o        nS 3 .2
                                             S3                                               a
                                                  <3 03                            H              <u re ™ -_ rc!
                                                  5 DD                      >     '*3            CQ UC DD £ ^
                                       c/3
                                       b

                             cr.
                             r".
                             O'.
                                      "C
                                       b
    Q                        _c
           X>                          u
    OO     O
           oo
                             03        b
    r^*                      b
    O'.    O'.               J

                        (,0 "C
    *b      c
                        *o C           b
     c                  O'. O          b
            C/2
     o      s~
            b
    j£
           ~c
            r-•
                        sc "5
     b
    CQ     <
                        5 2
                        Q J




                                      b
                        o         ,
    CO     O                          ’u
    OO     CO           —1   rt-      b

    +1     +1           +1 +1
    0“2    to           o o
    CO     CO                CO       C
    O'.    o            O'. r^.       b

                                      5
                                      >.



                        3
                        -D
    b
    ~G
    TJ

                         O Oj
    b      b            13 'C
                                      bil Q
    03     O-           "C "O
     b                                b ’5
    CQ     O            i s           be 3
                                      < s*
                                      oo
                                      to
                                      •o
                                      *o

           to
           CO
           O                          ^      b
                                      ^ tL
                                      o ^
                                      tO 0
                                      O'. _c
                  ^3 U
-5 H       CO      g « —
                  ■S tfl o            a.
J <       § s      s _ o
^   03
           u.     N rt B"
                                      CQ
                                      b
                  a •!= ”5            be
to D       J
                  5-*   03   ft
                                      < a,
                                        o
                  £££
76            Process

Geoff Irwin (1981) has recently gone further and suggested that East
Polynesia may have been settled not long after Samoa and Tonga, early
in the first millennium BC. He argues that since the rapid spread of
Lapita colonizers throughout the western Pacific demonstrates their
voyaging and colonizing abilities, there is no reason why thev should
have abruptly ceased their eastwards movement upon reaching Samoa
and Tonga. It is possible, of course, that colonizing voyages did set off
eastwards, but attempts to establish new settlements repeatedly failed
until the Marquesas landfall late in the first millennium BC. Irwin’s
hypothesis is intriguing, although there is no concrete evidence as yet of
East Polynesian settlement prior to that represented at Hane and
Ha'atuatua.
     In searching for evidence of early sites in any island group, serious
sampling problems must be overcome. Early sites are never common,
since initial population densities on any island were low. More import¬
ant, these initial settlement sites have had the longest time for deep
burial, erosion, submergence, or other disturbance by post-depositional
processes. Spriggs (1981:125-42), for example, has recently claimed -
on the basis of geomorphic evidence from the New Hebrides - that
many earlv valley-bottom sites in Oceania are now deeply buried under
alluvium resulting from human-induced forest clearance and erosion.
Such a sampling problem may well exist in the Society Islands, another
likely candidate for initial East Polynesian settlement. To date, onlv two
relatively earlv sites, Maupiti and Vaito‘otia-Fa‘ahia, have been dis¬
covered in the Societies, and neither of these appears to be as old as
Hane or Ha’atuatua in the Marquesas. It is noteworthy that both of
these sites were discovered by accident, and that there has not been a sys¬
tematic attempt at sub-surface sampling in those Society Island
environments where initial settlement sites might predictably have
been situated (e.g., on coastal plains near the larger, well-watered
valleys and opposite passes through the barrier reef). This situation is
compounded by the apparent recent subsidence of the Society group,
so that earlv deposits may now lie up to 1 metre beneath sea level. At the
coastal midden site of Te Amaama (Site ScMf-5) on Mo'orea, Green
(Green et al. 1967:181-2) found that the lower 12" of a 42” thick deposit
lay beneath the present water table. A charcoal sample from beneath
the water table yielded a NC age of 760 ± 80 BP, indicating subsidence
on the order of more than 0.3 metre since AD 1200. A similar
stratigraphic situation obtained at the Hauiti Site (ScMf-2). In short,
one suspects that the Society Islands could have been a locus of early
East Polynesian settlement (cf. Bellwood 1970), and that for reasons of
inadequate sampling strategy, we simplv have not yet recovered the
direct archaeological evidence.
     At the present, we can with certainty state only that at least one central
East Polynesian archipelago, the Marquesas, was settled bv the last one
             Dispersal, colonization and adaptation                      77


or two centuries BC. The possibility of earlier sites in the Marquesas, or
of other early settlements in the Society group (or even in the Cook
Islands) remains unresolved on archaeological evidence. Linguistic
data (Green 1966; Pawley 1966) indicate that whatever the location of
the initial East Polynesian settlement (and whether over one archipelago
or two adjacent ones) it remained an intact speech community long
enough for certain lexical innovations to develop, prior to the further
dispersal of colonists to the marginal extremes of East Polynesia: Easter
Island, Hawai‘i, and New Zealand.
  There are good reasons to presume that the voyagers who colonized
Easter Island were among the first to venture beyond the central East
Polynesian   homeland.      Although    the Rapanui   language includes
several Proto-East Polynesian lexical innovations, it also retains some
archaic features, suggesting divergence of the ancestral Rapanui speech
community earlier than other marginal East Polynesian groups.
Among these retentions is the Proto-Polynesian glottal stop (*?), noted
by Green (1966:17). Ross Clark (1979:263) interprets the glotto-
chronological evidence for East Polynesia as indicating ‘about 1500
years of divergence’ of Rapanui from the other central Eastern Poly¬
nesian languages. According to McCoy (1979:145) ‘the agreement
between glottochronological and radiocarbon dates place the setde-
ment of the island at AD 400 to 500’. Such an age for initial settlement is
further supported by the presence of early East Polynesian adz forms,
as well as the absence of‘certain widespread materials items known to
be of somewhat later origin than AD 500 in the primary dispersal
centers of East Polynesia’ (1979:145).
  Several radiocarbon-dated occupation sites in the Hawaiian Islands
document colonization of this northern Polynesian outpost by AD
300-500, probably not long after the settlement of Easter Island. The
best-known early occupation site, at Bellows Beach, 0‘ahu, yielded
several artifact forms closely related to those of the earlv Marquesan
sites, including plano-convex adzes, pearl-shell, one-piece hooks with
distinctive line-lashing devices, and an imitation porpoise-tooth pen¬
dant (Pearson, Kirch, and Pietrusewsky 1971; Kirch 1974). Onlv a few
kilometres from the Bellows Site, Clark (Kellv and Clark 1980) tested
buried deposits containing flaked stone, dated 1500 ± 145 BP. This site
is situated on a slope adjacent to the present Kawainui Marsh, recently
shown by the geologist Kraft to have been a marine embavment at the
time of early human occupation of the area. The Pu‘u Ali‘i sand dune
site on Hawaifi Island, also containing early East Polynesian artifact
forms, may have been settled by the fourth century AD. The Halawa
Dune Site on Molokafi (Kirch and Kelly 1975) was settled by about AD
650, and contains archaic artifact forms. With regard to the initial
Hawaiian colonization, it is worth noting that A.          Sinoto (1973)
recovered evidence of early East Polynesian occupation on Fanning
78           Process

Island, just north of the equator and approximately half-way between
central East Polynesia and Hawai‘i. Site FAN1-7 yielded a corrected l4C
age determination of 1560 ± 85 BP, consistent with the Hawaiian data,
and indicative of northerly voyaging by East Polynesians in the first few
centuries of the Christian era.
     Y. Sinoto (ms.), however, has recently disputed the evidence for
settlement of Hawaii by AD 300-500, basing his argument on the
absence, in the early Hawaiian sites, of diagnostic artifacts of his
‘Archaic East Polynesian Culture’, especially such items as shaped
whale-tooth pendants, toggle-head harpoons, and patu hand clubs.
There are, however, grounds for questioning Sinoto’s attribution of
these traits as ‘archaic’: they may in fact represent developments in cen¬
tral East Polynesia after the settlement of Easter and Hawaifi. Further¬
more, these supposedly ‘archaic’ traits were notably absent in the
earliest stratigraphic horizons (Layers VI and VII) at the Hane site
(Y. Sinoto 1966:Fig. 3). Rather, the alternative hypothesis that these
material culture traits represent Later developments is consistent with the
dating of Sinoto’s ‘archaic’ site of Vaito‘otia-Fa‘ahia to c. AD 800-900
(Y. Sinoto 1979b).



                                  •*   •» HAWAII




              19. Polynesian dispersal patterns, as indicated bv current
              archaeological and linguistic evidence.
           Dispersalcolonization and adaptation                        79


  While Polynesia’s eastern and northern outposts were settled within
the first few centuries of the Christian era, the southern extreme- New
Zealand - did not witness man’s arrival until about AD 800. The
material culture of the early New Zealand sites-whale-tooth pendants,
adz types, cloak pins, and so forth - clearly relates them to sites of the
same age in the Society Islands (Y. Sinoto 1979a, b). A Society Islands
origin for the Maori is further consistent with linguistic evidence,
wherein Maori language is part of a Tahitian subgroup (Green 1966;
Pawley 1966; R. Clark 1979).
  The Chatham Islands, 860 km east of South Island, may have been
first settled by drift voyagers from New Zealand not long after the latter
was colonized. Sutton (1980:79) plausibly argues that‘a small founding
population with little substantial chance of secondary settlement was
involved’. Harsh environmental challenges in the Chathams must have
placed remarkable pressures on the founding population.
  Raoul Island in the Kermadec group, 1,000 km north-east of New
Zealand, was evidently also colonized about the same time. A. J. Anderson
(1980b) reports a midden site, with a basal radiocarbon age of 1015 ±
65 BP, containing the characteristic whale-tooth pendants and early
adz forms. For unknown reasons, this Polynesian colony did not sur¬
vive, and the island was uninhabited when rediscovered by Europeans
late in the eighteenth century.
  To sum up the current evidence for East Polynesian dispersals, it is
likely that at least one successful ancestral East Polynesian settlement
had been established in the Marquesas by the closing centuries of the
first millennium BC (Fig. 19). From this (and possibly other) East
Polynesian homeland(s), voyagers ventured eastward and northward to
settle Easter Island and Hawaifi by AD 300-500. Another half¬
millennium later, the vast lands of New Zealand became the final out¬
post to be settled by the Polynesians. Beyond this archaeological and
linguistic reconstruction of settlement events lies the fundamental issue
of colonization strategies: what motives led the Polynesians to under¬
take these voyages of up to 4,000 km, and how were they able to so fre¬
quently succeed in founding viable communities in the new landfalls?


The challenge and strategy of colonization

The issue of colonization strategy raises the question of whether the
Polynesian dispersal resulted from purposive voyages of discovery and
settlement, or was largely the consequence of accidental drift of canoes.
This question is the crux of a long-standing scholarly debate, fuelled in
part bv the writings of Andrew Sharp (1956), and dealt with at length bv
others (e.g., Golson 1962; Finney 197 7). The answer is not an either/or
proposition, and both purposive voyages of colonization and accidental
drifts have actively influenced the geographical distribution of the
Polynesians.
HO           Process

     Computer simulations carried out by the geographers Levison,
Ward, and Web!) (1973) proved particularly enlightening in this debate.
In essence, their computer experiments were designed to test the null
hypothesis that all of the Polynesian islands could have been settled by
successive drift voyages. The research approach was statistical, to assess
the relative probability of drift from one island to any other, given our
knowledge of Pacific Ocean winds and currents. Data on wind and
current direction and force were compiled, for Marsden squares (5° of
latitude and longitude) by month, and probability tables established.
Using these stochastic data some 101,016 ‘voyages’ were simulated
from sixty-two different starting locations with three possible out¬
comes: (1) a landfall was reached; (2) the canoe was lost in a gale (wind
Beaufort Force 9 or greater); or (3) the drift exceeded 183 days, the
maximum length. The track of the canoe, as carried along by wind and
current, was plotted each day. The end result of this truly mammoth
simulation study is a set of drift contact probabilities, which allow a
realistic assessment of the likelihood that certain island groups were
ever settled by drift voyagers. For those islands with negligible drift-
contact probabilities, we can be reasonably confident that colonization
was a purposive matter.
     While drift voyages could have resulted in the settlement of some
islands, the initial movement from West to East Polynesia, as well as the
settlement ofsuch remote isolates as Hawai'i, Easter, and New Zealand,
was certainly due to intentional voyages against prevailing winds and
currents. Not a single experimental voyage out of 16,000 drifts from
‘starting points along the northern margins of central and eastern
Polynesia’ made a Hawaiian landfall (Levison et al. 1973:53). The
authors were ‘led to the conclusion that voyages from the Marquesas
and Tahiti areas would have to be made by crews who intended to
follow a northerly course, which implies a motive such as seeking new
lands’ (ibid.).
     Given that the settlement of the Polynesian Triangle was predicated
upon a purposive search for new lands, what motives could induce
would-be colonizers to risk their lives in such an uncertain quest? The
question may be more rhetorical than amenable to scientific testing,
but it is worth posing. One possible motive for voyaging, suggested by a
number of authors (e.g., Emory 1946:278; Suggs 1960a: 106), is that of
over-population, with resulting competition between local social
groups leading to one or more of these departing the homeland, leaving
those behind to take over its abandoned lands. Such scenarios are,
indeed, witnessed in oral traditions, one of the best documented being
the expulsion of the Nga Faea from Tikopia (Firth 1961:136-43). These
people were driven from the Faea district by the rival Nga Ariki who,
faced with land shortages, were desirous of the former’s fertile garden
lands. Rather than fall prey to the enemy, the Nga Faea elected to take
to their canoes:
             Dispersal, colonization and adaptation

The women and children were in the canoes; many of the men swam alongside.
According to one account, the canoes were decorated with barkcloth streamers,
as if it were a gala rituai occasion. Wailing, the folk of Nga Faea abandoned the
land, some of them supporting their chief on the deck of his vessel, holding him
aloft in their arms, in the gesture of supreme respect which the Tikopia pav to
men of rank (Firth 1961:139).


Whether this chief Tiako or any of his people ever settled new lands we
shall never know. Handy (1930c: 131) recorded another voyaging
legend, from Hivaoa in the Marquesas, of a canoe named Kaahua,
‘which made a voyage from Puamau in ancient times in search of lands’.
An interesting detail is that the canoe is said to have carried ‘a great
quantity of breadfruit paste’, evidently to sustain the party of men,
women, and children during their quest.
   One major objection voiced against population pressure and com¬
petition as a voyaging motive is that ‘voyages left island groups much
earlier than the stress of numbers is attested archaeologically’ (Irwin
1980:328). While probably true for the larger islands, such as-Upolu or
Savaii in Samoa, we cannot assume that relatively high population den¬
sities were not reached on some smaller islands within a matter of a few
centuries. In the first millennium BC, for example, the island of
Niuatoputapu was less than one-half its present area, and a population
of perhaps 1,000 persons might have put severe pressures on pro¬
duction, especially when compounded by the stress of periodic
drought or cyclone. It is possible, then, that on some of the smaller
islands population growth might have led to overcrowding, com¬
petition, and expulsion of a group within a comparatively short time
after initial settlement.
  Yen (1974a:75) alluded to extra-demographic inducements to mi¬
gration when he wrote that, ‘It will never be known whether the spurs to
wider and earlier migrations were associated not merely with popu¬
lation considerations, but with the insufficiency of adjustments in some
human ecosystems.’ We know from archaeological evidence that
Polynesian colonies were at one time established on some of the more
tenuous habitats of the central Pacific, such as the drought-prone
equatorial atolls. It is conceivable that colonists in such harsh environ¬
ments, unable to produce at a constant subsistence level, chose to move
on in search of better prospects.
  Although demographic and ecological pressures probably motivated
a goodly number of colonization voyages, one must question whether
such pressures alone could have led to the extraordinary dispersal wit¬
nessed in Polynesia. The opposition between senior and junior sib¬
lings, or between branches of a descent group, may also have provided
a motive for voyaging in search of new lands to colonize. The younger
brother of a chief might well be enticed by the possibilities of establishing
his line as foremost in a new island, and quarrels between rival siblings
could have led the loser to flee with his followers. Such motives for
82           Process

colonization are not mere speculation, for just such scenarios are
encoded in Polynesian myth. In the great cosmogonic myths of
Polynesia, it is Maui - the younger brother - who goes fishing with his
magic hook to pull islands from the sea(Luomala 1949). Another well-
known instance is the Hawaiian legend of Pa‘ao, who was forced to
leave his ancestral homeland in Kahiki after a falling out with his older
brother, Lonopele. Arriving in Hawai'i, the younger brother Pa‘ao
became a ‘stranger king5 (Sahlins 1981b), deposing the existing chief
and establishing a new line of ruling paramounts. Whether the legend
is historically ‘true’ matters not, for the structure it represents is real,
and formed the basis upon which the actions of real men were
formulated.
     It might appear unscientific or incurably romantic to suggest that
‘wanderlust’ could have been a motive for migration, yet some
culturally ingrained ethic of exploration and discovery may have
played a vital role in Polynesian dispersal. Moving over the course of
several thousand years through the island arcs of the south-western
Pacific, Polynesian ancestors would have built up a conception of the
Pacific as a sea of islands, more bridge than barrier. Thus the Poly¬
nesian explorer mightwell have‘set sail. . . in search of new land, confi¬
dent in the belief that, as usual, islands would rise over the horizon to
meet him’ (Levison et al. 1973:64). Certainly, Polynesian mythology is
replete with tales of the great culture heroes, like Ru, who went in
search of new lands. The folklorist Luomala has claimed that ‘one of the
many reasons why Polynesians set out on hazardous voyages to other
islands is the restless desire to visit strange places, to go sightseeing*
(1955:27). Firth (1936:18-21) describes just such an attitude for the
Tikopia. Too frequently, perhaps, Western anthropologists attribute
the actions of ‘primitive’ peoples to environmental or utilitarian
motives. But to the Polynesians, the ‘undiscovered lands beyond the
horizon’ were a ‘ space frontier as the solar system is today* (Levison et al.
1973:4), and the simple desire to conquer this frontier may have
dominated all other motives for voyaging and colonization.
     A curious and unexplained aspect of Polynesian voyaging is that the
purposeful expeditions which reached every habitable island by about
AD 1000 seemed to have abruptly ceased not long after this date. In
Hawai'i, New Zealand, Easter Island, the Marquesas, and other islands,
canoe technology changed radically from ocean-going designs to those
suited only for inshore sailing. Two-way inter-island voyaging did con¬
tinue in central Polynesia, especially between and within the Society
and Tuamotu island chains,          and amongst the West Polynesian
archipelagos, but here distances were much shorter. As Irwin notes, ‘we
are faced with the situation that once virtually every scrap of land in the
Pacific had been settled, the process stopped’ (1980:328). Since it is
unlikely that there was any ‘widespread underlying reason for the ending
             Dispersal, colonization and adaptation                      83


of voyages, it suggests that information that the islands had been suc¬
cessfully colonized was transmitted back to the sources’ (ibid.). Whether
this was so may prove to be an untestable proposition, but one that
hints at the complexities of Polynesian dispersal and colonization.

Polynesian colonization strategies

The successful establishment of a human population on a remote and
previously uninhabited Pacific island was surely neither a simple nor
easy task. Successful colonization required a maritime technology to
transport cultigens and domestic animals and methods for their
establishment, strategies to exploit the natural resources of the new
habitat upon arrival, and a reproductive strategy to ensure that the new
propagule did not go to extinction within a few decades. The issue of
colonization strategies is one that Polynesian prehistorians have not
carefully considered, even though this initial phase was absolutely critical
in influencing the direction of subsequent adaptation and evolution on
any island or archipelago. Direct archaeological evidence for certain
aspects of colonization strategy (such as reproduction) may admittedly
be difficult or impossible to obtain. As in other facets of island pre¬
history, however, the first step in obtaining answers is to formulate
appropriate questions.
  The ocean-going capabilities of Polynesian double-canoes have been
the focus of recent experimentation, most spectacularly the voyages of
the Hokulea (Finney 1977). Not only canoe design, but such factors as
the social organization of the crew and their ability to withstand con¬
siderable psychological stress are at issue. Direct evidence of pre¬
historic canoe design and construction techniques has recently been
forthcoming from excavations at the uniquely waterlogged site of
Vaito‘otia-Fa‘ahia (Fig. 20) on Huahine, Society Islands, dating to AD
850-1200 (Sinoto 1979b). Anaerobic conditions have preserved adzed
planks ‘probably used on the front and back ends of the double canoe
platforms’ (ibid: 13). Sinoto suggests an extrapolated canoe length of 24
metres (80 ft). By way of comparison, the experimental cano eHokule'a is
18.9 metres (62 ft) long, and carried a crew of seventeen persons (Finney
1977). Also recovered at Huahine was a steering paddle 3.8 metres
long. Clearly, vessels of this size were capable of transporting organized
expeditions of as many as twenty to thirty colonists along with their
stocks of domestic animals and crop plants.
  Since the natural biota of the Polynesian islands lacked much in the
way of edible plants, or terrestrial game other than birds, the establish¬
ment of imported vegetative stocks of crop plants and of breeding pairs
of domestic animals would have received the greatest priority. Many of
the earliest East Polynesian sites contain faunal evidence for one or
more domestic animals, and evidence for the transport of plant
materials exists in the form of anthropophilic land snails which wrere
84            Process


carried inadvertently in adhering soil (Christensen and Kirch 1981a, b).
In a fledgling colony’s first years, transplanted cultigens and animals
could not have provided a sufficient basis for subsistence, and the set¬
tling party would have had to depend heavily upon naturallv abundant
resources, particularly shellfish, fish, wild birds, and wild plants (such
as indigenous bracken fern rhizomes). Initial settlement sites, when
archaeologically excavated, show the unmistakable signs of such inten¬
sive exploitation of natural resources. SiteTK-4 on Tikopia, colonized
about 900 BC, though only about 4,500 m2 in area, and with a deposit
averagings 30 cm in depth, contains an estimated 70 metric tons of
molluscs (Kirch and Yen 1982). Also present are large quantities of
marine turtle, fish bone, and a considerable range of land and sea birds
(Fig. 21). The megapode, a galliform bird, was locally extirpated within
the first few years of settlement doubtless due to predation. Similar
emphasis on marine exploitation has been noted for the earliest
stratigraphic horizons of the Hane dune site in the Marquesas Islands
(Kirch 1973).
     The most critical aspect of colonization strategy is certainly the re¬
production of the human propagule. The size and ag^sex com¬
position of the population were essential in determining whether the
colony would survive and grow, or head irreversibly toward extinction.
MacArthur and Wilson (1967) and Richter-Dyn and Goel (1972) have
discussed survivorship theory in general terms, noting that the critical




              20. Two wooden canoe planks with lashing holes, and a
              wooden bowl, at the waterlogged Fa'ahia site, Huahine Island,
              Society Islands (photo courtesy Y.H. Sinoto, Bishop Museum).
             Dispersalcolonization and adaptation                                   85

factors are (1) the size of the founding propagule, N, (2) the per capita
birth rate, A (3) the per capita death rate, jtt, and (4) the carrying capacity
of the environment, K (see also Black 1979:65-6). With human popu¬
lations, the matter of carrying capacity is complicated, since more than
static environmental parameters are involved, including the level of
technology. Ideally, N should be as large as possible, and a high rate of
intrinsic population growth (r) should be ‘accomplished by a small
death rate rather than by a large birth rate’ (McArthur and Wilson
1967:78). Thus the ratio (A—jU.)/A = r should be large. Furthermore,
‘when K is small . . . the expected time to extinction is small, and
colonists must reinvade frequently to maintain the species’ (ibid.).
Establishing precise A or ju. values for colonists is probably impossible
on archaeological data, but our knowledge of canoe capacities suggests
an upper limit of about thirty persons for N. Quantitative estimates of K
are extremely difficult to calculate (cf. Glassow 1978), and the size of an
island is only a very rough index of K. It is doubtless significant,
however, that several rather small islands, with correspondingly low K
values, once supported Polynesian colonies which subsequently went
to extinction (these are further discussed below).
  In an important study, McArthur, Saunders, and Tweedie (1976)
used computer-generated simulation to assess the potential survival
probabilities of Polynesian propagules of 6, 10, and 14 (formed of 3, 5,
and 7 couples). The effects on survival probability of increasing N are
obvious: with a propagule of 6 in which the only marriage rule was a




                                                                             —1800 AD




                                                                             —1200 AD




                                                                             —100 BC




                                                                             — 900 B C


                                                                  l.5kg/m3




            21. General trends in the exploitation of major faunal groups
            throughout the Tikopia sequence, as reflected in estimates of
            usable meat per cubic metre of archaeological deposit. Note
            the great reduction in all wild animal foods following the initial
            colonization phase represented bv Site TK-4.
86           Process

ban on incest, probability of extinction was as high as 77 per cent,
whereas increasing N to 14(7 couples) lowered the extinction prob¬
ability to 19 per cent. As MacArthur and Wilson (1967:89-92) originally
observed, reproductive value, determined by the age structure of
females and their associated fertility rates, also has a significant effect on
survival. For a propagule of 10 in which the females are between seven¬
teen and twenty-one years, the extinction probability is only 28 per
cent, whereas with females between the ages of twenty-six and thirty,
this probability rises to 77 per cent (McArthur et al. 1976: Table 2).
     In their classic study of island biogeography, MacArthur and Wilson
(1967) argued that different selection pressures affect reproductive
strategies of colonizing versus established populations. Their so-called
r/K selection model takes its terms from the Verhulst-Pearl logistic dif¬
ference equation that describes a sigmoid population-growth curve:




Population size, A, is a function of the intrinsic rate of increase, r, con¬
strained by the carrying capacity or resource threshold of the environ¬
ment. For humans, the latter is, of course, not an absolute parameter,
but one that is dependent upon the technology and production strategy
of the particular population under study. In the MacArthur-Wilson
model, which Diamond (1977) among others has suggested is applic¬
able to human populations, a spectrum of reproductive strategies is
idealized as two dichotomized patterns. At one end of the spectrum are
populations with a high intrinsic rate of increase, operating in the
absence of substantial competition or other density-dependent effects.
Colonizing species or populations, such as the‘supertramp’ birds dis¬
cussed by Diamond (1977) are characteristically r-strategists. On the
other hand are populations in which growth is closely regulated in the
face of intense competition. Naturally, these ideal types are merely
endpoints on a continuum.
  The r/K selection model as developed by MacArthur and Wilson
(1967) was, however, applied to non-human populations, and to the
selection of genetic determinants of reproductive behaviour. Despite
the claims of Diamond (1977) and others that such biogeographic models
are relevant to human groups, the r/K model is itself too simplistic to
explain     Polynesian   adaptation   to   the reproductive challenge of
colonization. In humans, for example, the intrinsic rate of increase, r, is
closely regulated bv a variety of cultural and behavioural mechanisms,
including social organization (marriage patterns, tabus), post-partum
tabu or other spacing mechanisms, infanticide, abortion, Warfare,
immigration, and so forth. Nevertheless, while the basic r/K model
does not account for the complexities of human reproduction and
demography, it does appear that human groups in Oceania responded
            Dispersal, colonization and adaptation                      87


- technologically and socially - to density conditions. There are good
reasons to believe that, over time, changes in population size and den¬
sity of particular islands led to modifications in reproductive rates.
  In general, groups of colonizing Polynesians probably exhibited
rapid population growth (not constrained by such practices as abortion,
infanticide, or warfare), generalizing and broad-based subsistence
practices, and only weakly developed socio-political controls on pro¬
duction. In contrast, later populations that had achieved high levels of
density appear to have shifted to conscious regulation of population
growth, along with economic and ecological specialization, well-
developed socio-political controls on production, and intense com¬
petition. This shift from density-independent to density-dependent
adaptations seems to have occurred both on individual islands and
over whole    archipelagos,    and    is   a basic feature of Polynesian
technological and social evolution. Chapter 5 explores this shift in
greater detail, and assesses certain archaeological and palaeodemo-
graphic data for testing the model outlined here.


Adaptation in new environments

Thus far, we have been concerned largely with the challenges and re¬
sponse strategies directly related to initial voyaging and successful
transfer of cultural landscapes. As demonstrated in Chapter 2, the
diversity of island environments within Polynesia would also have
posed substantial adaptive challenges to founding populations. The
process of adaptation to these new environmental conditions forms a
critical part of the evolution of Polynesian societies.
  Since colonizing parties of Polynesians were small, and therefore
representative of only a portion of the cultural-behavioural variability
inherent in the ‘mother’ population, something akin to the ‘founder
effect’ known to geneticists (e.g., Mayr 1942; Dobzhansky 1963:71-2)
may have operated to produce rapid change in island cultures. As
argued by Vayda and Rappaport, ‘if the migration to an isolated place,
whether a small island or a large continent, is by a relatively small group
of people who are unable to reproduce in full the culture of the popu¬
lation from which they derived, then the culture in the new place will be
immediately different from the culture in the homeland’ (1963:134-5).
It is indeed likely that certain initial changes in technology, resource
exploitation strategy, or even in religious practice, were due to this
founder effect.
  On the other hand, to the extent that the new environment differed
in certain respects from the homeland - as it sometimes radically did (as
in the case of New Zealand) - technology and behaviour patterns
transferred from the homeland would have undergone an immediate
reassortment or segregation. Yen (1973a) has emphasized this aspect of
88           Process

Table 8. Cultigens and domestic animals in various Polynesian island groups


Island group        Farinaceous   Tree crops   Other crops   Dog   Pig   Fowl
                    annuals


Western Polynesia
Futuna                   9            9             6        X     X      X
‘Uvea                    8            9             6        X     X      X
Tonga                    9            8             6        X     X      X

Eastern Polynesia
Societies                7            7             5        X     X      X
Marquesas                7            6             5        X     X      X
Easter Island            5            1             3        —     —      X
Hawai‘i                  6            3             4        X     X      X
Tuamotus                 3            1             0        —     X      —
New Zealand              4            0             2        X




adaptation to new environments, with particular reference to agricultural
systems. The ‘ detachable parts of former environments’, such as planting
stocks, tools, and cultural concepts, ‘together with the elements of
natural exploitation, have to undergo a reassortment or resegregation as a
first step in the colonization of a new island’ (1973a: 76, my italics). The
progress of this introductory-developmental sequence is ‘dictated by
the ultimate constraints offered by the new environment’, and in the
case of agricultural systems, by the ‘genetic flexibility of the introduced
species’ (ibid.). The effect of such resegregation is evident in the dis¬
tribution of plants and domestic animals throughout Polynesia (Table
8). East Polynesian groups suffered a reduction in the number of crop
species and domestic animals, all of which are adventive to the region.
This reduction may be due in part to a failure to attempt the transfer
process, or to failure of planting stocks or breeding animals to survive
lengthy sea voyages. It is clear, however, that where crop reductions
were most severe, for example, theTuamotus and New Zealand, these
were due to particularly harsh environmental constraints. Polynesian
crops were tropical in origin and in ecological template, and only four
species were sufficiently adaptable to withstand the temperate climate
of N ew Zealand. In the Tuamotus, atoll constraints of limited water and
poor soils posed equally stringent challenges to an ancestral agricultural
economy.
  The reassortment and adaptation of technological systems is well
illustrated in the case of fishing gear excavated from early Marquesan
archaeological contexts. Early levels of the Hane and Ha’atuatua sites
yielded an unusual range of one-piece fishhook types, both in form and
size. This variability is explicable, however, when we contrast the
Marquesan situation with that of the West Polynesian homeland. In the
           Dispersal, colonization and adaptation                      89


western archipelagos, angling with one-piece fishhooks evidently did
not constitute a dominant fishing strategy, owing to the greater pro¬
ductivity of netting and spearing in lagoons and broad reef flats (Kirch
and Dye 1979). When the first colonists of the Marquesas moved from
their lagoon-reef homeland environment, they were confronted with a
new set of environmental conditions - rocky headlands and deep bays
with limited coral growth - not suited to the fishing strategies that had
been developed in the western tropical islands. The adaptive response
to these conditions was a rapid increase in experimentation and
innovation with angling gear (Fig. 22). Fishing gear in later Marquesan
sites again became less variable and highly standardized (with essen¬
tially one form of jabbing hook). This subsequent reduction in
fishhook variability represents the effect of variety-limiting selection
upon the earlier range of experimental behaviour, with the few forms
that proved effective in the new environment ultimately becoming the
only fishhook types manufactured (see also Kirch 1980b: 1 15-17).
  Processes of adaptation to environment are often best exemplified in
situations where constraints are especially severe, or where the shift
from one habitat to another is marked by unusual ecological differences.
The Polynesian Triangle provides several instances of such conditions,
with a number of marginal islands and with temperate New Zealand,
particularly South Island.
  Not all attempts at island colonization and adaptation succeeded.
Within Polynesia are at least twelve islands that, while initially
colonized by man at some point in the past, lacked Polynesian occu¬
pants when rediscovered by European voyagers in the eighteenth cen¬
tury. These ‘mystery islands’ as Bellwood dubbed them represent
unsuccessful experiments in colonization and adaptation. As a perusal




            22. Adaptation and change in Marquesan angling gear; sec text
            for discussion (after Kirch 1980a).
90           Process

Table 9. Polynesian islands unoccupied at European contact


Island            Tvpe            Area (km2)      Ecological constraints


Howland           Cav                   1.3       Fresh water limited
Washington        Closed atoll        10.3        Fresh water limited
Fanning           Atoll               33.5        Fresh water limited
Christmas         Atoll              645.0        Fresh water limited
Malden            Closed atoll        10.0        Fresh water limited
Palmerston        Atoll               n.a.        n.a.
Suwarrow          Atoll                0.4        Fresh water limited
Nihoa             High volcanic        0.6        Fresh water limited; no
                                                  timber, no fringing reef
Necker            High volcanic        0.2        Fresh water limited; no
                                                  timber; no fringing reef
Pitcairn          High volcanic        5.2        No fringing reef
Henderson         Makatea             38.7        Fresh water limited
Raoul             High volcanic       29.4        Active volcano




of Table 9     indicates, all of these islands (with the exception of
Christmas atoll) are rather small, with correspondingly limited carrying
capacities. Most of them suffer additional constraints, such as limited
sources of fresh water and absence of timber, or in the case of Raoul
Island, from volcanic hazard. It is indeed likely that ‘insufficiency of
adjustments’ to these harsh ecosystems led their colonizing popu¬
lations to abandon them after a relatively short time(cf. Yen 1974a:75).
On others, however, we have evidence that populations persisted for
several hundred years at least (e.g., Pitcairn, see Gathercole 1964; and
Raoul, see A.J. Anderson 1980b). Why such larger and fertile islands
should have ceased to be occupied is indeed a mystery, though either
demographic instability, or the depredations of internal conflict are
conceivable causes for extinction.
     One of the ‘mystery5 islands on which archaeological excavations
have been conducted, Henderson Island (169 km from Pitcairn), has
revealed remarkable evidence of adaptation to local environmental
conditions. Y. Sinoto (ms.) excavated a rockshelter situated in the
northern cliff of this uplifted, makatea island, with a cultural deposit
spanning about 300 years (basal layer dated to 790 ± 110 BP, upper
deposit dated 495 ± 105 BP). From the lower stratigraphic levels, Sinoto
recovered pearl-shell fishhooks, abraders of block coral, and adzes of
basalt. The pearl shell and basalt are not local to Henderson, and were
evidently imported at, or not long after, the period of initial settlement.
The upper stratigraphic levels, on the other hand, yielded crude
fishhooks of local hammer-oyster shell, coral files of Porites, and adzes
of fossilized Tridacna shell available in the island’s upraised limestone
(Fig. 23). As Sinoto writes, ‘gradual material adaptation ... is excellently
Dispersal, colonization and adaptation                          91




     HEN 1




23. Artifacts excavated from upper and lower levels ol a rock-
shelter site (HEN 1) on Henderson Island, illustrating local
adaptation in material culture. A. Artifacts from the lower level
include adzes of non-local basalt, files of Pontes coral, pearl-
shell fishhooks of Marquesan tvpe (possiblv imports); and cut
bird bone. B. Artifacts from the intermediate and upper levels
include adzes of fossilized Tridacna shell, files of Pontes coral,
and fishhooks of local Isognomon shell (photo courtesy Y.H. Sinoto,
Bishop Museum).
92            Process

demonstrated. As the materials that were brought to Henderson were
exhausted, the locally available resources were exploited’ (ms.:4-5).
  With the colonization of New Zealand, Polynesians from the tropical,
central archipelagos of East Polynesia (probably the Society Islands)
suddenly faced drastically different environmental conditions which
truly challenged their ingenuity and ability to adapt. Even in the north,
where the climate is milder, only four of the crop species transferred
from the tropical homeland would survive the temperate climate
(Table 8). Most interesting, however, are the adaptations undergone by
those who settled the far southerly regions, south of the Banks Peninsula
A resurgence of archaeological work in Southland over the past decade
has provided much new data on the processes by which colonizing
tropical East Polynesian agriculturalists were transformed to temperate
hunters-and-gatherers (A.J. Anderson 1982a, 1982b, 1983; Hamel
1982).
     Though Southland is a vast region - especially for people used to
relatively small islands - its constraints were formidable. The coast
regions have a mean annual temperature of about 10°C, and the
interior has very marked climatic extremes. Not only was agriculture
impossible with the Polynesian crop inventory, but the range of
naturally occurring starchy plants was limited, with the New Zealand ti
(Cordyline australis) as the only major species. Southland’s coasts are
relatively exposed, and lack the coral reefs and great species diversity
known to the colonizing East Polynesians in their homeland islands.
     Despite such constraints, the land offered new possibilities for forging
a subsistence regime on which to base stable, if not very dense, popu¬
lations. The productivity of the southern ocean is quite high, and the
coastal regions are rich in several species of fish (barracouta, red cod,
blue cod, and groupers), in seabirds (penguins, albatrosses, petrels,
shearwaters, and shags), and in sea mammals (fur seals, sea lions). Most
remarkable, however, were the large ratite birds.

For the first Polynesian voyagers to step ashore, the luxuriant forest held a sur¬
prise at once familiar and bizarre: birds in form not unlike the tropical house-
fowls they called moa but here materialized in the size of dreams. Some, the
height of a child, busily scratched at the litter on the forest floor; others, the
height of a man, pecked and tore at the shrubbery; and still others, half as tall
again, reached up into the foliage of the trees (Anderson 1983:8).

These ‘marvellous fowls’ ranged in size from the small Megalapteryx
didinus, weighing perhaps 15-30 kg, up to the impressive Dinomis giganteus,
with a body weight of 125-230 kg. In short, the pioneering East Poly¬
nesians had been thrust upon ‘a land for hunting, fishing and gathering,
more or less in that order’ (A.J. Anderson 1982b:49).
     These new and drastically different environmental conditions clearly
put pressures upon the archaic Polynesian technology and subsistence
strategies, requiring significant adaptation. Although much of the
            Dispersal, colonization and adaptation                            93

material culture in Archaic Southland sites retains its East Polynesian
forms (as in the adzes and ornament styles), certain aspects of technology
direcdy related to subsistence underwent significant change. As Anderson
notes, ‘one of the most striking features of the fishing patterns is the
scarcity of evidence of the netting-trapping complex which is so promi¬
nent historically in northern New Zealand and elsewhere in Polynesia’
(ibid:51). Angling gear, on the other hand, underwent a phase of
experimentation and proliferation of forms, in a manner directly
analogous to the Marquesan case described earlier. The new emphasis
on hunting is also reflected archaeologically by the development of
large silcrete and porcellanite blades and flake tools used for moa
butchering, and of large earth ovens for processing moa flesh.
  The early Archaic settlement patterns also reflect the process of adap¬
tation to a hunting and fishing way of life. As shown in Figure 24, large
multi-function bases, situated along the coast (frequently at the mouths
of interior-trending rivers), were linked with a series of inland staging,
transit, and base camps. Moa hunting proceeded from these base
camps, where, as at the Hawksburn site (A.J. Anderson 1979a), large
numbers of earth ovens and flake tools indicate the emphasis on moa
processing. Other specialized sites linked into this settlement pattern
were stone quarries (for silcrete and porcellanite in the interior, and for
basalt and chalcedony on the coast), and coastal restricted-function
sites, such as fishing camps. Despite the shift in subsistence from
agriculture to hunting-fishing-gathering, the adaptation of settlement
patterns did not lead to a fully transient pattern. Indeed, there was
probably a strong desire on the part of the colonizing East Polynesians
to lead a settled existence, such as is evidenced by the primary coastal
multi-function bases (such as Papatowai, Little Papanui, Murdering
Beach, Shag Mouth, and other well-known Archaic sites). Permanent
settlement, however, required an effective means of food storage, and
here again the adaptive ingenuity of the colonizing Polynesians is
reflected. Methods were developed to preserve meat in kelp bags,
sealed with fat and made airtight (A.J. Anderson 1983:21-2), which
made it possible to ‘organize food gathering activities to take the maxi¬
mum advantage of seasonally abundant resources’.
  While adaptations in material culture and settlement pattern are
most clearly evidenced in the archaeological record, there are also
suggestions of significant changes in social organization. Anderson has
speculated that the Archaic period in Southland may have seen a ‘re¬
structuring of Polynesian society to New Zealand life’:

A small population, and very probably an asymmetric one in terms of the social
structure from which it derived, would have been intent upon establishing new
systems of political power and prestige as the‘colonial effect’ struck home: the
release from traditional social stratification and sources of wealth. Competition
by small groups, perhaps centered on the multi-function bases, for new
94   Process




      24. Archaic settlement pattern in the South Island, New
      Zealand, reflecting adaptation to a dominantly hunting-gathering
      and fishing subsistence mode (after A.J. Anderson 1982b).
             Dispersal, colonization and adaptation                           95

territories, a different ‘pecking-order’ and a new scale of material values could
have involved conspicuous consumption of big game, territorial marking by
painting and the display of technological virtuosity (and thereby wealth) in
decorative artefactual styles (1982b:69).




Overview

The differentiation of Ancestral Polynesian Society began with the dis¬
persal of colonizing populations, first to the central eastern archipelagos,
and later to the more remote, marginal outposts. Change was implicit
in the colonization process, with the founder effect operative on
various aspects of culture. Equally important were the environmental
conditions and constraints featured in each island group, many of
which required immediate adaptations or adjustments, in technology,
subsistence strategies, settlement patterns, and social relations. Thus,
the colonization phase in any island sequence may be regarded as a
significant period of reassortment of social and technological systems.
In some islands, especially the smaller ones, environmental challenges
proved to be too severe, and pioneering groups either left in search of
more hospitable lands, or failed to reproduce themselves. On most of
the larger islands, however, the colonization process was successful,
and the seeds of new societies became firmly rooted, their features now
more closely adapted to local conditions, but still carrying the imprint
of Ancestral Polynesian Society.
           5
           The demographic factor




Population growth - from small founding propagules to large and
densely settled societies - is a fundamental aspect of all Polynesian
developmental sequences. Jack Golson maintained that ‘even though
the colonizing groups were probably small, their capacity to increase
would be enormous in the untouched and generally benign environ¬
ments of the Pacific Islands and with the technology and economy’ at
the command of the Polynesians (1972a:29). In the previous chapter, I
argued that a relatively high intrinsic rate of population increase would
have been essential to a successful strategy of island colonization, and
indeed, that rapid population growth helped to assure a propagule’s
permanence. In a study of historical data relating to population
increase on three isolated islands, Birdsell (1957) demonstrated that
small colonizing groups, such as those that settled the outposts of
Polynesia, are certainly capable of growing at a very fast rate, with
doubling times on the order of one generation. In the case of the Bounty
mutineers, who with their Tahitian wives settled remote Pitcairn Island,
the intrinsic rate of increase (r) approximated 0.04. There is no reason
to suppose that growth rates among colonizing prehistoric Polynesians
were appreciably lower than that of Pitcairn.
  At the same time, it is clear that the exponential rates of population
growth which characterized early phases of settlement on Polynesian
islands were not generally operative when the European explorers
arrived on the scene, one or more millennia later. These early observers
reported large and relatively dense populations in which a variety of
cultural and natural mechanisms served to maintain island popu¬
lations at essentially static levels. The practice of infanticide for example,
so abhorrent to missionaries and explorers, was endemic among the
Society Islanders (Oliver 1974:424-6), and is reported for other Poly¬
nesian populations as well (e.g., Firth 1936; Kamakau 1961: 234). Thus,
while initial population growth rates were high, a balance between
human numbers and the capacity of their insular environments to
maintain them had to be reached during the development of each
Polynesian chiefdom. As Brookfield (1976) avers, a concept ofpopu-

            96
               The demographic factor                                                 97

lation thresholds is necessary, given that the resources - renewable and
non-renewable - of any island ecosystem have finite limits. This is not
the simple deterministic process it might at first appear, however, and
the    relationships     between     population,       environment,        and     socio¬
economic and political structures were complexly interwoven.
     These complex interrelationships are well portrayed in a model of
island    carrying capacity developed             by   Bayliss-Smith (1974),          re¬
produced here as Figure 25. The size of an island population is
regulated by two kinds of constraint: cultural and ecological. Ecological
constraints comprise the total land area, the effects of periodic natural
disasters, deterioration of the environment due to over-exploitation,
limits on productivity, and basic nutritional requirements. Cultural
constraints include controls on fertility and mortality, production
beyond basic subsistence needs (‘social’ or ‘trade’ production; cf.


             CULTURAL                  DEPENDENT                ECOLOGICAL
            CONSTRAINTS                 VARIABLES               CONSTRAINTS




 •    External inputs
                                                            -DEMOGRAPHIC     (D
                                                            -SOCIAL          (2)
                                                            -PSYCHOLOGICAL   (3)

                                                            -TECHNOLOGICAL   (4)
CONSTRAINTS
                                                            -ENVIRONMENTAL   (5)

                                                            -SPATIAL         (6)
                                                            -PRODUCTIVE      (7)

                                                            -NUTRITIONAL     (8)



               25. A model of cultural and ecological constraints affecting
               island populations (courtesy of T. Bayliss-Smith, Cambridge University).
98          Process

Table 10. Estimated populations of the principal islands and archipelagos at
European contact


Island or          Total        Population Total land Arable land Densitv
group           population*     of maximal    (km2)     (km2)t   (A7km2)tt
                               political unit


Hawaiian Is.       200,000        30,000      16,633     1,663        120
Tongan Is.          40,000        40,000         696       487         82
Societv Is.         45,000         9,000       1,535       460         98
Samoan Is.          80,000        25,000       2,829       810         99
Easter Is.           7,000         3,500          160      106         66
‘Uvea                4,000         4,000           59       40         68
Mangaia              3,000         3,000           70       40         75
Marquesas Is.       35,000         1,500       1,058       529         66
Futuna               2,000         2,000           62       40         50
New Zealand        115,000         3,500     265,146    10,000         11


* Best estimate based on ethnographic and archaeological evidence.
tEstimate based on environmental data available.
ftDensitv per area of arable land.



Brookfield 1972), psychological perceptions of diet and needs, and the
level of available technology and agricultural skills.
   The significance of demographic variables for the evolution of the
Polynesian chiefdoms is highlighted by a consideration of the contact-
period populations of the major island groups (prior to the massive
depopulation which           occurred   nearly everywhere as     a result of
introduced disease). Table 10 presents population estimates for ten of
the main archipelagos and islands of Polynesia, along with estimates of
the size of a maximal political unit (that under the control of a
paramount chief). Also provided are data on total and arable land, and
an estimate of population density in relation to arable land. Several
significant conclusions may be drawn from these data. First, for all
 islands except New Zealand, there is a strong correlation between
 population and total land area (R = 0.97), reinforcing the proposition
 that most Polynesian populations had reached some threshold level of
 balance between numbers and resources. (The fact that New Zealand is
 something of an anomaly, supporting for example only slightly more
 than half as many people as Hawai'i on sixteen times the land area, is
 accounted for by the more severe constraints of the New Zealand
 climate acting upon the tropical Oceanic crops.) The correlation
 between population and arable land is also reasonably high (R = 0.49),
 suggesting that agricultural resources were a significant limiting factor
 16 population increase.
    Somewhat more suggestive are the relationships between population
                   The demographic factor                                                                     99

size, density, and the degree of social stratification in Polynesian
societies (see Table 2). As shown in Figure 26, there is a reasonably con¬
sistent correlation between the degree of stratification, as measured by
Sahlins’s (1958) criteria, and the population size of the maximal political
unit. A similar correlation, shown in Figure 26, obtains between popu-
ation density per square kilometre of arable land and degree of
stratification. Clearly, demographic variables relate significantly to
socio-political complexity in Polynesia. We must let caution reign,
however, and stop short of positing particular causal relationships
between demography and socio-political complexity. Lacking direct
historical evidence, one could argue either the primacy of population
growth as a spur to increased stratification, or — conceivably - the
reverse proposition, that increased stratification allowed chiefs to bring
neighbouring groups under their sway thus swelling the size of the
chiefdom. Indeed, these two scenarios are not necessarily mutually
exclusive. Obviously, we need accurate diachronic data for prehistoric
Polynesian populations, data which can be compared with parallel
archaeological               evidence            for   social   stratification,     from          mortuary
remains, settlement patterns, and the like.
        Polynesian islands - and especially the more isolated ones such as
Hawai'i, Easter, and New Zealand - provide unique opportunities for
the study of demographic processes. This is due to several factors. First,
the remote Polynesian islands were colonized relatively recently, pro¬
viding short, controlled time-frames. Second, due to their isolation,
such islands have been colonized only once or twice, by small founding
populations. Third, and particularly important, the isolation of many


                                                                      40-
         120-
                                                                      30-

                 (Atolls - III - not included)                        20-



>
t        80-                                                                  (Atolls - III - not included)


O   jv

z « fin.
2 < 60                                                          < x
F“ **                                                           2 ~ 5
<   E
                                                                      4
? * 40-
                                                                      3


                                                                      2 -




                      ”1—             “1—                                                          “I—
                       lib              lla                                        lib              lla
                LEVEL OF STRATIFICATION                                     LEVEL OF STRATIFICATION



                  26. Population densitv and size of maximal political units for
                  nine Polynesian societies, plotted in relation to Sahlins’s
                  categories of social stratification.
100         Process

Polynesian islands has effectively barred both immigration and emi¬
gration, allowing one to discount the effects of exogenous population
movements. Finally, being precisely bounded, islands are microcosms
with sharply defined limits to the development and intensification of
production. Because of these opportunities for analytical control, the
remoter Polynesian islands are excellent localities in which to under¬
take archaeological investigations of the relations between demography,
environment, and cultural systems.
  Archaeologists and prehistorians have displayed varying attitudes
toward the role of population growth and density in Polynesian culture
history. Some have simply ignored demographic considerations, a
reflection of the difficulties of obtaining accurate population estimates
from archaeological data. A few, however, have recognized the fun¬
damental role of demographic change in the evolution of Polynesian
societies. Suggs, whose Marquesan work stands out for its forward-
looking theoretical base, held population growth to be a major factor in
Marquesan cultural change, leading to settlement expansion out of the
favourable windward valleys to morejnarginal leeward habitats, and to
inter-tribal warfare and competition (1960a: 119,128; 1961:182). Suggs
argued that population growth and political intensification were
intimately linked in the Marquesas:

a large population was producing a sizeable food surplus which was appro¬
priated by the upper classes of Marquesan society, the chiefs and priests, and
utilized in supporting the population in large public works that of course also
reflected the glory of the chiefs and priests, reinforcing their power (1960a: 128).

The cause of the intense prestige rivalry may be seen in the relation of the popu¬
lation to the habitable land. As the population increased beyond the point at
which all possible ecological niches became filled, intergroup conflicts over
land would have increased . . . The need to acquire and hold the land necessary
for existence and to increase the areas held to accommodate population
increases intensified to an extreme the rivalry apparently present in most
Polynesian societies (1961:185-6).

  Somewhat parallel views have been expressed regarding Easter
Island and Hawai'i. McCoy (1976:141-7) suggests that in Easter Island
rapid population growth after initial settlement led fairly quickly to
high density levels. Ensuing environmental degradation, in part due to
population pressure, led to internal strife and warfare, ultimately leading
to a collapse of the political system (see Chapter 11). For Hawaifi,
Tuggle and Griffin (1973:63) and Cordy (1974b:97-8) have posited
population growth as an independent variable. In Cordy’s words: ‘the
presence of complex chiefdoms in Hawaii requires an initiating
independent variable; steady population increases within simple chief¬
doms in one or many areas reaching the population pressure level is
proposed as such an independent variable’ (1974:98). Hommon,
however, has taken issue with this stance, and regards population
            The demographic factor                                    101

growth in prehistoric Hawai‘i as an ‘important phenomenon that
interacted with the natural environment, agricultural technology and
social and political organization in a systemic fashion’ (1976:250).
  The social anthropologist Oliver likewise attributed primary import¬
ance to population growth in the development of Maohi (Society
Island) society: ‘I believe that the principal influence upon social
change in these Islands was population increase, and not so much by
immigration as by steady internal increase’ (1974:1 123). This increase
‘led people to spread out over all the Islands and, eventually, in some
places (but not everywhere), to exert pressure upon the land - to com¬
pete for favorable territory, terrestrial and marine.’


Models of population growth on islands

Several lines of evidence all imply that the size and densities of Poly¬
nesian populations were closely related both to the level of agricultural
production and to degree of social stratification. The demonstration of
such correspondences, however, is not of much help in furthering our
ultimate goal of understanding the evolution of Polynesian societies.
To assess the evolutionary role of population, we must deal with
demographic change, with patterns of growth over long periods of time.
In Figure 27 I have diagrammed several kinds of population growth
curves which might have actually occurred on one or more Polynesian
islands. It may be instructive to consider these briefly in turn.
  The first model (Fig. 27 A) is one we may term the extinction curve, and
which we presume represents the scenarios of the ‘mystery’ islands dis¬
cussed in Chapter 4. In this model, population increases at first, but
never reaches a critical threshold, and after a time (ranging from a few
generations to perhaps several centuries) declines to extinction.
  In the exponential model (Fig. 27 B), population growth is a direct
reflection of the intrinsic rate of increase (r), so that




and,

           TV, = 7V0e

In the more isolated islands, where emigration and immigration were
minimal, such exponential growth would directly reflect the excess of
births (b) over deaths (d), since r= b—d. It is probable that exponential
growth curves did characterize the initial phases of colonization on
many Polynesian islands, as argued above and suggested by Birdsell’s
(1957) data. However, if a population continued to increase at a steady
exponential rate, it would be a simple matter of time before the popu¬
lation size far exceeded the resources available for its biological needs.
102        Process

(For example, a canoe load of twenty-five persons arriving in Hawai'i in
AD 400, whose descendants proliferated at an annual rate of 2 per cent,
well below the historically documented Pitcairn Island case, would
have given rise to 2.32 X 10IS people by the time of Captain Cook’s
arrival in AD 1778!) This brings us to the theoretically critical but
methodologically thorny issue of carrying capacity (K), the utility of
which has been hotly debated in anthropology (Glassow 1978). The
debate centres largely on the methodological difficulties of estimating
K for human populations, yet as Brookfield (1976) pointed out, some
concept of population thresholds is fundamental, given that resources




           27. Hvpothctical demographic scenarios for island populations
           (see text for discussion).
            The demographic factor                                      103

have certain finite parameters. Population biologists and evolutionary
ecologists have long recognized the inverse relationship between
growth rate and population density, noting that r decreases as the ratio
NIK approaches unity (Pianka 1974; Wilson and Bossert 1971; Pielou
1977; Christiansen and Fenchel 1977). Carrying capacity, in this sense,
can be defined in terms of growth, as the density of individuals at which
the population ceases to grow (r = 0), whether or not the theoretical
maximum population that can be supported on any given island has
been attained.
  The simplest model for natural population growth in which r de¬
creases as N approaches K is that which assumes a linear relationship
between r and N. This relationship is given by the well-known Verhulst-
Pearl-logistic equation,




describing an S-shaped or sigmoid growth curve (Fig. 27 C). Such a
model is frequently similar to actual growth curves empirically
generated for animal populations.
  Although the logistic often appears to give a close approximation to
natural   growth   processes,   its   underlying assumptions     may    not
accurately reflect a ‘real world’ situation. Pianka (1974) and Pielou
(1977) among others have discussed some of these assumptions and
possible modifications of the logistic model. Possible variations on the
logistic model are, for example, portrayed in Figures 27 D to F. In the
overshoot or crash model, population levels climb well above carrying
capacity, and having exceeded their resource base, undergo a subse¬
quent crash. There is thus a lead-lag time relationship between r and N.
In the alternative oscillating model, the overshoot and crash are less pro¬
nounced, and population levels oscillate around carrying capacity. To
complicate matters further, K itself does not have to be static (indeed, it
probably is never static in real world situations), and fluctuations in
population levels may be adjustments to fluctuations in resource levels.
Variations in carrying capacity can result from a range of temporal pro¬
cesses, including environmental hazards such as periodic drought and
cyclonic destruction of crops. The long-term effects of human use of an
island, including deforestation and erosion, also certainly had a real
impact on carrying capacity (see Chapter 6). In yet another variant,
carrying capacity may be shifted upwards, as in the case of technological
development or intensification (through irrigation, for example, or the
introduction of a new, high-yielding crop), resulting in a step growth
curve, as in Figure 27 F.
  Some form of sigmoid or logistic process probably characterized
population growth on all Polynesian islands. The archaeological prob¬
lem is how to test this hypothesis, for any test requires that we be able to
104       Process

reconstruct with reasonable accuracy the magnitude of population
changes in particular islands over time. To date, attempts to estimate
prehistoric Polynesian populations have been limited to those of Green
(1973) for Tonga, W. Shawcross (1970) for New Zealand, and Bellwood
(1972a) for the Hanatekua Valley in the Marquesas. These studies were
concerned with static or maximum population estimates for the period
immediately prior to European contact, and did not attempt to analyse
population change over time. Archaeological data potentially bearing
on prehistoric population growth are of two general kinds: (1) material
remains of human behaviour whose quantity per unit time and rate of
deposition are proportionally related to population size; and (2) the
direct evidence of human skeletal material. In the following pages I
examine evidence for prehistoric population growth in the Hawaiian
Islands, to test the hypothesis that such growth followed a sigmoid pro¬
cess. Our basic concern is with the shape of the prehistoric Hawaiian
population growth curve (rather than actual numerical estimates), and
its wider implications for human ecology suggested by the relationship
between N and K.


Population growth: the Hawaiian case

Census-taking in archaeology is based on an assumption of correspon¬
dence between population size at a given time, and the number of
objects or material remains used by that population (Ammerman et al.
1976:31). Among the classes of material remains commonly used to
estimate past populations are food residues, artifacts, and habitation
space (houses, packed house volumes, rooms, and so on; Cook 1972).
The present analysis relies on a variant of the habitation space
approach, assuming an allometric relationship between number of
habitation sites and population size. In prehistoric Hawai'i, habitation
sites were usually discrete physical structures, often stone platforms or
stone-walled enclosures (sometimes rockshelters) associated with a
household unit (for examples, see Green 1969, 1970; Kirch and Kelly
1975). Settlement patterns were dispersed, with some tendency toward
nucleation around prominent geographic features, such as a sheltered
bay, or major stream. Since most Hawaiian habitation sites are equat-
able with household units (the exceptions being certain early coastal
sites that were evidently nucleated settlements with more than one
household, e.g., the Halawa Dune Site on Moloka'i), the assumption of
an allometric relationship between population size and number of
habitation sites is probably reasonable.
  To implement a census-taking approach in Hawaiian archaeology,
we must of course have reasonably tight chronological control, and be
able to specify time-spans for the occupation periods of each of the
residential sites that comprise our sample. The development of
            The demographic factor                                     105

hydration-alteration rind dating of volcanic glass artifacts (Barrera and
Kirch 1973; Morgenstein and Rosendahl 1976), in conjunction with the
more traditional l4C dating, has permitted the age assessment of several
hundred prehistoric Hawaiian residential sites over the past decade.
Flake tools of volcanic glass are ubiquitous at all Hawaiian sites, and age
assessment of multiple flakes from single habitation components per¬
mits the assignment of an occupation time-span. In many cases, these
spans are cross-checked by l4C dates from the same deposits. It would
be misleading, however, to imply that the hydration-alteration rind
dating of Hawaiian volcanic glass is problem free. Recent investigations
have demonstrated that both chemical composition of the glass, as well
as temperature variations, may affect the rate of hydration-alteration
(Olson 1983). These factors may be partially controlled: (1) by the
choice of sites from one geographic region, such as West Hawai‘i,
where nearly all volcanic glass was derived from a single, high-quality
source (the Pu‘u Wa‘awa‘a cone); and (2) by the selection of coastal or
lowland sites, all within a relatively uniform temperature regime. These
controls have both been applied here.

Population growth in West Hawaii

The western leeward half of Hawai‘i Island has been the scene of more
intensive archaeology than any other part of the archipelago (Kirch
1979a: 198-201; Clark and Kirch 1983:5-8), and is an excellent location
to attempt a census-taking approach, using the temporal frequency of
dated habitation sites. Somewhat arid and less optimal for Polynesian
settlement than windward valleys, West Hawaifi was evidently not per¬
manently settled until about the ninth century AD. By the time of Euro¬
pean contact, however, the area had developed large and dense
populations whose subsistence needs were provided for by extensive
dryfield agricultural systems (see Chapter 7). To date, we have four
well-dated samples of residential sites from West Hawaifi; the temporal
distribution of these is given in Table 11, with the total number of sites
occupied in each 100-year interval indicated.
  The first sample consists of 51 sites from various parts of the West
Hawaifi region (including Lapakahi and Anaeho'omalu), temporal data
for which were synthesized by Hommon (1976) in his own attempt to
model population growth in Hawai'i. The sites in Hommon’s general
sample include the initial settlements at Koaie (Tuggle and Griffin
1973) and at Anaeho‘omalu (Barrera 1971). The second sample of 13
sites is from Kalahuipua‘a, a coastal fishing community centred around
a group of fishponds (Kirch 1979a). The Kalahuipua'a area was first set¬
tled in the thirteenth century and was abandoned before significant
European contact. The North Kona sample, obtained by Cordy (1981),
consists of 39 residential site complexes from Kohanaiki to Kukio. The
temporal distribution of North Kona sites, given in Table 11, has been
106   Process




                 o _
                'Sc0'’
                 <u —i        (NrfOO‘0‘0‘0^^
                                        - (N         OO >£)


                o —
                H
                o
                03
                Is
                IJL
         K      ^ <                       -H CO ts O
         o
                k if
                ¥ 13
                .§ D

         3
                cd cr.
                £ CO
                O
                                                ^ x o
                JZ    >                         —< Ol 04
                  HO
                z uO
                Z U



          o
                .S-K               04     04 O O'! <*D
                 2 .
         -C5    JZ -c
                    U
          a     13 •-
         "X3
          a


          SS                  04^10^04 — 00
                                        —• 04 CO rh CO
          a
         JS
                o
         *&,
                              oooooo oo
                          Cl O', d O'. ^ d Cl d Cl
         £      HO        OO 0-04COTf-OON
                 O        oOO0f-< — —                         «
                 C         I I I I ! I      I    I    I   I
                 CJ       oooooooooo
                 Q-       oooooooooo
          v               XOO-McO'tOOlN

         JZ      r;
          cd              QQQQQQQQQQ
         h      H         <<<<<<<<<<
           The demographic factor                                        107

derived from the original age estimates presented in Cordy (1981:
Appendix E). For reasons explained in Kirch (1983), Cord/s own
population reconstructions for the North Kona area are based on
several unwarranted assumptions and suspect methods, and have been
rejected here. The fourth sample of 10 sites consist of a recently
excavated and dated series in the Waimea-Kawaihae road corridor
(Clark and Kirch 1983).
  The combined West Hawai‘i sample of 113 dated residential sites is
plotted as a site frequency histogram in Figure 28. Since the population
of West Hawai'i at any given time should be reflected in the number of
occupied residential sites, the growth curve indicated by Figure 28 is
believed to reflect the general shape of the area’s prehistoric population
growth curve. The data synthesized in Figure 28 suggest a small popu¬
lation for the first four centuries of settlement in the region. By about
AD 1200, a phase of rapid population expansion was underway, with
population nearly doubling every century until about AD                 1600.
According to the data at hand, population growth then slowed con¬
siderably in the seventeenth century, and may have reached a peak by
about AD 1650-1700, with a decline in total population in the century
prior to European contact. Whether such a decline might have been
due to an actual increase in deaths over births, or to emigration (to




            28. Site frequency histogram for the West Hawai'i region.
108           Process

other parts of the island or archipelago), is not certain. Nevertheless, it
is clear that we are dealing with a typical sigmoid curve.
  A sigmoid growth pattern for the prehistoric West Hawai'i popu¬
lation is clearly indicated, and the mathematically simplest sigmoid
model is the logistic. However, a strictly logistic model requires that we
accept several assumptions (Pianka 1974; Pielou 1977) that may not be
warranted. In particular, the logistic assumes a linear relationship
between per capita rate of increase (r) and population size, N, so that r
decreases monotonically with increasing N, becoming 0 when N/K
equals unity. This assumption means that population growth is
density-dependent at all density levels. As Pielou (1977:35) observes, ‘it
may be more reasonable to suppose that there is some threshold den¬
sity below which individuals do not interfere with one anotherf This is
especially so in Polynesia, because we would not anticipate density-
dependent growth in a population colonizing a previously uninhabited
island or area, until such time as a sizeable population had built up and
pressure on land and resources began to be contributing variables. In
fact, an absence of density-dependent controls should characterize
colonizing propagules. Thus, rather than assume a linear relationship
between r and N, we may postulate a curve in which r decreases only
after a threshold population size had been reached.
  A second problem with a purely logistic model is that it does not fit
the rapidly attained peak indicated in the West Hawai‘i site frequency
distribution. If the population peak was equal to K, then under the
logistic, population growth should have begun to slow down con¬
siderably before it appears, in fact, to have done. Under a logistic model,
a point of optimal yield would have been reached in West Hawai'i at
about AD 1200, rather than in the fifteenth century, as suggested by
Figure 28. In fact, the shape of the West Hawai‘i site frequency distri¬
bution can be fitted to a logistic model only if we suppose that r was
monotonically decreasing in response to a value of K somewhat higher
than the actual population peak. The rapid attainment of a peak might
have been due to a rapid decline in K, due possibly to environmental
degradation. On the other hand, other factors such as warfare, infanti¬
cide, and so forth could also have precipitated a decline in population
growth. This is a significant point, the implications of which we will
consider further below.

Population growth on Kaho'olawe Island

The   arid,    leeward   island   of Kaho'olawe,   whose   archaeological
landscape is relatively unscathed by agricultural or urban develop¬
ment, was recently the subject of a massive archaeological survey,
covering the entire island and resulting in the identification of 2,337
features. Of these, some 655 features were dated by means of 1,120
hydration-rind age determinations on basaltic-glass flakes, and Hommon
               The demographic factor                                     109

(1980) has used these data to derive a preliminary model of the island’s
population growth curve. The frequency of dated residential features
by 100-year time intervals is shown in Figure 29, based on data com¬
piled by Hommon (1980: table 6). These data suggest a small founding
population during the first three centuries after colonization, followed
by a period of rapid population increase peaking in the sixteenth cen¬
tury. The last two centuries prior to European contact then witnessed a
major decline in population and, according to Hommon, a retraction
of settlement distribution from the upland plateau to a few small settle¬
ments along the coast The Kaho'olawe case thus appears to be an
example of the overshoot or ‘crash’ model of population growth and
decline, discussed earlier (see Fig. 27 D). This late prehistoric popu¬
lation decline, far more acute than that indicated for West Hawaifi, is
believed to be the result of human-induced degradation of the island’s
rather fragile, xerophytic plant community, and consequent erosion of
its arable soil cover.

Evidence from other islands

The West Hawai'i and Kaho’olawe residential site frequency curves
both suggest sigmoidal processes of population growth, and the
Kaho‘olawe case a substantial reduction in local population prior to
European contact. We must be cautious, however, of leaping to the
assumption that these curves            reflect the   demographic situation
throughout the archipelago. Both West Hawai'i and Kaho‘olawe are
relatively dry, leeward areas where the limits to agricultural intensifi-

      300-i



      250H
 CO
 UJ


      200-


 LU
 9    150-
 co
 UJ
 tr
 O    100-
 O

       50-


                          J
        0-               .1.T“            T      T       T
        1000             1200            1400           1600         1800A.D.
                                TIME

               29. Site frequency histogram for Kaho'olawe Island.
110         Process


cation were much lower than those in the more optimal, windward
regions, and where the possibilities tor human-induced environmental
degradation were more acute (see Chapter 6). Indeed, evidence from
other parts of the Hawaiian group indicate that the archipelago’s total
population was still increasing at the time of Cook’s arrival, and that
there may have been considerable internal redistributions of popu¬
lation concentration. Certainly, the data from such areas as Halawa
Valley and Kawela on Molokai Island (Kirch and Kelly 1975; Weisler
and Kirch 1982), and from the Makaha and Anahulu Valleys on O'ahu
(Green 1980; Kirch 1979b), support the notion of continued popu¬
lation increase up until European contact and the introduction of
debilitating diseases. Clearly, we need to generate more local site popu¬
lation frequency curves, like those for West Hawaii and Kaho'olawe,
for other areas in different ecological situations throughout the
archipelago,    before   the   overall   picture of prehistoric        Hawaiian
demographic change can be thoroughly understood.
  The need for additional palaeodemographic research notwithstanding,
the data obtained to date do, in my view, demonstrate that prehistoric
Hawaiian population growth curves were sigmoidal, reflecting a shift
from early, high rates of population increase, to later, decreased growth
rates, with population reduction in at least some areas. The significance
of such sigmoid growth sequences for Hawaiian prehistory, including
structural changes in Hawaiian societv and political organization, has
been discussed bv Hommon (1976) and Cordy (1981), and wall be
explored in greater detail in Chapter 10. At this point, I simply wish to
draw attention to the important suggestion of Baker and Sanders
(1972:162-3) that the rapid evolution of complex political systems may
partiallv be accounted for bv the ‘steepness’ of the later phases of popu¬
lation growth in a given system:

If we agree that a major stimulus in the evolution of large-scale political systems
is population growth, then the explanation for the evolution within such a short
period may lie in the nature of population growth. For societies organized on a
tribal level, a tribal size up to 5,000-6,000 people is conceivable, but a doubling
of population to 10.000-12,000 would require a chiefdom type organization in
order to maintain it as a stable society. This means that chiefdoms would evolve
from tribes within a single century (1972:162-3).

In Polynesia, societies were already hierarchically organized from the
time of initial colonization, as we have seen from a reconstruction of
Ancestral Polynesian Society (Chapter 3). However, the degree of
stratification witnessed in some Polynesian societies at European con¬
tact may well have developed over a very short time period, in partial
response to population growth, as suggested by Baker and Sanders.
   The West Hawai'i growth model (Fig. 28) indicates that the time
 period from about AD 1250 to 1650, and especially the latter 200 years
of that span, would have seen not only rapid population growth, and
            The demographic factor                                      111

expansion into previously vacant environmental zones, but pre¬
sumably also increased competition for local resources. As we shall see
in Chapter 7, this period in West Hawai‘i is also characterized by exten¬
sive archaeological evidence for the development and intensification of
large dryfield agricultural systems. Such intensification of production
must furthermore have had concomitants in the social mechanisms for
control and distribution of agricultural and other products. The clear
implication is that we must look to this period of rapid population
growth for the evidence of change in socio-political structure leading to
the unique degree of Hawaiian social stratification and political
development. Similarly, it is quite likely that the elaboration of socio¬
political structures on other Polynesian islands was also associated with
major episodes of population growth and expansion.
  The Hawaiian population growth curves presented above demonstrate
that empirical evidence for prehistoric demography can be generated
with archaeological data from Polynesian sites, and that at least one
major Polynesian society underwent a transition from rapid, density-
independent to reduced, density-dependent growth. Since the Hawaiian
case is unlikely to be unique, it may be taken as a model for population
growth in other (though not necessarily all) Polynesian archipelagos. At
this point, we may turn to several sets of palaeodemographic data
obtained from analysis of skeletal populations, to further assess the
level of density dependence in later prehistoric Polynesian popu¬
lations.


Palaeodemography of Polynesian populations

Techniques for the analysis of palaeodemographic parameters based
upon skeletal populations have developed rapidly in the past decade
(Angel 1969; Acsadi and Nemeskeri 1970; Weiss 1973; Bennett 1973;
Moore, Swedlund, and Armelagos 1975). There has, unfortunately,
been virtually no application of these methods in Polynesia. At least
four reasonably good-sized skeletal series — one from Tonga, one from
the Marquesas, and two from Hawai‘i - can be regarded as represen¬
tative of former populations, and meet criteria necessary for the con¬
struction of life tables. (For a detailed discussion of life tables, and the
methods for their construction from skeletal data, see the above cited
references, especially Acsadi and Nemeskeri 1970; also Hassan 1981.
An excellent treatment of life tables in population biology is provided
in Hutchinson 1978.)
  TheTongan sample derives from two adjacent/a itoka burial mounds
at ‘Atele (sites TO-At-1 and -2) on Tongatapu Island, excavated by
 Davidson (1969), with an osteological study of the human remains by
Pietrusewsky (1969). Both mounds were apparently used over a period
of several centuries during the second millennium AD, and thus date to
112             Process

Table 12. Life table: ‘Atele skeletal population


  X           4           4     K         4          4         4          e<;


 0-1          12      19.67   100.00    0.197      180.33    1695.06     16.95
 2-3          12      19.67    80.33    0.245      21 1.49   1514.73     18.86
 4-7           7      11.48    60.66    0.189      219.68    1303.24     21.48
 8-11          0       0.00    49.18    0.000      196.72    1083.56     22.03
12-17          6       9.84    49.18    0.200      265.56     886.84     18.03
18-21          1       1.64    39.34    0.042      154.08     621.28     15.79
22-31         10      16.39    37.70    0.435      295.05     467.20     12.39
32-41          9      14.75    21.31    0.692      139,35     172.15      8.08
42-51          4       6.56     6.56    1.000       32.80      32.80      5.00
  E           61


Explanation:
  x = age interval; I\ = actual number of observed deaths at age x
  ds = number of individuals dving at age x based on cohort of 100
  individuals




      = survivorship at age x or number of individuals living at age x
   qs = mortalitv rate; probability of dying at age x (qs = djly)
   Lx = number of individuals alive between age x and x + 1
   7) = total vears lived from age x on

          t-1
      4
          ^ 4*
          x

   d' = expectation of life at age x (e',' = 44)


a late phase of the Tongan sequence, when the population of the group
had probably achieved a dense and possibly stable condition. The
excavations provided a sample of 61 individuals assignable to age and
sex (out of a total of 99 individuals), which has been used to construct
the life table given here as Table 12.
   The Marquesan population derives from the Hane Dune Site on
Uahuka Island, excavated by Y. Sinoto (1966). Some 42 burials, mostly
from Layer IV, were analysed by Pietrusewsky (1976), and the life table
given in Table 13 is from this study (1976: table 3). The population
dates to the Marquesan Expansion Period, which Suggs (1961) regarded as
a time of population expansion into marginal areas of the archipelago
(Sinoto [1970:125-8, figs. 13, 14] provides a brief discussion of the
archaeological context of the Hane burials).
   The two Hawaiian samples both come from communed sand-dune
sepulchres. The largest of these, Mokapu on the island of 0‘ahu, con¬
sists of 1,163 individuals (probably the largest single cemetery in
Polynesia), studied in detail by Snow (1974), whose ag^sex distri-
            The demographic factor                                            113


Table 13. Life table: Hane skeletal population*


  X         A             d.          /v         ?v       Lv        T         d

 0-1         l            2.6        100.0      0.026    987      2094.7     20.9
 2-6         7           17.9         97.4      0.184    885      1996.0     20.5
 7-11        5           12.8         79.5      0.161    731      1553.5     19.5
12-16        4           10.2         66.7      0.153    616      1188.0     17.8
17-21        1            2.6         56.5      0.046    552       880.0     15.6
22-31        9           23.1         53.9      0.429    424       604.0     1 1.2
32-41       11           28.2         30.8      0.916    167       180.0       5.8
42-51        1            2.6          2.6      1.000     13        13.0       5.0
  X         39


* After Pietrusewskv (1976: table 3).


Table 14. Life table: Mokapu skeletal population


      X           D,            d.         /'     T        L,       T        d

   0-1              51      4.39      100       0.0439   195.61   2395.37   23.95
   2-3.5            95      8.17       95.61    0.0855   137.29   2199.76   23.01
 3.6-5.5            38      3.27       87.44    0.0374   171.61   2061.71   23.58
 5.6-10.5           65      5.59       84.17    0.0664   406.88   1890.10   22.46
10.6-16.5           50      4.30       78.58    0.0547   458.58   1483.22   18.88
16.6-20.5           26      2.24       74.28    0.0302   292.64   1024.64   13.79
20.6-30.5          454     39.04       72.04    0.5419   525.20    732.00   10.16
30.6-40.5          338     29.06       33.00    0.8802   184.70    206.80    6.27
40.6-50.5           43      3.70        3.94    0.9348    20.90     22.10    5.61
50.6—over            3      0.26        0.24    1.0000     1.20      1.20    5.00
    X            1,163


See Table 12 for explanation.


butions have been used to construct Table 14. Regrettably, the age of
the Mokapu interments is unknown; the presence of early settlements
along the windward 0‘ahu coastline near Mokapu (dating, as with the
Bellows site, from the initial colonization of the archipelago) provides
reason to suspect that the Mokapu series could be of some antiquity,
but until radiocarbon or other absolute dates become available, such a
conclusion remains speculative. (A programme of radiocarbon dating
of the Mokapu skeletal series would seem to be a high priority for
Hawaiian archaeology, given the potential significance of this popu¬
lation for the modelling and interpretation of demographic processes.)
The second Hawaiian skeletal series, with 92 burials (Table 15), was
excavated from the upper levels of the Pu‘u Ali‘i Sand Dune site at
114        Process

Table 15. Life table: Puu Alii skeletal population


  X       D,         dx                                     T,        eV

 0-9     39     42.39     100        0.4239     788. 04   1904.89    19.05
10-14     1      1.09      57.61     0.0189     285. 33   1116.85    19.39
15-19    11     11.96      56.52     0.2116     252 7 1    831.52    14.71
20-24     9      9.78      44.56     0.2195     198 37     578.80    12.99
25-29     6      6.52      34.78     0.1875     157 .61    380.44    10.94
30-34     7      7.61      28.26     0.2692     122 .28    222.83     7.88
35-39    10     10.87      20.65     0.5263      76 .09    100.55     4.87
40-44     9      9.78       9.78     1.0000      24 .46     24.46     2.50
  £   92


See Table 12 for explanation.

South Point, Hawaifi Island (Underwood 1969), and dates to about AD
1600-1780, that is, the two centuries preceding European contact.
  Several palaeodemographic parameters have been graphed in
Figures 30 to 32 for these four prehistoric Polynesian populations.
We may consider first the survivorship curves of Figure 30. In overall
pattern, the populations are similar, particularly the rapid decrease in lx
after about age thirty-five. There is considerable variation, however, in
the younger portions of the curves,           which   may reflect certain
demographic conditions of these populations. Survivorship is lowest
for the Tongan population, which in late prehistoric times had
achieved a high level of density in relation to arable land (and possibly,
lower nutritional status than the other populations represented). The
Pu‘u Ali‘i population fared only slightly better, and this too represents a
late period in the local prehistoric sequence, a phase of high population
density and intense inter-group conflict for resources (see Chapter 11).
Next in order of increased survivorship is the Hane population, which
- perhaps significantly- represents a phase of the Marquesan sequence
prior to the achievement of maximum density. Finally, there is the
Mokapu population, for which we have (regrettably) no accurate age
estimates. If the Mokapu population does date (even in part) to a
relatively early phase of the Hawaiian sequence (as the nearby presence
of early sites might imply), we would have in Figure 30 a significant
ordering of survivorship according to the relative positions of these
populations in their local island sequences, with later populations
which had achieved high density levels being marked by the lowest sur¬
vivorship. The implications for density-dependent controls on popu¬
lation growth are obviously considerable.
   The patterns of age-specific mortality shown in Figure 31 evidence
further correlates of this putative association between density and
palaeodemography. The Pu‘u Ali‘i and ‘Atele populations have the
            The demographic factor                                      115

highest levels of infant and child mortality, which is what would be
expected given reduced nutritional status of dense, agricultural popu¬
lations (also those for which the intake of animal protein was likely to be
lower, for reasons explained in Chapters 6 and 7). This general trend is
also reflected to a degree in the life expectancy curves shown in
Figure 32.
  The palaeodemographic data provided by these skeletal populations
are tantalizing in their suggestion that Polynesian populations were re-




              O Mokapu        A Pu'u Ali'i   V Hane          □ 'Atele


             30. Survivorship in four prehistoric Polynesian populations.
116        Process

sponding to certain density-dependent effects. Unfortunately, archae¬
ological and osteological data are mute when it comes to understanding
the behavioural patterns by which late prehistoric Polynesian popu¬
lations were regulated, and how the islanders themselves viewed the
relationship between population size and resources. For this purpose
we must again turn to ethnographic materials.


Population regulation: the case of Tikopia

Sir Raymond Firth’s richly textured ethnographic monographs have
made Tikopia, one of the Polynesian Outliers, the most thoroughly
documented of any Oceanic society. A small volcanic high island (4.6
km2), Tikopia supports a population very close to carrying capacity,
under a traditional agricultural regime. In 1929, there were 1,281
Tikopians, or a density of 278 persons per square kilometre, a high
value not only for Polynesia, but for any ‘primitive’ agricultural society
(by way of comparison, the population density of Tikopia rivals that of
the most densely settled areas of Ifugao, in central Luzon, Philippines,




               O Mokapu       A Pu'u Ali'i   v Hane         □ 'Atele



            31. Age-specific mortalitv in four prehistoric Polynesian
            populations.
           The demographic factor                                       117


noted for their magnificent, intensively irrigated rice terraces [Conklin
1980:6, 72]). By 1952, the population had increased even further to
about 1,750 (density 380/km2), due in large part to the relaxation of
traditional cultural controls on population size (Firth 1936; 1959b;
Borrie, Firth, and Spillius 1957). As we shall see, this level of density
actually exceeded the island’s carrying capacity under conditions of
environmental stress.
  The Tikopia, who at the time of Firth’s 1928 fieldwork (and to a large
degree even today) operated under a traditional Polynesian economic
system, unaffected by plantation agriculture or cash cropping, are
acutely aware of the close relationship between population, land (and
agricultural) resources, and the quality of life. They ‘realize the exist¬
ence of a food problem in general as well as in individual terms’ (Firth
1939:39). Thus, ‘not only is there a tendency for families to be regulated
in size according to the quantity of their orchards and other ground,
but there is a conception of a total population for which food has to be




                O Mokapu      A Pu'u Ali'i   v Hane        D 'Atele



            32. Life expectancv in four prehistoric Polynesian populations.
118        Process

provided’ (1939:39). Fakatau ki te kai, ‘measured according to the food’
(1939:43) is the fundamental concept underlying a variety of cultural
controls used by the Tikopia to maintain population at an acceptable
level- acceptable not merely in terms of bare subsistence necessity, but
in terms of culturally specified standards. Among these controlling
mechanisms are celibacy, coitus interruptus, abortion, infanticide, sea-
voyaging, and ultimately, war. Should these cultural mechanisms fail,
there is always the threat of natural disaster - drought or cyclone -
which brings the inevitable onge famine.
 Tikopia population is regulated largely at the family (paito) level, but
cultural sanctions against over-population are also encoded in the most
sacred rituals of the traditional religious system, the ‘work of the gods’
(Firth 1967). A critical part of the monsoon-season ritual, following
upon the complex yam rites, was thefono or proclamation at Rarokoka,
in the sacred district of Uta. The fono took the form of a ritually pre¬
scribed public address by the Ariki Tafua to the entire populace. ‘Not
only was it picturesque in setting- the glade in the forest, the rising sun,
the expectant silent crowd, and the towering figure of the chief of Tafua
rolling out the phrases - but the speech itself was remarkable for its
dignity and rhythm and for the moral code which it promulgated’ (Firth
1967:263). The fono ended with the following lines:

            The man who slept with his wife
            And feels thus let him rise
            One male and one female
            That is the plucking of the coconut and the carrying of the
              water bottle
            The man who will persist in creating himself a family
            Where is his basis of trees he will create his family for?
            He will make a familv merely to go and steal. (1967:269)

This is, as Firth notes, a ‘remarkable injunction’, embodying several
Tikopia concepts of population regulation. First is the idea that the
ideal family size consists of two children (one male and one female)
with their parents - the concept of fai tama fakangamua, ‘producing
foremost children’. The question is posed, where is the ‘basis of trees’
(tafito i rakau), the productive orchards, that will feed an increasing
household; if the productive basis is lacking, the result will clearly be
anti-social. Finally, the fono also refers - in the opening lines - to one of
the favoured methods of contraception, that of coitus interruptus.
  A variety of other methods were used to keep population in check.
One of the most important was the celibacy of junior males of a‘house’,
who were frequently expected to refrain from marriage and the pro¬
duction of offspring, since the children of‘their elder brothers will
occupy all the food resources at command’ of the descent group
(1936:414). The limitation of offspring, not only of these celibates (who
were not, however, denied sexual activity), but by married couples was
            The demographic factor                                      119


accomplished by coitus interruptus, abortion, and infanticide. In addition,
the common practice of young men to set out on overseas canoe
voyages, on which many of them were inevitably lost, also helped to
reduce the general population level.
  The efficacy of these measures has been demonstrated, in a negative
fashion, by the great increase in population since the advent of Chris¬
tianity when abortion and infanticide were outlawed, and since the
government discouraged overseas voyaging. Between 1929 and 1952
the island’s population grew by 37 per cent (an average intrinsic rate of
0.014). This increase was accommodated in large part by outmigration
to new communities in the Solomon Islands, and by certain adjust¬
ments in the agricultural system (including the adoption of steel tools
and the cultivation of high-yielding manioc). Nevertheless, the increase
was such that when disaster struck in 1952 and again in 1953, only the
relief supplies of rice provided by the government in Honiara helped to
alleviate the severity of the resulting famine, and even then at least
seventeen   persons    succumbed     to   famine-induced     deaths   (Firth
1959b:59).
  Disaster-induced famine (onge) is a powerful force in periodically
trimming the Tikopia population, as it was for many of the tropical
Polynesian societies (see Chapter 6). Here we must note a significant
point concerning the concept of carrying capacity- that measured over
a sequence of decades, rather than annually, an island’s carrying
capacity is the population capable of surviving a severe disaster-
induced famine. Thus, carrying capacity is not a static variable, but one
that fluctuates over time in a stochastic fashion. In the case of Tikopia, it
is clear that by 1952 population had grown to a level well above the low
point on the carrying capacity curve; had government relief not been
provided to the Tikopia, the demographic consequences would have
been grimmer.
  Like other Polynesians, the Tikopia have a well-developed set of re¬
sponses to disaster-induced famine, both to alleviate the severity and
impact of the famine itself, and to speed the process of recovery of the
agricultural sector. Food shortages are alleviated in part by drawing
upon the surplus reserves of pit-ensiled breadfruit and other starch
(mast). Among other adjustments observed by Firth (1959b) are: (1) a
 shortening of the fallow period; (2) the restriction of planting rights by
 non-kin on kin-group property; (3) a similar restriction on rights to
collect wild food plants; and (4) a concern with the precise demarcation
 of land boundaries.
   We cannot leave this analysis of Tikopia demography without dis¬
 cussing one final, cultural means of population regulation. War
 between social divisions of the island was an ultimate means of relieving
 the stress of over-population, and according to Tikopia tradition (Firth
 1961), was practised twice within the last four or five centuries. A more
120        Process

detailed discussion of these traditions will be found in Chapter 8; here I
note simply that the Tikopia themselves openly recognize warfare, and
the extermination or expulsion of one segment of the population, as a
real, albeit ultimate, means of demographic control. (During the
course of the 1952-3 famine in Tikopia, the ancient tales of the ex¬
pulsion of the Nga Ravenga and Nga Faea groups by the ancestors of
the present chiefs were frequently re-told, and there was at one point
some apparent concern that history might repeat itself [Firth 1959:93].)
Furthermore, the ethnographic literature for Polynesia as a whole tells
us that Tikopia was certainly not unique in this respect. As we shall see,
the links between population and competition were tightly forged in
the Polynesian chiefdoms.


Overview

K. B. Cumberland once wrote that ‘the future of Polynesia is bound up
above all with the growth of population in physically confined and pre¬
cisely bounded island areas’ (1962b:388). The same may be said for the
past. In this chapter, I have explored several lines of evidence -
archaeological, palaeodemographic, and ethnographic - relating to
Polynesian demography. At the most general level, there can be no
doubt as to the importance of population growth in the evolution of
Polynesian societies; the close correlation between population and
social stratification is merely one indicator of this relation.
  A general consideration of population biology on circumscribed
islands is in itself sufficient to suggest that the sequence of population
change on any Polynesian island would be characterized by a gradual
transition from an initially small, but rapidly growing population, to a
more stable, density-dependent population regulated by a variety of
cultural and natural controls (Table 16). To judge from the ethnographic
data, virtually all Polynesian populations had reached such high-
density levels by the time of European contact. In some islands, this
level may have been reached even a millennium or more before Euro¬
pean incursions, while in the large archipelagos of East Polynesia, there
is evidence that populations could have expanded to yet higher levels of
density. As Golson noted, ‘the demographic prehistory of the Pacific
Islands’ was very likely ‘complex with different islands at different
stages of the [demographic] cycle when Europeans first attempted to
number their inhabitants’ (1972a:30).
  Utilizing archaeological evidence for Hawai'i, I have attempted to
demonstrate that sequences of population growth can indeed be
empirically validated. In the Hawaiian case, rough population growth
curves for some areas have been approximated, supporting the con¬
tention of a sigmoid growth process. With the Tikopia ethnographic
data, we have glimpsed something of the varied cultural and natural
              The demographic factor                                          121


Table 16. Probable characteristics and cultural correlates of early and late popu¬
lations on Polynesian islands


Variable                      Earlv, colonizing         Late populations
                              population


Demographic characteristics
Population size               Well below carrying       At or near carrying
                              capacity; non¬            capacity; equilibrium or
                              equilibrium               oscillating
Intrinsic growth rate         High                      Low
Population density            Low                       High
Mortality                     Densitv- independent      Density-dependent
Cultural regulation           Limited                   Important; abortion,
                                                        infanticide, celibacy,
                                                        warfare and other
                                                        controls

Cultural correlates
Subsistence                   Broad-based, non-         Intensive production;
                              intensive                 emphasis on
                                                        specialization
Inter-group competition Variable, usually lax           Frequently intense;
                                                        warfare common
Social controls on            Weak                      Highly developed
production                                              regulatory apparatus;
                                                        ritual and secular
                                                        controls




controls that served to regulate Polynesian populations once they had
expanded beyond the initial, colonization phase of density-independent
growth.
  I cannot overstress the caveat that the demographic sequences of the
Polynesian islands were not identical, and each of the possible vari¬
ations shown in Figure 27 will doubtless be evidenced once additional
empirical analyses of population growth are forthcoming. In Tonga,
for example, it is likely that an oscillating steady-state population was
achieved more than one thousand years prior to European contact. The
population of Easter Island on the other hand appears to have seriously
overshot the carrying capacity of that remote isle, with a major
demographic crash in the late prehistoric period. These variations are
significant for the understanding of particular evolutionary sequences.
   On the broad canvas of the Polynesian region, however, it is the
similarities in these demographic sequences that stand out in terms of
the evolution of particular societies. As witnessed by the European
explorers, Polynesian chiefdoms were by-and-large densely settled,
agrarian societies, in which competition for land and other resources
122        Process

was a fact of life. In the chapters to follow, the linkages between the
demographic factor and other variables, such as settlement patterns,
agricultural intensification, and political organization, will be further
explored. It should already be clear that in the course of evolution in
the Polynesian islands, population was never solely a dependent or
independent variable. The views of Malthus and of Boserup must both
find their place in our models.
