The evolution of
the Polynesian
chiefdoms
PATRICK VINTON KIRCH
 NUNC COCNOSCO EX PARTE




THOMAS J. BATA LIBRARY
  TRENT UNIVERSITY
         Digitized by the Internet Archive
            in 2019 with funding from
            Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/evolutionofpolynOOOOkirc
NEW STUDIES IN ARCHAEOLOGY




The evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms
 NEW STUDIES IN ARCHAEOLOGY

 Series editors

 Colin Renfrew, University of Cambridge
Jeremy Sabloff, University of Pittsburgh




Other titles in the series

Dean E. Arnold, Ceramic theory and cultural process
Graeme Barker, Prehistoric farming in Europe
Richard E. Blanton, Stephen A. Kowalewski, Gary Feinman and
   Jill Appel, Ancient Mesoamerica
Peter Bogucki, Forest farmers and stockherders
Graham Connah, Three thousand years in Africa
Geoffrey W. Conrad and Arthur A. Demarest, Religion and empire:
   the dynamics of Aztec and Inca expansionism
Olivier de Montmollin, The archaeology of political structure
John Fox, Maya Postclassic state formation
Bo Graslund, The birth of prehistoric chronology
Ian Hodder, Symbols in action
Ian Hodder and Clive Orton, Spatial analysis in archaeology
Rosalind Hunter-Anderson, Prehistoric adaptation in the American
   southwest
Patrick Kirch, The evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms
Daniel Miller, Artefacts as categories
Ian Morris, Burial and ancient society: the rise of the Greek city-state
Keith Muckelroy, Maritime archaeology
Stephen Plog, Stylistic variation in prehistoric ceramics
Michael Shanks and Christopher Tilley, Re-constructing archaeology
Joseph A. Tainter, The collapse of complex societies
Robin Torrence, Production and exchange of stone tools
Peter Wells, Culture contact and culture change
Alasdair Whittle, Problems in Neolithic archaeology
Frontispiece. The Tahitian fleet assembled at Opare‘e, as seen
during Captain James Cook’s second voyage, 1774. (Lithograph
based on original oil bv W. Hodges: photo courtesy Bishop
Museum.)
The evolution of the
Polynesian chiefdoms




PATRICK VINTON KIRCH




                           lioni   UnivB/-sijy library
                              PfiJiMBOi-ouaji* ot&t.




CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
CAMBRIDGE
NEW YORK    PORT CHESTER
MELBOURNE    SYDNEY
G POt-7 0 •                      Hr,6               (9<o9
  Published by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge
  The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1RP
  40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011, USA
  10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia


  © Cambridge University Press 1984

  First published 1984
  First paperback edition 1989

  Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridge

  Library of Congress catalogue card number: 84—3249

  British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

  Kirch, Patrick Vinton
  The evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms. -
  (New studies in archaeology)
  1. Polynesia - Social conditions
  I. Title II. Series
  996 HN930.7.A8

  ISBN 0 521 27316 1
               CONTENTS




     Preface                                             page ix


 1   Introduction                                              1
     Methods, aims, and objectives                             5
     Approaches to prehistoric change in Polynesia             8
     Dominant trends in Polynesian prehistory                 13

Part I: Foundation
 2   Polynesian societies and ecosystems                      17
     The island ecosystems                                    17
     Cultural and linguistic subgroups                       25
     The material basis of Polynesian societies              28
     Organizational principles of Polynesian societies       31
     Overview                                                39

 3   Ancestral Polynesia                                     41
     Origins                                                 41
     The Lapita Cultural Complex                             44
     The Eastern Lapita sequence                             48
     Ancestral Polynesia: a reconstruction                   53
     Overview                                                67

Part II: Process
 4   Dispersal, colonization, and adaptation                 71
     The Polynesian dispersal                                71
     The challenge and strategy of colonization              79
     Adaptation in new environments                          87
     Overview                                                95

5    The demographic factor                                  96
     Models of population growth on islands                 101
     Population growth: the Hawaiian case                   104
     Palaeodemographv of Polynesian populations             111
     Population regulation: the case of Tikopia             116
     Overview                                               120
viii           Contents

 6     Changing environments                                  123
       Directional change in island environments              124
       The significance of environmental hazards              127
       Man’s transported landscapes                           135
       Human impact on island ecosystems                      139
       Overview                                               150

 7     Development and intensification of production          152
       Development of production systems                      153
       Production and the chieftainship                       160
       Intensive production: the wet and the dry              168
       Other aspects of production                            179
       Intensification in West Hawai'i: a case study          181
       Overview                                               192

 8     Competition and conflict                               195
       Demographic and ecological correlates of competition   198
       Warfare and political development                      204
       Archaeological manifestations of warfare               207
       Overview                                               216

Part III: Transformation
 9     Tonga                                                  217
       The archaeological sequence                            219
       Environment, agriculture, and population               221
       Rise of the dual paramountship                         223
       Structure of the protohistoric chiefdom                230
       Inter-island relations                                 232
       Voyaging and tribute                                   237
       Long-distance exchange                                 238

10     Hawai'i                                                243
       Colonization, adaptation, and expansion                244
       Local sequences of development                         246
       Traditional accounts of political development          253
       Late prehistoric Hawaiian society                      257
       Hawaifi and Tonga: a comparative note                  262

11     Easter Island                                          264
       Colonization and early developments                    266
       The Ahu Moai Phase (AD 1000-1500)                      269
       Decadent (Huri Ahu) Phase (AD 1500-1722)               274

12     Epilogue                                               279

       Glossary of Polynesian terms                           287

       References                                             290

       Index                                                  312
             PREFACE




There are probably few areas in the world where the potential for studying
the growth and development of complex, stratified social and political
systems is as great as among the islands of Polynesia. In part, the
analytical advantages of Polynesia are due to the often-cited ‘laboratorv-
like conditions that isolated islands naturallv provide. Equally import¬
ant is the wealth of ethnohistorical and ethnographic materials
pertaining to Polynesian societies as they existed and functioned at the
time of initial European contact, and the decades following such con¬
tact. The continuity from prehistory to ethnohistory allows for a more
extensive and precise use of historical documents and ethnographic
data in the interpretation of archaeological materials than is the case
with the study of prehistoric chiefdoms in many other parts of the
world.
   Until quite recently, however, Polynesia was an archaeological back¬
water, so that discussions of social and political change in the region
(such as the work of Sahlins [1958] and Goldman [1970]) were based
almost exclusively on synchronic ethnographic and ethnohistorical
evidence. Fortunately, the increasing pace of archaeological investi¬
gation throughout Polynesia over the past two to three decades has now
provided a firm foundation for diachronic studies. We should not
ignore the older ethnographic corpus, however, for, by using these data
in conjunction with the temporal framework provided by archaeology,
we are finally in a position to speak meaningfully about processes of
change in the Polynesian islands.
  My objective in this book is to dissect the several major processes that
underlie the transformation of the various Polynesian societies from
their common ancestor. To accomplish this, I have structured the
volume into three parts. In the first, I marshal a range of evidence to
reconstruct the broad outlines of Ancestral Polynesian Society, from
which the various contact-period societies descended. In Part II, I
dissect   in analytical   fashion   the major processes which       led   to
technological,   environmental,     demographic,   social,   and   political
change. My approach is comparative, using various data-rich case
studies to exemplify general trends or processes common to many, if

            IX
X           Preface

not all, islands. Finally, in Part III I consider three case studies (Tonga,
Hawai‘i, and Easter Island), and outline in diachronic fashion the
transformation of these societies from their ancestral forms. Similar
studies could have been made of other island groups, such as the
Marquesas or New Zealand, but limitations of space prevented this. In
any event, it is not my aim to provide definitive statements on the evo¬
lution of particular societies, but rather to use these case studies to
exemplify processes of change in Polynesia.
    This exploration into the Polynesian past mirrors a kind of personal
research odyssey through several island groups over more than fifteen
years. Since the book is, in part, an attempt to draw together the varied
strands of my research, and since I draw heavily upon this research in
my case studies, a few comments may be relevant. My interest in the
development of socio-political complexity in Polynesia was first
awakened during a study of the Halawa Valley, Molokah, carried out in
1969-70. Applying an ecological, settlement pattern approach, my
colleagues and I attempted in Halawa to unravel some of the complex
linkages between environment, population, subsistence (particularly
irrigation), and social organization in a w’indward Hawaiian valley.
Soon after, in 1971, the opportunity arose to carry out archaeological
work in one of the most remote, isolated, and traditional of Polynesian
communities, the tinv outlier of Anuta in the south-eastern Solomon
Islands. The experience of excavating a deeply stratified site spanning
three millennia of south-western Pacific prehistory was combined in
Anuta with the privilege of participating in a vibrant, functioning
Polynesian society, where no European missionaries, no traders or
trade stores, indeed verv little at all of Western influence had yet altered
the dailv pulse of life. The Anutan experience established a certain
direction to my research, for, once having experienced archaeology in
the midst of a traditional       Polynesian community in which           the
possibilities for ‘etlmoarchaeology’ were ubiquitous, it was difficult to
imagine doing anything else.
  In 1974, pursuing developing interests in ecology, intensive agri¬
culture, and cultural adaptation, I spent half a vear in the West Polynesian
islands of Futuna and ‘Uvea, excavating a variety of sites but also con¬
ducting ethno-ecological studies of irrigation and other aspects of local
etlmobotanv. Though Futuna and ‘Uvea are not so remote as Anuta,
enough remains intact of their indigenous subsistence economies and
socio-political organizations to      make studies     in   this area quite
productive.
  The Futuna—‘Uvea work was conducted on a veritable shoe-string
budget under somewhat trving field conditions, leaving me with the
desire to return again to West Polynesia to pursue further the study of
cultural adaptation to island ecosystems. With the support of the
 Bishop Museum, plans were laid for a second phase of extended work
            Preface                                                      xi

in Futuna. As political developments would have it, the fieldwork site
had to be changed at the last minute, and in 1976 some seven months
were spent on seldom-visited Niuatoputapu, one of the outlying Tongan
islands. With some background in the related Futunan language, a
working fuency in Tongan came quickly, and our studies of traditional
agriculture and fishing immersed us in the economic and social fabric
of the island. The archaeology, as well, proved to be rich and fascinating,
and the geomorphic evidence of environmental change striking. The
long months on Niuatoputapu were a period during which my ideas on
Polynesian cultural evolution began to take definite form.
  There was little time for reflection on the Tongan results after mv
return to Honolulu at the end of 1976, however, since within three
months I left again for an extended stay on anthropologically famous
Tikopia, as part of the second phase of the South-east Solomons
Culture History Programme. In 1977 with Doug Yen, and alone in
1978, I spent more than eight months on Tikopia, which remains not
greatly changed from what Firth described in 1929: a self-contained,
traditional community of fiercely independent Polynesians, its local
polity dominated by four hereditary chiefs. The archaeology of Tikopia
proved rewarding beyond expectations, but the constant stimulus of
life in a vibrant Polynesian society was even more compelling, if not
always beneficial to the archaeological work. It was in Tikopia that the
outline for this book was conceived, partly as a mental diversion during
weekend sojourns through the betel and breadfruit orchards to the
summit ofTumuaki, yielding views of the crater lake and the sacred dis¬
trict of Uta. To have been set down in Tikopia, with the vast
ethnography of Sir Raymond Firth as a guide, and the opportunity to
explore a continuity of three thousand years of cultural change revealed
in a panopoly of rich sites, was an intellectual stimulus which, I fear, I
may never again enjoy.
  The outline of this book was actually drafted during 1978 in Tikopia,
though serious writing did not begin until 1980. A precis of mv ideas on
Polynesian cultural evolution was published in 1980 (‘Polynesian pre¬
history: cultural adaptation in island ecosystems’, American Scientist
1980), originally attracting the editors of Cambridge University Press,
and resulting in an offer to publish the extended work in their series.
During the nearly three vears that the book has been in progress,
additional stimulus has been provided bv the initiation of a major
ethnohistorical and archaeological project in the Anahulu Valiev,
O'ahu, in conjunction with Marshall Sahlins. This experience has
shaped some of my views on the significance of structures of social re¬
production in the evolution of Polvnesian chiefdoms.
  A work that pulls together the varied strands of more than a decade of
experiences, thoughts, and research efforts obviously owes much to a
great many people, yet only a fewr can be singled out here for special
xii           Preface

thanks. Roger Green made possible my early work in the Halawa
Valley, and has been a constant source of inspiration and a gentle men¬
tor. Doug Yen not only encouraged my initial efforts, but provided the
wonderful opportunity to         join    him   in Anuta.   Our subsequent
collaborations, particularly in Tikopia, have been especially rewarding.
For whatever insights I may hope to have provided on Oceanic ecology
and production systems, Doug can take a healthy share of the credit
(though, surely, no blame for any pitfalls). Yosihiko Sinoto has over
many years provided not only the full institutional support of the
Bishop Museum, but openly given of his deep knowledge of East
Polynesian prehistory. In more recent years, my collaboration with
Marshall Sahlins has influenced my approach to prehistory, tempering
a long-standing commitment to ecology with the perspective of a
strongly cultural orientation.
   I would be remiss not to acknowledge the long-standing support of
the National Science Foundation, which through a series of grants (SS-
40294, BNS 76-04782, BNS 76-17672, BNS 82-05621) enabled my
extensive fieldwork in the south-western Pacific and Hawai'i.
      For specific assistance in the preparation of this volume I gratefully
thank: Tom Dye for his exhaustive review of the entire draft; Matthew
Spriggs for giving the final draft a critical reading; Debra Connelly-
Kirch, Patrick McCoy, and Carl Christensen for reading one or more
draft chapters; Eric Komori for his splendid drafting; Peter Gilpin for
photographic work; and Patience Bacon for typing most of the final
draft. For their courtesy in providing illustrations, or for granting per¬
mission to use copyright materials, I thank Roger Green, Thor Heyerdahl,
Yosihiko Sinoto, Matt McGlone, Tim Bayliss-Smith, Marshall Weisler,
and the Bishop Museum Photo Archives. And finally, my greatest debt
of thanks to my wife, Debra Connelly-Kirch, for her patience and con¬
 stant urging that I ‘get on with it’.
                                                                     P.V. K.
               1
               Introduction




The first European explorers to pierce the sea barriers to Polynesia
wondered at the vast distribution of the Polynesian ‘Nation’ - from
Easter Island to New Zealand, thence to Hawaifi, enclosing a watery
triangle of 20 million square miles. Since Europeans had themselves
only recently‘discovered’ the Pacific Ocean, the idea that mere savages
(however noble) had navigated a great ocean and colonized its remotest
isles was astonishing. While at Easter Island in 1774 Captain James
Cook wrote that ‘it is extraordinary that the same Nation should have
spread themselves over all the isles in this vast Ocean from New
Zealand to this island which is almost a fourth part of the circumference
of the Globe’ (Beaglehole 1969:354). Despite their astonishment, the
explorers could not miss the clear similarities in material culture, cus¬
toms of behaviour, and in speech, which all bespoke a common origin
for the Polynesians. As Lieutenant King of the Resolution astutely observed:
‘The same language . . . hardly requires any other proof of those who
speak it being the same people, and originating from the same country’
(Beaglehole 1967:1392).
  Ever since Cook’s and King’s observations, generations of scholars
have puzzled at whence, when, and how these Oceanic ‘Vikings of the
sunrise’ penetrated and colonized the vast Pacific. Sunken continents,
multiple migration waves from both west and east, bizarre racial
theories - all were invoked to explain the so-called ‘problem of Poly¬
nesian origins’. A compelling explanation has emerged only in the past
few decades, largely due to the advent of intensive sub-surface
archaeology in the Pacific Islands. Bolstered by ancillary studies in
historical linguistics, comparative ethnography, ethnobotany, and
physical anthropology, archaeology has resolved the ‘problem of
Polynesian origins’ thus: the Polynesians became Polynesians within
their oceanic realm, their varied cultures the product of millennia of
local evolution in island environments. Polynesian prehistory unfolds
as an exceptional instance of evolution and diversification.
  Having achieved this modern perspective on Polynesia’s myriad
cultural and social variations as the product of differentiation and

           1
2             Introduction

transformation from a common ancestor, a whole new array of analytical
problems confronts the anthropologist and prehistorian. What par¬
ticular conditions or processes propelled Polynesian societies along
sometimes divergent, yet oft-times convergent evolutionary or develop¬
mental pathways? How is it that elaborate, hierarchical, and at times
oppressive political systems emerged in some islands while others
appear to have maintained relatively egalitarian polities? How did varying
environmental constraints affect particular pathways of technological
and social change? Such are the questions that continually tease the
student of Polynesian ethnography and prehistory, and that have
inspired the present work.
  At this point I must advise the reader as to what I mean (and, as
importantly, do not mean) by evolution, a term the use of which carries a
certain risk that one will be pigeon-holed with some particular school of
anthropology. In this book, I intend the term to apply simply to
technological and social change in the most general sense. Although we
are not here concerned with biological evolution, Darwin’s classic
phrase, ‘descent with modification’, is probably closest to a definition
of evolution in the present context. Certainly, I wish to avoid any
prejudice of association with particular theories of mechanisms for
cultural or social evolution. I have my own biases, as the reader will dis¬
cover, but it is upon the evidence for social and technological change in
Polynesia that I want to focus, not upon some narrow theoretical argu¬
ment. The reader should also be forewarned that although I use the
term ‘chiefdom’ to characterize the socio-political organization of
Polynesian societies at the contact-era endpoints, this does not mean
that I regard them as exemplars of some evolutionary ‘stage’, or that I
subscribe to the ‘neo-evolutionary’ schemes popular in American
anthropology during the 1960s and 70s (e.g., Service 1967; Fried 1967).
    Indeed, for reasons given in detail below, I believe that a stadial or
    stagal approach to evolution in Polynesia is something of a ‘dead horse’,
    entirely inadequate as an explanatory framework.
      Polynesia is as exemplary a setting for such a study of technological
    and social evolution as we may hope to find. It has been fashionable to
    speak of Polynesia as a cultural ‘laboratory’ (Suggs 1961:194; Sahlins
    1963; Kirk and Epling 1972; Clark and Terrell 1978; Kirch 1980a;
    Friedman 1981:275) and the metaphor may well be appropriate, for the
    region   offers   nearly   unique   possibilities   for   analytical   control
    (Goodenough 1957). Islands and island societies by their very nature
    provide microcosms for the study of ecological and evolutionary pro¬
    cesses. As Loren Eiseley put it, islands are apt to open doorways to the
    unexpected. The fifty ethnographically known societies that comprise
    Polynesia were all demonstrably derived from a single ancestral society.
    Each society presents an ecological and evolutionary isolate which
    together can be likened to a set of historical, cultural ‘experiments’, in
            Introduction                                                 3

which the founding ancestor was identical, but where certain variables
- ecological, demographic, technologic, and so on - differed from case
to case. Sahlins (1958:ix) invoked a biological analogy when he stated
that the Polynesian societies ‘are members of a single cultural genus
that has filled in and adapted to a variety of local habitats’. The analogy
is appropriate, and just as studies of island biology from the time of
Darwin and Wallace have contributed enormously to an understanding
of organic evolution, so island anthropology promises to open door¬
ways regarding the nature of social and technological evolution.
  Various aspects of analytical control are inherent in Polynesia. Not
only does the region represent a spectrum of societies derived from a
common ancestor, but isolation between many islands effectively
reduces the thorny problem of diffusion and cultural contact following
initial colonization (Goodenough 1957). More, the Polynesian islands
contrast remarkably in their ecological settings, offering a multi¬
dimensional spectrum of environmental challenges to which the
founding populations variously responded. With climates ranging
from tropical to temperate (indeed, sub-antarctic in the Chatham
Islands), and with topography encompassing atolls, high islands, and
near-continents, the ecological variability within Polynesia may be
greater than that exhibited within any other culture area of the world.
One additional aspect of control lies in the diverse population sizes of
Polynesian societies at European contact, ranging from a few hundred
to several hundred thousand persons. Population densities ranged
from truly sparse (c. 0.02 persons/km2 in southern New Zealand
[Anderson 1980a: 12]) to among the densest known for horticultural
societies worldwide (432 persons/km2 in Anuta [Yen 1973b]). Surely
here are tantalizing data for testing the role of population growth and
‘pressure’ in relation to technological and social change .
  To paraphrase G.E. Hutchinson, each Polynesian archipelago and
island was an ecological theatre,      wherein was enacted its own
evolutionary play. To make sense of Polynesia’s variability, we must
ascertain the consistent and meaningful similarities, as well as any
significant anomalies, in the developmental sequences represented by
each island. Building on that framework, our ultimate aim is to isolate
underlying mechanisms and processes of change or evolution. Clearly
this goal extends beyond the geographic confines of Polynesia, and is
relevant to the wider issue of social transformation, without regard to
particular time or place.
  Polynesian societies are of wide anthropological interest for another
reason, owing to their socio-political structures. Chiefdoms, as an
intermediate level of socio-political organization bridging the acephalous
society with more complex state societies, hold a special fascination for
anthropologists. Polynesian societies not only exemplify the ‘typical’
chiefdom, they display the limits of variation in organizational struc-
4              Introduction

ture and complexity of such societies. Within Polynesia we find
societies in which chiefs were inseparably linked as kinsmen to com¬
moners, where redistribution was minimal, and production almost
entirely a household matter. On the other hand were elaborate chief-
doms such as Hawai'i, where the chiefly class claimed descent indepen¬
dent from commoners, ranked themselves internally into seven or
eight grades, practised sibling marriage to maintain those grades,
mobilized corvee labour and organized production on a grand scale,
and most notably, alienated land from ownership by commoners.
These latter Polynesian chiefdoms, which ‘approached the formative
levels of the old fertile crescent civilizations’, have been said to lie at a
critical interface between the chiefdom and state (Sahlins 1963; Fried
1967; Service 1975).
  Polynesia offers an opportunity to address the development and
elaboration of chiefdom socio-political organization, both from the
perspective of comparative ethnography and through the evidence of
archaeology. What was it that led some Polynesian societies in the
direction of increasingly complex, stratified polities, while others
remained relatively simple? How did this trend towards increased
organizational complexity correlate with population growth, agricultural
intensification, or level of inter-group conflict? Since the Polynesian
spectrum of socio-political variability represents evolutionary divergence
from a shared ancestor, the aspects of analytical control cited above
should also permit the isolation of some of the processes that helped to
mould each Polynesian chiefdom throughout the course of its historical
development.
      This task is not entirely novel, and several classic works of anthropology
have addressed themselves to a nearly identical theme (of which the
most widely read is probably Sahlins [1958]). However, whereas
analysis of synchronic ethnographic materials characterized earlier com¬
parative studies of Polynesian chiefdoms, we can employ now a large
body of archaeological data with direct, diachronic relevance to the prob¬
lems of Polynesian evolution. Alan Howard (1972:822) presaged the
role of archaeology in a general synthesis of Polynesian society when he
wrote that the ethnographic theorists had provided prehistorians ‘with
a richer set of competing possibilities concerning social change around
which to orient their [archaeological] efforts, and if they do their job
well we may yet accumulate sufficient data to produce compelling
    reconstructions’. Three decades of intensive work in Polynesian
archaeology have now brought us to a point where the data, if not
    totally satisfying, are at least sufficiently rich to demand an attempt at
    synthesis that ranges beyond mere description. Archaeology, after all,
    is privileged by the nature of its data to address problems of technological
    and social change most directly. Polynesian archaeology must avail
             Introduction                                                    5

itself of the region’s analytical opportunities, and inherit the challenge
left by the comparative ethnographers.


Methods, aims, and objectives

Fundamentally, this book is a study of the internal differentiation of
Polynesian societies. Since these were non-literate societies, it is a study
in prehistory, but by no means restricted to the use of strictly archaeological
data or methods. Precisely because Polynesia as a region consists of a
series of discrete, but historically related societies - all derived from a
common ancestor - and because there was direct historical continuity
between the ‘ethnographic present’ and the prehistoric past, we are in
an excellent position to draw upon ethnohistoric, ethnographic, and
linguistic data, as well as upon strictly archaeological evidence in an
attempt to     understand    the   region’s   prehistory.   The   Polynesian
ethnographic baseline does not provide mere analogies for the
interpretation of archaeological data; it illuminates directly the endpoints
of indigenous developmental sequences.
  The method of this study can be clearly described with reference to a
simple model of Polynesian differentiation (Fig. 1). In the diagram, the
variety of island societies witnessed at European contact is represented
by their ethnographic endpoints (shaded circles, e.g., X4, Y,). Each of
these societies was the product of an internal sequence of development
from the same historical ancestor, which I term Ancestral Polynesian
Society (APS). Over time, the differentiation of Ancestral Polynesian
Society resulted from colonization of a range of new and environ¬
mentally contrastive islands, and from subsequent internal change,
generally in isolation. In some cases, contact between island societies
(as in the case ofW3 and X3 in the diagram) may have resulted in later
cultural or linguistic borrowing (diffusion) which occurred after initial
colonization and differentiation and can further confuse the picture.
Despite these caveats, the use of lexical and ethnographic evidence
does permit a fuller reconstruction of the ancestral baseline from which
the differentiation of Polynesian societies proceeded, than that which
archaeology alone can provide.
  In and of themselves, however, ethnographic and linguistic methods
cannot inform us of the particular sequences of development of island
societies: they simply illuminate the point of origin (Ancestral Poly¬
nesian Society) and the endpoints of indigenous change. To get at
sequences of change requires properly diachronic data. Thus, as pre¬
historians interested fundamentally in sequences of change- and in the
processes underlying change — we must rely primarily on archaeological
data, the material remains from which technological and social change
may be inferred. Only such archaeological data can fill in the record of
6            Introduction

change from Ancestral Polynesian Society to the diversity of endpoints
that were met by the eighteenth-century European explorers.
    In our quest to understand the processes that underlay and initiated
change and differentiation among Polynesian societies, there is yet
another body of data with potential relevance. This is the corpus of
indigenous oral traditions, of which Goldman writes, ‘at the very least
they represent a Polynesian viewpoint on their own history, and in this
important respect they reveal local historiography1 (1970:xii). Each
Polynesian society possessed its own body of traditions, especially of
the political events surrounding the ruling elites, and these traditions
are invariably tied to* genealogies that provide a relative temporal


       ISLAND A             ISLAND B          ISLAND C         ISLAND D




                       RANGE OF ENVIRONMENTAL VARIATION




    KEY:       ANCESTRAL POLYNESIAN SOCIETY               COLONIZATION EVENT




               SOCIETY X AT TIME to                 -► LOCAL DEVELOPMENT



               SOCIETY AT ETHNOGRAPHIC ENDPOINT           INTER-ISLAND
               OF INDIGENOUS DEVELOPMENT                  CONTACT/EXCHANGE



              1. The differentiation ol Polynesian societies from a common
              ancestral society (see text for discussion).
            Introduction                                                 7

framework. There has been a cyclical debate among Polynesian
scholars as to whether such traditions and genealogical records
accurately reflect ‘real’ historical events (Suggs 1960b; E. Leach 1962;
Firth 1961; Hooper 1981). My own view, based primarily on close
analysis of traditional materials from Tonga, Tikopia and Hawai'i, is
that the traditions pertaining to the last few hundred years of the
developmental sequences (the past several generations prior to Euro¬
pean intrusion), do indeed represent actual events and affairs of real
people, although some distortion of fact, as well as use of metaphor and
allegory are obviously problems to be dealt with (cf. Vansina 1965). The
Tikopia case clearly shows      remarkable correspondence between
indigenous oral traditions and archaeological evidence (Kirch and Yen
1982:363-8). What really matters, however, is not whether such oral
traditions are literally ‘true’ in any Western sense of history or pre¬
history, but that they offer an alternative view of historical process and
frequently illuminate the motives or inducements to change. They
allow us to perceive change as the results of conscious actions on the
part of knowledgeable members of society, and not merely as the pre¬
cipitate of vaguely defined interaction between ‘system variables’ (cf.
Giddens 1981:18). In short, they offer an indigenous perspective which
at times may help in the analysis of our own ethnographic and
archaeological formulations.
  Using these several sources of data pertaining to Polynesian pre¬
history, each of them serving to supplement and cross-check the others,
the specific objectives of this study are three-fold. First, I attempt a
reconstruction of the common baseline, Ancestral Polynesian Society.
Sahlins (1976:23) has said that ‘history begins with a culture already
there’, and, as Friedman pointed out, evolutionary models begin ‘with
an . . . “original” structure in order to generate subsequent structures
with the consequence that the initial form must remain temporarily
unexplained’ (1979:32). For Polynesia this baseline is Ancestral Poly¬
nesian Society, and Chapters 2 and 3 are devoted to a reconstruction of
this society as it flourished in the West Polynesian archipelagos some
thousand years before Christ. By combining forces with historical
linguistics and comparative ethnography, archaeology can achieve a
reasonably detailed outline of this ancestral baseline. The reader must
understand that my primary aim is to analyse what happened to this
ancestral society as its members were dispersed to the isolated islands
of Polynesia, to adapt to, interact with, and modify a range of local con¬
ditions. We shall not, however, be concerned with the origins of
technological and social patterns alreadv in existence some three
millennia ago. The ultimate origins of Ancestral Polynesian Society are
another story that we must leave aside for now, a story that eventually
must lead us back in space to island south-east Asia, and in time
perhaps to the end of the Pleistocene.
8            Introduction

    My second objecdve, which forms the central and major portion of
this volume, is an analysis of the dominant processes that resulted in
the internal differentiation of Polynesian societies. Rather than treat the
development of the Polynesian chiefdoms geographically, on an
island-by-island basis, or chronologically, I have chosen to arrange my
analysis and argument around the several major processes which
appear to have dominated Polynesian developmental pathways. Thus,
after an initial review of the region’s ecological diversity and constraints
and the reconstruction of Ancestral Polynesian Society, I turn to a con¬
sideration of the reassortment of technological and social systems, and
adaptation    to   new      conditions    that   inevitably   accompanied   the
colonization of new landfalls. Successive chapters each treat other
significant processes,       namely      population   growth,    environmental
change, development and intensification of production, and com¬
petition and conflict. In each case I try to show how technological and
social patterns already developed in Ancestral Polynesian Society were
a dynamic part of the process of change.
    The third and final objective is to examine three particular sequences
of development, three case studies, and to compare and contrast their
unique yet similar pathways of change. For this purpose, I have chosen
Tonga, Hawai'i, and Easter Island, and the diachronic analysis of their
sequences is the theme of the final third of the volume. In their often
radical departure from Ancestral Polynesian Society, these three cases
reveal the historical limits to structural transformation within the
Polynesian chiefdoms.
    In relation to these objectives, I would like to offer a brief comment
on the idea of explanation in prehistory, borrowing some of the insights
of a foremost student of evolution, Ernst Mayr (1961). This book is not
so much an argument in favour of a particular explanation, as an
attempt to specify some of the various causes, both proximate and
ultimate, that lay behind Polynesian technological and social change,
and to explore the often complex interrelations amongst these causes. I
do not believe that any single paradigm will ever parsimoniously and
sufficiently ‘explain’ the transformation of the Polynesian chiefdoms.
What we can hope to achieve is a reasonably clear understanding of the
major proximate causes for particular, observed changes in the
archaeological record, and the major ultimate causes responsible for
channelling evolution in certain general directions. Such an achieve¬
ment is reward enough, and perhaps of more lasting value than trendy
explanations tied to some particular theory of culture or society current
at the moment.


Approaches to prehistoric change in Polynesia

Speculation regarding Polynesian origins and prehistory began with
the eighteenth-century explorers and continued unabated throughout
            Introduction                                                  9

the nineteenth century (see Howard 1967 for a thorough review), but
serious anthropological studies of the region began only about sixty
years ago. The year 1920 saw ‘the problem of Polynesian origins’ pro¬
claimed a major scientific issue (Gregory 1921), with the B.P. Bishop
Museum initiating an exhaustive ethnographic and archaeological field
survey eventually requiring two decades to complete. Among the
young anthropologists enlisted in this programme was E.S.C. Handy,
whose subsequent publications typify the strongly diffusionist view of
Polynesian cultural origins and development, a view that held sway for
several decades.
  Handy’s theoretical perspective was actually anticipated, in tenor if
not substance, by the formulations of earlier scholars such asj. Macmillian
Brown, who explained the‘strangely varied web’ of Polynesian cultures
as the result of ‘a singularly advanced barbaric woof crossing a
palaeolithic warp’ (Brown 1907:xxx). In consort with the Boasian anti¬
evolutionism of the times, Handy maintained that variability in Poly¬
nesian societies was to be explained - not as the result of processes of
cultural change and divergence within a local ecological setting- but as
an amalgam of traits imported by successive movements of colonizing
or conquering populations. Based upon field studies in the Society
Islands, Handy (1930a; 1930b) proposed a‘two strata’ theory of origins,
in which the multitude of traits comprisingTahitian society was divided
into those of an ‘old Tahitian’ or manahune population, and those of a
later, conqueringarii people. Such blatant diffusionist schemes appear
naive in retrospect, yet it is well to consider that Handy’s viewpoint not
only dominated Polynesian studies for nearly two decades, echoes of it
linger on in some modern formulations.
  Piddington (1939), in a concluding essay to Williamson’s classic
works on Central Polynesia, attacked at length the ‘two strata’ theory of
Polynesian origins. Piddington rightly criticized the lack of rigour in
Handy’s diffusionist approach: ‘using a pair of compasses, and, taking a
Polynesian institution as the centre, drawing gradually increasing con¬
centric circles upon the map until the circumference of one of them
passes through the venue of some extraneous institution bearing a
superficial resemblance to its putative Polynesian offspring’ (1939:341).
Piddington convincingly argued that Polynesian cultural variation
could readily have resulted from local developmental processes, ‘that
there was never more than one cultural “migration” into the area, and
that the variations to be found there are due to spontaneous develop¬
ment from a single original culture’ (1939:337). His argument freed
Polynesian studies from the shackles of diffusionist logic, and opened
the way for modern conceptions of prehistoric change.
  In two papers published contemporaneously with Piddington’s
critique, Burrows (1939a, b) advocated a parallel notion of internal
process in the differentiation of Polynesian cultures. Based upon a
detailed trait analysis, Burrows (1939a) proposed a four-fold partitioning
10          Introduction

of the region (into Western, Intermediate, Central, and Marginal sub¬
groups). Cultural differentiation, Burrows argued, had been due to in
situ historical process, not diffusion from outside Polynesia. Burrows
(1939b) likewise examined variability in social organization, specifically
addressing the presence within Polynesia of two kinds of social units:
kinship-based groups (‘breed’), and those organized on territorial prin¬
ciples (‘border’). Although diffusion was not entirely ruled out,
Burrows righdy stressed ‘the role of purely local dynamic factors’ in giving
each region ‘a pattern in some respects unique’ (1939b: 18). Among
these dynamic factors he mentioned intermarriage, adoption, and
migration, and ‘perhaps most powerful of all - warfare arising from
rivalry over land or ambition for enhanced status’ (1939b:21).
     In addition to stressing social factors, Burrows was aware of the
potential role of environmental constraint and diversity in moulding
characteristic aspects of each society. Burrows’s seldom-cited com-
parison(1938) of Futuna and‘Uvea in Western Polynesia (both ofwhich
he had studied during Bishop Museum’s ethnographic survey) dealt
with the significant influence of topography and local ecology on social
development and differentiation. Some of Burrows’s conclusions
appear naive or deterministic in the light of a contemporary ecological
perspective, but his attempt was seminal, foreshadowing later inno¬
vations, including Sahlins’s concept of‘differentiation by adaptation’
(1958).
   By the 1940s the anthropological consensus on Polynesian cultural
diversity had shifted from a Kulturkreise mentality to an emphasis on the
role of internal processes. Peter Buck’s work (e.g., 1944), laying out a
grand synthesis of Polynesian ‘culture stages’, exemplified this view¬
point. The role of diffusion was not entirely abrogated, however, for
Buck- who held that the original Polynesian ancestors had entered the
region via the Micronesian atolls - believed that crop plants and
domestic animals were added to the Polynesian cultural repertoire after
initial colonization. It is significant, however, that Buck used the term
‘evolution’, albeit a unilineal evolution synonymous with ‘progress’.
For instance, in discussing the geographic movement from atolls to
high islands, Buck wrote that: ‘The Society Islands provided an abun¬
dance of basaltic rock, thus the shell age Polynesians had the raw
material with which to rise again into the stone age’ (1944:474).
     Under the influence of Leslie White, Julian Steward, and others,
cultural evolution had become fashionable in American anthropology
by the late 1940s and early 1950s. One of their students, Marshall
Sahlins, saw in Polynesia the inherent advantages for a controlled study
of what Steward had termed ‘multi-lineal evolution’. In a justly famous
though much criticized monograph, Sahlins (1958; see also 1957)
advanced the thesis that ‘Polynesian cultural differentiation was pro¬
 duced by process of adaptation under varying technological and
             Introduction                                             11

environmental conditions. A single culture has filled in and adapted to
a variety of ecological niches’ (1957:291). Sahlins reviewed the forms of
Polynesian social organization, and argued that two basic structural
types, ‘descent-line systems’ and ‘ramage systems’ were each the result
of adaptation to particular ecological conditions, compaction of
resources in the former case, and dispersed resources in the latter. In
contrast to high islands, the unique constraints of atolls favoured ‘a
multiplicity of socio-economic groups formed on different principles
and connected with production and distribution of different goods or
on different scales’ (1957:296). In all cases, stratification was to be
accounted for vis-a-vis its role in spurring production and in organizing
the distribution of strategic goods.
  Unfortunately, the logical clarity ofSahlins’s argument was flawed by
ethnographic and ecological inconsistencies. J.D. Freeman (1961,
1964)   refuted the attribution of descent-line systems to Samoa,
demonstrating instead the existence of ramage organization. Finney
(1966) invoked Tahitian ecological data to reject Sahlins’s contention
that high islands were characterized by widely distributed resources.
Instead, the valley-centred, wedge-shaped Tahitian territorial units
each contained all necessary resources, and thus could be effectively
exploited by a minimal ramage. Despite such criticisms, Sahlins’s work
had a tremendous impact, and not only within the field of Polynesian
studies (see, for example, Flannery and Coe 1968; Sanders and Price
1968; Peebles and Kus 1977). As FIoward( 1972:822) suggests, the lasting
contribution of Sahlins’s monograph was to force anthropologists to
‘focus our lenses on the relationship between ecological features,
modes of production,        distribution and consumption, and social
institutions’.
  Whereas Sahlins saw Polynesian societies building upon an ecological
foundation, Irving Goldman (1955,       1970) presented an opposite,
though complementary perspective, that these societies were moulded
by ‘status rivalry1 inherent in their aristocratic political structures.
Goldman’s arguments also suffered criticism on the basis of inattention
to ethnographic detail, logical tautology, and other grounds (Hawthorne
and Belshaw 1957; Howard 1972), and his thesis received neither the
acclaim nor notoriety of Sahlins’s. Nevertheless, as Howard (1972:822)
asserts, Goldman made a substantial contribution in stressing the dis¬
tinction between the ‘cultural concerns of high chiefs and persons of
lower rank. . . . the former were primarily concerned with matters of
honor, power, and prestige, while the latter were preoccupied with the
pragmatics of making a living’. The ecological perspective of Sahlins
and the structural orientation of Goldman together contribute ele¬
ments for a more sophisticated and compelling theory of Polynesian
evolution.
  Those uninitiated in the history of Polynesian anthropology may
12           Introduction

wonder that in a review of theories of prehistoric change no reference
has as yet been made to archaeology. Not until the 1950s did archaeology
begin to plav a leading role in considerations of Polynesian origins and
cultural differentiation, having ‘come of age’ only within the past two
decades. Although limited excavations had been conducted in New
Zealand (even as early as the 1870s), up until 1950 Polynesian archaeology
was largely confined to surface surveys of the more impressive archi¬
tectural sites, and to descriptive analyses of stone tools such as adzes.
Archaeology was held to offer little more than ancillary, corroborative
data to historical ethnography. Even the forward-looking Piddington,
while admitting grudginglv that archaeological methods were ‘valid’ in
Polynesia, questioned whether the ‘systematic exhumation of pre-
European Polynesian artifacts is a profitable and urgent task for science
today’ (1939:335).
     The serendipitous results of a university class in archaeological field
techniques, conducted at Kuli‘ou‘ou Rockshelter,           O'ahu by K.P.
Emory in the spring of 1950, shattered the dogma that Polynesian
archaeology was historical ethnography’s poor relation. Not only did
the Kuli‘ou‘ou deposits yield an unanticipated range and abundance of
prehistoric artifacts, but a radiocarbon age determination for charcoal
from the shelter’s lowest level (the first l4C date for the Pacific Islands,
946 ± 180 BP) pushed the initial settlement date of Hawai'i beyond
expectations. At the same time Gifford’s (1951) excavations in Fiji, at
the western gateway to Polynesia, and Spoehr’s (1957) work in the
Marianas on the Asiatic fringe of Oceania, began to hint at the lengthy
time depth of human settlement in the Pacific, and at the extent of local
cultural development revealed by archaeological sequences. Amongst
Polvnesianists, a furore of intellectual excitement was generated by the
realization that archaeology could indeed provide a direct means of
studying prehistoric change in Oceania.
     Since Emory’s pioneering excavation, thirty years of increasingly
intensive archaeological work has revealed the prehistoric sequences of
almost every major Polynesian archipelago. Whereas scholarly consen¬
sus of the late 1940s held that most of Polynesia had been settled for no
more than 1,000 vears (e.g., Emory 1946), it is now evident that a time-
scale in excess of three millennia is the case, at least in the western
archipelagos. Ample time had therefore elapsed for significant local
development. Furthermore, the archaeological evidence conclusively
demonstrated a single, common origin for all Polynesian societies, and
this ancestor was shown to have affinities with eastern Melanesian
materials (Green 1968). Finally, even in the shorter sequences of East
Polynesia, archaeological data were indicative of substantial and signifi¬
cant change from the time of initial colonization to European contact-
in technology, settlement pattern, subsistence systems, demographic
patterns, and so forth. In situ prehistoric change was at last empirically
            Introduction                                                 13


demonstrated, rather than a matter of speculative reconstruction based
solely upon synchronic comparisons.
  A consequence of its pioneering status, Polynesian archaeology has
focussed until recently upon descriptive, culture-historical endeavours.
Basic archaeological sequences of all major archipelagos have been
worked out in some detail, as attested in three recent regional syntheses
(Bellwood 1978a, 1979; Jennings 1979). From this wealth of archae¬
ological data, one may abstract several broad and widespread trends
characteristic of many (if not all) local developmental sequences . A
brief catalogue of these trends should aid in orienting the reader to the
main outlines of Polynesian prehistory, and to the central problems
addressed in this book.


Dominant trends in Polynesian prehistory

Given that all Polynesian chiefdoms were derived from the same ances¬
tral stock, and that the challenges of island life (despite differences of
scale and local constraint) tend to be similar in kind if not degree, it is
reasonable to suppose that the evolutionary processes operating on
Polynesian societies were parallel in many island groups. A comparison
of the dominant trends in the sequences of the well-investigated islands
(Samoa, Tonga,     Marquesas,    Hawai‘i,   Easter,   Societies, and   New
Zealand) does, in fact, reveal remarkable consistency. I list here some
nine trends, each of which will be the focus of considerable analysis and
discussion in later chapters.
  1. With colonizing populations relatively small in numbers, popu¬
lation growth in the centuries following initial settlement was a fun¬
damental trend in all Polynesian societies. Such growth was evidently
rapid in many cases, for substantial population densities had built up in
nearly all island groups by the time of European contact. In Chapter 5 I
examine in full the proposition that population growth was a significant
force (though not a ‘prime mover1) in the evolution of the Polynesian
chiefdoms.
  2. Extensive modification of island ecosystems by the colonizing
populations was a continuing process, frequently resulting in reduced
biotic diversity, and in creation and maintenance of artificial vegetation
communities. In many cases, the modification of landscapes, including
significant erosion, can only be classed as degradation. At the same
time, environmental transformation may in some cases have led to the
creation of micro-environments favourable to particular economic
activities, such as irrigation.
  3. Sequences of agricultural development in Polynesia reflect, as a
general trend, increasing intensification. Such intensification can be
measured archaeologically in terms of the scale and complexity of
agronomic infrastructure and facilities, such as irrigation ditches and
14           Introduction

pondfields, walled garden plots, or dryfield systems. These develop¬
ments are presumed to have been accompanied by the usual indices of
intensification: increased labour per unit area, and decreased fallow
periods. In certain islands, such as the Marquesas and Society groups,
intensification took an alternative route to that of field cropping,
namely arboriculture. The trend of intensification may in fact be said to
apply to productive systems as a whole, and is reflected in such develop¬
ments as Hawaiian fishpond aquaculture. Chapter 7 will explore these
evolutionary pathways and their relationship to demographic and
socio-political change.
  4. A corollary of agricultural intensification is increased economic
specialization over time. This trend is particularly evident in those
societies that displayed the greatest degree of social stratification at
European contact. In Hawaifi, for example, there is evidence for con¬
siderable specialization in agriculture, adze production, canoe manu¬
facture, fishing, and other activities. The ethnohistoric records for
Tonga and the Societies indicate similar specialization.
     5. Increased emphasis upon storage facilities for farinaceous staples
is a trend characterizing certain tropical chiefdoms, as well as that of
New Zealand. Hawaifi, in this regard, is an exception which proves
especially enlightening as to the relationship between storage and
chiefly power, a topic pursued further in Chapter 10.
     6. The prehistoric sequences of several Polynesian archipelagos
reflect changes over time in settlement pattern distribution, from
nucleated hamlets in the early, colonization phase to dispersed
household units later in time. This appears to be the case in Tonga,
Samoa, the Societies, Marquesas, and Hawaii. It does not necessarily
hold for New Zealand or Rapa, exceptions which again illuminate cer¬
tain relations between settlement, socio-political organization, and
resource use.
  7. In all of the Polynesian chiefdoms, there is a dominant trend in the
development of specialized, ceremonial or public architecture, even
though different functional categories are emphasized in different
island groups.      In Tonga,   for example,    architectural elaboration
centred upon the tombs of apotheosized chiefs. In Hawaifi, Easter
Island, and the Societies, a focus upon increased scale and complexity
of temple architecture is evident, whereas in the Marquesas emphasis
was placed upon massive tribal dancing and feasting centres.
     8. The development of militarism is another dominant trend in
 Polynesian cultural evolution, for which there appear to be no signifi¬
 cant exceptions. Archaeologically, the trend is evidenced in increased
 construction over time of a range of earthwork or stone fortifications,
 the terraced hill forts of Rapa and thepa of New Zealand representing
 apogees of technological development. Militarism and the socio¬
 political competition it reflects are trulv fundamental trends to be
 accounted for in anv model of evolution in Polynesia.
           Introduction                                                15

  9. Finally, there was the trend toward increased stratification and dif¬
ferentiation in social status and rank, which was uneven throughout the
region, and led to a range of societal complexity at the time of Euro¬
pean contact. This trend was most significant in Tonga, the Societies,
and Hawaifi, in which the hierarchical differentiation of society reached
new heights. It is, however, also reflected to a lesser degree in other
Polynesian groups.
  The nine major trends summarized above constitute a catalogue of
sorts for the technological and social changes that transformed Ances¬
tral Polynesian Society into the chiefdoms witnessed at European con¬
tact. Such a catalogue or inventory is a necessary starting-point for
understanding evolution in Polynesia. To move beyond description
and achieve some understanding of the processes of change leading to
these trends is the primary aim of the analyses to follow.
 PART I      FOUNDATION
            We are not engaged in some kind of trick photography, which would produce a fuzzy con¬
            ventional image, deceptively generalized; what we are looking for are characteristics
            held in common, which will make whatever is original stand out by contrast.
                                                                      Marc Bloch (1966:xxiv)



            2
            Polynesian societies
            and ecosystems

Descendants of a common ancestor, all Polynesian societies share cer¬
tain basic features- for example- in subsistence and technology, social
organization, land tenure, and religion. The delineation of these com¬
monalities provides one baseline from which we may reconstruct
Ancestral Polynesian Society and assess the varied transformations
undergone by particular societies. This baseline, moreover, would be
incomplete without some consideration of the environmental variability
inherent in the spectrum of Polynesian island ecosystems. This chapter
develops such a baseline, with an ecological overview of the region’s
natural diversity, and with an ethnographic review of the material and
social bases of Polynesian life.


The island ecosystems

In large measure, the Polynesian evolutionary drama reflects the
region’s great ecological variability. The islands range in size and form
from atolls and diminutive volcanic specks less than 1 km2, to near¬
continental New Zealand, while the climatic continuum spans tropical,
sub-tropical, temperate, and (this may come as a surprise to some),
sub-antarctic zones. Island ecosystems vary as well in other physical
and biotic characteristics - their isolation, elevation, age, geological
structures, local weather patterns, natural resources, soils, and suscep¬
tibility to natural disasters. As a consequence, Polynesian islands pro¬
vided contrastive milieux for the development and growth of new
societies, each created by the fission of colonizing parties from ances¬
tral homes, each responding anew to the unique opportunities and
constraints offered by a new landfall. The Lapita-pottery makers who
first colonized the tropical western archipelagos of Samoa and Tonga
about 1500 BC, and who would become the ‘first Polynesians’, could
scarcely have imagined the environmental extremes that their descend¬
ants would discover, explore, and successfully adapt to. Probably

           17
                                             HAWAII




2. The Oceanic region, showing the Polynesian Triangle, the
Polynesian Outliers, and the major islands and archipelagos
discussed in the text.
              Polynesian societies and ecosystems                               19

Table 1. Principal islands and archipelagos of Polynesia


 Island or group      Type and number of islands          Area (km2)   Estimated
                                                                       population*

West Polynesia
Tonga                 Raised coral; atoll; high     160        647          40,000
Samoa                 High                           10      3,134          80,000
Futuna                High                            2         65           2,000
‘Uvea                 High                            1         59           4,000
Niue                  Raised coral                    1        259           4,500
Tokelau               Atoll                           4          6           1,200

East Polynesia
Cook Is.              High; atolls                  15        240          15,000
Society Is.           High; atolls                  11      1,536 ,        45,000
Marquesas Is.         High                          10      1,057          35,000
Hawaiian Is.          High                          10     16,692         200,000
Equatorial Is.        Raised coral; atoll            5        702          n.o.**
New Zealand           ‘Continental’                  2    501,776         115,000
Chatham Is.           High                           2        713           2,000
Kermadecs             High                           1         29             n.o.
Tuamotu Is.           Atolls                        76        790           7,000
Austral Is.           High                           5        132           5,000
Mangareva             High; atolls                   8         15           4,000
Pitcairn              High                           1          5             n.o.
Easter                High                           1        160           7,000
Henderson             Raised coral                   1         36             n.o.

Outliers (Total 18)
Anuta                 High                           1           0.4           150
Tikopia               High                           1           4.6         1,250
Bellona               Raised coral                   1          20             450
Nukuoro               Atoll                          1           1.7           150


“Estimate at time of initial European contact.
ssn.o. = not occupied at European contact, but with archaeological evidence of
former Polynesian inhabitants.



nowhere else in the world has a single cultural group radiated over such
a broad ecological spectrum.
  Some thirty-eight major archipelagos and islands are inhabited by
Polynesian peoples (Fig. 2). The majority of these lie within the Poly¬
nesian Triangle, whose apices are formed by New Zealand, Hawai'i,
and Easter Island. To the west, eighteen Polynesian ‘Outliers’ (Bavard
1976) lie in a wide arc along the fringe of Melanesia. Together, more
than 344 individual islands w7ere, at one or another time, colonized by
Polynesians (Table 1).
  Despite their diversity, island ecosystems share several intrinsic
properties, with far-reaching implications for their inhabitants including
20          Foundation

man. Fosberg(l 963a:5-6), introducing a symposium on man’s place in
the island ecosystem, enumerated several of these properties. Basic to
insularity are isolation and limited size, with major consequences for both
genetic and cultural evolution. Acting as barrief and filter, the isolation
of islands accounts for much of the uniqueness of island life. Once past
the hazards of overseas transport or dispersal, a colonizing propagule
was likely to find on islands an environment free of predators and com¬
peting species, with adaptive radiation a frequent occurrence. In the
Hawaiian Islands, for instance, some 2,000 endemic higher plants
evolved from as few as 275 ancestral immigrant stocks (Zimmerman
1948). Limitation in island size has as well the effect of restricting avail¬
able resources and micro-environments, and for certain groups of
biota the size of an island will therefore index its organic diversity
(MacArthur and Wilson 1967).
  Isolation and size are, of course, relative. In parts of tropical
Polynesia, some archipelagos form inter-visible chains with islands
only a few kilometres apart. Other Polynesian islands are among the
most isolated landfalls on earth; Hawai’i lies 3,862 km from its closest
Polynesian neighbour, the Marquesas, and 3,800 km from the west
coast of North America. Despite the developed seafaring and navigating
abilities of Polynesian peoples, isolation was a major factor influencing
technological and social evolution. The developmental pathway of the
Tongan political system, for instance, was heavily influenced by the
proximity of Fiji and Samoa, and by the relative ease of maintaining
exchange systems of chiefly spouses and prestige goods between
those archipelagos.
  Island size exhibits even greater variability than degree of isolation.
The miniature‘high’ island of Anuta, one of the Polynesian Outliers, is
a scant 40 hectares in area, and supports a permanent population of
about 160 persons (Yen and Gordon 1973). This is perhaps the smallest
permanently inhabited Polynesian island, although many of the atolls
have comparably restricted land areas. At the opposite extreme are the
two near-continental islands of New Zealand, with a combined land
surface of 501,776 km2, more than all the other Polynesian archipelagos
put together. Clearly, the constraints imposed on a human population
by circumscribed island resources vary tremendously, and must be
assessed case by case.
  Among other characteristics of island ecosystems of direct relevance
to the study of Polynesia is the ‘extreme vulnerability’ of insular eco¬
systems once isolation is broken down, and the ‘tendency toward rapid
increase in entropy when change has set in’ (Fosberg 1963a:5). Though
never completely stable, prior to man’s advent the older island eco¬
systems had achieved some form of relative stability or effective
equilibrium. The arrival of human populations, along with their inten¬
tional and unintentioned biotic introductions, invariably upset this
             Polynesian societies and ecosystems                           21

dynamic equilibrium, often with dramatic and sometimes deleterious
consequences.
  Except for New Zealand - a pre-Mesozoic continental remnant con¬
trasting in every aspect with the rest of Polynesia - the islands are
volcanic in origin, constructed of successive flows of basalt and andesite
lavas, and of pyroclastic ash, cinder, and tuff. As a result, the range of
isotropic rocks available for stone tool production was restricted to
fine-grained basalts, vesicular lavas, and volcanic glasses (on makatea
islands and atolls, of course, no volcanic stone was available.) Erosion,
submergence, and emergence of these igneous masses produced
islands of three classic types: (1) high islands with volcanic soils; (2) low
islands or atolls; and (3) raised coral or makatea islands (Thomas
1963).
  High volcanic islands, such as the Society and Hawaiian archipelagos,
offered the least constraint and greatest opportunities for colonizing
human populations. Sufficiently elevated to orographically induce pre¬
cipitation, high islands tend to have permanent drainages (at least on
windward sides), developed and fertile soils, and are thoroughly
vegetated. Because of rainfall differences, windward-leeward contrasts
are often considerable on high islands, and pose different environmental
challenges to human populations. The marine environments of high
islands vary greatly, ranging from the rock-bound coasts of the
Marquesas (Chubb 1930), through islands like Rarotonga where a
fringing reef forms a narrow integument around the island (Marshall
1930), to the encircling barrier reefs and lagoons of the Society group,
or of ‘Uvea (Fig. 3).
  Atolls and raised coral (makatea) islands are actually coral caps on
igneous cores. The greatest limitation of these is fresh water, although
the largest atoll islets support a thin sub-surface aquifer (the Ghyben-
Herzberg lens) floating on salt water, and many makatea islands have
seeps or springs. Both lack permanent watercourses, and their floras
are impoverished in comparison to the high islands. The larger and
older raised coral islands do have thick, fertile soils capable of sustaining
intensive agriculture (e.g., Tongatapu, enriched with volcanic ash fall).
The terrestrial impoverishment of atolls, however, is offset by the high
organic productivity of atoll reefs and lagoons (Wiens 1962; Salvat
1970, 1972), the structure and complexity of which have been likened
by Marston Bates to that of the tropical rainforest. This great marine
productivity in large measure sustained human existence through the
Tuamotu and other atoll habitats of Polynesia.
  Some islands combine the classic volcanic-maAatea-atoll forms in
various permutations. Mangaia, for instance, consists of a volcanic core
with a rim of raised coral reef (Marshall           1930).   The island of
Niuatoputapu in the Tongan archipelago exhibits a central volcanic
ridge surrounded by an uplifted plain of coral reef and detritus, a
22           Foundation

windward fringing reef, and a leeward coast and lagoon protected by a
barrier reef with offshore islets in typical atoll configuration (Fig. 4).
     Cross-cutting the variability of Polynesian landforms is the climatic
spectrum. Most islands are tropical, with fairly uniform and equable
temperatures between about 70-80°F, and a mean annual range of 1-
9°F (Freeman 1951:12). Some islands, such as Easter and the Australs,
are sub-tropical, and in the higher elevations on Hawaifi and Maui
Islands, true alpine conditions exist. New Zealand is temperate, and in
the Foveaux Straits region of South Island, as well as in the Chatham
Islands east of New Zealand, sub-antarctic conditions prevail (Sutton
1980). Looking upon the vestiges of Archaic East Polynesian settlement
in the Chathams, lashed by the ‘roaring forties’, one can only marvel at
the adaptive propensities underlying the shift from tropical horti-
culturalists to sub-antarctic hunters.




              3. The major tvpes of Oceanic islands. Dark screening rep¬
              resents volcanic land mass; light stipple represents coral reef or
              reefal limestone (adapted from Thomas 1963).
           Polynesian societies and ecosystems                         23

  The Polynesian biota derives largely from Asia, particularly tropical
South-east Asia, and as a general rule there is increasing biotic
impoverishment as one moves from west to east through Oceania.
Among the consequences of this depauperate biota for colonizing
Polynesians was the near-total absence of food plants and of most edible
land mammals or reptiles. The wild relatives of all the Oceanic crop
plants do not occur eastwards of the Solomon Islands, and cultigens
had to be purposely introduced throughout Polynesia. On certain of
the more isolated islands, such as the Hawaiian group, adaptive radi¬
ation produced extreme endemism in the local flora. The first Poly¬
nesian settlers to Hawai'i were confronted with a 99 per cent endemic
flora, the potential properties and uses of some 2,000 previously unen¬
countered species having to be discovered through trial and error. New
Zealand presented an equally challenging organic environment.
  This is not to imply that the islands were totally lacking in vegetal
resources, for most of the high, and even makatea-type islands were well
forested at the time of initial human colonization. A range of soft and
hard woods provided timber for construction and for firewood, and
experimentation with native species led to their adaptation for dyes,
medicines, and other household uses. In the process of pioneering new
environments, the Polynesians frequently transferred their ethno-
biological categories, or folk classifications, to the new biota. For
instance, the Proto-Polynesian term for ironwood, *toa, was transferred




           4. The island ot Niuatoputapu in Tonga displavs a central
           volcanic ridge surrounded bv an apron of uplifted coral reef.
           Note the broad lagoon, and the volcanic cone of Tafahi in the
           distance.
24           Foundation

to an endemic hardwood [Acacia koa) in Hawai‘i, where the true iron-
wood was absent.
     The terrestrial fauna of Polynesia was on the whole impoverished.
Abundant endemic insects and land molluscs were of little direct con¬
sequence to humans. In the western islands several species of fruit bat
(Pteropus spp.) were regularly taken for food. The only major, non¬
marine source of wild animal protein, however, was that of the native
land birds and migratory seabirds (Mayr 1945). Several species of
seabirds, such as the frigates (.Fregata spp.). shearwaters, and the dark-
rumped petrel (Procellariidae), were prized for their succulent flesh.
Native land birds were taken either for their flesh, as with the Pacific
pigeon (Ducula pacifica), and the purple swamp hen (Porphyrio porphyrio),
or for their brilliant feathers, as with the Fijian parrots (Vini sp ,,Phigys
sp.) and the Hawaiian honeycreepers (Drepaniididae). In New Zealand,
some thirteen species of flightless moa birds (Dinornithiformes) pro¬
vided a terrestrial resource unparalleled elsewhere in Polynesia.
     The sea provided the dominant source of protein in Polynesian diets.
Littoral and inshore habitats yielded a variety of seaweeds, molluscs,
holothurians, sea urchins, octopus, squid, crustaceans, and small fish,
while the deeper reefs, benthic, and pelagic zones produced larger fish,
rays, sharks, turtles, and cetaceans. Diversity and productivity in the
marine components of island ecosystems vary considerably. For the
most part, the central, tropical islands support extensive barrier reef
and lagoon ecosystems with high organic productivity. Many of the
sub-tropical islands have much less extensive reef development, and a
less diverse marine fauna. Easter Island, lacking a fringing reef and
isolated in the east Pacific, has only 140 species of fish, compared with
about 450 species in Hawaifi, and more than 1,000 species in Fiji.
     Polynesia is clearly an ecologically varied region, each island imposing
environmental constraints and opportunities in some respects different
from those of any other. The above examples demonstrate the con¬
straints imposed by resource limitation, climatic factors, island size,
geological composition, and so forth. Equally significant are a range of
natural perturbations, or‘environmental hazards’ (Vayda and McCay
1975). The most pervasive of these hazards in Polynesia are drought,
cyclone, volcanic eruptions, and tsunami. Even larger, well-forested
high islands are subject to periodic drought, sometimes of severe pro¬
portions. In the Marquesas, for example, drought is a major and
recurrent phenomenon with considerable impact on the course of pre¬
historic cultural development (Adamson 1936; Suggs 1961). Tropical
cyclones usually devastate an island’s agricultural base, and constitute a
major threat in the western archipelagos of Tonga and Samoa (Visher
1925). Volcanic eruptions and tsunami are more limited in their
occurrence, but may have had dramatic effects upon local populations.
Polynesian adaptive response to recurrent environmental perturb-
            Polynesian societies and ecosystems                       25

ations, including forms of technological buffering, will be considered
in Chapter 6.
  The dynamic nature of Polynesian man-land relationships has
become increasingly evident in the course of recent archaeological
investigations. As Fosberg (1963a, b) observed, islands are fragile and
vulnerable, and we are just now beginning to realize the extent to which
prehistoric populations modified island ecosystems. The introduction
of exotic biota, extensive burning and clearance of native vegetation,
exploitation of marine and terrestrial fauna, erosion, siltation - all of
these processes transformed insular landscapes. Adaptation of Poly¬
nesian societies to their island world is thus not a simple problem of
technological adjustment to a set of stable environmental conditions.
Environmental constraints confronting a colonizing population in anv
island were in most cases quite different from those which faced a
descendant population generations later. The environmental con¬
straints at the time of European contact were in many respects the
product of human actions. Nor was the modification of island landscapes
necessarily fortuitous; part of the success of Polynesian colonizing
strategies must be attributed to their conscious and purposeful
rearrangement of island environments. Indeed, the modification,
manipulation, and all too frequently, the degradation of island eco¬
systems is a dominant theme of Polynesian prehistory.


Cultural and linguistic subgroups

One may distinguish within Polynesia several major cultural sub¬
groups, the delineation and relationships of which provide important
clues for the Polynesian prehistorian. The basic cultural distinction
separates West and East Polynesian groups. West Polynesia incorporates
the major archipelagos of Tonga and Samoa, along with the isolated
islands of Futuna, ‘Uvea, and Niue; the Ellice and Tokelau groups are
sometimes included as well. In a major comparative study, E.G.
Burrows (1939a) pointed to various uniquely shared traits - in material
culture, kinship terms, ceremonial behaviour, food, and so forth -
which distinguished West Polynesian societies from all others. As it
turns out, the West Polynesian archipelagos were also the first to be
colonized, and thus constitute the original Polynesian ‘hearth’ or
homeland, from whence the rest of the Triangle was settled (see Chap¬
ter 3).
  East Polynesia is something of a misnomer, since one of its major
members, New Zealand, is geographically among the most westerly of
Polynesian islands. The term East Polynesia, however, is thoroughly
ingrained in the regional literature. Included in this major subgroup
are the Hawaiian, Society, Marquesas, Cook, Tuamotu, Austral, and
Mangarevan archipelagos, as well as Easter Island. Again, these
26           Foundation

societies all share certain features or traits in common which dis¬
tinguish them from the Western societies. Burrows (1939a) and Buck
(1944) further divided East Polynesia into Central and Marginal sub¬
groups, the former comprising the Society, Tuamotu, Austral, and
Cook Island chains. These archipelagos, relatively less isolated than the
Marginal groups, have had considerable inter-island contact, probably
accounting for certain shared similarities in language, material culture,
and socio-political organization.
     The Outliers constitute a third primary subgroup, distributed along
the eastern fringe of Melanesia. Neglected until recently by ethnologists,
linguists, and archaeologists, these societies remain lacunae in our
knowledge of Polynesian prehistory. Early opinions on Outlier culture-
history ranged from Capell’s view that these societies represented rem¬
nant or relict populations left behind in the course of easterly
migrations, to the theory that they are recently derived from West
Polynesia by a process of drift voyaging. Archaeological excavations on
Anuta, Tikopia, Bellona, Nukuoro, and Taumako (Kirch and Rosendahl
1973; 1976; Kirch and Yen 1982; Poulsen 1972; B.F. Leach personal
communication), conducted within the past decade, have revealed
occupation sequences spanning three millennia, sometimes with pos¬
sible hiati or cultural replacements. Evidently, many Outliers have a
lengthy and complex settlement history, and a great deal of intensive
archaeological work must be carried out before this complexity can
be unravelled.
     Emory (1946) and Elbert (1953) were among the first to syste¬
matically study the interrelations and subgrouping of the Polynesian
languages. Later work by Pawley (1966), Green (1966), and others has
resulted in a clear outline of the historical relationships amongst the
Polynesian languages. The widely accepted genetic subgrouping of the
Polynesian languages is diagrammed in Figure 5 (after Green 1966 and
R. Clark 1979), and constitutes a model for the primary settlement of
Polynesia, latent with implications for prehistorians.
     To a significant degree, the linguistic subgrouping mirrors the
cultural subdivisions recognized by comparative ethnologists. The
linguistic unity of East Polynesia, for example, supports the delineation
of that major subgroup on ethnologic criteria. On the other hand, the
linguistic schema cross-cuts the cultural classification       in certain
regions. A first-order linguistic division between Tongic and Nuclear
Polynesian languages occurs within West Polynesia This not only re¬
inforces the archaeological interpretation of West Polynesia as the area
of original and most lengthy settlement, but suggests that many of the
shared traits that are used to define the western subgroup resulted from
continued contact and borrowing between the Samoan and Tongan
archipelagos. The Outlier languages are most closely allied to the non-
Tongic languages of West Polynesia, that is, Samoan, Futunan, ‘Uvean,
and Ellicean.
            Polynesian societies and ecosystems                               27

  The cultural and linguistic subgrouping of Polynesian societies and
languages furnishes an important basis for the reconstruction of Ances¬
tral Polynesian Society to be developed in Chapter 3. The method of
lexical reconstruction (Dven and Aberle 1974) can be applied to sets of
cognate terms from several Polynesian languages to determine the
proto-term and its semantic value in the Proto-Polynesian language.
Clearly, a knowledge of subgrouping is essential for this process. For
example, since reflexes of the term for chief appear in both the Tongic
and Nuclear Polynesian branches (Tongan ‘eiki, Futunan aliki, Hawaiian
alii), one may be confident that the term for chief (*‘ariki) was present in
Proto-Polynesian, and more importantly, that a concept of chiefship
existed in Ancestral Polynesian Society. The same method may also be
applied to ethnographic data on social organization, religion, land
tenure, and so forth. If a particular social institution is present in all, or
a large number of Polynesian societies, then it was most likely present in
the ancestral society from which these derived. (If, however, the insti¬
tution is restricted to the societies of one particular branch, such as East
Polynesia, then we are justified only in reconstructing the proto-form
for the immediate ancestor of that branch, e.g., Archaic East Poly¬
nesian.) With both lexical reconstruction and comparative ethnographic
analysis one must also carefully consider the alternative possibilities,
that borrowing (diffusion) or independent invention (innovation) were
responsible for the observed similarities. Certainly, amongst geo¬
graphically close islands (such as Tonga and Samoa) such borrowing is


                 PROTO-POLYNESIAN




PROTO-TONGIC                   PROTO-NUCLEAR POLYNESIAN




               PROTO-SAMOIC OUTLIER               PROTO-EASTERN POLYNESIAN




                                                  PROTO¬
                                             CENTRAL EASTERN




                                          PROTO-          PROTO-
                                        MARQUESIC        TAHITIC




                                                                         m
                                                                         Q1




                                                                QJ
                                                                O




           5. The subgrouping of the Polynesian languages, and their
           putative sequence of divergence from Proto-Polvnesian.
28           Foundation

more likely. Cautiously applied, however, these methods provide a
powerful tool for the reconstruction of the ancestral society from which
all of the ethnographically known Polynesian groups descended.
     In the following pages, I review some of the common features shared
by most Polynesian societies, and point out some of the variations
which arose following dispersal and colonization of the varied island
groups. This overview thus provides a necessary ethnographic baseline
for the reconstruction of Ancestral Polynesian Society, the subject of
Chapter 3.


The material basis of Polynesian societies

Despite some regional diversity, Polynesian societies were all predi¬
cated upon highly similar material bases. ‘Neolithic’ in the classic sense,
Polynesians developed lithic technology to such peaks as the statues of
Easter Island and the greenstone adzes and ornaments of the Maori.
Subsistence was based on an advanced horticulture, intensified in some
island societies into proper field agriculture, either irrigation or
drvfield rotation. (The absence of cultivation in southern New Zealand,
and in the Chathams, where environmental conditions were severely
limiting, are exceptions that prove the rule.) Husbandry of pigs, dogs,
and fowl, hunting, gathering of wild plant foods, and significant
exploitation of the sea rounded out the indigenous production sys¬
tems. A domestic mode of production (Sahlins 1972) based on an intri¬
cate kinship logic dictated the production, distribution, exchange, and
consumption of food and material goods. At the same time, however,
Polynesian chiefdoms were aristocratic societies. The structural prin¬
ciples of the chieftainship - genealogical rank, primogeniture, mana,
and tapu - permeated the societal fabric, organizing production and
mobilizing labour in ways that counteracted the centripetal tendencies
of the elemental domestic units. A continual dialectic between a
‘domestic’ and a ‘political’ economy constitutes a dominant theme run¬
ning throughout the evolution of Polynesian societies.
     Polynesian agricultural tools were simple and limited in number, yet
effective and well suited to the tasks at hand. Stone adzes and fire served
as the major instruments for forest clearance, while planting poles and
digging sticks were the gardener’s main tools. Long-handled, fruit-
plucking poles, carrying poles, and a variety of baskets aided in harvesting.
The material culture associated with fishing and marine exploitation
was more complex, and reflects considerable ingenuity. One-piece
fishhooks for angling were made from wood, bone, shell, and stone in a
wide range of sizes, and used in a variety of ways, along shorelines, with
and without poles, from canoes, while swimming, and so on. Trolling
lures of pearl shell were quite effective in landing the larger, prized
pelagic fish such as bonito. In many islands, some form of benthic lure
             Polynesian societies and ecosystems                           29

 was used to capture octopus. Nets were manufactured in a wide range
 of forms, from dip and scoop nets used by women foraging on reef flats
 at low tide, to long-handled flying fish nets, to community-owned
 semes up to several hundred feet long. Other sorts of nets, traps, weirs,
 sweeps, floats, spears and so on are well described in the literature on
 Polynesian material culture (e.g., Buck 1930, 1944).
   Other areas of Polynesian material culture were reasonably well
 developed and reflect successful adaptation to the constraints of
 Oceanic environments. Primary manufacturing tools included the
 ubiquitous adzes and chisels (generally of fine-grained basalt or
andesite), files and abraders of coral, pumice, or scoriaceous lava, drill
points of stone and shell, bone awls, and flake tools of obsidian or fine¬
grained basalt. A wide range of culinary implements served to convert
crops to cooked food, including wooden and stone food pounders,
bowls, basins, scrapers, graters, and storage containers, as well as serving
bowls and platters. The manufacture of barkcloth from a variety of
plant sources (especially paper mulberry, but also breadfruit, Pipturus
and other species), and the plaiting of mats and other woven items, was
well developed. Various strengths and types of cordage were similarly
produced. Nor was Polynesian material culture restricted to utilitarian
items. Darts, pitching disks and other gaming devices were widespread,
as were drums, dance paddles, nose flutes, and other musical instru¬
ments. In the esoteric and ritual sphere, Polynesian religious images in
stone, wood, ivory, wicker-and-feather, and so on are renowned
worldwide.
   Not all Polynesian societies possessed the same degree of elaborate
and diverse material culture, nor did all attain equal levels of artistic
expression. Among many societies - particularly those of the atolls and
smaller, more isolated high islands - production of material goods was
a largely domestic matter. Goods tended to be utilitarian in design, with
certain items, especially Pandanus mats, playing a vital role in kinship-
based exchanges. Among the larger archipelagos, with more complex
and highly stratified chieftainships, a degree of craft specialization
developed. In protohistoric Tonga, for instance, there were hereditary
classes of canoe builders, navigators, stonemasons (who constructed
the chiefly tombs), and tattooing experts (Martin 1818). The brilliant
specimens of Polynesian art that grace museum cases - feathered cloaks
and head-dresses, inlaid feather and sennit wands, temple images —
were prerogatives and symbols of rank, produced by specialists who
were supported by and for the chiefly classes.
  The lives of all Polynesians, including the most sacred of chiefs,
rotated around one central theme — the production, distribution, and
consumption of food, of which starch staples were the essence. A con¬
cern with food permeated Polynesian life at all levels of the social ladder,
and in all social dimensions (Bell 1931). The role of food among the
30           Foundation

Tikopia of Outlier Polynesia, described so well by Raymond Firth, was
approximated by all Polynesian groups:

Food serves as a most important material manifestation of social relationship,
and through it kinship ties, political loyalty, indemnity for wrong, and the
canons of hospitality are expressed. It also provides a basis for the initiation of
other social relations, such as bond-friendship, or pupil and teacher in the
acquisition of traditional lore. Again, the major foodstuffs rest in totemic align¬
ment with the major social groups; ritual appeals are made to the gods and the
ancestors who are regarded as the sources of food. All such situations are
expressed in a bodv of linguistic material, rich in metaphors and circum¬
locutions (1939:38).

This overriding concern with food formed a critical linkage between the
material conditions of production - environment, technology, and
demography - on the one hand, and the social relations that directed
production and distribution on the other. It is a linkage of vital concern
in our analysis of technological and social change in Polynesia.
     Polynesian classifications of food, and the cultural values associated
with various categories, are further clues to the structuring of pro¬
duction and consumption. The most elemental food category, that
which minimally constitutes a meal, is the starch staple, product of
agricultural labour.      The Anutans classify food (kai)           into several
categories of which the most basic is the marked term kai tao, ‘baked
food’, usuallv taro, yam, or breadfruit. Two further categories of kai are
ngaruenga, starch ‘puddings’, sweetened with coconut cream, and
kanope, animal flesh (fish, seabirds, chicken, etc.). These are considered
supplementary to kai tao, and a prerequisite for the entertainment of
honoured guests, or for ritual purposes. This Anutan division of food is
paradigmatic of Polynesian subsistence in general: a balance between
the cultivation of the dominant and fundamental starch staple, and the
procurement of the less abundant, but socially and ritually valued,
specialities and animal flesh.
  Five groups of staple-starch-producing cultigens dominated Poly¬
nesian agriculture: aroids, yams, breadfruit, bananas, and (in East
Polynesia) the sweet potato. Various cropping combinations were
emphasized in each island setting, depending upon several historical
factors including environment and the inevitable reassortment of
agricultural svstems upon initial transfer (these are matters which will
be taken up in detail in Chapter 7). The indigenous systems of culti¬
vation - associations of crop plants, tools, and particular micro¬
environments with discrete patterns of agricultural behaviour- were of
two elemental tvpes: extensive and intensive. What appears as a
dichotomy of svstems, however, in reality describes the extremes of a
continuum. At the extensive endpoint was shifting cultivation in the
characteristic Malavo-Oceanic pattern (Spencer 1966), where swidden
garden plots are cleared, fired, cropped, and fallowed in a second-
             Polynesian societies and ecosystems                        31

 growth rotational cycle. On the other hand, intensive cultivation often
 required the modification of hydrologic, topographic, and edaphic
 conditions so as to favour certain cultigens, with the creation and main¬
 tenance of a permanent infrastructure, such as irrigated pondfields.
   Animal husbandry, terrestrial hunting, and marine exploitation
 comprised the extra-agricultural component of Polynesian subsis¬
 tence. A triad of domestic animals - pigs, dogs, and the jungle fowl -
 was transported and introduced to most island groups upon initial
 colonization. Production of these animals was intimately linked with
 the cultivation systems. Excepting New Zealand (where the endemic
 moa provided abundant game), hunting was an underdeveloped aspect
 of Polynesian economies, although birds were regularly taken, and in
 the case of remote and protein-deficient Easter Island became socially
 and ritually significant. As in all island societies the sea provided the
 major daily source of protein, and the structure and complexity of
 indigenous folk classifications of fish and other marine life (Titcomb
 1952; Dye, in press) reflect an intense familiarity with the ocean, built
 up over millennia.
   In sum, Polynesian subsistence was dominated by horticulture and
fishing, successfully promulgated by means of a developed ‘neolithic’
technology. To understand the integration of this subsistence pattern
into the larger societal fabric we must turn to a consideration of social
groups, and of the political and ritual orders that validated the extant
social relations of production.


Organizational principles of Polynesian societies
Social groups and land

As is typical with chiefdoms, the organizational basis of Polynesian
"societies wax the conical clan, an extensive group descended from a
Common ancestor, ranked and segmented along genealogical lines
(Rirchoff 1955; Sahlins 1968). Patrilineal in ideological basis, distinc¬
tions amongst clan members were made on the basis of genealogical
distance from the founding ancestor. Typically, the senior male in
direct line of patrilineal succession from the group ancestor claims the
position of highest rank in the conical clan. The pyramidal political
geometry of Polynesia underlies the significant advances in political
evolution   made by various societies within the region (Sahlins
1963).
  A proclivity to segmentation or ramification characterizes the conical
clan. On islands, after initial settlement by founding groups, popu¬
lation growth led to fissioning of local subgroups, or ramages (Firth
1936; Earle 1978:10). The head of each ramage was its senior male, and
the head of the original senior ramage remained as chief of the conical
clan. Each local ramage was ranked in relation to the senior ramage.
32          Foundation

just as members of each ramage were ranked internally. This pattern of
segmentation, and the resulting social structure, is diagrammed in
Figure 6A.
  The ramification or branching of the conical clan also corresponds
with a characteristic territorial division, as shown in Figure 6 B. As local




            6. A. Diagrammatic model of the conical clan. B. Geographical
            distribution of clan segments on a hypothetical island.
              Polynesian societies and ecosystems                                 33

 groups fission, they expand to occupy new territory, so that a typical
 high island came to be divided in radial fashion, with each local group
 occupying a pie-shaped slice running from the island’s core out to the
 reef. Such a territorial pattern has fundamental ecological implications
 since (in theory, at least) the territorial units lie transversely across the
 environmental      grain   of the land.       That   is,   since   island   micro¬
 environments are in general concentrically arrayed, each local group’s
 radial   segment    includes    all    major resources:      forested      uplands,
 agricultural land, coastal plains, and marine resources. Of course, local
variations in topography and distribution of particular resources (e.g.,
 isotropic stone) dictate that such an ideal pattern is never fully realized.
 Nevertheless, these territorial groups, such as the Futunan kainga, the
 Rarotongan tapere,     and     the     Hawaiian ahupua'a      do    tend    toward
economic self-sufficiency (Finney 1966). This tendency toward economic
independence of local ramages is one of the centripetal forces of
Polynesian society which were in opposition to those of the greater
political economy.
   Polynesian descent groups are not strictly unilineal, even though
they have a patrilineal         bias.    As   Firth (1957)    and    others (e.g.,
Goodenough 1955; Davenport 1959) recognized, Polynesian descent
groups or ramages are, with few exceptions, ambilateral, that is, affili¬
ation may be through either male or female links. Such affiliation is,
however, heavily conditioned by residence. As Firth notes, ‘Residence
by itself does not give title to descent-group membership, but land
rights established by descent-group membership tend to remain
operational only through residence’ (1957:7). In fact, as Goodenough
(1955) astutely observed, the ambilateral nature of Polynesian descent
groups is a highly flexible adaptive strategy in situations of land short¬
age, such as pertain on Oceanic islands.
  The classic Polynesian ramage organization may be illustrated
briefly with the case of Futuna (Burrows 1936; Panoff 1970; Kirch
1975). This high island incorporates two territorial districts, each the
province of a major conical clan with its paramount chief. Within each
clan are a series of ramages or kutunga, each presided over by its own
chief, the launiu or aliki, with the highest-ranked kutunga serving as the
line of the district paramount. Every Futunan is automatically a mem¬
ber of the kutunga of both his father and mother. The kutunga, however,
is not strictly speaking a land-holding corporate group, which is the
function of the kainga. The term kainga denotes both a radial land seg¬
ment, and a group of persons resident on it. Generally, several kainga
make up the ancestral lands of a kutunga, and affiliation with a particular
kainga is thus a matter both ofkutunga membership and of residence. In
practice each kainga parcel is worked by its own residence group. Kainga
are managed by the senior males of the minimal ramage, the pule kainga.
The adaptive flexibility of this system of land tenure is obvious. Should
34           Foundation

the population of any kainga become too dense in relation to its land
resources, the ambilateral nature of affiliation allows some of its mem¬
bers to exercise alternative options and affiliate by means of residence
with other kainga of lesser population density.


Rank and stratification

The conical clan is, at every level, a ranked structure. Older and
younger siblings, chiefs and commoners, higher and lesser ramages -
all are positioned on a continuous scale with the fundamental criterion
of seniority of descent. This principle of genealogical seniority may be
viewed as a set of structural equivalents:
   father : son :: older brother : younger brother :: chief: commoner.
Indeed, as Sahlins (1968:64) remarked, the ranked structure of Polynesian
chiefdoms is mirrored within each household unit, ‘the little chiefdom
within the chiefdom’.

Like the great chief in his domain, the father is in his own house a sacred figure,
a man of superior mana, his possessions, even his food, guarded by tabus
against defilement bv lesser familial kinsmen. Polynesians know innately how
to honor the chief, for chieftainship begins at home: the chief’s due is no more
than elaborate filial respect (1968:64).

Yet, the gradation of rank within the Polynesian chiefdoms is not a con¬
tinuous progression. A qualitative disjunction exists between chief and
people, a disjunction clearly marked by differential access to sump¬
tuary items,     by prescribed behaviour,          and by distinctive ritual
behaviour (cf. Peebles and Kus 1977:422).
  There is a strong ideological bias in Polynesian societies toward patri-
lineage and primogeniture in the hereditary succession to high rank.
Nevertheless, just as ambilateral affiliation allows for flexibility in
descent group membership, there is some flexibility in succession to
high office. As noted earlier, maternal linkages may be used by persons
of lower rank in order to associate themselves with those of higher rank.
In some chiefdoms, such as Tonga, the female role in rank determi¬
nation was to become extremely important, and pose potential con¬
tradictions to the political structure.
   A second option for manipulation of the usual rules for succession to
 high office was that of usurpation. Sahlins observed that‘the contention
 between older and younger brothers is a celebrated condition of
 Hawaiian - indeed Polynesian - myth and practice’ (1981 a:56). In
 Figure 6A the theoretical rank of individuals declines progressively
 from left to right, with increasing genealogical distance from the founding
 ancestor. The actual political rank of the individuals, however, does not
 follow the same progression, since A1 and Cl are district paramounts,
 and Al, Bl, Cl, and D1 are sub-district chiefs. Thus, A2 is politically
 subordinate to Bl, Cl, and D1. Clearly, a junior brother can only look
 forward to increased diminution of his offspring’s rank, as the conical
              Polynesian societies and ecosystems                             35

 clan continues to ramify. That junior brothers should seek to usurp the
 power and positions of their elder siblings is therefore not surprising,
 and the opposition between junior and senior is a ‘structure of
 significance’ that underlies status rivalry as a major force in Polynesian
 socio-political evolution.
   Polynesian chiefdoms varied considerably in the degree to which dif¬
ferences in rank were formalized as distinct social strata. Given the
common ancestry of all Polynesian societies, this range in degree of
social stratification bespeaks major differences in pathways of political
evolution. As Sahlins (1958:250) correctly recognized, such differen¬
tiation does not reflect regional cultural history, since the full range of
minimal and elaborate stratification can be found in both West and
East Polynesia.
   A few ethnographic examples will illustrate the range in Polynesian
systems of social stratification and political development. Represen¬
tative of the least stratified chiefdoms is the atoll society of Pukapuka
(Beaglehole and Beaglehole 1938). Pukapukans classified themselves
into only two status levels, chiefs (aliki) and non-chiefs [te tama, lit. ‘the
children’), and as the Beagleholes state, ‘status and rank grades. . . were
not highly developed’ (1938:234). Although the chief was sacred, and
represented the people (his ‘children’) in rituals to the gods, no
elaborate tabus or symbols of office separated him from the com¬
moners who were also his kinsmen. His house was of the same type as
others, and only a special sitting place, and private doorway, were reserved
for him. ‘ During youth and boyhood, he, like his siblings, was without
tapu and mixed freely with the other young people of the island’
(1938:236). While the chief’s word was not openly disputed, political
control of economic production did not rest solelv in his hands. Rather,
such decisions were reached in village meetings (wakapono lulu) attended
by all adult males as well as the chiefs.
  Futuna represents a more elaborate and status-conscious level of
society (Burrows 1936; Panoff 1970) in which the social ranks are more
clearly distinguished and elaborated. In this case, a clear paramount
[sau) existed, as well as lineage chiefs (aliki), and each of these was attended
by a ceremonial adjutant (mua). Symbols of rank (such as feather
crowns) were more developed, and so was deference behaviour and
ritual accorded chiefs. In pre-contact times the chief’s house was
larger, and set off from those of commoners in a prominent position
facing the malae or village plaza (Kirch 1975:365). A stylized kava
ceremonial, still practised today, validated the relative rank of all chiefs
to each other. Economic control, while still largely in the hands of the
household heads (pule kainga), was impinged on considerably by the
chiefs, especially in the mobilization of commoners for competitive
feasts, clearing of communal gardens, or construction of large irri¬
gation works.
  Hawai'i represents an extreme of stratification in Polynesia, approxi-
36          Foundation

mated also by Tonga and the Society Islands. Here the chiefs had
become a conical clan superimposed upon a truncated class of com¬
moners. The chiefs (ali'i) were internally ranked into seven or eight
grades, with a paramount [ali'i nui or mo'i) at the pinnacle, and they prac¬
tised sibling or half-sibling marriage to assure the highest rank of off¬
spring. The symbols of tapu and rank were elaborate, the most sacred of
chiefs holding the kapu moe, prostrating tapu. Feather cloaks and
helmets, special eating bowls and spittoons, and so on, were made of
the chiefs by craft specialists. The birth of a chief was celebrated by
elaborate temple ritual. In the economic sphere, the ali'i not only
closely regulated production through their stewards (konohiki), but
regularly mobilized corvee labour. Most significantly, the direct con¬
trol of land had passed out of the hands of the commoners, so that it
was the chief, not the ramage, that was directly responsible for a
territorial unit.
   The search for an explanation of this range of social stratification
among Polynesian chiefdoms motivated both Sahlins (1958) and
Goldman (1970) in their comparative ethnographic studies. Though
arriving at disparate conclusions - the one stressing ecological deter¬
minants, the other inherent status rivalry - both studies produced
similar tripartite classifications of stratification. Table 2 lists the various
societies treated bv Sahlins and Goldman, with their corresponding
typological statuses. Goldman described the differences between his
three ‘tvpes’ as follows:
In the first, which I call ‘Traditional’, seniority is central. As the source of mana
and sanctitv, senior descent establishes rank and allocates authority and power
in an orderly manner. The Traditional is essentially a religious system headed
by a sacred chief and given stability bv a religiously sanctioned gradation of
worth. In the second system, which I call‘Open’, seniority has been modified to
allow military and political effectiveness to govern status and political control.
The Open system is more stronglv military and political than religious and
stability in it must be maintained more directly bv the exercise of secular
powers. In the Open, status differences are no longer regularly graded but tend
to be sharply defined. Finally, the third system, which I call ‘Stratified’, is
characterized by clearcut breaks in status that are fa reaching in their impact
on everyday life. In the Stratified system, status differences are economic and
political. High rank holds the rule and possesses the land title: commoners are
subject and landless. The Stratified represents a synthesis of Traditional and
Open, combining respect and reverence for hereditary rank via seniority with
necessary concessions to political and economic power (1970:20).

Since the spectrum summarized by Goldman encapsulates the full
breadth of the chiefdom condition, Polynesia offers fertile terrain for
the investigation of political evolution, with the most stratified of
 Polynesian societies bordering on the true ‘state’. As Sahlins has written
of Hawaiian society, the ‘threshold which it had reached but could not
cross was the boundary of primitive society itself’ (1972:148).
             Polynesian societies and ecosystems

Table 2. Social stratification in Polynesian societies


 Island group           Approx, population of            Degree ol stratification
                         largest political unit
                                                         Sahlins      Goldman

Tonga                            40,000                     I         stratified
Hawai'i                          30,000                     I        st ratified
Society Is.                       9,000                     I        stratified
Samoa                            25,000                     I        ()p(‘11
Mangareva                         4,000                   11A        st ratified
Easter Is.                        3,500                   11A        open
Mangaia                           3,000                   IIA        open
Marquesas Is.                     1,500                   IIB        open
Niue                              4,500                    —
                                                                     open
‘Uvea                             4,000                   11A        traditional
Maori (N.Z.)                      3,500                              traditional
Tongareva                         2,000                    —
                                                                     traditional
Tikopia                           1,250                   IIP        traditional
Futuna                            2,000                   11B        traditional
Pukapuka                            500                   III        traditional
Ontong-Java                       2,000                   III        traditional
Tokelau                             500                   III        traditional




Ritual, polity, and production

The principle of seniority of descent which associates rank with prox¬
imity to the founding ancestor also links Polynesian chiefs directly with
the gods, themselves either deified ancestors or supernatural pro¬
genitors. Polynesian political systems cannot be understood separately
from cosmology and religion, nor for that matter can their economic-
systems be divorced from their political and ritual contexts. As
Goldman put it, ‘whether we start with politics to explain the economy
or with economics to explain the polity, we are involved in the same
equation’ (1970:509).
  Closest to the gods, the chief is their earthly representative, the
means by which supernatural efficacy, mana. is conveyed to the soi iety
at large. The chief is mediator, receiving and transmitting the offerings
of the people to the ancestral and tribal deities. It is he who, on behalf of
his people, recites the appropriate ritual formulae for securing rain,
bountiful harvests, success in fishing, or victory in war. And since it is
through the chief that these things are conveyed, he is imbued with the
corollary of mana, sanctity or tapu. Not only is the chief tabu, but
through his edicts certain crops, fish, activities, or indeed the whole
‘land’ may be made tabu in order that the gods shall grant his requests.
(In certain societies, a class of priests developed, but never divorced the
38           Foundation

ritual apparatus from the chiefs. Indeed, the priests were usually mem¬
bers of chiefly families.)
     fust as the degree of social stratification varied in Polynesian chief-
doms, so did the sanctity of the chief. All Polynesian chiefs were set
apart from commoners by their mana, and by certain kinds of ritual
deference. The most elaborate societies developed chieflv tabu to
extreme levels. Consider the native historian Kamakau’s description of
a Hawaiian chief ofpi'o rank (the offspring of a brother-sister union):
‘The children born of these two were gods, fire, heat, and raging blazes,
and they conversed with chiefs and retainers only at night’ (1964:4).
‘The kapu of a god was superior to the kapu of a chief, but the kapu of
the . . .pi’o chiefs were equal to the gods’ (1964:10). The elaboration of
chieflv sanctity parallels that of social stratification, and is a critical
aspect of Polynesian social transformation.
     The wresting of food and material goods from nature was for Poly¬
nesians a fundamentally religious process, precisely because the
natural world was the realm of the gods. ‘When the native planted, tended
his crops, and harvested, he did so psychically as well as physically,
ritual including consecration, purification, prayers, charms, and offer¬
ings, accompanying every phase of his physical husbandry’ (Handy
1927:6). Production was intimately tied to ritual sanction and control.
‘The Work of the Gods’, as the Tikopia called their annual religious
cvcle (Firth 1967), was for example a ritual codification of the island’s
production system. The chief, naturally, occupied the central role in
this ritual regulation of production, and herein lies another vital clue to
the evolutionary transformation of Polynesian societies. The chief, as
Peebles and      Kus   maintain,   is a ‘ritually sanctioned      homeostat’
(1977:430) for the production system. But, he is more than the main-
tainer of a status quo, for it is precisely at the level of ritually controlled
production that the political economy held sway over the domestic
mode of production. Firth (1939:180) lucidly described the material
advantage of ritual control: ‘the effect of ritual is to maintain the
association of the major instruments of production with the group of
persons of higher social status, especially the chiefs of the clans. It is a
conservative force,       orienting the productive svstem       towards the
interests of the privileged group.’ Thus, in Hawai‘i, political tribute
received bv the chiefs from the people was rituailv conceived as offerings
to the gods (.ho'okupu, literallv, ‘to cause to grow or multiply’), offerings
which fell to the chiefs bv virtue of their status as mediators between the
society and its deities. Such tribute not only assured the chiefdom of
supernatural support, it formed the material basis upon which the
political aspirations of the chieflv class were realized.
     Throughout Polynesia, a regular, ritual offering of tribute to the
ramage chief in the form of first fruits suggests that this was an anc ient
pattern, which in the more developed chiefdoms reached elaborate
            Polynesian societies and ecosystems                           39

proportions. The Tongan ‘inasi (Gifford 1929), Society Islandspararaa
matahiti (Oliver 1974:259), and Hawaiian makahiki (Handy and Handy
1972) are major community-wide ritual presentations of first fruits and
other products of the people to the ruling chiefs, which have their
origins in a simpler first-fruits ritual.
  We cannot close this discussion of the role of polity and ritual in pro¬
duction without at least a brief consideration of redistribution, which
most theorists (Service 1967; Sahlins 1958, 1968; Fried 1967) have
regarded as a fundamental characteristic of the chiefdom level of
society. The tribute presented regularly to the chief was redistributed to
other members of society, but not necessarily in the more-or-less
equable manner sometimes assumed. In the less stratified societies, in
which chiefs were intimately bound to the people through direct ties of
kinship, first-fruits offerings and contributions of food and valued
goods for major ceremonials were generally redistributed back to the
individual households. In the increasingly stratified societies, however,
this was not the case, and the goods rendered to the chief tended to con¬
centrate near the apex of the socio-political pyramid. As Oliver
(1974:1007, 1071-2) has shown for Tahiti, and Earle (1977) argues for
H awaifi, goods channelled into the redistributive network were used to
support the chiefly hierarchy and to finance the political activities of the
ruling elites. ‘In some measure, goods and services contributed by the
people precipitated out as the grand houses, assembly places, and
temple platforms of chiefly precincts’ (Sahlins 1963:299). The tribute
given to the god in fact assured the glorification of the chiefly god-head.
As it was said in a prayer of the Hawaiian makahiki harvest ritual,

            O Ku! O Kane! O Lono! . . .
            Here is an offering,
            A swine sacrificed for this visible rite
            The rite of hula for the alii.
            For the house of the god. . . .
            Life to the alii, life to the gods! (Handv and Handv 1972:365)


Overview

This review of the main features of Polynesian social, economic, and
political life, while necessarily brief, provides us with an ethnographic
baseline from which to approach the linguistic and archaeological data
directly relevant to a reconstruction of the ancestral form of Polynesian
culture. I have tried to convev something of the range of variation in
particular features, such as social stratification, as seen at the develop¬
mental endpoints represented bv European contact. From such a
review of structural variation and underiving similarity, it is possible to
pose several hypotheses about the nature of the Ancestral Polynesian
Societv which gave birth to the region’s protean cultures. First, this
ancient society was centred around the pvramidal geometry of the conical
40           Foundation

clan, with its segmentary, ramage structure and ambilateral rules of
affiliation. That such groups were territorially defined as much on the
basis of land rights as on descent also seems highly probable .Within
the conical clan, rank was determined on the basis of proximity to the
founding ancestor, with the senior/junior distinction critical (a male/
female distinction less so). The inherent opposition between senior and
junior is one that permeated the society, and was to form the basis for
much of what transpired in the subsequent evolution of the varied
daughter societies. The archaic society had for its titular head a
hereditary chief, imbued with mana from the ancestral and primal
deities, and who was tapu as a consequence. This person formed the
critical linkage in the chain between gods and the earth and sea that
provided sustenance. That the chief occupied the central role in the
rituals of production seems to be significant to the later evolution of
Polynesian polities, for in the rituallv sanctioned control of production
lay the seeds of a political economy. The opposition between a domestic
‘strategy' of underproduction’ (Sahlins 1972:41-100) and the centri¬
fugal demands of the chieflv, status-conscious armature is a vital aspect
of the evolutionary process in Polynesia. ‘The . . . potential of Poly¬
nesian chieftainship is precisely the . . . pressure it could exert on
household output, its capacity both to generate a surplus and to deploy
it out of the household towards a broader division of labor, cooperative
construction, and massive ceremonial and military action’ (Sahlins
1963:303).
     These basic structural elements, and the contradictions and oppo¬
sitions inherent in them, were carried as part of the‘cultural baggage’ of
everv canoe-load of Polynesian voyagers who searched the Pacific for
new landfalls. How such vovagers would apply these social and political
structures to build new societies depended in part on the constraints,
challenges, and opportunities presented by the particular island or
archipelago they succeeded in finding and colonizing. Whether the
new land was too isolated to maintain contacts with the homeland,
whether it was vast or small, high or low, endowed with permanent
streams, and so on, were factors that were to channel evolutionary
pathways in certain directions. But the driving force in Polynesian
technological and social evolution lav in the people, and in their con¬
cepts of themselves as members of a pyramidal society, as people of the
chief, as descendants of the gods.
