            3
            Ancestral Polynesia



The preceding chapter explored some structural principles characteristic
of Polynesian chiefdoms, and the diversity of island settings in which
they arose. While these data provide a baseline from which we may
plumb the remoter periods of Polynesian antiquity, there are limits to
the inferences one may draw from such a synchronic baseline, rep¬
resenting the endpoints of millennia of local evolution in several
archipelagos.   Comparative ethnographic analysis is important in
reconstructing Ancestral Polynesian Society, but it is clearlv desirable to
rely on the direct, if sometimes meagre, data of archaeology. Fortunately,
these archaeological data can be cross-checked and augmented bv the
evidence of historical linguistics, which aid in developing a fuller
reconstruction of some aspects of the Ancestral societv.


Origins

Over the years, the accumulated evidence of linguistics, physical
anthropology, ethnobotanv, and most recently, of archaeology have
firmly convinced all but a few die-hards that Polynesian origins lie in
the island realm of south-east Asia. Still ingrained in much of the
Polynesian literature,   nevertheless, is a ‘migration mentality’, an
assumption that the ancestral Polynesians entered the Pacific more or
less as a single ethnic unit, separately from other Oceanic peoples.
Rather than viewing the peopling of the Pacific as a series of rapid and
populous migrations that quickly led to an ethnic status quo, modern
archaeology has contributed the perspective that the region’s settle¬
ment history is both lengthy and complex. Man’s progression into
Oceania must be viewed as a gradual process of dominantlv west-to-
east movements (but w'ith significant counter movements and ‘eddies’)
beginning not long after the end of the Pleistocene, and completed onlv
within the last millennium.
  This gradual penetration of Oceania bv man was more than the con¬
quest of a great ocean: it encompassed a continual process of adap¬
tation to an increasingly insular world. As the ancestral Oceanic

           41
42            Foundation

colonizers moved from the Melanesian island arcs into the remote
tracts of the Pacific, they encountered more isolated, geologically simpler,
and frequently biotically depauperate islands. They had to contend
with new species of plants and animals, and with differing climates.
These and other constraints led to the development of new cognitive
and behavioural patterns, new technological and social adjustments.
The cultural patterns characteristic of Ancestral Polynesia were not
carried intact along migration routes, but developed in the islands
themselves, in response to the challenges of oceanic existence. As
J. Peter White observed: ‘Polynesians were not strange newcomers to
the Pacific: their roots lay in generations of adaptation to this island
world’ (1979:374). The Polynesians became Polynesians in Oceania,
over the course of several thousand years of continual change.
     In retrospect, it is surprising that the idea of a south-east Asian origin
for the Polynesians did not gain widespread acceptance until the mid
twentieth century, since one of the most compelling lines of evidence-
language- did not need to await excavation. The linguistic position of
the Polynesian languages has become clear as a result of the resurgence
of interest in historical linguistics in the south-west Pacific since about
1950. The twenty-six languages of Polynesia (Biggs 1971:487) form a
separate branch of the Austronesian language family, which together
includes between 300 and 500 languages distributed from Madagascar
to Easter Island (Dyen 1971). The Austronesian family, in the orthodox
view, can be subdivided into two principal branches, a Western
Austronesian group (including the modern languages of Indonesia and
the Philippines) and an Eastern, or Oceanic group (Fig. 7). The Oceanic
group itself may be divided with at least one major subgroup, Eastern
Oceanic, composed of the languages of the South-east Solomons,
North New Hebrides, Fiji, Rotuma, and Polynesia (and in some ver¬
sions, Eastern or Nuclear Micronesian). Most culture-historians would
associate the dispersal of the Eastern Oceanic languages with the
archaeologically attested Lapita Cultural Complex, to be discussed
shortly (Shutler and Marck 1975; Pawley and Green 1975). In any event,
the position of the Polynesian languages as a subgroup of the Austronesian
family unambiguously links the roots of Polynesian culture to its south¬
east Asian homeland.
     The dispersal of the ‘Austronesian horticulturalists’ (Shutler and
Marck 1975) from the area of island South-east Asia and western
Melanesia and beyond required the development of appropriate
technological skills and adaptive strategies. The human conquest of
remote Oceania

required that man bring with him the plants and animals on which he was
largely to depend; that he possess a maritime technology, including boats
capable of distance voyaging; and finally, that his culture be capable of fully
               Ancestral Polynesia                                              43

exploiting the products of sea, for at times he would be almost completely
dependent on these resources if he was to establish himself in some parts of this
island world (Green 1972:657).

The island-studded seas of south-east Asia were an ideal setting for the
development of such critical pre-adaptations to oceanic existence.
Linguistic reconstructions of Proto-Austronesian language (Dyen 1971;
Pawley and Green 1975) indicate that these pre-adaptations-watercraft
and voyaging ability, horticulture, and advanced fishing techniques -
had all been achieved by perhaps 6000 BP. The Proto-Austronesian
(pan) lexical set includes terms for boats/canoes (pan *wangka), out¬
riggers (*katiR), and paddles (*besay), for most of the Oceanic cultigens
including taro (iftales) and yam (*qubi[s)), and for such fishing gear as
traps (*buqubuqu) and fishhooks (*kawil). The stage was set for the
Austronesian colonization of the Pacific.
  Direct evidence of the early horticultural-maritime peoples of island
South-east Asia has been slow to materialize, since archaeological
investigation in the region is still in an embryonic state. Recent work in
Taiwan(Chang 1969), and on mainland South-east Asia(Gorman 1971;
Solheim 1969) has demonstrated the presence of earthenware, cord-
marked ceramics associated with ground-stone adzes and other tools
by c. 8000 BP. Furthermore, the plant evidence from Gorman’s sites
(Yen 1977) suggests that several of the Oceanic cultigens (Areca, Aleurites,
Canarium, Lagenaria, Piper, Terminalia) were in use by Hoabinhian times.
In the Philippines, Celebes,                Halmahera, and Eastern Indonesia,


                      PR0T0-AUSTR0NESIAN                                   4000 B.C.




  INDONESIA        SOLOMON IS.         NEW HEBRIDES              SAMOAN
 PHILIPPINES      NEW CALEDONIA           R0TUMA                HAWAIIAN
   TAIWAN           NEW GUINEA      EASTERN MICRONESIA            MAORI
 MADAGASCAR        (In part)                                     (etc.)



               7. Generalized ‘familv tree’ of the Austronesian language family,
               showing the relative position of the Polynesian language.
44         Foundation

excavations by R.B. Fox (1970), Glover (1977), Bellwood (1976) and
others are revealing a ‘technocomplex’ of ceramics, chert and obsidian
flake tools, stone and shell adzes, and other shell implements that look
very much like the kind of archaeological manifestation to be expected
for ancestral Austronesian culture.       This technocomplex appears
throughout this area between about 5000-4000 BP. Although a great
deal more excavation must be carried out, it appears that the‘neolithic’
technocomplex being revealed in the middens and rockshelters of
island South-east Asia represents the immediate ancestor of the
Oceanic peoples.


The Lapita Cultural Complex

The material manifestations of the Austronesian dispersal across
Melanesia to the gateway of Polynesia are much clearer than they are in
the South-east Asia hearth, thanks to a greater intensity of archaeological
exploration in Oceania. Polynesian origins may be traced to the Lapita
Cultural Complex (Green 1978, 1979a), apparently representing the
first major intrusion of man into the deeper reaches of Oceania (i.e., the
island arcs that lie beyond New Guinea and its immediate neighbours,
such as the Bismarks). Archaeological assemblages belonging to the
Lapita   complex   are distributed     from    the   Bismarks   in   western
Melanesia, through the Santa Cruz Islands, New Hebrides, and New
Caledonia, to Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa in West Polynesia (Fig. 8).
Temporally, the complex spans the period from c. 1600 BC to 500 BC
(Green 1979a: table 2.1). Lapita sites provide‘evidence ofacommunity
of culture in the South-west Pacific straddling the traditional boundary
between Melanesia and Polynesia and antedating its appearance’
(Golson 1972a: 10).




            8. The distribution of Lapitoid sites in the south-western
            Pacific region.
             Ancestral Polynesia                                           45

   Lapita sherds had first been reported by Father Otto Meyer, in 1909
 from the Watom site in New Britain. Despite McKern’s 1921 excavation
 of decorated Lapita ceramics on Tongatapu and ‘Eua Islands (McKern
 1929:102-19), their significance for Polynesian origins was not realized
 until three decades later when Gifford and Shutler (1956) excavated the
 site at Lapita (Site 13, which gave its name to the ceramic style) on the
west coast of New Caledonia. Gifford and Shutler (1956:94) drew atten¬
 tion to the close resemblance between the ceramics from Watom, Site
 13, and Tonga, as well as with sherds collected by Gifford at Sigatoka in
 Fiji. Two l4C age determinations from Site 13 (2800 ± 350 BP, 2435 ±
400 BP) underscored the probable significance of Lapita pottery for
Polynesian and eastern Melanesian origins.
   Throughout the following two decades, various Lapita sites were
investigated, in Watom, Santa Cruz-Reef Islands, New Hebrides, New
Caledonia, Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa (see Green 1976a, b, 1978, 1979a).
Unfortunately, most excavators focussed narrowly upon the decorated
ceramics to the virtual exclusion of other artifact types, so that a
broader definition of the Lapita Cultural Complex has been achieved
only recently, largely as a result of Green’s major excavations in the
Reef-Santa Cruz sites of the South-eastern Solomon Islands (Green
1976b). Green (1979a) has provided the most thorough review of our
present understanding of the Lapita Cultural Complex, of which the
following discussion is a synopsis.
  The Lapita Complex is minimally defined on the basis of its charac¬
teristic dentate-stamped pottery (Fig. 9). Since there is both spatial and
temporal variability in Lapita ceramics, it has proved useful to employ a
concept of a Lapitoid Ceramic Series (Golson 1971; Kirch 1978a,
1981 a), emphasizing that Lapita assemblages partake of aspects of both
horizon and tradition, as used in American archaeological terminology.
Lapitoid ceramics are generally well fired, frequently calcareous-sand
tempered, paddle-and-anvil finished, earthenware vessels (including
shouldered    pots, jars,   bowls,   flat-bottomed   dishes,   and   plates).
Although plain ware exists in substantial quantities, the decorative
component is most distinctive. Mead and others (Mead et al. 1973;
Donovan 1973) demonstrated that the Lapita design system is formed
from a small set of design elements which are combined according to a
set of syntactical ‘rules’ to form about 150 motifs. A certain number of
these motifs are shared throughout the entire geographic extent of
Lapita distribution, and testify to the cultural continuity of the complex
(Green 1978).
  Ceramics constitute only one aspect of the larger cultural complex.
Other portable artifacts include a broad array of stone and shell adzes,
flake tools (of chert and obsidian), coral and sea-urchin spine abraders,
shell scrapers and peelers, slingstones, simple fishhooks, tattooing
needles, awls, spear points, and various ornaments (shell rings,
46         Foundation

bracelets, and beads). Lapita sites range in size from 800-10,000 m2 in
area (Green 1979a:31), and display basin-shaped earth ovens, pits, and
postmoulds indicative of permanent structures. The Lapita economy
may be characterized as broad-spectrum, including horticulture,
animal husbandry, and marine exploitation; more on this will be
said shortly.
   Among the most intriguing aspects of Lapita archaeology is the
evidence for long-distance exchange. Ambrose and Green (1972)
utilized emission spectrography to characterize obsidian excavated at
the Ambittle and Gawa sites, demonstrating for both a source of
Talasea on the Willaumez Peninsula ot New Britain. The distance from
Talasea to Gawa (Santa Cruz), some 2,000 km, testifies to ‘the effective
sea-faring ability of the region’s earliest pottery manufacturers who
were capable of transporting materials over long distances’ (1972:81).
Subsequent work has shown that, aside from obsidian, other items -
including chert, metavolcanic adzes, oven stones, and pottery - were
transported between Lapita communities from a variety of source
areas. This evidence prompted Green (1976b:264) to suggest that ‘the
original Lapita adaptation was one to an area with a complex continental
island environment which possessed a wide range of resources able to
be assembled in individual communities through exchange’.




            9. Slicrd <>l Lapita potterv from the Reel Islands, showing
            characteristic dentate-stamped decoration [photo courtesy R.C.
            Green, University of Auckland).
                   Ancestral Polynesia                                                                   47

    Despite evidence - in ceramic design-system continuity and in
transported materials - that the Lapita people were capabe of maintaining
contacts over reasonably long distances by means of two-way voyaging,
there were evidently limits to this capability. Most of Melanesia consists
of inter-visible island chains, facilitating inter-island contacts. A major
open-water gap, however, of 850 km, separates eastern Melanesia from
the Fiji group to the east. Not surprisingly, the detailed analysis of
Lapita design motifs undertaken by Green (1978,1979a) revealed a fun¬
damental distinction between Western and Eastern Lapita groups, the
latter comprising the Fijian, Tongan, and Samoan sites (Fig. 10). This
Eastern Lapita group seems, after initial settlement, to have become
effectively isolated from its Western counterpart due to the large ocean
gap between Fiji and the New Hebrides. It is this Eastern Lapita popu¬
lation which, over the course of some 1500 years of local adaptation,
gave rise to Ancestral Polynesian Society.
   Archaeological evidence for the breakup of the ancestral Lapita
population into discrete Western and Eastern branches is paralleled by
that of historical linguistics (Pawley and Green 1975). The breakup of
Proto-Eastern Oceanic language (Fig. 7) was probably associated with
the differentiation of local Lapita communities, itself a function of
isolation due to sizeable ocean gaps. The Eastern Lapita population,
which occupied Fiji-Tonga-Samoa, and continued to maintain inter¬
island voyaging within this triangle of archipelagos, may be associated
with Proto-Central Pacific language. Central-Pacific diverged into
Proto-Fijian and Proto-Polynesian branches over the course of several
hundred years after the initial settlement of the region.
   In     short,    archaeological and            linguistic evidence are mutually
supportive in pointing to an Eastern subgroup of the Lapita Cultural


                           CO        >
                                o        E   00
                           1         1   0    1   !N   D    Z     >      §

                           U         U   o   N     1   c          .!_    £    Jaccard coefficients
                                                       o    :=•   :=>    0
                           Z    O'   z £     CO   oc   ►—   u_    u_    t/>
                                                                              indicating number     of

New Caledonia: 13                                                             shared   Lapita   motifs


Reef Islands: RL-6

New Caledonia: Vatcha

Watom : FAC                                                                              59-98

Santa Cruz : SZ 8

Reef    Islands : RL-2                                                                   51     -   58

Tongatapu: TOl-5

Fiji : Natunuku                                                               ITTI       33-50
Fiji: Yanuca

Samoa : MU -1                                                                             0-32


               10. Sorted matrix of Jaccard coefficients representing tire
               number of shared Lapita design motifs between a set of
               Western and Eastern Lapita sites (from Green 1978). Note the
               tight coherence of the Western group, including Watom. SZ-8.
               and RL-2.
48         Foundation

Complex as the ancestral population for Polynesians. By the time this
founding population had arrived in the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa area, it
reflected generations of adaptation to an island mode of existence. The
further environmental and social challenges posed in the West Poly¬
nesian hearth were to mould from this Capita progenitor an Ancestral
Polynesian Society. It is on this Eastern Lapita population and the Fiji-
Tonga-Samoa area that we must focus for evidence of the transition
from Lapita to Polynesian culture and society.


The Eastern Lapita sequence

In crossing the water gap between the New Hebrides and Fiji and
colonizing the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa triangle, the Lapita people crossed
the threshold of Oceania proper. Here they were to encounter truly
oceanic environmental conditions and constraints. The island arcs of
Melanesia - the immediate homeland of the Eastern Lapita pioneers -
consist of large, ‘continental’ islands, geologically old and complex,
with a rich and varied biota. Fiji, too, is geologically complex but
beyond it the island chains of Lau, Tonga, and Samoa consist only of
recent volcanics or of coral islands (both atolls and uplifted limestone),
with a correspondingly depauperate biota. This is a region of much
geological activity, and the andesite line which divides the region (Fig.
11) marks the border between the Pacific Plate and the Fiji Plate. Along
this subduction zone there is much tectonic activity and vulcanism. Not
the least consequence of this geologic turmoil has been the displace¬
ment of Lapita sites in relation to their ancient shorelines. More
importantly, however, ‘on crossing the andesite line and entering the
oceanic world of the geologist, the first people to setde Polynesia
encountered a rather restricted suite of suitable rock types, continental
equivalents of which they had largely ignored previously’ (Green
1974b: 142). The effects of this environmental transition we shall
explore shortly.
  Although Eastern Lapita pottery had been discovered by McKern
(1929) in Tongatapu and ‘Eua in 1921, its significance for Polynesian
origins was not realized until Gifford’s investigations in Fiji in the late
 1940s (Gifford 1951), and Golson’s discovery of plain pottery in Samoa
in 1956, precipitated the emergence of a consistent culture-historical
framework (Golston 1971). Subsequently, intensive excavation of sites
with Lapitoid pottery in Tongatapu, Niuatoputapu, Samoa, ‘Uvea and
 Futuna, Viti Levu, and Lau have provided a great deal of new evidence
 for the 1500-year transition from pioneering Eastern Lapita to Ances¬
 tral Polynesian Society.
    The principal excavated sites containing Lapitoid pottery are listed in
 Table 3, with their associated l4C ages (the earliest reliable age for each
 site is given). These sites, which include open middens and rock-
            Ancestral Polynesia                                            49

shelters, are either coastal,     or associated with geomorphological
features indicative of former shorelines. The Mulifanua site on Upolu is
presently submerged, while the Niuatoputapu and Tongatapu sites are
situated behind elevated shorelines now as much as 2 km inland.
Figure 11 shows the geographical distribution of these sites, and their
relation to the andesite line, as well as to known chert and obsidian
sources. To date, the earliest dated Lapita site in the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa
triangle is Natunuku, on the north coast ofViti Levu, with a l4C age of
3240 ± 100 BP. A newly discovered site on Naigani Island, off the east
coast ofViti Levu, may well prove to be older (S. Best 1981). By the end
of the second millennium BC, we have clear evidence for the perma¬
nent colonization ofTongatapu and Samoa as well. Given that intensive
surveys have yet to be conducted on most of the smaller islands, it
seems certain that all three archipelagos, and probably the isolated
islands of Futuna and ‘Uvea, had been settled by 1000 BC.
  The prehistoric sequence of the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa area from about
1500 BC to the first few centuries of the Christian era is most clearly
represented in the sequence of ceramic change. Unlike many other
areas of the world, in West Polynesia the ceramic sequence is one of
gradual simplification of the Lapitoid Series, until the potter’s art was
completely abandoned c. AD 300. Green (1974c, 1979a) has divided




           11. The distribution of known Lapitoid sites in the Fiji-West
           Polynesian region.
                                                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                                                               OO
                                                                                                                                                                                               O'.




                                                                                                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                                OO _«             oo
                                                                                                                                                                            ct                 X
                                                                                                                CO                CO           03
                                                                              O      CO                         O'-   0s.         O'.         OO                            a            ^     &
                                                                              oo                                                                                oo
                                                                                                                                                                O'.
                                                                              O'.    O'-                        C     cj                                                                 ^ &c
                                                          Cj                                       C/3          C/3    ^          C/3
                                                          U                                        Cj                                         _c                            Cj             .   c
                                                         ci                    3     *            CQ           T       O ^         3           u Tgj                        E rg ^ o ^
                                                          Cj                                                                                                                O-Ci -O CJ -Cj
                                                         U                    PC     CQ           CO                                          5 J                             ^ ^ —3^
                                                                                                                                                                                   Cj    Cj     Cj   Cj
                                                                                                  2                                                                                s-    u      •
                                                                                                                                                                                   r3    o3     CU   ctf
                                                                        5 C                       ‘5-           2 ;2        2     $           2      ctf
                                                                                                   o3
                                                                                                                                              CL • —                        ■E£ £ £ £
                                                                               8      O.          H-J           I" l"'a-'a-                   Ctf CL            C-           ^ c c c q
                                                                                                         Cj     _;    rtf ctf
                                                                        j w           rtf
                                                                                                                     -J J
                                                                                                                                              J
                                                                                                                                                 J              J              'c5 O J3
                                                                                                         o3
                                                          o3 ~p                                    u             C C c c                       c c                          r     a-     cx    D* 04
                                                                                                   Cj
                                                         -c  2          r*     ctf                                          u      s~          0j    s~    _,                                   r*   r-
                                                          Q- c          a j                                                 Cj     Cj          w     (U    c
                                                                                                                                                                                                o3   o3
                                                                        E/l                                                                    ^     ~     O                       oj     o3
                                                          cj    <L>     rtf o ctf                 k)             os a       C/3    C/3         03 <£ •-                     WC/3 C/3
                                                                                                                                                                            03 *         *■
                                                                        W *=      rtf                                       o3
                                                                                                                            UJ UJ
                                                                                                                                   o3         r-il
                                                                                                                                              W Ul a
                                                                                                                                                     &     ?     o3
                                                                                                                                                                UJ             Cj        Cj




Sites with Lapitoid pottery in West Polynesia and Fiji
                                                          C                        CL W                          >. >                                                       >. C         C
                                                          o3
                                                          C-    Oj      u
                                                                                   rtf „
                                                                               L- __3 w           U      %
                                                                                                                -7-'-f*' CJ
                                                                                                                c-    u
                                                                                                                                  Cj
                                                                                                                                  4_,
                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                                                                              i-i    Cj    >.
                                                                                                                                                                            •t >■ >■
                                                          Cj    c-      o3     03     o3          o3            o3    03     o3   o3          o3      . C                   rtf O O O O
                                                         u              w            hJ           w             U3    UJ    hQ    J           W
                                                                                                                                              UJ     J Cu       J           W Cl         Ou    O O
                                                                        o                         O                     O
                                                                        o     O      O                                O •—i •—«               CO                O           o o o o o
                                                                              O'.    O'.                        O'.     -■< CO                OO                OO          00 CO CO -rt* VO
                                                          Cj                  +1     -hi          -hi           -hi   +1    +1    +1          +1                +1          +1 +1        +1 “hi +1
                                                                        -hi
                                                          bC
                                                          o3            o o          o            O             o o O O                       o                 O           o o o o o
                                                                           OO        CO           O             o^ CO    oo                   ■—1               CM          Oi rf OO O CO
                                                         u              CM O'.                    CO            o CO     CO                   CM                            oo oo oo oo O
                                                                        CO CM        CM           CM            CO CM CM CM                   CO                            Ol — — —(N

                                                                                                                                                                            Cj
                                                                                                                                                                            ~0
                                                                                                                                                                            ”0
                                                                                                                                                                tV          r-
                                                                                                                                                                ' V.        c
                                                                                                                                                                 0                        <U
                                                                                                                                                                            “S     ^
                                                                                                                                                                                     V3
                                                                         r-    ^       3           Cj                                                                       Lp 55     . r-           c
                                                                                     '■a          _C
                                                                                                   c/3           Cj Cj Cj Cj                   Cj    Cj    Cj    Cj                  ^ 4.            4.
                                                          Cj            "O ^         -o                         Tj T3 ~G -G                   "O T3 Tj          Tj          c      c = ~a            -a
                                                          O-            T3 CJ         c            CJ           ~G "O "O Tj                   "O “0 "C          -c
                                                                                                                                                                                          o ^ ^
                                                          >.            •- O          o3            O                                                                        ^ "c
                                                          H             S OrC         co                                                      252               S           CO —         222



                                                                                                                                              o                                        __            ST
                                                                                                                      X3                                                           c?r —«             '
                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                           o^
                                                                        —1    ^                                                               O OO                                  03    03     1
                                                                                                                       3 "O                h^ O CD                                 CO
                                                                                                                    o c                                                                  >     X s
                                                                                                                                         s Z    H
                                                                      if ~ J                                       2 §                        H                             ^ D
                                                                                                              s                          f-* Z Z                D           u CO CO CO




                  Table 3.
                                                                                             k,     Cj                                                          ;            Cj                      ctJ
                                                           o3                          o3                          .3 s                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                              I-                         ■g. o
                                                                                                                                                           t)               CQ            CJ    o3
                                                          -o          £cS
                                                                      ^02
                                                                         o3     o3
                                                                                       O JS S
                                                                                       bJC
                                                                                                              « 04 Sc."’
                                                                                                              IP o
                                                                                                                                         <3
                                                                                                                                         •Jo
                                                                                                                                                C
                                                                                                                                                      ctf ”4/
                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                      O    0
                                                                                                                                                                 >
                                                                                                                                                                03
                                                                                                                                                                       C2
                                                                                                                                                                       o>
                                                                                                                                                                       S3
                                                                                                                                                                             p
                                                                                                                                                                             u
                                                                                                                                                                             CJ
                                                                                                                                                                                   "o3 JJ
                                                                                                                                                                                 C/3
                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                                                 c3 'c3
                                                                                                                                                                                                C/3 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                2 JD
                                                                                                                                                                                                5 o3
                                                                        Z >-                                  (S H                       Ss J j a.              h           U-. CO >                U-
           Ancestral Polynesia                                          51

this sequence of ceramic change into three phases, as shown in Figure
12. Early Eastern Lapita pottery (as found at Natunuku, Lolokoka, and
TO-2) includes the characteristic dentate-stamped decoration, and a
wide range of vessel types. Late Eastern Lapita pottery loses certain
early vessel forms, especially those exhibiting the dentate-stamped
decoration (although notched rims are frequent). Polynesian Plain
Ware, the endpoint of the sequence, is restricted to undecorated,
simple bowls, often of crude manufacture.
  The gradual decline and eventual disappearance of the potter’s craft
is one of the major technological changes marking the transition from
Lapita to Ancestral Polynesia. Explanations for the unique loss of
pottery in Polynesia remain at the level of speculation. Absence of raw
materials can be ruled out, since both clay and temper are abundant on
all high islands in the region. The process of ceramic change was doubt¬
less complex, and may have included such variables as changing roles
of pottery as objects of ritual or exchange, and food preparation
methods (Irwin 1981).
  It must be noted that while the sequence of ceramic change in Viti




          12. The sequence of ceramic change from Earlv Eastern Lapita
          to Polynesian Plain Ware, as reflected in vessel form (courtesy
          R.C. Green, University of Auckland).
52           Foundation

Levu parallels that of the Polynesian islands through the Late Eastern
Lapita phase, it is thereafter divergent, reflecting increased differen¬
tiation between Fiji and Polynesia. The later culture-history of Fiji is
something apart from that of Polynesia, an intriguing and complex
sequence (Frost 1979) requiring its own analysis beyond the purview of
this book.
   The transition from pioneering Lapita to archaic Polynesia is reflected
in    more than    ceramic change,    and   Green (1971a,     1974c)   has
demonstrated that the early Polynesian adz kit developed gradually
from a set of early Lapita adz prototypes. The range of isotropic rocks
available for stone tool manufacture is severely restricted in the Samoan
and Tongan archipelagos, which may have been a significant factor in
the sequence of adz change. Among the major technological changes in
adzes was the gradual abandonment of the use of heavy Tndacna shell,
and an increase in the relative frequency of plano-convex forms.
     The ceramic and adz sequences from c. 1500 BC to the first few cen¬
turies of the Christian era reflect the transformation of an ancestral
Lapita technology to a truly Polynesian form. These changes parallel
other economic and social developments as well as the increasing
divergence and subsequent breakup of Proto-Polynesian language. By
the first few centuries after Christ, the basic cultural pattern that we
know as ‘Polynesian’ had been formed, moulded by the environmental
constraints and possibilities of an oceanic world. The stage was set for
the expansion eastwards of the Polynesian peoples, and for their rapid
dispersal over some 20 million square miles of Pacific Ocean.
     I have referred continually to Ancestral Polynesian Society, by which
term I mean the social forms and supporting technological base that
emerged from the Lapita transition just described. It is difficult to fix a
lower date for the appearance of Ancestral Polynesian Society, for its
development was clearly a gradual process, and the rate of change was
unlikely to have been the same on all islands (even though these islands
were evidently in regular or at least intermittent contact). In general
terms, Ancestral Polynesian technology is archaeologically distinguish¬
able from its Lapita ancestor by about 500 BC. By about AD 300,
independent developments had occurred in Tonga and Samoa (as well
as on the smaller, isolated islands) which led those populations down
separate pathways of technological and social evolution. In the remainder
of this chapter, I focus closely upon Ancestral Polynesian Society as it is
evidenced in the excavated materials dated from c. 500 BC to AD 300,
with secondary evidence derived from lexical reconstructions of the
 Proto-Polynesian language. The reconstruction which follows is a syn¬
 thesis of data from a range of excavated sites throughout West
 Polynesia; items or data present at one site are often not represented at
 others.   In presenting a generalized reconstruction for Ancestral
 Polynesian Society I do not mean to imply the absence of variability
              Ancestral Polynesia                                         53

 between individual settlements and their communities. Indeed, as I
 have recently argued (Kirch 1981a) there is increasing evidence for such
 variation. Nevertheless, sufficient consistency between sites and their
 assemblages exists so that the reconstruction made here should be
 generally valid throughout the region.


Ancestral Polynesia: a reconstruction
 Technology

 Excavations in a range of Eastern Lapita and Polynesian Plain Ware
 sites have provided a substantial collection of Ancestral Polynesian
material culture, even though the acidic soils of most open sites have
not been especially favourable to the preservation of bone and shell, let
alone highly perishable wooden or fibre objects. Some aspects of
Ancestral Polynesian technology, notably adzes and ceramics, have
already been reviewed in terms of their roles in defining the Lapitoid
sequence in West Polynesia. Ancestral Polynesian material culture
clearly reflects considerable adaptation to the restricted range of raw
materials available in an oceanic environment. The Ancestral Poly¬
nesian tool kit included a variety of adz forms, stone and shell chisels,
hammerstones, abraders of branch coral and echinoid spines, rubbing
or polishing stones, grindstones, and smaller whetstones (a sample of
artifacts from the Niuatoputapu sites is shown in Fig. 13). These and
other tools were utilized to manufacture a variety of implements and
objects, not all of which are as yet archaeologically attested. In the
household sphere, we have numerous examples of several varieties of
vegetable peelers and scrapers, and of course the ubiquitous ceramics,
which include such functional types as water jars, cooking pots, and
serving bowls/dishes. The use of the earth oven(PPN *umu) is well attested,
with excavated examples in more than seven sites (Fig. 14). Fishing gear
has been only sparsely represented to date, but one-piece shell
fishhooks (cf. Kirch and Dye 1979), net weights, and Cypraea-shell caps
for octopus-lure gear are attested; several possible trolling lures are also
in evidence. In the way of clothing and personal adornment, we have a
series of shell ornaments, including Trochus- shell armbands, a variety of
shell beads and rings, and several kinds of‘bracelet’ segment of Tridacna
or Spondylus shell.
  We may infer the presence of many kinds of perishable items from
the lexical reconstruction of appropriate terms in the Proto-Polynesian
language (Walsh and Biggs 1966; Biggs, Walsh, and Waga 1970; Pawley
and Green 1971). Thus, the use of barkcloth is indicated by the term
" tapa. Likewise, a developed outrigger canoe technology is evidenced
by a variety of technical and functional terms, such as canoe (*waka),
outrigger boom(*fezto), paddle (* a/o), sail(*/aa), cargo (*uta), to voyage
(*folau), and seaman or navigator (*tautai).
54           Foundation

     Beyond the technical-functional level of material culture, there are
indications that the artistic styles expressed in contact-period Poly¬
nesian societies find their antecedents in Ancestral Polynesia. That the
art of tattooing was practised is evident from the presence of tattooing
chisels in Tongan sites excavated by Poulsen (1968:fig. 2). Moreover,
Green (1979b) argues that a number of Lapita decorative motifs may be
traced     in ethnographically documented barkcloth            and   tattooing
designs.

Production systems
An earlier debate as to the economic foundations of Lapita and Ances¬
tral Polynesian societies, inspired principally by Groube’s proposal
(1971) that the Lapita populations represented ‘oceanic strandloopers’,
has now been resolved by the accumulation of both direct and indirect
evidence supporting the view of Ancestral Polynesian economy as a
broad-based, generalist set of strategies including agriculture, animal
husbandry, and marine exploitation. Certainly the excavated material-
culture items enumerated above are in line with such a reconstruction.
I will review the ethnobotanical, linguistic, and archaeological evidence
for the two main facets of production - agricultur^animal husbandry




              13. Artifacts from Lapitoid sites on Niuatoputapu, Tonga: a,b,
              one-piece fishhooks of Turbo shell; c, Trochus-1.shell armband;
              d, Conus-shell ornament; e, sea-urchin spine abrader; f,g, flakes
              of volcanic glass; h,i, 7nV/tffHfl-shell adzes; j. hammerstone or
              nut-cracking hammer with pecked finger-grips.
           Ancestral Polynesia                                             55

and marine exploitation — and for the exchange of goods between
communities.
  The case for an agricultural subsistence base for Ancestral Polynesian
Society could be built on ethnobotanical evidence alone. Polynesian
agriculture, as witnessed by the European explorers, was clearly deriva¬
tive (Yen 1973a), and set in the mould of south-east Asian-Melanesian
tropical vegeculture’ (Barrau 1965b, c). The roster of Polynesian crop
plants, as well as domestic animals, is (with the significant exception of
the sweet potato) south-east Asian and Melanesian in origin. Re¬
construction of Proto-Austronesian language includes terms for many
of the Polynesian cultigens, including the taro-yam complex. We may
presume, with Yen, that the transfer of plant species in island coloniz¬
ation was accompanied by ‘the concepts that underlie method' (1973a:70).
Such fundamental ethnobiological concepts as that ‘taro requires a wet
edaphic medium and yam requires a dry (Yen 1973a:70) have surely
been part of the Austronesian view of agriculture for millennia, and are
reflected in the significance of Thumide et le sec’ (Barrau 1965a) in
Oceanic cultivation systems everywhere.
  Archaeological evidence for Ancestral Polynesian agriculture and
animal husbandry is uneven, but convincing when analysed as a total
complex. Settlement sites range in size from just over 1,000 m2 to 7,000
m2, and the depths of accumulated deposit bespeak continuous
occupation for some term of years (perhaps as great as 300-400 years in




          14. Earth oven, filed with fire-altered cooking stones, in the
          Early Eastern Lapita site ol Lolokoka, Niuatoputapu Island,
          Tonga.
56         Foundation

several instances). It is difficult to conceive of such settlements being
maintained solely on the basis of hunting-gathering-fishing. For¬
tunately, we need not rely on these indirect arguments, for the presence
of domestic animals is attested in the faunal components from
excavated sites. Pig bone is reported from at least six sites, dog from
four sites, and the domestic fowl (Gallus gallus) from five sites. The
presence of pig, in particular, is strong indirect evidence for agri¬
culture, given the close association between the two in all Oceanic sub¬
sistence systems. ‘The dependence of animals, especially pigs, on
agricultural systems seems to be an argument for the transfer of plant
agriculture itself. Apart from household waste, pig husbandry is mainly
conducted by the feeding of coconut, breadfruit, and sweet potato, with
the support of foraging for natural products from the flora and sea¬
shore’ (Yen 1973a:71).
  Although the ideal direct evidence of cultigen macro-fossils (or
pollen) is lacking (with the exception of carbonized coconut endocarp),
artifactual evidence for crop plants comes from a variety of scrapers and
peelers that appear to be designed for removing the skins of tubers and/
or breadfruit. Similar implements were used throughout Polynesia in
historic times. Furthermore, indirect evidence for the transfer of plant
materials between island groups has come recently from the presence
of terrestrial molluscs (Christensen and Kirch 1981a; Hunt 1980)
recovered from archaeological sediments by fine sieving. Several
anthropophilic snails, such as Gastrocopta pediculus and Lamellidea oblonga,
have long been suspected by malacologists to be adventive, transported
and introduced to the Pacific islands by prehistoric man (Cooke 1926;
Cooke and Kondo 1960; Pilsbry 1916-18; Solem 1959, 1978). These
species frequent food plants and disturbed vegetation surrounding
human habitations, and their dispersal by man is thus presumed to
reflect the transport of plant materials (and, probably, of soil) as well. As
Cooke and Kondo (1960:251) note of Tomatellides oblongus, ‘it was
undoubtedly a lowland species disseminated accidently with food
plants’.
   In short, the introduction to the West Polynesian archipelagos of
domestic animals and crops by the earliest Capita colonizers seems
indisputable, and is consistent with the linguistic reconstruction of
terms for these items in the Proto-Polynesian lexicon (Table 4). But
what of the cultivation systems, their agronomy and operation? Here we
must depend increasingly on linguistic and ethnobotanical evidence.
Swidden (slash-and-burn) farming is fundamental to Oceanic agri¬
culture (Barrau 1965 a; Yen 1973a), and was doubtless the basis of most
Ancestral Polynesian cultivation. However, some rudiments of inten¬
sive systems, such as drainage and irrigation (particularly in association
with the cultivation of taro) may well have been known to the earliest
Austronesian settlers of the Pacific (Spriggs 1982).
           Ancestral Polynesia                                             57

           Table 4. Proto-Polynesian (PPN) lexical reconstructions relating to
           technology and production


           Gloss                         Reconstruction

           Material culture
           Canoe                         * waka
           Outrigger boom                *kiato
           Sail                          "ha
           Paddle                        * ‘alo
           Cargo                         "uta
           Wooden bowl                   "kurnete
           Cooking pot                   "kulo
           Kava bowl                     '*taano‘a
           Adz                           "toki
           Barkcloth                     "tapa
           Mat                           "fa la
           Basket                        "kete

           Agriculture
           Pig                          "puaka
           Dog                          *kulii
           Domestic fowl                *moa
           Taro (Colocasia)             *talo
           Yam tDioscorea)              * ‘ufi
           Breadfruit (Artocarpus)      *kulu
           Banana (Musa)                *futi
           Chestnut (Inocarpus)         *ifi
           Alocasia                     *kape
           Kava (Piper)                 *kawa
           To plant                     *too
           To harvest                   "utu
           Garden                       *maala
           Fermented food               *maa/masi
           Cook in earth oven           ~ta‘o

           Fishing
           To fish                      *faangota
           To fish with torches         "ram a
           Fish trap                    *fiinaki
           Net                          *kupenga
           Fishhook                     *ma(a)ta ‘u

           Settlement pattern
           House                        "pale
           Ceremonial area              *mala'e
           Canoe shed                   "folau



  Aside from the annual cultivated crops - centred around the taro-
yam complex - Polynesian agricultural systems display an important
arboricultural component. Breadfruit is the dominant cultigen, but
other trees, such as the fruit- or nut-bearing Inocarpus, Spondias,
58         Foundation

Terminalia, Barringtonia, Canarium, and others, are also important. Two
lines of evidence indicate that arboriculture was one focus of Ancestral
Polynesian agriculture. The first is the presence, in several excavated
sites, of large pits inferred to have been used for the ensilage and fer¬
mentation of breadfruit paste, the terms forwhich (*maa/masi) are again
reconstructable Proto-Polynesian items. Such a pit, excavated at the site
of Pome'e (NT-93) on Niuatoputapu, is illustrated in section in Figure
15. (The adaptive significance of such fermentation pits is explored in
greater detail in Chapter 6.) A second line of evidence consists of a large
number of ovoid stones, frequently with pecked finger grips (Fig. 13),
interpreted as hammers for opening various hard-shelled nuts, such as
Canarium or Terminalia. The degree of edge-damage evidenced on these
stones is too slight for hammerstones used in lithic tool production,
and they are furthermore virtually identical to ethnographically
documented nut-cracking stones from the Solomon Islands. It is likely,
therefore, that a full complement of tree species was also transferred




                                        .Turbo

                                             Sherd




                                        Turbo,




                                           0 Sherd




            15. Excavated section through a probable breadfruit fermen¬
            tation and storage silo. Site NT-93, Niuatoputapu, Tonga.
             Ancestral Polynesia                                           59

with the initial colonizers of West Polynesia. Whereas the nut-fruit
species were to become dominant aspects of certain eastern Melanesian
subsistence systems (e.g., Santa Cruz, cf. Yen 1974b), in Polynesia they
were relegated to a minor role with only the breadfruit occupying a
significant position in subsistence production.
   Whereas uninhabited oceanic islands lacked much in the way of
terrestrial food resources, the adjacent reefs, lagoons, and pelagic
waters were characterized by extremely large populations of fish and
shellfish, prior to initial human exploitation. Pioneering Lapita com¬
munities depended heavily upon marine resources while terrestrial
production systems were being established. Tongan visitors to the site
of Poulsen’s Early Lapita excavations ‘expressed surprise at the size of
the biggest of the excavated too [Gafrarium           sp.]   shells’ (Poulsen
1967:292), and Swadling(ms.) found that initial Lapita sites in the Reef
Islands likewise display a great species diversity and unusually large
size range of edible molluscs. The same situation, moreover, obtained
with the earliest occupation deposits in Tikopia (Kirch and Yen 1982),
where the volume of shellfish deposited greatly exceeded the densities
at any later sites.
   Linguistic evidence (Table 4) implies that Ancestral Polynesians
inherited from their Lapita ancestors a sophisticated knowledge of
marine resources, and a variety of strategies for their exploitation.
Lishhooks, traps, nets, spears and plant poisons are all indicated by lexical
reconstructions.    Unfortunately,    artifactual   evidence   of Ancestral
Polynesian fishing gear is sparse, although excavations in Tongatapu,
Samoa, and Niuatoputapu have yielded simple one-piece fishhooks of
Turbo shell, and Cypraea-shell caps probably for the octopus-hook.
(Large collections of similar Lapitoid fishing gear were recovered from
early levels on the outliers of Anuta and Tikopia.) Unambiguous
evidence for the range of fish and shellfish taken by the Ancestral
Polynesian fishermen derives from the excavated faunal components
of these sites. Molluscs (both bivalves and gastropods) are abundant in
all sites, as are the bones of marine turtles and elasmobranchs (sharks
and rays). The range of fish species represented is illustrated by the
three principal Niuatoputapu sites (Table 5). The fish bones from these
sites are all common inshore reef genera, and in fact are by and large
the same taxa that dominate in contemporary Niuan fish catches (Kirch
and Dye 1979). Significantly, several of the taxa represented in Table 5
are not usually taken with hook and line, and thus provide indirect sup¬
port for the contention that angling was only one component of Ances¬
tral   Polynesian   fishing strategies.   Based on    ethno-archaeological
comparisons (Kirch and Dye 1979), the bulk of the fish caught was
probably taken by spearing and netting methods. In Ligure 16, some¬
thing of the diversity of indigenous Polynesian fishing strategies is dis¬
played, as these are applied to the varied micro-environments of the
60          Foundation

Table 5. Minimum numbers of identified fish from Niuatoputapu Lapita sites


Taxon                       Site NT-90       Site NT-93       Site NT-100

Acanthuridae
  Acanthurus                   4                                   2
  Other                        5                 1                 1
Balistidae                     1                                   2
Carangidae                                                         1
Diodontidae
  Diodon hystrix              18                 4                 1
Labridae                       2                 1                 1
Lethrinidae                    2                                   1
Lutjanidae
  Lutjanus                      1
Scaridae
  Calotomus                     1                                  2
  Scarus                       13                2                 9
Serranidae
  Cephalopholus                                                    1
Sparidae
  Monotaxis grandoculis         6                6                 6

Totals (MNI)                  51                10                27
Total bones (E)               99                14                38
MNI/E ratio                    0.52              0.71              0.71



contemporary Niuatoputapu marine ecosystem. All available evidence
- linguistic, artifactual, faunal, and ethno-archaeological- suggests that
a similar range of exploitation strategies was fully developed by Ances¬
tral Polynesians.
   While terrestrial production and marine exploitation provided
Ancestral Polynesian settlements with the basis for economic self-
sufficiency, there is some evidence for exchange relations between
communities. Green argued that the original Lapita adaptation was to
an environmentally diverse area, and that exchange permitted the dis¬
tribution of scarce resources (obsidian, chert, adzes, clay, oven stones,
etc.) among Lapita populations. Since the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa region is
also characterized by an uneven distribution of natural resources
(especially isotropic stone, and clay and temper for pottery manu¬
facture), one might predict exchange to have been an important aspect
of the Ancestral Polynesian economy. There is, in fact, some evidence
for the importation of exotic items; chert from the NT-90 site on
Niuatoputapu, for example, is probably from a Futunan source, while
basalt adzes in Tongatapu are clearly imports from one of the high
volcanic islands. On the whole, however, these items are represented in
low frequencies, and then only in the earliest sites. While a clear state¬
ment on this point is not yet within our purview, the evidence suggests
                                                                                                                                                ■
                                                                                                               hvaonn                 ivaoiin
                     iXOOd 333dj                                                                 :XOOd 333d]
                                                                                 ;W0il08 ONVSj                          SSVl'N 0NV1

                                   sniiaiaa 333di                                                                                                   Pl3NNVH0 39dHS!   3001 d NOIN W V H10H !


                                                    :333d HOlVd;   333d HOlVdi




                                                                                                                                       LU <                                                    O LU   o
    DC                                                                                                                                 LU -I
I   LU                                                                                                                                 DC U.                                                   Z LU




16. The micro-environmental distribution of indigenous fishing strategies on Niuatoputapu, based on contemporary
ethnoecological studies (after Kirch and Dye 1979). Bar thickness indicates relative quantitative significance.
62          Foundation

that exchange did not constitute a significant economic strategy for
Ancestral Polynesians. Exotic items in the early sites may reflect con¬
tinued    contacts   between    ‘mother*    settlements    and    ‘daughter*
propagules which became less important once the pioneering settle¬
ments had become firmly established. Furthermore, as the Lapita
descendants adapted lithic technology to the restricted rock suites of
the oceanic islands, the need for imported chert or obsidian pre¬
sumably declined. An hypothesis suggests itself, that the discon¬
tinuance of exchange in Ancestral Polynesian Society reflects an
increasing propensity for economic self-sufficiency, which was to aid
significantly in the successful colonization of the farthest flung and
isolated island groups of Polynesia in the first few centuries of the
Christian era.
  It is worth considering that the evidence for wide-ranging exchange
systems linking Lapita communities, as suggested for instance by
Green (1979a), also implies the existence of complex forms of social
and political organization. Such systems, moreover, need not have
been based on hierarchic networks, but rather on horizontally struc¬
tured networks of areal integration, such as described ethnographically
by Schwartz (1963). Friedman (1981, 1982) has recently suggested that
ancestral Austronesian social forms were indeed hierarchic, and
involved long-distance trade in prestige goods, but this has yet to be tested.
At any rate, we must not assume that the ancestral Lapita societies were
any less complex than their Polynesian (or, for that matter, Melanesian)
descendants. The course of social and political change in Oceania was
one of transformation, and not of some kind of‘progress’ from lesser to
greater complexity.

Social relations

Nothing is so critical in our attempt to understand and explain the
evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms as the social relations of the
Ancestral Polynesians. The structural principles by which the Ancestral
Polynesians organized their social and political affairs formed the
baseline from which the varied ethnographic endpoints of Polynesia-
from relatively egalitarian to elaborately stratified - were ultimately
derived. In Chapter 2, we developed several hypotheses based on a
comparative ethnographic review. Here, we will further test these with
a consideration of archaeological and lexical data.
     The archaeological evidence of Ancestral Polynesian settlement pat¬
terns tells us relatively little of the nature of social groups per se. The
basic unit of settlement was evidently the small hamlet or village, which
on the size of Ancestral Polynesian sites would have incorporated
several household units. Since no large areal exposures have as yet been
excavated, we are still ignorant of the internal layout of such settle¬
ments. Certainly, however, there is no evidence of any significant
            Ancestral Polynesia                                          63

public architecture such as is found among some of the later Polynesian
chiefdoms. The Proto-Polynesian term *mala‘e does implv the exist¬
ence of communal assembly grounds, though these were probably little
more than open yards where religious rites and community feasts were
held. (Such open spaces continued to form a part of West Polynesian
settlement patterns, whereas in East Polynesia themarae was developed
in the direction of elaborate and frequently megalithic religious
structures.)
  Artifactual evidence for social status is similarly lacking. Differential
mortuary behaviour might provide valuable clues in this area, but to
date no Ancestral Polynesian cemeteries have been located. None of
the shell ornaments recovered from excavations can be unequivocally
interpreted as insignia of rank, even though it is possible that they
functioned in such a manner. Direct archaeological data, in short,
imply only dispersed hamlet groups composed of several households
each, with no direct evidence of social stratification.
  The data of lexical reconstruction provide one of the most important
sources for accurately interpreting the nature of Ancestral Polynesian
social relations. In Table 6 are given a number of Proto-Polynesian
lexemes pertaining to kinship terminology, social statuses, social
groups, and ritual. Sibling terminology (Epling, Kirk, and Boyd 1973;
R. Clark 1975) in Proto-Polynesian offers one clue, evident in the dis¬
tinctions drawn between senior and junior siblings of the same sex:

                        //              x


          senior       //s                       (// same sex
                                  xCf       x9   x opposite sex)
          junior       //.I'
                                  d         9


The senior/junior distinction, as we have noted, was fundamental to the
Polynesian ideology of rank. While this pattern was to be simplified in
certain Polynesian societies, it is significant that the ancestral sibling-
term system was retained          by all of the more highly stratified
chiefdoms.
  Of the several reconstructable Proto-Polynesian lexemes for social
statuses, the most important is certainly *‘ariki, ‘chief’. Among the
Polynesian languages, semantic agreements for reflexes of * ‘anki are
close, and confidently permit the attribution of a Proto-Polynesian
gloss, ‘chief, head of a lineage; first born in the senior line, who suc¬
ceeds to the chieftainship of the lineage and has strong personal ‘mana’
and ‘tapu' (Pawley 1979:20). Indeed, tl te associated terms *mana and
*tapu are likewise reconstructable items. Pawlev(1979, 1981) suggests
that the term *‘ariki was derived from an older Proto-Oceanic contrast
64           Foundation

set *qa-lapa(s) ‘chief’ (lit. ‘Great One’), and *qa-diki, ‘first born son of
chief’ (lit. ‘Little One’). Originally these terms were probably titles:
‘Whereas in Proto-oceanic *qa-lapa(s) and ’:‘qa-diki were proper nouns,
the titles of individual people, PPN *qariki is reconstructable as a com¬
mon noun, occurring after the definite and indefinite articles, and
designating a class of objects rather than a title’ (1979:23). Pawley
(1981:12) suggests that the principle of primogeniture ‘led to the title of
the chief himself, and ultimately becoming a common noun designating
a class of people or a member of that class’. The lexical data clearly indi¬
cate that Ancestral Polynesian Society had already developed the
institution of hereditary chieftainship.
     The nature of chiefship in Ancestral Polynesian Society can be
hypothesized in its broad aspects on. the basis of comparative
ethnography. Some years ago, Williamson portrayed his notion of the
ancestral type of Polynesian chief:

We must, I think, believe that at one time the concentration in a head chief of
sacred duties and secular rule was usual among the Polynesians or their ances¬
tors, more or less remote; that the high priest was the head chief; and some of
the islands offer . . . indications that this has been so. Presumably the foun¬
dation of his power was religious (1924:55).

Koskinen (1960) reached essentially the same opinion based on an
extensive comparison of ariki-ship in Polynesia, noting that the original
meaning of the term ariki was clearly ‘first born’ of the chief (thus pres¬
aging Pawley’s lexical reconstruction). The ‘more clearly sacerdotal’
character of the ‘oldest form of Polynesian ariki chieftainship’ was also
evident to Koskinen (1960:148). An ideology of direct, male descent
from the gods, and of associated mana and tapu was the original mode of
legitimation for Polynesian chieftainship.
     Aside from the chief, a number of other Polynesian social statuses
can be reconstructed from the lexical data (Table 6). Among these is
*tufunga, with a gloss of‘expert, specialist, craftsman’. The position of
*tufunga was probably not hereditary, but some ritual status may be
implied by several Polynesian reflexes in which the semantic value is
‘priest’ (e.g., Hawaiian kahuna). *Tufunga were the valued guardians of
specialized knowledge, especially in areas concerned with production.
Another social status of note is *toa, ‘warrior’ (see also PPN *kaitaua, ‘to
be warlike’), indicating that conflict may have been an important aspect
of Ancestral Polynesian Society. To judge on the basis of the compara¬
tive ethnographic baseline, this was also an achieved status, based on
prowess and skill. However, since success in war is a physical manifes¬
tation of mana, here is the germ of a potential conflict between ‘ariki and
toa over their respective claims to the sources of mana or power. As we
shall see in later chapters, this conflict was in some Polynesian societies
to come to the forefront of political transformation.
     One further lexical item of note is Proto-Polynesian *tautai, ‘seaman,
                Ancestral Polynesia                                           65

Table 6. Proto-Polynesian lexical reconstructions relating to social organization
and ritual


Gloss                                      Proto-Polynesian reconstruction

Sibling kin terms
Elder sibling, same sex                    *tuakana
Younger sibling, same sex                  *t(a,e)hina
Woman’s brother                            "tuangaane
Man’s sister                               "tuafafine

Social statuses
Chief                                      "‘ariki
Expert, craftsman, specialist              *tufunga
Warrior                                    "toa
Seaman, navigator                          "tautai

Social groups
Corporate, land-holding descent            "kainanga
 group
Minimal descent group, household           *kainga
  (with land)
Assembly of people                         "fono

Gods, ritual, religion
Sacred, prohibited                         "tapu
Supernatural power                         "man a
Deitv                                      "‘atua
Spirit, soul, corpse                       * *anga ‘anga
Piper methysticum\ ceremonv                "kawa
To perform ritual                          "fai
Offering, act of worship, remove           "man
   tapu
Prayer                                     "lotu
Kava bowl                                  "taano'a
Pigment of Curcuma domestica               "renga




navigator, fisherman’. According to Pawley, from the existence of this
term one may ‘infer that there was some specialization of economic
roles in PPN society5 (1979:18). More, *tautai is matched by *tauuta,
‘landlubber’, which raises the tantalizing suggestion of a land people /
sea people distinction, as reflected for instance in traditional Fijian
society (Hocart 1929, 1952; Sahlins 1976).
  The ramage or cognatic descent group was throughout Polynesia the
basic social and territorial unit. Lexical reconstruction allows us to
specify the ancestral term for this group, "kainanga, which may be
glossed as ‘a land-holding descent group, under the authority of a
chief’ (Pawley 1979:6). Some modern reflexes o{"kainanga areTikopian
kainanga, ‘clan, non-exogamous descent group’, Tongan kainanga,
66            Foundation

‘populace’, Tahitian mataeinana, ‘high order ramage’, and Rarotongan
matakeinanga, ‘tribe’ (note that the East Polynesian reflexes have the
added prefix mata-). The term may have derived from a Proto-Oceanic
root *kai(n), meaning the people of a place, local inhabitants (Pawley
1981:17). As Goodenough (1955) recognized, the *kainanga group is
actually an ancient ‘Malayo-Polynesian’ social structure, since it is
found not only in Polynesia, but in various Micronesian communities
as well (e.g., Trukese kainang, ‘matrilineal sib’). That Ancestral Poly¬
nesian Society was organized on such a ramage system has important
implications for the subsequent evolution of its daughter societies.
Inherently segmentary and expansionistic, such a structure is well
suited to a kind of‘radiation’ into all of the primary ecological zones of
an island. Despite this tendency, the pyramidal geometry of the conical
clan allows the segmentary branches to retain their genealogical
interrelations, thus facilitating the amalgamation of large political units
under the leadership of a ranking chief.
  In addition to the *kainanga descent group, we can reconstruct a
second Proto-Polynesian term, "kainga, with reflexes in both Tongic
and Nuclear Polynesian subgroups (e.g., Tongan kainga, ‘relative’,
Futunan kainga, ‘household group with associated land’, Samoan ‘ainga,
‘family group’, Easter Island kainga, ‘land segment3, Mangarevan kainga,
‘lands belonging to a family3, and Hawaiian ‘aina, ‘land’). The semantic
values for these reflexes suggest that the Proto-Polynesian term referred
to a minimal descent group or extended household, together with the
lands occupied and cultivated by that group. Probably, residence was a
criterion for group membership, which would not have been the case
with the larger and more inclusive "kainanga.
     The "fono, or political assembly of people (especially adult males), is
also a term of Proto-Polynesian ancestry, which suggests that despite
the hereditary chieftainship, decision-making in Ancestral Polynesia
was based on consensus within the "kainanga as a whole. (Such an
interpretation is in keeping with the idea that the *‘ariki was more of a
sacred, than secular, ruler in Ancestral Polynesian Society.) The physical
space upon which such "fono were held, and where the * ‘ariki probably
invoked the ancestral deities, was the "malae or ceremonial plaza.
     Finally, lexical reconstruction and comparative ethnography allow
us to say something of the ancestral religion, and of the ritual forms that
linked society to the supernatural and that validated social relations of
production. The concepts of mana and tapu have already been men¬
tioned. In Chapter 2 I noted that Polynesian ritual is intimately linked
to the chieftainship, with the apotheosized ancestors of the chiefs con¬
stituting the principal deities.JFor Proto-Polynesian, we may reconstruct
the term *‘atua, ‘class of spiritual beings, deities^Note that this term,
like that for chief, begins with *‘a~, ‘this form being the POC marker
preceding proper nouns, personal names’ (Pawley 1979:35), supporting
             Ancestral Polynesia                                              67

the interpretation that, originally, deities were specifically ancestral
gods.J_A second category of spiritual beings is indicated by Proto-
Polynesian *‘anga‘anga, probably best glossed as‘soul, spirit, or corpse’
(Biggs, Walsh, and Waga 1970). Presumably, ‘angaanga were not
specifically deities, but rather the spirits of deceased persons, perhaps
of low rank.
  Several Proto-Polynesian terms refer to aspects of ritual: *mori, ‘offering,
act of worship, to remove tapu’; *fa‘i, ‘to perform ritual’; *1 otu, ‘prayed;
and *kawa, ‘ceremonial involving the use of the narcotic Piper methysticurri’.
The last mentioned was throughout Polynesia an important kind of
ritual, usually involving the invocation of ancestral spirits (cf. Firth
1967). That the ritual use of P. methysticum was already developed by the
ancestral Polynesians is supported as well by the Proto-Polynesian term
*taano‘a, a bowl for mixing and serving the narcotic kava infusion.
Green   (personal   communication        1981)   has   speculated   that    the
elaborately decorated, flat-bottomed Lapita ceramic dishes with out-
turned rims might have functioned as such kava vessels (in Fiji, kava
continued to be served        in   special   ceramic vessels,   ndari,     until
historic times).
  One final Proto-Polynesian reconstruction with relevance to ritual is
*renga, the saffron-coloured pigment extracted from the root of
Curcuma domestica. In almost every Polynesian society this pigment was
an important accompaniment to ritual, used to decorate the bodies of
participants, or to dye their barkcloth. Such ritual use of renga most
probably began with the Ancestral Polynesians, or their ancestors.


Overview

The evidence of linguistics, ethnobotany, and archaeology all converge
on a central theme: that the economic basis and structural principles
characteristic of Polynesian societies developed gradually, in part
through adaptation to the challenges of island life. This process began
some five to six millennia ago in island South-east Asia, with the
development of sophisticated outrigger canoes, marine exploitation
techniques, and taro-yam horticulture. As the Oceanic-speaking peoples
dispersed eastwards through the island arcs of Melanesia to the western
gateway of Polynesia, new environmental constraints, such as reduced
island size, greater isolation, biotic impoverishment, and geological
simplicity, continued to influence the direction of change. Successful
colonization of new islands came to depend increasingly upon the
ability to transfer both biotic and cultural elements of the ‘human
landscape’: cultigens, domestic animals, and the ethnobiological con¬
cepts and techniques that permitted their rapid establishment in
new landfalls.
  Following upon the colonization of the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa triangle,
68           Foundation

by about 1500 BC, this region became isolated, an 850 km ocean gap
separating these archipelagos from eastern Melanesia. Developments
in West Polynesia led to the formation of Ancestral Polynesian Society,
concerning which we have advanced several propositions:
     1. Ancestral Polynesians possessed a relatively elaborate material cul¬
ture (well adapted to local raw materials), with most elements of the
historically documented Polynesian material culture either archae-
ologically represented or inferred on the basis of lexical reconstruction.
Ceramics were the significant element which did not persist to the
ethnographic period.
  2. Subsistence economy was based upon agriculture (‘tropical
vegeculture’), with the taro-yam complex of central importance.
Arboriculture (especially of breadfruit) and animal husbandry (pigs,
dogs, fowl) comprised significant elements in the agricultural pro¬
duction systems.
  3. Marine resources (fish and shellfish) furnished the primary source
of protein, and Ancestral Polynesians utilized a broad range of marine
exploitation strategies, including netting, angling, spearing, and the
use of plant poisons.
  4. Small, generally coastal, multi-household hamlets constituted the
basic Ancestral Polynesian settlement pattern. Lexical reconstruction
specifies the existence of ceremonial plazas (malae).
     5. The organizing principles of the society were those of the conical
clan, with rank based upon genealogical distance from a founding
ancestor. A system of hereditary chieftainship was already established,
with clan deities consisting of the apotheosized chiefly ancestors. These
chiefs were both sacred and secular rulers, whose perceived efficacy
depended upon mana from the gods. The rank differential between
chiefs and commoners was not, at this stage however, reflected in
elaborate material or behavioural terms. Land was controlled and
utilized by corporate, non-unilinear descent groups or ramages.
     The structure of this ancestral social pattern was to play a fundamental
role in directing the courses of evolution and societal transformation
throughout Polynesia. For example the opposition between junior and
senior, manifested in kinship terminology, but also in the whole ranking
system, was to have great effects on the development of Polynesian
polities. Likewise with the opposition between high and low mana
which on the one hand correlated with distinctions in rank, but which
was also manifest in efficacy and hence practical action. Chiefs were by
definition the receptacles of mana, but theirs was not a monopoly, leaving
open the possibility for rivals (such as thefoa, warriors) to usurp some of
the social and economic power that accompanied the control of mana.
We can as well infer that the contradiction between domestic and political
interests in the organization of production was already entrenched in
Ancestral Polynesian Society. This opposition between the centripetal
underproduction of the household, and the centrifugal demands of the
            Ancestral Polynesia                                          69

larger polity is one that we see played out in all of the Polynesian
islands.
  The ethnographically witnessed spectrum of Polynesian chiefdoms -
from relatively egalitarian to elaborate and highly stratified - all reflect
transformations from this Ancestral Polynesian Society. In outlining
the above Ancestral Polynesian model, we have thus laid bare the ‘zero-
point’ from which Polynesian societies differentiated. To now under¬
stand the varied transformations of this ancestral base, we may begin by
considering the dispersal to, and colonization by Polynesians of, the
many widely separated islands. These processes of colonization and
adaptation to new environments were the first stage in the evolution of
the Polynesian chiefdoms.
PART II           PROCESS
             All human action is carried on by knowledgeable agents who both construct the social
             world through their action, but yet whose action is also conditioned or constrained by the
             very world of their creation. In constituting and reconstituting the social world, human
             beings at the same time are involved in an active interplay with nature, in which they
             both modify nature and themselves.
                                                                    Anthonv Giddens (1981:54)




