           8
           Competition and
           conflict



Warfare- ranging from simple raiding aimed at restoring the honour of
an insulted party to major wars of territorial or inter-island conquest-
was ubiquitous in Polynesia. Niue was ‘in a state of more or less in¬
cessant warfare’ (Loeb 1926:128); Buck (1932:54) describes ‘constant
fighting and warfare’ in Tongareva; ‘the Marquesas tribes were in a con¬
tinual state of warfare’ (Handy 1923:123); and, in Easter Island, ‘there
was constant rivalry between the tribes, particularly those of the eastern
and western parts of the island’ (Metraux 1940:149). Similar state¬
ments, readily extracted from the ethnographic accounts of virtually
every Polynesian society, demonstrate that competition and armed
conflict were fundamental aspects of these societies. As we shall see,
warfare played a significant role in the transformation of Polynesian
political and economic systems. Neither the causes nor functions of
warfare in Polynesia, however, can be explained or understood from
purely demographic or ecological perspectives. War, as the overt form
of competition between greater and lesser powers, higher and lower
status, indigene and invader, was thoroughly ingrained in Polynesian
concepts of society.
  Warfare surely characterized Ancestral Polynesian Society, for the
term   *toa,    ‘warrior’,   can   be   reconstructed   for   Proto-Polynesian
language. (The term is an interesting one, applied also to the ironwood
tree, Casuarina equisitifolia, from which clubs and other weapons were
commonly made in many islands.) Toa, though they need not have been
of noble birth, rivalled the power and status of ariki in many islands.
Buck notes that in Mangareva, ‘the influence of tried warriors was very
great’ (1938a: 189), while in Easter Island, ‘some of the matatoa seem to
have procured for themselves privileges usually reserved for the ariki'
(Metraux 1940:138). Papa, a famous warrior ofFutunan tradition, was
so ‘arrogant’ that he established his malae on a site overlooking that of
 the Lalolalo chiefs, and ‘had his kava served in the fashion appropriate
 to kings’ (Burrows 1936:32). Indeed, the achievement of toa status pro¬
vided an alternate route to power than that of the hereditarv succession
 to ariki-ship (see Connelly 1976).

               195
196        Process

  The significance of toa, and their ability to challenge the authority of
ariki, was bound up with the Polynesian concept of mana. For the ariki,
mana ‘flowed’ from the gods through a succession of sacred ancestors.
However, sincemana was manifest in prowess, power, and especially, in
an ability to challenge the established order and succeed, it could also
be demonstrated in practical action. A chief who was also ait accom¬
plished warrior would have greatly enhanced status, for his mana would
be unquestioned. Should he suffer defeat, the stigma of low mana
would attend him, and his authority and power might well be




            62. A Marquesan warrior with trophv skull, as sketched during
            the voyage of Krusenstern in 1803 (photo courtesy Bishop Museum).
            Competition and conflict                                          197


challenged by another, either from within his group or from outside.
Thus, as Goldman notes, ‘the prominence of war, the adulation of
sheer power, not to mention the immediate political consequences of
victory or defeat, almost inevitably elevated the warriors to a level
where they could challenge the ariki’ (1970:14).
 The usurpation of power, by prominent warriors and particularly by
junior collaterals of a ruling chief, is a recurrent theme of Polynesian
political traditions. The ascendancy of the famous Kamehameha,
keeper of the war god Kukailimoku (‘Ku-the-snatcher-of-chiefdoms’),
over his senior collateral Kiwala'o (to whom the previous paramount,
Kalaniopu'u, had bequeathed temporal overlordship) is but one
instance of such usurpation. In Mangaia, the Temporal Lord was the
most powerful war leader (Buck 1934). The theme recurs throughout
Polynesia, and as Sahlins observes, ‘usurpation itsell is the principle of
legitimacy’ . . . Hawaiians say, “Every king acts as a conqueror when he
is installed”, for if he has not actually sacrificed the late king, he is
usually presumed to have poisoned him’ (198lb: 113).
   Warfare in Polynesia was therefore a means of preserving the mam
and status of chiefs, as well as an opportunity for their rivals to usurp
that same mana and status, and for toa to achieve a position in society
not open to them by birth. Given this cultural context of warfare, it is
easy to understand that          the proximate causes of conflict were
numerous; Williamson provides a partial catalogue ol these.

struggles of rival chiefs for power, disputes as to succession, insubordination or
rebellion of a subchief, or his resentment at the domination of his superior,
lack of respect to a chief, disputes as to land, boundaries and property generally,
the need of food and consequent raids, abduction of or elopement with
women, vengeance for the death of a relation or insult or injury inflic ted upon
him, or theft or damage to his property, and the need of victims for human
 sacrifice to the gods   (1937:3).

   Polynesian warfare varied considerably in scale and intensity. At one
 end of the spectrum we have relatively simple raiding, such as that de¬
 scribed by Buck (1932:55) for Tongareva, when ‘the proclaiming of a
 masanga [ban on coconuts] forced the people of closed territory to make
 raids on their neighbor’s plantations’. Raiding was a frequent means as
 well of avenging insults against one’s person or tribe, a means of restoring
 mana. From the wider perspective of political evolution in Polynesia,
 however, it is the larger conflicts that are of special interest, particularly'
 those that involved territorial conquest. Goldman rightly observed that
 ‘war made lands and produce instruments and rewards of power’
 (1970:556). Having examined the cultural background of warfare in
 Polynesia, we may now look more closely at conflict in relation to island
 ecology and political systems.
198          Process

Demographic and ecological correlates of competition

Vayda, in several studies of Maori warfare (1960, 1961, 1976), was
perhaps the first to produce a model of Polynesian warfare in terms of
‘direct ecological functions or consequences as the expansion of popu¬
lation and an increase in the extent of the environment being exploited’
(1961:350). Vayda recognized that in situations of rapid population
growth and expansion, such as evidently occurred in prehistoric New
Zealand, ‘sooner or later there would have been groups whose territory
adjoined only the territory of other groups rather than any virgin land
suitable for agriculture’ (1961:348).          Given continued population
growth, the onlv viable alternative would be to expand the territory of
the group by forcibly taking over the lands of one or more neighbouring
groups. Furthermore, Vayda argued that the annexation of cleared
agricultural land was preferable to expansion into virgin forest,
‘because the labor involved in clearing the primary forest was so great’
(1960:113). In the model, such territorial conquests not only allowed
stronger local groups to expand, but the displacement of conquered
groups led to a general population redistribution, and settlement of
previously unoccupied lands. ‘The expansion of one group, by means
of warfare, into the contiguous territory of another could lead the
second group to expand into the contiguous territory of a third - and so
forth until finally there would be displacement of a group having
territory contiguous to unoccupied land’ (1976:77-8).
   Vayda further argued (1976) that Maori warfare may be analysed as a
war process, with distinguishable phases of fighting. Thus, raids and
smaller-scale conflicts may have been a means for groups to continually
‘test’   each other’s relative strength.       Ultimatelv,    such    small-scale
 encounters would escalate to full-scale territorial conquests. Given the
 deeply ingrained cultural background of war in Polynesia, Vavda’s
 model may appear demographically and ecologically deterministic.
 Nevertheless, his model in general terms is supported by a consider¬
 able array of ethnohistoric data, and provides an important perspective
 on the ability of territorial conquest to respond to pressures of popu¬
 lation and land distribution (whether ‘real’, or simply perceived as such
 by the groups involved).
   Roger Duff (1967) similarly stressed the role of population pressure
and competition for arable land as the primary stimulus to warfare in
New Zealand. In his words,

II we have to assign a specific reason for the evolution of warfare in the North
Island rather than in the South or the Chathams, we can find it in tile buildup of
population which followed the adaptation ofkurnara growing to a still marginal
environment. If we have to explain the distinctively chronic nature ol Classic
Maori warfare, we mav seek it in the inherent competition for good kumara land
and in the one-crop season (1967:1 16).
           Competition and conflict                                   199


Cassels (1974) while also acknowledging that population pressure was
likely the primary stimulus to the development of Maori warfare, has
stressed the need to be cautious about such models. Citing Kelly’s
(1968) important work in New Guinea, he rightly notes that very local
population pressure or resource imbalances could trigger warfare, long
before the entire region had approached a level of‘carrying capacity’.
  The relationships between population growth, land (both limited
area, and marginal versus fertile areas), and warfare have been noted
for other Polynesian island groups as well. Suggs (1961) considered
rapid population increase during the Marquesan Expansion Period to
have led both to the settlement of marginal parts of the islands, and to
an intensification of warfare. Suggs applied Vavda’s model to the
Marquesan situation, and indeed, carried it further, suggesting that the
local population ‘explosion’ led to the settlement of other East Poly¬
nesian islands, by ‘groups fleeing from the Marquesas’ (1961:183-4).
Ultimately, as all marginal lands were occupied, ‘intergroup conflicts
over land would have increased’ (1961:186), a process serving to inten¬
sify ‘to an extreme the rivalry present in most Polynesian societies’.
McCoy (1976:143-5) also drew upon Vayda’s model in his analysis of
Easter Island warfare. He notes that‘it is clear that warfare was intended
to force withdrawal from the land, thereby leaving it for exploitation by
the victorious party’ (1976:144). At the same time, however, McCoy
recognized that while warfare served an adaptive function in the dis¬
persal of population to unexploited land, it also had maladaptive
aspects which in the long run prompted socio-political disintegration.
  In Hawai‘i, the role of war as the dominant factor in local socio¬
political development was argued by Cordv (1974b). In a rather linear
chain of causation, Cordy proposed that population pressure acted as
an independent ‘initiating variable’ to cultural change: ‘one simple
chiefdom (perhaps several) continued to grow in population, and this
chiefdom(s) was surrounded by neighboring chiefdoms creating a full-
land situation’ (1974b: 101). War for land, as an adjustment to this pres¬
sure, in turn ‘required greater social complexity and integration’
(1974b:102).
  There seems to be little doubt that territorial conquest was a signifi¬
cant response to population increase and pressure on circumscribed
lands throughout Polynesia (one would question, however, the‘prime
mover5 status that Cordy appears to attribute to warfare [cf. Friedman
1979:250, 258]). A general model is perhaps useful in outlining the pro¬
cess of competition and conflict; this is illustrated in diagrammatic
form in Figure 63. We mav envision this process as a series of phases
(each grading into the next), the entire process taking several hundreds,
or even a thousand or so vears. In Phase I, our hypothetical island is
colonized by a small social group, A, and a settlement is established in
200         Process

one of the fertile vallevs on the south-east side of the island. (As is typical
throughout much of Polynesia, this ‘model’ island has a well-watered,
windward side, with permanent stream valleys and alluvial soils, and a
drier, leeward side, more marginal for agricultural production.) Popu¬
lation growth within the next several generations gradually leads to
fissioning of the original social group, with junior collateral lines
establishing new groups in valleys farther along the coast (B, C). In this
manner, the most favourable local environments come to be settled
relatively rapidly.




           63. A diagrammatic model of the colonization of a hypothetical
           island, segmentation of social groups, and expansion leading to
           territorial conflict (see text for discussion).
           Competition and conflict                                   201


  By Phase II, continued population growth has led to fairly dense
settlement in the windward valleys, with the territories of groups. A, B,
and C now contiguous. Some degree of local agricultural intensifi¬
cation is initiated, particularly in the development of water-control sys¬
tems for Colocasia cultivation. Nevertheless, the process of fissioning off
of junior lines still continues, with the establishment, by this phase, of
settlements in the more marginal, leeward side of the island (Phase II
would, in essence, be equivalent to Suggs’s Expansion Period in the
Marquesan sequence). Competition and conflict between the densely
settled windward groups (A, B, C) may be expected by Phase II, par¬
ticularly with regard to boundary disputes.
   In Phase III, population increase has now led to a ‘full-land’ situ¬
ation, where the boundaries of all five political groups are contiguous.
The windward groups have intensified irrigation production, while the
leeward groups have adapted shifting cultivation to a short fallow
regime. Under these conditions, boundary disputes have escalated,
and inter-group raiding becomes common. The situation is easily
exacerbated by environmental perturbations, such as drought or
cyclone. In addition, degradation of the environment is occurring in
local areas, for example, erosion on leeward ridges, and reduction in
populations of wild birds, fish, and shellfish; these also tend to heighten
the pressure on food resources.
   By Phase IV, we have reached the level where territorial conquest has
become full-fledged. Group A has conquered the territory of adjacent
Group C, and incorporated the populations of both into one chiefdom
polity. On the leeward side of the island, Group D has expanded into
E’s territory; in this scenario, the populace of E (those who were not
felled in war) fled the island in search of new lands. Basicallv, a process
of political consolidation has begun, with a monopolv of force as its
 principal instrument.
   The general model or scenario sketched above is, of course,
 hypothetical. It is, nonetheless, closely reflected not only by ethno¬
 graphic and archaeological evidence, but by indigenous oral traditions
 of local political history from several island groups (e.g., Mangareva,
 Buck 1938a; Mangaia, Buck, 1934; Society Islands, Oliver 1974; Easter
 Island, Metraux 1940; Hawai'i, Hommon 1976; Kamakau 1961). By
 way of ethnohistoric validation of this general model, I will briefly cite
 just two cases, those of Tikopia and Futuna. (Archaeological evidence
 supporting this model will be given in Part III.)
   The demographic situation in Tikopia has already been discussed
 (Chapter 5), and it was briefly noted that war was an ultimate cultural
 control on over-population. In fact, a set of oral traditions (Firth 1961),
 tied to a genealogical framework and pertaining to the last few' centuries
 of the Tikopia prehistoric sequence, provides a coherent account of war
 in relation to population pressure, food shortage, and competition for
202         Process

land. Although some anthropologists have dismissed such traditions as
pure‘myth’ (E.R. Leach 1962; Hooper 1981), archaeological investi¬
gations in Tikopia have corroborated many kev aspects of the oral
accounts, and confirmed Firth’s view that these traditions constitute a
‘quasi-historv’ which, if not entirelv accurate from a Western historical
viewpoint, at least is correct in its overall treatment of historical process.
A detailed discussion of these traditions, and their archaeological cor¬
roboration, has been presented elsewhere (Kirch and Yen 1982:362-8),
and here I summarize only certain highlights.
  According to Tikopia tradition, by about the mid seventeenth cen¬
tury AD (based on genealogical calculation), the island was in a ‘full-
land’ situation, with three major social and political groups. The first of
these, Nga Faea, occupied the fertile western lowlands, while Nga
Ravenga had control of the southern coast and adjacent hills. The third
group, Nga Ariki (relative late arrivals to the island) were hemmed in
along the inner shore of a marine embayment, with only steep talus for
their agricultural land. These three groups were in a state of com¬
petition for limited agricultural resources, manifested by continual
boundary disputes and the like. The problem of food shortage, acute
for Nga Ariki, is explicit in the oral traditions, as in this metaphorically
stated account:

time and again, I was told how dav bv dav thev and their households saw the
scrapings of giant vain from the cooking houses of their Nga Ravenga
neighbors float past them on the waters of the lake. Feeling the pinch of hunger
thev collected these scrapings, and baked them for food in their own
ovens (Firth 1961:131-2).

Unable to tolerate this situation, and provoked by land boundary dis¬
putes, Nga Ariki ultimately fell upon Nga Ravenga in a war of conquest,
and virtually exterminated the latter, appropriating their lands. Nga
Ariki were satisfied for a time, but after a generation or so, the scenario
was repeated. This time Nga Faea fled before the Nga Ariki onslaught,
leaving them sole masters of the island (see Chapter 4).
  What the traditions do not discuss, but our archaeological investi¬
gations revealed (Kirch and Yen 1982), was that the seventeenth to
eighteenth centuries in Tikopia were also a period of radical environ¬
mental change, the most dramatic manifestation of which was the
closure of the salt-water bay to form Lake Te Roto (see Chapter 6, Fig.
34). Thus, not only did Nga Ariki originally possess the most marginal
agricultural land on the island, but the creation ofTe Roto eliminated
their direct access to the sea (and to pelagic fish), and killed off the rich
bivalve beds that had formerly been a major source of protein (as
indicated in the midden deposits of Nga Ariki habitation sites). In
short, archaeology has provided a solid ecological context for the political
events discussed in Tikopia oral traditions. (As a footnote to the Tikopia
case, it is worth noting that rivalry between social groups did not cease
               Competition and conflict                                                                203


with Nga Ariki’s mastery over the entire island. Rather, a division has
developed between two districts, Faea and Ravenga, again manifested
by frequent land disputes. Were population pressure not released by
emigration (to Waimasi, Vanikoro, and other islands in the Solomons),
it is probable that inter-district warfare would again erupt, as indeed
was threatened as recently as the severe famine of 1952-3; Firth
1959).
  The Futuna case involves a somewhat more complicated series of
inter-group conflicts, again resulting in political consolidation, and
related to competition for agricultural resources. Full analyses of the
Futunan traditions may be found in Burrows (1936) and Kirch (1975).
Figure 64 presents a summary of the political history of the Asoa-Alofi
region of Futuna, beginning with five independent political units, and
ending with the consolidation of the entire area by the paramount chief
Veliteki, immediately prior to European contact. The underlying,
recurrent themes in these political traditions are unmistakable, those of
conquest and political amalgamation, resulting from desire for land, as
seen for example in the founding tradition of the Mauifa line at Loka
(competition for gardens between the Asoa people and the Fale Tolu),
or in the conquest of Alofi, after the devastating effects of a cyclone and
subsequent famine (Kirch 1975:342-7).


    TU’A                             ASOA                                 ALOFI

                           LALOLALO          VELE                  LOKA    GANIU            ALOFITAI




  Salo  Mago
     A = O

                           Fakavelikele      Tu*i Asoa




                                                                                               Independent
                                                                           Fale Tolu
                                                                                                   Chiefs
                                          — Congest -


                                          Assimilation

                                                                            Driven to
                                                                              Tu^a

                                                                                       Expansion

         Assimilation         Veliteki^
                              (Papa)*          Conquest of Alofi




                                                    A L O



                 64. Graphic representation of the political traditions of the
                 Asoa—Alofi region of Futuna and Alofi Islands, showing the
                 succession of conquests and progressive amalgamation of the
                 area under the authority of the Lalolalo line oi paramount
                 chiefs. Starred names are associated with known archaeological
                  sites.
204        Process

  The Futunan case is significant in another regard, for it highlights the
particular intensity ofland competition in environments where shifting
cultivation is the dominant agricultural mode. In Futuna, the sequence
of inter-group conflict over land was strongest in the eastern part of the
island (Asoa), which lacked permanent watercourses (unlike Sigave Dis¬
trict, where irrigation was highlv developed). Widening our perspective
to include other Polynesian islands, there is considerable evidence to
suggest that war for land was prominent in areas characterized bv shifting
cultivation, or its intensified dryfield forms (Kirch 1980a:47). This ten¬
dency is not surprising, when we consider that the limits to agricultural
intensification are more severe in these environments, usually leeward
areas lacking suitable water supplv for irrigation or drainage. In areas
where irrigation was feasible, local population pressure could be
relieved (for a longer time, at least) through continued development of
the pondfield infrastructure. The intensification of shifting cultivation,
however, had more severe constraints, since reduction in fallow
beyond a point will lead to decreased yields, or worse, permanent
degradation of a landscape. With continued population increase, the
only viable recourse in leeward, marginal environments was expansion
to adjacent lands.
  It is a fact of some significance that in Hawai'i, the most politically
powerful and highlv competitive chieftainships developed, not in areas
where large-scale irrigation was feasible, but on the leeward sides of the
islands, especially in the Kohala-Kona region of Hawai‘i Island.
(Curiously, this point has been overlooked bv those who have dis¬
cussed Hawaiian irrigation in terms of its evolutionary implications,
e.g., Earle 1978, 1980.) Likewise, in the Societv group, it was the
smaller, more marginal islands such as Raiatea and Borabora that came
to dominate the political scene in the late prehistoric period. Oliver
(1974:1124) has suggested that Borabora’s poor agricultural resources
were, in fact, a direct stimulus to inter-island conquest. Sahlins as well
(1972:141) has remarked on this important aspect of Polynesian pro¬
duction, ‘the occupation and improvement of once-marginal areas
effected under the aegis of ruling chiefs’.


Warfare and political development

Among the war songs intoned bv the rauti during the course of battle in
Tahiti was the following:

           War is growth (extension) to the land.
           Establishment of rock strata (great men).
           Spreading out of land (population) . . .
           War is fertile soil;
           Soil that will produce seeds (extension).
           Soil that will be verdant (produce power).
            Competition and conflict                                        205

            Soil spread out,
            Soil for leaning slabs (increase of priests),
            Soil for pavings (for marae [temples]).     Henry (1928:307)

As an indigenous statement, the chant is of particular interest, for it
illustrates the political benefits that accrued to those victorious in war.
While the use of coercive force as a dominant strategy in Polynesian
islands was doubtless stimulated by the demographic and ecological
factors discussed above, it was also spurred on by political motives. The
association of victor with high mana and attendant status has alreadv
been discussed; here I wish to simplv point out a few of the implications
of intensive warfare for the evolution of complex polities.
  The case of Mangaia( Buck 1934) is instructive, for though a relatively
small high island, it is a sort of microcosm for a Polynesian society in
which politics, as well as economics and religion, had come to be
thoroughly bound up with warfare. In Buck’s words,

In the course of historv the prestige ol the toa (successful warrior) began to
overshadow that of the rangatira (chief). Successful leadership in war deter¬
mined whether the tribe kept its own lands and acquired other . . . The war
leader of the successful tribe became Temporal Lord ol Mangaia ... A
hereditarv chief could not relvon his seniority alone, but, to maintain his power
in the tribe, he had to be a warrior as well   (1934:110).

In essence, the basis of political power had undergone a fundamental
transformation, from one dependent upon descent and relationship to
senior lines, to one in which the ability to apply coercive force was critical.
Koskinen has referred to this change as a ‘new type of arz&zship’, noting
as well that the ‘chief became a political factor, and only remnants of his
earlier priestly duties were retained’ (1960:148-9). This transformation
occurred, to varying degrees, in all of the larger island groups, and
especially in the Society Islands, Hawai‘i and Tonga. Not that the
original emphasis on high rank and descent from the gods was entirely
lost In Hawai‘i, for instance, while forceful usurpation of the reins of
power by junior collaterals had become a recurrent pattern, the efforts
of the usurpers to engage in marriages with high-ranking women were
remarkable. Kamehameha was exceedingly disappointed that his child
bv Keopuolani, a chiefess of the highest (ni'aupi'o) rank, could not be
born at Kukaniloko, ancestral temple of the ancient (indigenous) O'ahu
paramounts, for this would have assured his heir of the highest
status.
   Burrows (1939b) long ago recognized the evolutionary significance
of this shift in emphasis from a political apparatus based primarily on a
 kinship model of descent (‘breed’) to one in which power was defined
 on more directly practical, and overt, grounds, and in which territory
(‘border’) was essential. As he wrote, ‘progressive encroachment of bor¬
 der over breed seems to have been the rule in Polynesia. As territorial
 units grew larger and stronger, kinship grouping became simpler or
2(H)          I'm I ess

v.^ucT (I 939b:20). Signific antly, and I believe, correctly, Burrows
pointed to ‘warfare arising from rivalry over land or ambition for
enhanced status’ as the most powerful process favouring the transition
from ‘breed’ to ‘border’ (1939b:21). Goldman, too, stressed this
transformation from a political order rooted in the organic imagers of
kin group segmentation, to one based on territoriality. ‘Kin groups
bud, branch, and unfold. Territorial groups are created by chiefs. They
express human agency. In this expression, they assert a radically new
six tal idea’ (1 *)7():/>d5).
   I he shill from descent to overt force as a basis for the attainment of
politic al power also had major repercussions on local systems of land
tenure and economic organization, and on religion. The Mangaian
case is again instructive. Whereas originally the tribes ‘occupied
definite continuous areas’ (Buck 1934:107), continued warfare- led to a
system wherein choic e lands, especially the irrigated taro lands (puna),
wore redistributed as spoils of viotorv. ‘Land tenure came to depend on
conquest, whic h obliterated the rights of previous occupation and
cultivation’ (1934:129).        In the Society Islands,    paramount chiefs
established personal estates in each ofihe territorial subdivisions under
theit suzerainty, plat ing their own stewards in charge of these lands
(Oliver 1974:1209). Referring to Hawai'i, Hommon stressed that the
significance ol territorial acquisition lay, not so much in the land itself,
but in the c apture of a ‘complete productive unit, consisting of terres¬
trial and marine resources and the resident producers’ (1976:291). The
benefit to the victorious chief was considerable, since surplus pro¬
duction could be- redirected to his own entourage and political pur¬
pose's. As we shall explore more lullv in Chapter 10, the- Hawaiian case'
witnessed the most radic al shift in land tenure of any of the Polynesian
groups, for the common populace came to be totally disenfranchised,
working the land for chiefs who themselves held segments and districts
at the pleasure of the1 paramount.
   Clearly, warfare in Polynesia had more than one‘function’: it was a
means to relieve population pressure and obtain land for agricultural
expansion, but was also a route to power and aggrandizement of status.
Karin's argument that warfare should be understood as a ‘capital invest¬
ment ... a feature of political competition over the means of pro¬
duction’ (1978:1(33) has considerable merit. In Hawai'i, Mangaia,
Tahiti and elsewhere throughout Polynesia war was indeed a means for
chiefs to capture the' productive apparatus of adjacent territories so as
to put these to political uses. At the same time, however, we cannot
ignore1 the' real demographic and ecological pressure and constraints
that provide a context for such political competition. Thus, I believe
Earle was in error in rejecting outright any relationship between war¬
fare   and    ‘expanding        population   and   subsistence   requirements’
(1978:183 4, 192).
           Competition and conflict                                    207

  Repercussions of the increased emphasis on coercive power can also
he followed in the religious systems of the larger and more stratified
( hiefdoms. Buck tells us that in Mangaia, the war god Ron go became
the'national’ god, and that ‘< hange of government and the allocation of
office and land had to be inaugurated by human sacrifice and ratified
on the marae o( Rongo wit It religious ritual’ (1934:161—2). I his is no¬
table, for elsewhere throughout Polynesia Rongo is the god of agri¬
culture and peace (e.g., the Hawaiian Lotto; cl. Handy 1927:107-13),
and was evidently so at an earlier time in Mangaia as well. According to
Buck, it was the precedent set by the Ngariki clan, who first offered a
human sacrifice to Rongo after a great victory, which established
Rongo as a national god of war. In any event, the dominance of war
( tilts, and associated human sacrifice, is clearly associated with the rise
of militaristic chieftainships, notably in the Society Islands (the ‘Oro
cult) and in I lawai‘i(lhe Ku cult). In Hawai‘i, the worship of Ku became
what Sahlins (1968:1 12) ( alls ‘a religion of tribal dimensions’, in which
the pivotal figures were the ruling chiefs and a class of high priests
(themselves of chiefly descent). As we shall see in Chapter 10, the
material   manifestations of the cult were massive stone temples,
demanding considerable labour to construct and even more to supply
the prodigious offerings needed for their consecration (see Chapter 7).
In the worship ol both Ku and ‘Oro, human offerings enforced the
absolute power and authority ol the ruling chiefs. As Oliver observes,
‘here is a case par excellence wherein religious commitment and
politic s were mutually supportive of an ideal condition for aggrandize¬
ment by either one or both’ (1974:908).


Archaeological manifestations of warfare

Archaeological evidence for prehistoric warfare in Polynesia consists of
occasional weapons (slingstones, spear points, etc.) found on the sur¬
face or in excavations, and of fortifications. Of these two classes of
evidence, the second is far and away the most important, providing
critical data on the age, development, and degree of armed conflict.
Polynesian fortifications (and especially those of New Zealand), are the
subject of a considerable literature, and here I can only review a few
highlights of direct relevance to the arguments presented above. A
good overview of the field is Daugherty (1979), to whom the reader is
referred for an in-depth survey.
  Several attempts have been made to classify Polynesian fortifications,
and for New Zealand in particular there are a number of differing
typologies (e.g., Best 1927; Golson 1957a; Groube 1965, 1970; A. Fox
 1976). For our purposes, a modified version of Daugherty’s simple
 functional classification (1979:5) will suffice to indicate the major kinds
 of fortification found throughout Polynesia. Three major categories
208           Process

were indicated by Daugherty’s scheme: I, homeland defences; II,
strategic defences; and III, refuges. Homeland forts, situated within an
occupied territory, were the most substantial, and basically consisted of
fortified, defended hamlets or villages, that is, permanent residential
sites.   In   general   terms,   we   can   divide   this   category   into   two
morphological classes: IA, those which utilized natural ridges, volcanic
cones, headlands, and the like (usually with additional, often sub¬
stantial modification, like pallisades and fosses), which were easilv
defended; and, IB, forts constructed on flat terrain (or in swampy
ground), utilizing ditch-and-bank or pallisade construction. Type IA is
epitomized by the Maori/><2, while IB is well represented by the Tongan
kolo (McKern 1929).
   The second major class (II) of fortification is the strategic, designed to
‘deny the enemy access or entrance into the territory’ (Daugherty
1979:5). Such forts are most frequently sited on ridges or other high
points, though there are exceptions, such as the great Poike Ditch on
Easter Island. This latter construction, actually a linear series of ditches
(each about 100 metres long and 10-15 metres wide, and 2-3 metres
deep) with associated spoil banks, runs for nearly 3 kilometres, and
would have blocked access to the Poike Peninsula from the rest of the
island (Heyerdahl and Ferdon 1961: fig. 2, 385-91).
   The final class of fortification (Type III) is that of refuges, places to
which a group would flee in time of war. These are naturally defensive
positions, such as ridges or peaks, with some artificial structural modi¬
fication, which I have labelled as Type III A. A distinct subtype, 111B,
consists of caves or lava tubes modified for use as refuges.
   Table 20 shows the distribution of each of these major classes of forti¬
fication throughout the various island groups, and lists some primary
references to archaeological surveys and excavations of fortified sites.
While strategic defences and refuges are found in virtually every island
group, homeland sites are conspicuously absent in certain areas, even
though warfare itself was endemic. Daugherty (1979:173) attributes the
lack of elaborate fortifications in Hawai'i and the Society Islands to the
‘openness and obviousness’ of their war tactics, though other factors
(such as the size of the territorial unit) mav also be important.
   Early discussions of Polynesian fortifications (e.g., Best 1927) tended
to view these large artifacts in diffusionist terms. It is clear, however,
that Polynesian forts must be viewed, in the main at least, as local
developments, and that morphological similarities have often developed
convergently, due to use of similar natural terrain, the same level of
technology, and fighting tactics. It is probably significant that there is
no general Polynesian term for fort. Rather, in West Polynesia forts are
called kolo (or ‘olo in Samoa), whereas in East Poly nesia they are termed
either pa or pare, a term derived from the Proto-Polynesian word for
‘enclosure’.
             Competition and conflict                                     209

Table 20. Distribution of fortifications in Polynesia


Island/group                 Types               Primary references


                   IA   IB   II   III A   111B

Tonga                   X    P                   McKern 1929; Davidson 1971
Samoa                   X    X       X     X     Green and Davidson 1969,
                                                 1974
Futuna                       X       X           Burrows 1936; Kirch 1975
‘Uvea                   X    p                   Burrows 1937; Kirch 1975
Marquesas                    X       X           Suggs 1961; Sinoto 1970
Easter Island                X             X     Heverdahl and Ferdon 1961;
                                                 McCov 1976
Society Islands              X       p           Emory 1933; Green 1967
Raivaevae          X                             Heverdahl and Ferdon 1961;
                                                 Green 1967
Hawai'i                              X     X     McAllister 1933; Bonk 1969;
                                                 Schilt 1980b
Rapa                X        X       X           Stokes ms; Ferdon 1965
New Zealand         X        X       X           Best 1927; A. Fox 1976; Groube
                                                 1970




   Polynesian fortification reached its apogee in New Zealand, where
the total number of forts has been estimated at 4,000-6,000 (Groube
1970:133), and this, as A. Fox (1976:9) admits, may be an under¬
estimate. The vast majority of pa sites are situated in the North Island,
and their distribution closely reflects the prime agricultural settlement
areas. Likewise, the less numerous pa of South Island are nearly all
found along the north-east coasts (from Murderers Bay to the Banks
Peninsula), also in association with agricultural areas (Brailsford 1981).
 Despite an early ethnographic interest in pa sites (Best 1927), it was not
 until fairly recently that archaeologists began to tackle the problems
 presented by excavation of such large-scale field monuments. There
 are now, however, several detailed investigations of pa sites, among
 these Fox’s work at Pawhetau and at Tiromoana Pa (1974, 1978),
 Bellwood’s excavation of Otakanini (1971, 1972b), Harsant’s study of
 Oue Pa (1981), Fox and Green’s excavation of the defended settlement
 of Maioro (1982), and Peters’s of Mangakaware (1971). The recent syn¬
 thesis by Fox (1976) concisely surveys the current state of knowledge of
pa variation and development.
   Groube (1970) distinguished three major classes of the Maori pa on
 the basis of their defences: Class I, terraced sites; Class II, sites defended
 with transverse ditches and banks; and Class III, sites defended with
 both transverse and lateral ditches and banks,              including wholh
 enclosed forms. Fox (1976) suggests the addition to this scheme of
210        Process

Class IV, swamp pa, defended only by wooden pallisades. Figure 65 is a
plan of Tiromoana Pa at Ffawke’s Bay, showing many of the features
characteristic of New Zealand fortifications. To the west and north, the
pa is naturally defended by steep slopes, whereas ditches and banks,
and pallisades, strengthen the pa from attack on the south and east. On
the lower slopes are numerous terraces, many of which would have
supported habitations. A ubiquitous feature of any pa site, sunken
storage pits (for sweet potato, kumara), with raised rims and external
drains, cover much of the level top of the site. Storage pits were often
elaborately constructed, with internal drains and racks for holding the
kumara tubers. TaniwhaPa, in the lower Waikato, is a rather unique site,
in which fully 60 per cent of the flat area within the pa is taken up by a
series of forty-four storage pits (Fig. 66), capable of holding about 370
cubic metres of kumara tubers (Law and Green 1972:265). Taniwha
essentially consists of a ‘fortified store, one which can be retreated to
from other dwelling places if danger threatened’ (1972:265).
  Fox (1976:27-30) has presented a working model for the evolution of
the Maori pa, based on the excavations and radiocarbon evidence
obtained thus far. At several sites, such as Skipper’s Ridge, Tiromoana,




            65. Plan of Tiromoana Pa, New Zealand (courtesy R.C. Green,
            University of Auckland).
              Competition and conflict                                        211

Maioro, and Kauri Point, there is evidence for unfortified, hilltop
agricultural settlements preceding the construction of pa defences.
Such settlement sites, incorporating subterranean storage pits, had
evidently become common by the twelfth and thirteenth centuries
throughout parts of the North Island. The transition to earthwork or
pallisade defences occurred at several excavated sites during the fif¬
teenth and sixteenth centuries, and in some cases, successive stages of
construction of increasingly sophisticated defences are discernible
(e.g., at Otakanini andTiromoana). Fox summarizes the origin of the/>a
as follows:
fortification in New Zealand was an insular development, arising from the need
to defend existing hilltop settlements where basic foodstuffs were stored. A
stock of kumara, taro, and fern root was essential to feed the growing com¬
munities through the wet winter and to enable them to plant the new crops in
the spring. Raiding a neighbor was a quick way to overcome a shortage, and
hence the need and reason for defense (1976:28-9).

Archaeology has thus begun to provide concrete support for the
theoretical speculations of Vayda and others regarding the close
relationships between population growth, agriculture, and the develop¬
ment of warfare in New Zealand.
 The island of Rapa, in the Austral group, though only 39 km2 in area,
presents a marvellous example of the development of homeland for¬
tifications, elaborate ridge-top village sites with sophisticated defences.




                66. Aerial view ofTaniwha Pa, New Zealand, a fortified group
                of storage pits (photo courtesy R.C. Green, University of Auckland).
212        Process

Vancouver (1798, vol. 1:215) saw some of these villages from the sea in
1791, but a detailed survey was not conducted until Stokes’s work in
1920 (ms.). The Rapan forts, locally known as pare, number about
twenty-five, and are distributed over the island, occupying elevated
points along the central mountain crest (Fig. 67). Stokes collected a
wealth of oral traditions concerning clan history,            including the
relationship of these social groups to the forts, and some of this has
been summarized by Hanson (1970:23-6). Clearly, the emphasis on
fortified settlement reflected a phase of intense rivalry between social




            ridge-top fortifications and of irrigated agricultural terraces in
            valley bottoms (adapted from Heyerdahl and Ferdon 1965).
             Competition and conflict                                           213

groups, spurred by competition for limited agricultural resources
(especially the irrigated valley bottoms, see Fig. 67). It is probable that
environmental degradation, induced by human burning of the vege¬
tation on the steep hillsides, was also a factor which exacerbated the
resource problem. Stokes summarized the development of the Rapan
fortified villages as follows:
1 assume . . . that the original use of refuges began at a period of great internal
disturbance. It seems to suggest the period of the Tipi wars for ascendancy . . .
It is paralleled by the interleaved situation of the clans in all parts ol the island
which seems to tell a store of conquests, part or whole, and reconquests which
has left the plan of clan distribution exceedingly mixed (ms., p. 443).

  To date, archaeological investigation of Rapa has been limited to the
work of the Norwegian Expedition (1955-6), whose primary thrust was
the excavation of Morongo Uta, the largest fortified village site on the
island (Mulloy 1965). On this site, ‘evidence of debris of daily living was
plentiful’ (1965:22), and it functioned both as a permanent or home¬
land village as well as a citadel against attack. As seen in the reconstruction
(Fig. 68), the pare consists of a central tower, with surrounding terraces
levelled into the narrow ridge lines extending out from the tower in
three directions. Fosses across the ridges aided in defence, and the
village was probably pallisaded when in use. Mulloy’s excavation,
unfortunately, failed to provide any evidence for the sequence of con¬
struction at Morongo Uta. The problem of the development of warfare
and fortification in Rapa, along with the intensification of irrigation in
the valley bottoms (and of environmental change and erosion), is one
 that will greatly repay future attempts as in-depth archaeological
 study.
    In striking contrast to New Zealand or Rapa, the Hawaiian Islands-
 despite   the endemic warfare that            characterized      late   prehistoric
 Hawaiian culture - generally lack fortified sites. Nevertheless, moun¬
 tain refuges are probably more common than previously thought.
 Several examples seen by the author on O'ahu Island have fosses cut
 across steep ridges, although there is no evidence that such sites were
 ever permanendy occupied, or even used by fleeing groups for extended
 periods of time. At Kawela, on Moloka i Island, is a particularly
 interesting refuge site situated on a narrow ridge between two branches
 of the Kawela Gulch (Weisler and Kirch 1982). The ridge-top plateau is
 accessible only along the narrow crest, and this was fortified with small
 terraces, which probably served as crude fighting stages. At one point
 on the ridge line, a cache of carefully selected water worn slingstones
 (Fig. 69) was located. What makes the site especially interesting is the
 presence of a major religious structure, of the type called puuhonua,
 farther inland along the ridge. This temple, constructed of stacked
 stone masonry, served as a place of refuge to which tapu breakers or
 defeated warriors could flee and be safe from their pursuers. Within the
68. Conjectural reconstruction of the ridge-top fortified village of Morongo Uta, Rapa Island (from
Heyerdahl and Ferdon 1965, courtesy of T. Heyerdahl).
           Competition and conflict                                      215

confines of thepuuhonua such persons were under the protection of the
gods and, after appropriate rituals of purification, could go forth again
with impunity. In the Kawela refuge site, therefore, we see the close
relationship between religious belief and practical action (such as war¬
fare), which is typical of Polynesian cultures.
  On the leeward side of Hawaifi Island (in the districts of Kona,




             69. A cache of slingstones situated on the fortified ridge at
             Kawela, Moloka'i Island (photo courtesy M. Weisler, Bishop Museum).
216        Process

Kohala, and Ka‘u), where warfare was particularly intense, are found
large caves of refuge, utilizing natural lava tubes. Five of these have
been investigated: Lua Nunu (Bonk 1969), Keopu cave (Schilt, 1980b),
the Keahole refuge cave (Hammatt and Folk 1980),Waikoloa Cave 16
(Bevacqua 1972), and Cave 900 (Rosendahl 1973). All of these sites have
extensive modifications for defence, such as walled entrances and
narrow crawlways, where an attacking enemy would be forced to enter
single-file. At Keahole and Keopu, stratigraphic evidence suggests
earlier use of these sites for habitation, with construction of defences
only later. In fact, available dating indicates that these sites were used
for refuge beginning about the sixteenth century, correlating with
traditional evidence for a heightening of inter-district competition
and conflict.


Overview

The archaeological evidence for warfare, from several island groups,
reinforces a significant point regarding competition and conflict in
Polynesia - that the use of coercive force developed locally, in distinctive
patterns peculiar to each society. Yet, despite such variation, it is still
possible to isolate several dominant factors closely related to the esca¬
lation or intensification of Polynesian warfare everywhere. Population
growth, limited agricultural resources, chiefly demand for surplus and
a consequent need for territorial expansion were clearly fundamental
to the larger process. Environmental change - both stochastic pertur¬
bations and longer-term degradation induced by human land use -
also had a role, and acute disasters may frequently have precipitated
armed conflicts. Still, it is important to stress that the development of
Polynesian warfare cannot be explained solely on a demographic-
ecological model. Just as significant a variable in the process of war
were ancestral Polynesian social and political relations, including
cultural definitions of mana and status. As a socially defined category,
toa-ship existed long before the colonization of most Polynesian
islands, and the potential for political rivalry between toa and ariki (as
between high and low grades of ariki) was latent in Ancestral Polynesian
Society. Population increase and land shortage did not cause endemic
warfare in Polynesian islands; they provided a context and stimulus
wherein ariki and toa, striving for domination over people and resources,
created through conflict, alliance, subversion, and persuasion, social
and political systems never before realized in Polynesia. In these
struggles for power, legitimated by myth and past actions, we see the
evolution of island chiefdoms.
PART III       TRANSFORMATION
           History is always structured by society; there are only more or less dynamic modes of
           effecting this.
                                                               Marshall Sahlins (1976:220)




           9
           Tonga

The preceding five chapters explored the dominant factors in the
evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms: the reassortment and adap¬
tation of cultural systems following initial colonization, the growth of
large and densely settled populations, stochastic perturbations and
long-term environmental change, development and intensification of
the productive forces, and competition and conflict between social
groups. In examining each of these factors, I have drawn widely upon
ethnographic and archaeological data for supporting examples and
illustrations, avoiding an island-by-island culture historical treatment.
While extended case studies of particular phenomena have been pre¬
sented, we have yet to trace the evolutionary course of any particular
Polynesian society from settlement to European contact. Such an
objective is the aim of the next three chapters.
  In Part III, I apply the theoretical orientation and analytical pro¬
cedures developed in the preceding chapters to three specific societies.
In so doing, I hope to further illustrate how the dominant evolutionary
processes have, in the context of local conditions, resulted in the
emergence of three societies which, although divergent in some re¬
spects, all share certain underlying structural similarities. The societies
which I have chosen - Tonga, Hawai'i, and Easter Island - each have
characteristics of special interest. Tonga not only reached a remarkable
level of political development in Oceania, but is virtually unique within
Polynesia for its elaborate external voyaging and exchange network.
Hawai‘i represents a case of equally great political transformation, but
within a remote, isolated, yet large and fertile archipelago. Easter
 Island, perhaps the most intriguing of the three cases, is like Hawai'i
 truly isolated, and its fascination lies in the development there of a com¬
 plex society which was in the end only to exceed its developmental
 limits and collapse upon itself.

   From ‘Eua to Vava'u, the Tongan archipelago extends 300 kilometres
 along a roughly northeast—southwest axis, incorporating about 160
 islands, the largest being Tongatapu, ‘Eua, and Vava‘u, all uplifted

              217
218        Transformation

limestone, with fertile, developed soils (Fig. 70). The Ha'apai group
comprises numerous low coral islets and atolls, the largest of which are
Nomuka, ‘Uiha, Foa, Lifuka, and Ha‘ano. The active volcanic islands of
Tofua and Late, west of the main archipelago, were never regularly
inhabited, but were visited for stone and timber. Beyond this main




           70. The Tongan archipelago, excluding the northerlv islands of
           Niuatoputapu and Niuafo'ou.
           Tonga                                                    219

group, some 300 kilometres north of Vava'u, lie Niuatoputapu and
Tafahi, small high islands, and a further 190 kilometres north-west is
Niuafo‘ou, an active ring-shaped volcano with a central crater lake.
Farthest-flung of the former Tongan dominions was ‘Uvea, some 850
kilometres north-west of Tongatapu.
   The complexity of the Tongan political system was evident to the
early European explorers (indeed, the complexities confounded Cook
for a time), and later ethnographers have invariably classified Tonga as
one of the most stratified of Polynesian societies (e.g., Sahlins 1958;
Goldman 1970). The entire archipelago was controlled by a pair of sacred
and secular paramounts (the Tub Tonga and the hau), whose main seat
was on the island of Tongatapu (‘Sacred Tonga’). The truly unique
feature of Tongan society, in contrast with other Polynesian chiefdoms,
was the integration by the Tongan polity of an extensive geographic
region, extending far beyond the limits of the Tongan archipelago
itself. Guiart stressed this topological structure of the Tongan system:
‘A l’echelle de l’Oceanie, 1’ensemble tongien pourrait etre decrit
comme un empire insulaire’ (1963:661) . . . ‘seul peut-etre des pays
polynesiens, l’archipel tongien s’etait rallie autour d’une autorite
centralisee’ (1963:667).
  The archipelago’s northeast-southwest orientation facilitated inter¬
island contacts, for during the trade-wind season two-way voyaging up
or down the chain is comparatively easy. We may readily distinguish
between a group of‘core’ islands (‘Eua, Ha‘apai, and Vava u) closely
linked to the central polity on Tongatapu, and the more distant
‘outliers’ of Niuatoputapu, Niuafo‘ou, and ‘Uvea (not to be confused
 with the Polynesian Outliers of Melanesia). Ultimately, this system of
 political and economic activity extended to Samoa and to eastern Fiji,
 from whence certain prestige goods,        and chiefly spouses, were
 obtained (Hjarnp 1979-80; Kaeppler 1978). The development of this
 complex, stratified, and geographically extensive socio-political system
 may be traced through a combination of archaeological and ethno-
 historic materials.


 The archaeological sequence

 Archaeological investigations on Tongatapu, though limited in scope
 and uneven in their treatment of certain site types, provide the skeleton
 of a prehistoric sequence (Poulsen 1967, 1968, 1976, 1977; McKern
 1929; Davidson 1969; Groube 1971; Golson 1957b). Lapita coloniz¬
 ation was accomplished no later than about 1200 BC, based upon
 radiocarbon dated ceramic-bearing sites at Ha‘ateiho and Pea. For the
 first millennium of Tongan prehistory, settlement was closely concen¬
 trated along the shores of the inland lagoon (Groube 1971). A steadv
 increase in the island’s population, over the 1500 or so years that
220          Transformation

pottery was in use, is indicated by the distribution and density of
ceramic-bearing sites. Sites containing Early Eastern Lapita, with well¬
decorated vessels, are relatively scarce, whereas the later Polynesian
Plain Ware sites are so concentrated as to form an essentially con¬
tinuous zone of pottery-bearing soils bordering the lagoon. As Groube
argued, ‘this coastal profusion’ of pottery ‘conforms to a prehistoric
settlement   pattern    of villages   situated   along the lagoon   shore’
(1971:291). There is no obvious archaeological evidence, from this
early period, of major differences in social status; elaborate mortuary
practices, large-scale public architecture, or other evidence of status
differential are lacking.
  The first millennium AD has been termed the‘Dark Ages’ by Davidson
(1979), owing to the dearth of excavated sites from this period. Pottery
manufacture ceased early in the first millennium AD, and non-ceramic
habitation sites have not as yet attracted archaeological attention. As
Davidson reports, ‘there is little evidence until late in the first millen¬
nium AD of the monumental sites, particularly the earthen and stone
mounds, that are now such a feature of the archaeological landscapes of
both Samoa and Tonga’ (1979:95). These include communal burial
mounds, shared by members of a local ramage (Davidson 1969), chiefly
sitting mounds {‘esi), specialized mounds where chiefs practised the
sport of snaring pigeons (sia heu lupe), and burial mounds of the highest-
ranking paramounts and their immediate relatives (langi). Many of
these mounds, especially the latter, are large and impressive structures,
with facings of quarried and dressed coral limestone slabs up to 7.5
metres long. These monuments were constructed with corvee labour,
and a class of stone-cutting specialists (tufunga ta maka) also developed
(Martin 1818, 11:91).
  The profusion of these mounds throughout the Tongan landscape
signals a significant shift in settlement patterns, from the earlier dis¬
tribution of lagoon-shore villages to one of dispersed settlement inland
- the pattern observed at European contact. Most likely, this shift was
correlated with continued population             increase and demand for
agricultural land. The founding of the great ceremonial centre at
Lapaha, Mu'a, is attributed to the 12th Tub Tonga Talatama, which on
the basis of genealogical reckoning would date the initial constructions
there to the thirteenth century AD. Most of the fortifications and larger
burial mounds at Mu'a were, however, built after the reign of the 23rd
Tu‘i Tonga Takalaua, about 250 years later (mid sixteenth century).
Two communal burial mounds faitoka) excavated by Davidson (1969)
at ‘Atele have been UC dated, and tend to confirm the hypothesis that
construction of large mounds dates to the second millennium AD. Site
To-At-1 has an age of less than 1200 years, while To- At-2 dates between
about the twelfth and sixteenth centuries AD.
             Tonga                                                               221

Environment, agriculture, and population

Several significant environmental conditions constrained the direction
of socio-political development in the archipelago: (1) environmental
circumscription - islands are small and with precisely fixed boun¬
daries, yet they are large enough for populations in the tens of thou¬
sands to build up; (2) lack of permanent watercourses, and consequent
impossibility of irrigation, agricultural intensification therefore being
restricted to dryland field systems; (3) recurrent environmental pertur¬
bations, the most devastating being cyclones and drought. These
aspects of the Tongan ecosystem have had a major influence on the
course of socio-political change, particularly in heightening the role of
inter-group competition and warfare.
   Despite these constraints, the Tongan islands - and Tongatapu in
particular - are richly endowed with unusually fertile soils that permitted
an intensive level of dryland agriculture. Tongatapu consists of
relatively old makatea       whose organic-coralline          surface    has   been
enriched periodically with volcanic ashfalls from the active volcanoes of
Kao and Tofua. Annual rainfall, between 1,500 and 1,800 mm, is also at
an adequate level for Oceanic crops. At European contact,                        the
agricultural system consisted of a short-fallow swidden system, in
which yams (especially Dioscorea alata),            aroids (especially Alocasia
macrorrhiza, but also Colocasia esculenta), and bananas were the principal
field crops. A secondary arboricultural emphasis was represented by
fruit trees such as breadfruit and the Tahitian chestnut (Inocarpus
fagiferus); animal husbandry was also well developed. The dominance of
yams in Tongan agriculture is noteworthy, since Dioscorea tubers may be
stored for reasonably long periods, and thus provided an easily
appropriated surplus product for the chiefly class. It is no coincidence
that yams were the primary and mandatory item given as tribute to the
Tu‘i Tonga at the annual first-fruits ceremony (‘inasi).
   The intensity of Tongan agriculture is well documented in the jour¬
nals of early European explorers, and we can do no better than to quote
Cook’s observations on Tongatapu in 17 73:

I thought 1 was transported into one of the most fertile plains in Europe, here
was not an inch of waste ground, the roads occupied no more space than was
absolutely necessarv and each fence did not take up above 4 Inches and even
this was not whollv lost for in manvof the fences were planted fruit trees and the
Cloth plant, these served as a support to them . . . Nature, assisted by a little art,
no were [sic] appears in a more flourishing state than at this isle (Beaglehole
 1969, Book 11:252).


   Two aspects of this intensive dryland agriculture are of note: (1) the
 shortness of the fallow period; and (2) the stress on permanent land
 division. Cook noted that Tongatapu was ‘wholly laid out in Plantations
222         Transformation

in which are some of the richest Productions of Nature’ (1969:261), and
while ‘some old Plantations lay uncultivated or in fallow’ (1967, Book
1:139), it is quite clear that fallow periods were very short, on the order
of a few years. The unusual fertility of Tonga’s ash-rich soils, combined
with intensive agronomic practices such as mulching made such a
short-fallow cycle possible. The emphasis on fencing of gardens, and
indeed the degree to which the island was carved up into walled
parcels, bespeaks a permanency of land division which further reveals
the intensity of Tongan agriculture. Thus, at the time of European con¬
tact, the Tongan landscape was an intensely agrarian scene, and densely
settled.
   As Green (1973) argued, population density in prehistoric Tonga was
quite high for a productive system based upon such an intensified form
of shifting cultivation, and a plateau of relatively high density may have
been reached not long after the end of the Lapitoid Period (c. AD 300), if
the widespread distribution of Plain Ware sites is any indication. The
significance of population growth in Tonga can be illustrated using
Carneiro’s (1972) formula for calculating the time required for shifting
cultivators to achieve a state where all available land is utilized:




                1()g (c {Y+ R)/y) *°g P
            t =-
                        log (1 + r)

On Tongatapu, the total arable land (IT) is 55,398 acres, and under
ethnographically documented methods of shifting cultivation, about
0.4 acre/year is necessary per capita for subsistence (C). If we then
assume an original fallow period (R) of 10 years, and a productive life of
individual swidden plots {Y) of 2 years, we can calculate the time (t)
required to reach a ‘full-land’ situation, under varying rates of popu¬
lation growth (r), given an initial population size(T). For example, given
a founding population of 100 persons, and an intrinsic growth rate
of 0.005,

                    /      55,398     \

                los \0.4 (2 + 10)/2 J~ ‘°S 100
            t =- - 1,091 years
                              log 1.005

Even with a growth rate as low as 0.003 the elapsed time to a full-land
situation would be 1,817 years, or well before the period of European
contact. Roughly, all of the arable land on Tongatapu would have come
under agrarian use and territorial control between one to two millennia
after initial colonization, that is, between about 300 BC and AD 700. As
            Tonga                                                     223

noted above, this conclusion fits well with the evidence for the pro¬
fusion of Plain Ware pottery sites by c. AD 300.
  Such a full-land situation provided a context for inter-group com¬
petition as analysed in Chapter 8, leading ultimately to assimilation of
weaker groups by stronger and larger ones. The process would have
been more intense on the larger islands, such as Tongatapu and Vava'u,
where early lineage segmentation had led to the development of several
independent and subsequently competing chiefdoms. Assuming that
this process of competition, and the aggrandizement of local polity that
accompanies it, was in full swing during the first millennium AD, it is
not surprising that the archaeological evidence for political hierarchiz-
ation- in the form of the large monument sites- first appears about AD
1000.
  A linguistic clue is further suggestive of the direction of political
development in Tongatapu. Whereas reflexes of the ancient term for
‘chief’, *‘ariki are found throughout Polynesia, there is in Tonga a
second term, tui, as in the tides Tu‘i Tonga and Tub Ha‘apai. This term
generally takes the compound form Tu‘i-(of a)-Place, and may be
glossed as ‘Lord of the Place’. This term is restricted in its geographical
distribution to West Polynesia and Fiji, and therefore was probably an
innovation local to the region. We may hypothesize that the term tu i
represents the development of a second level of chiefly hierarchy, that
of the district paramount, the head either of the highest-ranking
ramage within the conical clan, or of the strongest local group in war¬
fare. It seems that by the beginning of the second millennium AD one
such lineage on Tongatapu had gained hegemony over several for¬
merly independent chiefdoms into which the island had been divided.
The chief of this ascendant line assumed the title Tub Tonga: Lord
of Tonga.


Rise of the dual paramountship

The more recent stage of socio-political evolution in Tonga is
elucidated by a particularly rich ethnographic and traditional corpus.
The renowned Polynesian obsession with genealogy - essential to the
legitimation of chieflv titles - was nowhere more developed than in
Tonga. The genealogical relations of the dominant political lines are
well known, and provide a basis for analysing Tongan socio-political
 structure, and its development. Figure 71 displays the core genealogy
 of the principal lines of Tongan ruling chiefs, and reference to this
 figure should be made throughout the following discussion.
   The first mythological ancestor of the Tub Tonga line, and - by
 extension - of all titled chiefs, was ‘Aho‘eitu, the half-man, half-god
 progeny of a union between the god Tangaloa ‘Eitumatupu a and a
 mortal woman. From this divine origin the line of the Tub Tonga, the
224                  Transformation

sacred paramounts, reputedly continued in unbroken patrilineal suc¬
cession through thirty-nine title-holders, ending with the Tu‘i Tonga
Laufilitonga who died in 1865. While the earliest part of this genealogy
is mythical, the latter portion, shown in Figure 71, may be regarded as
historically valid.
   Prior to the 23rd Tub Tonga Takalaua, about the Fifteenth century
AD, the Tub Tonga served as both sacred and secular paramount. The
assassination of Takalaua, however, precipitated a radical structural
change in the Tongan polity: the development of the dual paramount-
ship. According to the oral traditions (which are richly detailed and
internally consistent on this point), the sons of Takalaua pursued their

TU'I TONGA

                              TU'I HA'A TAKALAUA
23A j O

                     O
                                   o
24AyO =                            "n
                                  -<F
CM         CM
                                  2AjO

CM         O
           ii—
                                   3AjO
  l—
                                      oII-
28ArO                                 H

CM
     J                               £  ■ —ii

                                                 >-
             o
           II—                     o o  -n              TU'I KANOKUPOLU

     H--H-       F
30AtO OtA 7AtO
     r~i l Tf-F-1                                          F
3AfO Of AO    8AfO 10A
     r1 n—4                                                F
32AyO                    O         9A           ’AfO       3Af
33AtO o = a                       12AjO                    4Af O 5A
       F         i                                                    n
34ArO                                                      6AfO AfO
                                  13A
                         F
 35AfOfO OjA                                               7AjO 8A = 013A = O
       I                                                   9AfO
 36Af O 3A 0 = A
                         l-
                                                             10A
 38A=0                   O                                14Aj O 16A 18A
                                                          17AfO
 39,
     9A = 6                                               1A
                     71. Genealogical relations between the principal ruling lines of
                     Tonga. The succession of titles within each of the three ruling
                     lines is indicated bv the numbers.
              Tonga                                                       225

father’s assassins throughout the length and breadth of the Tongan
archipelago (a metaphor for conquest), extending the quest to the
outlying islands of Niuatoputapu, Niuafo‘ou, Futuna, and ‘Uvea,
which they subjugated in turn. Following the apprehension of the mur¬
derers in ‘Uvea, the senior son Kauulufonuafekai (Tub Tonga 24)
assumed the title of Tub Tonga, and created a new title of Tub Ha‘a
Takalaua, transferring the secular power of the chiefdom to the latter,
known henceforth as thehau. The first hau and Tu‘i Ha‘a Takalaua was
Moungamotu'a, younger brother of Kauulufonuafekai.
  Seven generations following the creation of th ehau title, a second and
structurally parallel collateral segmentation took place, with the for¬
mation of the Tu‘i Kanokupolu line, the first title-holder being the
junior brother of the Tub             Ha‘a Takalaua (Fig.    71).   The Tub
Kanokupolu gradually assumed the position of hau, temporal lord.
Thus at the time of European contact with Tonga, the central polity
consisted of a dual paramountship, summarized by Basil Thomson
as follows:
there were in Tonga a spiritual and a temporal king. The former- theTui Tonga
— was lord of the soil, and enjoyed divine honours in virtue of his immortal
origin;, but he had an ever-diminishing share in the government. . . The tem¬
poral king [hau] - the Tui Kanokubolu - was the irresponsible sovereign of the
people, wielding absolute power of life and death over his subjects, and was
charged with the burden of the civil government and the ordering of the tribute
due to the gods and their earthly representative, the Tui Tonga (1894:291).

  The structural relationship between the Tub Tonga and the hau is
diagrammed in Figure 72. To understand these relations, we must, as
Kaeppler (197la: 174) avers, conceptually distinguish principles of
social status from those governing societal rank. The most significant




                                                               =0 SAMOA




                 ^_
              72. Structural relationships between Tub Tonga and hau (see
              text for discussion).
226         Transformation

principle of social status is that within a group of siblings of both sexes,
‘females have higher status than males’ (1971 a: 176). The second principle
is that among siblings of the same sex, age determines rank. Thus, the
Tu‘i Tonga is outranked (in terms of social status) by his sister, the Tu‘i
Tonga Fefme, or female Tu‘i Tonga. The eldest daughter of the Tu‘i
Tonga Fefme was theTamaha, the‘sacred child’ of the Tu‘i Tonga, who
stood in thefahu relation to her mother’s brother (see Gifford 1929;
Kaeppler 1971a), with the right of appropriation of certain of the latter’s
possessions and privileges.
  Figure 71 shows that the line of the hau frequently served as wife-
givers to the Tub Tonga (this occurred nine times). Due to these
hvpergamic marriages, the Tub Tonga stood as‘sacred child’ to the hau,
with all of the obligations implied by the fahu relationship.
  A potential dilemma for the principle of patrilineal succession to the
Tu‘i Tonga title was the higher social rank of the Tu‘i Tonga Fefme.
Since the son of the Tub Tonga Fefme would outrank his mother’s
brother the Tub Tonga, the potential for a conflict of succession is
obvious. The problem was resolved ingeniously: the Tub Tonga Fefme
was espoused to a Fijian chief, the Tub Lakemba, who as a foreigner was
‘outside’ of the line of descent of theTongan paramounts. On the other
hand, the problem of obtaining a suitably high-ranked spouse for the
hau was resolved by marrying him to the Tamaha, or, by importing
chiefly women from Samoa, again outsiders to the Tongan ruling
house. This pattern of the Tongan paramount lineages serving as
‘spouse takers’ from Fiji and Samoa (Kaeppler 1978) is important in the
larger structure of the Tongan chiefdom, a point to which I shall
return below.
  Assimilation of the outer islands into the Tongan political armature
meant that the population tributary to - and to a degree dependent
upon - the Tub Tonga increased several fold. The direct result of the
Tongan expansion throughout the archipelago was to greatlv increase
the administrative burden on the central polity. The functional separ¬
ation of sacred and secular, and the increased bureaucratization of the
politv are probablv logical consequences ot the expansion process.
   One of the archaeological indicators of stratified societies is a two or
more tiered settlement pattern, with large ceremonial centres surrounded
by villages or dispersed hamlets, and smaller centres (Peebles and Kus
1977; Renfrew 1973; Friedman and Rowlands 1978). Although we
know relatively little of the development of Tongan settlement patterns,
it is certain that the last thousand vears of Tongan prehistory was
marked by a major increase in the construction'of large mounds of
varying function (Kirch      1977b,   1980c; McKern 1929). The most
important ceremonial centre, Lapaha at Mu‘a, Tongatapu, provides
further archaeological clues as to the transformation of Tongan
society.
             Tonga                                                   227

Lapaha: Tonga’s central place

The most important archaeological complex in Tongatapu is situated
at Mu‘a, on the eastern shore of the central lagoon, near the pass.
Lapaha, ancient seat of the paramount chiefs, was the central place
upon which the entire chiefdom focussed. There the Tu‘i Tonga and
hau resided, and at their death, were buried. The annual tribute
ceremonial, ‘inasi, was held there and shares were laid in front of the
royal tombs on the malae Fanakava. Although no excavations have been
conducted atMu'a, McKern (1929:92-101) mapped the area, and pro¬
vided descriptions of the principal features (Fig. 73). Some features,
particularly the langi or burial mounds, are associated with particular
ancestral chiefs, and a relative chronology can be established on the
basis of the genealogies.
  A relative event sequence for the construction and growth of Lapaha is
set out in Figure 74, based upon the known genealogical associations.
The growth of the central place mirrors the sequence of socio-political
transformation analysed above on the basis of the oral tradition. The
specific events referred to in Figure 74 are as follows:

   1. The founding of Lapaha is attributed to the 12th Tu‘i Tonga
Talatama, who on the basis of genealogical reckoning dates to about the
thirteenth century AD. It is noteworthy that the tradition regarding
Lapaha’s founding attributes the move to the need for a secure canoe
anchorage (Gifford 1924:30). On Figure 73, it will be noted that the for¬
tification   ditch   surrounding Lapaha ends abruptly at a former
shoreline, suggesting that this ditch was constructed prior to aggra¬
dation of the lagoon edge (the island of Tongatapu is known to be
undergoing gradual tectonic uplift).
  la. McKern (1929) notes that the 23rd Tu‘i Tonga Takalaua either
built, or rebuilt, the fortification ditch and bank surrounding Lapaha.
This need for fortification implies the importance of competition and
warfare even after the consolidation of political power by the Tu‘i
Tonga.
  2. The spatial structure of Lapaha was reorganized by the 24th Tub
 Tonga Kauulufonuafekai, reflecting the structural change in the central
 polity. The area inland of the old shoreline remained the dwelling area
 of the Tub Tonga, while a new area on the lower filled land of the
 former lagoon, Moalunga, was created for the hau, at that time the
 newly created Tu‘i Ha‘aTakalaua. This spatial division reflects a moietv
 division in the settlement, between Kauhalauta (‘people of the inland
 road’) or Tub Tonga with his kinsmen, and Kauhalalalo (‘people of the
 lower road’), the Tub Ha‘a Takalaua and his kinsmen. It also reflects a
 spatial division of the central place into secular and sacred precincts.
   3. Contemporaneous with the division of Lapaha into two precincts
 was the construction of the great dock, Mounu, reflecting the increased
228   Transformation




      73. Archaeological plan of the ceremonial centre of Lapaha at
      Mu‘a, Tongatapu Island, the seat of the Tu'i Tonga (from
      McKern 1929).
           Tonga                                                      229

importance of inter-island voyaging that accompanied the integration
of the outliers.
  4. The great langi or burial mound Paepae o Telea (J20 on McKern’s
map, Fig. 73) is the first such structure which can be placed in the rela¬
tive event sequence. This mound, with its massive, fitted facing blocks
of quarried limestone, stands outside the fortified area.
  5. Langi Leka (J9) is reported to be the burial place of Sinaitakala I,
sister of the 30th Tu‘i Tonga, and must have been constructed shortlv
after Paepae o Telea.
   6. Langi Tuofefafa (J4) was the first of two great mounds to be raised
inside of the fortified enclosure at Lapaha, adjacent to the malae
Fanakava. This structure is the sepulchre of the 33rd Tu‘i Tonga, Tu‘i
Pulotu I.
  7. A relatively small mound (J8), the burial place ofTokemoana, the
brother of Tu‘i Pulotu I, was constructed outside of the fortification
wall.
  8. Langi Tuoteau (J 1), very close to Tuofefafa (J4) in form, was built
for Tu‘i Pulotu II (Tu‘i Tonga 35), like J4 within the fortified
enclosure.
  9. Sometime after the reign of the 30 th Tub Tonga, with the rise of the
Tu‘i Kanokupolu line as hau, the capital seat was again expanded, with


           Tu'i Tonga
              12


             23




              24




              29


              30




              33




              35




            74. Event sequence for the construction of major features and
            monuments at Lapaha; see text for explanation.
230          Transformation

the construction of a new fortified enclosure abutting Lapaha, named
Tatakamotonga. This became the residence of the Tu‘i Kanokupolu
and contained the house of his priest and other functionaries.
  10. The langi known as Nukulukilangi (J19) and Namoala (J21), and
the circular mound near the latter (J22), are all burial places of the Fale
Fisi, and were constructed some time after the rise of this line to promi¬
nence, that is, after the 30th Tu‘i Tonga.
  In short, the relative event sequence reveals a gradual expansion and
increasing complexity of Lapaha that parallels the political transfor¬
mation of the chiefdom. The testing of this sequence by means of
stratigraphic excavation and radiocarbon dating would be highly
desirable.


Structure of the protohistoric chiefdom

The Tub Tonga and hau constituted the pinnacle of a hierarchical,
decision-making structure which ramified throughout the geographic
extent of the chiefdom. The general structure of this organization is
diagrammed in Figure 75. With the creation of the hau title, the func¬
tions of the paramount were split. The role of the Tu‘i Tonga was
mediation with the great ancestral deities, thus assuring the fertility of
the land. As Mariner (Martin 1818, 11:134) observed: ‘we are to regard
Tooitonga as a divine chief of the highest rank, but having no power or
authority in affairs belonging to the king [hau].' The significance of this
sacred role should not be underestimated, since the annual first-fruits
ceremony ('inasi), at which the Tub Tonga presided, served as a ritual
cement binding the outlying districts and islands to the central
political core.
  In secular matters, such as assuring that tribute would be received
from all districts for the 'inasi, the hau was the ultimate authority, and
evidently was under no compulsion to consult the Tub Tonga. Gifford
summarized the functional relations between the Tub Tonga and hau as
follows: ‘The Tongan conception of the Tui Kanokupolu was a “working
king”, the one who supervised planting and other activities for the real
king or Tui Tonga’ (1929:98).
  Attached to the Tub Tonga was a group of four great chiefs and their
ceremonial attendants (matapule) who constituted the Falefa (‘four
houses’); this body served as a ‘sort of permanent court to the Tui
Tonga’ (Gifford 1929:63). The Tub Kanokupolu had his own Falefa,
probably an imitation of that of the Tub Tonga. In effect, these chiefs
were the descendants of younger brothers of the paramount lines, since
all chiefly titles were ultimately derived from the ancestral Tub Tonga
line bv collateral segmentation. Each chief was represented by a
matapule (Gifford 1929:140-3), most of whom were of foreign origin
(from Fiji, Samoa, Rotuma, or Tokelau). The great chiefs each con-
            Tonga                                                          231

trolled a major land section or island, which they held in fief from the
paramounts. Administrative decisions passed down the hierarchy from
paramount to the great chiefs and their matapule, and were proclaimed
to the commoner class (tua) at public assemblies called fono (Gifford
1929:181).
  Below the landed chiefs were a large body of lesser chiefs (houeiki) and
matapule, followed by ranks of hereditary' craftsmen (tufunga), and finally
the commoners (tu‘a). Certain tufunga were of considerable rank and
importance,      particularly canoe-builders (tufunga fou vaka)       of the


   DEITIES
     A
       t
   mediation




               75. Hierarchical organization of the protohistoric Tongan
               chiefdoni (see text for discussion).
232          Transformation

paramount lines (Martin 1818, 11:87-91). Since voyaging was essential
to maintaining the political network, it is not surprising that navigators
(toutai vaka) of the paramount lines were themselves matapule (Gifford
1929:142-3).
  The division between commoner and chieflv classes was, at the time
of European contact, sharply drawn. Contrary to the statements of
Sahlins (1958) and others that Tongan society was organized on a
ramage structure throughout, it is clear that ranked lineages (ha'a) per¬
tained only to the class of chiefly title-holders and their immediate des¬
cendants (Korn 1974, 1978; Bott 1982:157). Commoners were affiliated
with chiefs not on the basis of descent from a common ancestor, but
through residence on the lands or estate (tofTa) of the chief. Thus, land
was no longer the joint property of a ramage group, as it had been in
Ancestral Polynesian Society, but was allocated by the paramount to his
subordinate chiefs, who in turn respected the use rights of commoners
in exchange for regular tribute, and for labour when required. As we
shall see in Chapter 10, the development of such true class distinctions,
and the control of land by chiefs rather than descent groups, were
transformations also found in late prehistoric Hawai'i.


Inter-island relations
The core islands

After his subjugation of the outer islands, Kauulufonuafekai (Tu‘i
Tonga 24) appointed a series of local chiefs (sometimes referred to as
‘governors’ or‘viceroys’). A junior son of the murdered Takalaua, bearing
the same name as his father, was put in charge of ‘Eua (Gifford
1924:62). For Ha‘apai, two representatives of the Tu‘i Tonga were
appointed, Matauvave and Kolomoeuto (Gifford 1929:135; 1924:62).
Two other chiefs, Haveatuli and Niutongo, were seconded to Vava‘u
(1929:134; 1924:62). The pattern of placing junior kinsmen as local
representatives of the ruling paramount did not end with Kauulu¬
fonuafekai, but was continued by the hau (Tu‘i Kanokupolu) who sent
various junior kinsmen of the Ha‘a Ngata line as representatives to the
outer islands (Bott 1982). AmongthesewereTakaihouma(‘Eua Island),
Ikahihifo (Ha‘apai group), Fakateli‘ao (Ha‘apai), Maluhou (Ha'apai),
and Tuituiohu (Vava‘u group). A corollary to this pattern involved the
sending of local women to Tongatapu as wives or concubines of the
Tu‘i Tonga and hau (Bott 1982).

Niuatoputapu

Whereas the core islands have been an integral part of Tonga since
before the dawn of historical tradition, the northern ‘outliers’ were
integrated into the Tongan political sphere only within the past 500
years. The evidence of linguistics is thoroughly convincing on this
            Tonga                                                      233

point; although the speech of Niuatoputapu is today Tongan, it was not
so in AD 1616, when the Dutch explorer Le Maire recorded a brief
word list (Kern 1948). As Biggs (1971) recognized, this list contains
numerous Nuclear Polynesian lexical innovations, indicating that in
the early seventeenth century the language of Niuatoputapu belonged
to the Samoic- Outlier subgroup of Polynesian languages, and not to the
Tongic group. Even today, terms referring to local aspects of environ¬
ment (e.g., plant and fish names) are often different from the corres¬
ponding Tongan terms and contain several Nuclear Polynesian
reflexes. Thus, the speech of Niuatoputapu became Tongan only after
about AD 1620, through intensive lexical borrowing due to social inter¬
course with the main Tongan islands.
  Archaeological evidence reinforces this linguistic picture.         The
archaeological signals of Tongan chiefly dominance on Niuatoputapu
consist of several score large field monuments - burial mounds, chiefly
sitting platforms, and pigeon-snaring mounds - distributed over the
island’s landscape. A relatively recent age for most of these structures is
evidenced by their location on recently emerged ground (the island is
undergong active tectonic uplift; Kirch 1978a, 1980a). Excavation of a
large, cut-coral slab-faced burial monument of typical Tongan style, at
Houmafakalele, yielded a radiocarbon age determination of 270 ± 85
BP, further indicative of the late period during which such sites were
constructed on Niuatoputapu (Fig. 76).




            76. A chieflv burial mound [fa'itoka) at Houmafakalele,
            Niuatoputapu Island. The facing is constructed of quarried and
            dressed slabs of reef conglomerate.
234         Transformation

  According to oral tradition, after Niuatoputapu was subjugated during
the epic conquests of Kauulufonuafekai, Talapalo was appointed
‘governor’ (Gifford 1924:62). Until this century, when the title lapsed
due to absence of a legitimate heir, the ruling chief of Niuatoputapu
was called Ma‘atu (Gifford 1929:135, 284-5). The first Ma‘atu bore the
name Latumailangi (‘chief from heaven’), corroborating Le Maire’s
statement of April 1616 that ‘this king or chief was called Latou by his
people’ (Villiers 1906:203). Bott(1982) states that Latumailangi was the
son of Fonumanu by the Tu‘i Tonga Fefine ‘Ekutongapipiki (sister of
the 31st Tu‘i Tonga).
  The tributary relationship      of Niuatoputapu      to   Tongatapu   is
indicated in an account of some iron nails left by Captain Wallis on
Niuatoputapu on 13 August 1767 (Carrington 1948:251). One of these
nails was seen at Tongatapu in October 17 73 by Captain Cook, and was
evidently held in some regard (Beaglehole 1969:206), and had been
carefully hafted to a bone handle. This was collected by the botanist
Forster, and is illustrated by Kaeppler (1971 b: Pi. 4b). Cook was told on
his third voyage that the nail ‘came from Onnuahtabutabu [Niuato¬
putapu], and on asking how the people of that island came by it, he
[Fattafee the King] said one of them sold a Club for five Nails to a Ship
which came to the island [Wallis in 1767], and these five Nails after
wards came to Tongatapu and they were the first they had seen’
(Beaglehole 1967:162). Such nails were surely a prized item, and it is
significant that they were dispatched from Niuatoputapu to Tongatapu,
seat of the paramount chiefs.

Niuafo'ou

Linguistic evidence indicates that Niuafo‘ou was also brought under
Tongan domination only within the last few hundred years, and this
Tongan influence has yet to totally obliterate the original Nuclear
Polynesian speech of the island. Studies of the language of N iuafo‘ou by
Collocott (1922), and by Dve (1980) confirm that a strong Nuclear
Polynesian component is still recognizable. Unfortunately, no inten¬
sive archaeological work has been conducted on Niuafo'ou.
  According to one tradition, Kauulufonuafekai appointed Makauka
and Hakavalu as‘governors’ of Niuafo'ou (Gifford 1924:62). In another
version, his eldest son Fotofili was appointed (1924:67);         Fotofili
remains the title of the ruling line of Niuafo'ou. Bott (1982) states that
the first Fotofili was the offspring of Tatafu (a son of the Tub Ha‘a
Takalaua and hau Fotofili) and Tokanga-fuifuilupe, a daughter of the
Tu'i Tonga.

‘Uvea

Burrows (1937:169) reported that‘traditional history points to Tonga as
the main source of‘Uvean culture’. The close relations between Tonga
            Tonga                                                       235

and ‘Uvea are indicated in such cultural aspects as place names (33 per
cent in common), kinship terms, the system of rank and matapule titles,
material culture, and so forth. Nevertheless, studies of‘Uvean language
by Biggs (1980) have shown that, as with Niuafo‘ou, ‘the language of
Wallis Island, which has been suspected of being a third Tongic
language, is in fact a Nuclear Polynesian language that has borrowed
very heavily from Tongan’ (1980:115—16). Biggs asserts that ‘approxi¬
mately half of the total EVU [‘Uvean] vocabulary is borrowed from
TON’ (1980:120), and suggests that* ‘Uvea was colonized by Tongans
perhaps five hundred years ago’ (1980:124-5). Limited archaeological
survey on ‘Uvea (Kirch 1975; 1976) revealed the presence there of dis¬
tinctly Tongan-style field monuments, including walled fortifications,
large chiefly burial mounds, and pigeon-snaring mounds.
  Both Tongan and ‘Uvean oral traditions refer to relations between
the islands. The first paramount of‘Uvea, Tauloko, was said to be of
‘Tui Tonga family’ (Burrows 1937:18; Henquel n.d.). Following the
subjugation of ‘Uvea by Kauulufonuafekai, Ngaasialili (or Elili, his
Tongan name) was sent from Tonga to be lord over ‘Uvea (Burrows
1937:19; Gifford 1929:68; 1924:62). Further, the Ha'avakatolo and the
Ha'amea, two‘Tongan lineages’ were sent to‘Uvea to guard Ngaasialili.
The ‘Uvean story of the land dispute between Liaki and Huka reports
that the protagonists went to the Tu‘i Tonga Telea to adjudicate the dis¬
pute. Probably the most famous traditional connection between the
two islands also involved Telea, who used the great canoe Lomipeau to
transport stones from ‘Uvea for the construction ot his langi or burial
mound at Lapaha(Burrows 1937:24; Gifford 1929:67-8). Two ‘Uveans,
Tua and Fafie, are reputed to have constructed the langi Tuofefafa
(Burrows 1937:36).
  By now, the logic of alliances underlying the political network which
bound the Tongan ‘maritime empire’ together should be clear. Tehina,
 junior brothers or kinsmen of the ruling lines, were placed at critical
 points on the outer islands, where they would marry into local chiefly
 lines and supplant the former, now conquered, autochthonous chiefs.
 This strategy was ingenious on several counts. First, it removed the
 direct threat of usurpation of the chiefly title by a junior sibling, at the
 same time that it offered the tehina considerable local autonomy (an
 appealing situation for a junior collateral, the rank of whose descendants
 would otherwise only be assured of geometrical decrease in relation to
 the senior line). Second, by marrying a local chiefly woman, the new
 chief and representative of the Tu‘i Tonga or hau effectively becamefahu
 or‘sacred child’ to the indigenous inhabitants (Fig. 77).
   Figure 7 8 displays the more prominent kinship connections between
 the various ruling chiefs. Initiallv, control over local governments was
 established bv placing junior members of the Tu‘i Tonga lineage as
 local representatives. This pattern was repeated by successive hau so
236            Transformation

that representatives of the new paramount would supplant the older
line established by the Tu‘i Tonga. It appears also that daughters of the
local ruling lines were sent to Tongatapu to become wives and con¬
cubines of theTu'i Tonga and hau. Sometimes, as in the case of the fifth
Ma‘atu of Niuatoputapu, a daughter of the hau was espoused to the


                                                            Autochthonous
                                                                Ruler
                                                                    A

                  r                                    r
               A                                       O                   Indigenous
                                                                           Inhabitants
               hau
                                                            fahu



                                             Local
                                             Chief

               77. Through a marriage alliance with a daughter of the
               autochthonous ruling line, the conquering Tongan chief (shaded)
               assures that his offspring will stand in the fahu relationship to
               the indigenous population.




          TONGA                 VAVA'U       NIUATOPUTAPU          NIUAFO'OU     UVEA



24   A-

           I
          A                                                        A=Q            A=

                  A                             iA=fO              AjO

                  <A=o                   4a ^r=o
                                             P-U—       adopted
                                                                   rio




                  sA=0
                                2AjO            3Atq        5"     j1
                                sAjO
                                 m r~
                                4A=0            6 AI
                                 i                I
                                                  I
     A    A       A             A                A
                     D
                     -I
                     S                                                            y      Chief
                                                                                         Titlei
                     *
                     O                                                             5t
                     z
                     <




               78. Marriage alliances between the ruling lines of the principal
               Tongan islands.
            Tonga                                                            237

local ruling chief. As a general principle, however, marriage alliances
between the central and local ruling lines were hypergamic.


Voyaging and tribute

A maritime chiefdom such as Tonga depended vitally upon developed
canoe building and navigation. The high rank of canoe builders and
navigators of the hau and Tub Tonga reflects the importance attached
by the ruling polity to sea transport. Lapaha, the seat of the Tub Tonga,
was reputedly chosen because of the advantage of its safe anchorage
(Gifford 1924:30).
  Early European explorers were duly impressed with the size and sailing
qualities of the Tongan double canoes. Circumnavigator Cook referred
to the large voyaging canoes as ‘Vessels of burdthen ... fit for distant
Navigation’ (Beaglehole 1969:264), noting that‘they carry from forty to
fifty people, and some sixty or seventy5 (1967:938). West (1865:48-9)
described the impressive arrival of fourteen canoes belonging to the
ruling line at Mu‘a in 1846; each was able to carry between 100 and
150 men.
  The political ties between the central polity of Tongatapu and the
outer islands were ritually manifest in the annual first-fruits ceremonv-
the ‘inasi - and the kava ceremony performed with it (Martin 1818,
11:196-204 provides a first-hand description). Actually, there were two
‘inasi each year, that of the first yam crop (‘inasi ‘ufimui, Jun^-Julv), and
one for the subsequent yam crop (inasi ‘ufimotua, about October-
November) (Urbanowicz 1973:82-3). The alleged function of the ‘inasi
was the mediation of the Tub Tonga with the great deities, especially
Hikuleo, in order to assure the fertility and prosperity of the chiefdom.
In reality, the bringing of first fruits and tribute from all parts of the
chiefdom validated the claims of the Tub Tonga and hau to supreme
political power, and provided the material basis for support of the non¬
food-producing chiefly class. As described by an eyewitness, Lawrv,
in 1822:
That part of the island where we live is called Mooa, or metropolis of Tonga:
and to this place the chiefs ofVavaou and the Hapais bring their machee [ ‘inasi],
towards the end of the last moon the fleet of canoes and crowds of people by
land rendering the Mooa a moving scene of universal bustle and stir (quoted
in Urbanowicz 1973:83).

Tribute was not limited to agricultural produce, though yams were
clearly required. Eyewitness missionary accounts report pearl shells
from ‘Uvea, ‘iron wood of a superior kind’ and fine mats from
Niuafo'ou, ‘the young of a sea bird’ from Tofu, and ‘fish from the sacred
lake carefully prepared’       from Nomuka (Urbanowicz              1973:81—2).
 Mariner lists dried fish, mahoaa (flour made from Tacca leontopetaloides),
 mats, barkcloth, and bundles of dyed Pandanus leaves as ‘other articles
 that form part of the Inachi' (Martin 1818, 11:202).
238             Transformation

Long-distance exchange

Tonga stands unique among the indigenous Polynesian chiefdoms for
its extensive and regular long-distance exchange relations with societies
beyond its own geographic and political borders. This long-distance
exchange had political consequences which were far greater than any
immediate, utilitarian gain due to the importation of exotic material
items. Long-distance exchange of chiefly spouses as well as of material
items was fundamentally a political strategy, and played a vital role in
binding the core islands and outliers to the central polity.
  Kaeppler (1978) presents a careful analysis of the exchange patterns
between Tonga, Samoa, and Fiji, noting that these three ‘form a larger
social system, while each is culturally distinct’. In Figure 79 the
underlying structure of social relations between Tonga, Fiji, and Samoa
is portrayed diagrammatically from the Tongan viewpoint.
  As discussed earlier, the potential contradiction in the Tongan social
system, wherein the offspring of the Tub Tonga Fefine could potentially
outrank the Tub Tonga (and hence lay claim to the title), was solved by
marrying the Tub Tonga Fefine to a Fijian chief. This ‘Fijian’ line in
Tonga became institutionalized as the Fale Fisi (‘blouse of Fiji’). On the
other hand, Samoan women were sought by high-ranking Tongan
males, who ‘might not want to marry into other Tongan lines for fear of
their own line falling in importance and eventually being overshadowed’
(Kaeppler 1978:249). The classic example of such a Tonga-Samoa
marriage was that of the first Tub Kanokupolu, Ngata (son of the sixth
Tu‘i Ha‘a Takalaua), who espoused the Samoan chiefess Tuhuia
(Limapou in Tongan), of the Fale‘ula lineage of‘Upolu, Samoa. Thus,
underlying the more overt exchanges of goods was a system of kinship
relations, with both Fiji and Samoa serving as spouse-givers to
Tonga.
  On the whole, relations with Fiji were more frequent and of greater
significance than those with Samoa. Although it is well known that there
was extensive intercourse between Tongans and the occupants of the
Lau group of eastern Fiji(Hocart 1929; Thompson 1940), the Tongan



      FIJI


 'eiki (high)                    ego              tu'a (low)        Kinship
  paternal                                         maternal         Analogy




      a=o                              a=o                          Chiefly
                                                                    Marriages




MALE GOODS       ^                             FEMALE GOODS         Prestige-goods



                79. Structural relationships between Tonga, Fiji, and Samoa.
               Tonga                                                        239

Table 21. Goods exchanged among Tonga, Samoa, and Fiji


                       From Tonga                To Tonga


        Fiji           Whale’s teeth             Canoes
                       Fine mats (Samoan)        Red feathers
                       Ornaments                 Decorated barkcloth
                       Barkcloth                 Mats
                                                 Baskets
                                                 Sandalwood (for oil)
                                                 Sails
                                                 Pottery


        Samoa          Barkcloth                 Fine mats (kie hingoa)
                       Sleeping mats
                       Red feathers




penetration of Fiji extended to the latter’s political core — Thakaundrove
(centred around the capital of Somosomo in Taveuni). The Tongans at
Vava‘u gave a clear description of Taveuni to Cook’s astronomer Baylv
(ms., 107), and named the paramount chief of Thakaundrove, Tui
Thakau (Lord of the Reef).
  Bayly noted that the ‘Tonga men get all their red feathers for making
their ornaments & all their fine painted cloth, & figured mats 8c curious
beaded baskets & other curious ornaments’ from Fiji. The range of
material goods exchanged between Tonga and Fiji are enumerated in
Table 21. Most important of the goods sought by the Tongans in Fiji
were the large canoes. As Derrick notes:

In Tonga, there was little timber of a size and quality for the construction of
these large vessels, and it became the practice for parties of Tongans to sail up
on the wind to Lakeba, arrange with the chiefs there for logs and food in
exchange for Tongan bark cloth, weapons, or services in war, and then to
establish themselves on islands such as Vulanga and Kabara and build, or help
to build, the canoes (1946:121; see also Thomson 1908:52).

The construction of a large kalia-type canoe could take up to seven
years, so that these Tongan footholds in Lau came to be permanent
settlements. Hocart (1952:90) reports a class of‘Tongan carpenters’
[matai Tonga) resident in Thakaundrove. Mariner (Martin 1818, 11:263—
5) confirms that the large Tongan canoes were ‘either purchased or
taken bv force from the natives of Fiji’. He adds an important point:
control of this long-distance exchange was initiated bv Tongan chiefs,
and maintained bv Tongan navigators. ‘No native of Fiji, as far as is
known, ever ventured to Tonga but in a canoe manned with Tonga
people, nor ever ventured back to his own islands, but under the same
guidance and protection’ (1818, 11:264).
240        Transformation

  Other prestige goods were also obtained in Fiji, including red and
green parrot feathers, sandalwood (used for making scented oil), sails,
pottery, and other items (Tippett 1968:103-4; Thompson 1940:29-30j
Kaeppler 1978). Parrot feathers were symbols of high status and rank in
Tonga, where they were sewn onto fine mats, and used in the special
pala tavake head-dress of the Tu‘i Tonga (Kaeppler 1971b). These
feathers were also carried by the Tongans to Samoa, where they were
prized also for ornamenting fine mats and head-dresses (Buck
1930:281, 619). In exchange for these goods, the Tongans brought to
Fiji whale’s teeth, fine mats of Samoan origin,         ornaments, and
barkcloth. Most important, however, were the whale’s teeth, as these
were the essence of Fijian wealth.
  Although traditional relations between Tonga and Samoa appear to
be ancient (cf. Br.F. Henry 1980:40-9), exchange of prestige goods was
never as developed as that between Tonga and Fiji. The one Samoan
item especially prized in Tonga was the fine mat (Ate hingoa): ‘One of the
famous Tongan kie hingoa or named fine mats from Samoa, of which
there are thirty-three original ones extant in Tonga, is “Va ofu mo
olosinga”, which is said to have been given to a Tu‘i Tonga on the oc¬
casion of his tatooing in Samoa’ (Kaeppler 1978:248). Objects brought
from Tonga to Samoa included Fijian parrot feathers, large sleeping
mats, and Tongan barkcloth (Table 21).
  The material goods brought from Fiji and Samoa to Tonga were not
by-and-large utilitarian objects, nor were they necessarily made of
materials scarce in Tonga. The large canoes, it is true, were manu¬
factured in Fiji because of a lack of suitable timber in Tonga. Other
prestige items, however, such as the red feathers, sandalwood, and fine
mats were valued as koloa, prestige items vital to Tongan marriage
alliances. As Kaeppler observed: ‘It appears that the pre-eminent
Tongan context for the use of Fijian and Samoan trade goods was, and
is, on ceremonial occasions - and especially weddings, funerals, and
various kinds of state and religious celebrations (katoanga)’ (1978:250).
  The acquisition of foreign prestige goods by the central polity thus
served the important function of binding local chiefs to the political
core. Control and redistribution of koloa by the paramount lines was
one strategy for binding the outer islands to the central polity: the flow
of tribute to Tongatapu and Lapaha was balanced by the distribution of
prestige goods to the outliers.
  This is not to say that there was not some element of material need in
the development of long-distance exchange. One of the goals of the
Tongan expeditions to Fiji was the acquisition of large sailing vessels,
since the smaller, low, Tongan islands had long since been denuded of
suitable timber for their construction. Prior to the integration of the
Tongan archipelago by the dual paramountship, there would not have
been the kind of demand for voyaging canoes that existed later. The
           Tonga                                                      241

maintenance of tributary relations between the outlying islands and
Tongatapu required a sizeable fleet, and this too doubtless was a
significant impetus to the intensification of Tonga-Fiji exchange.
  The Tongan polity as it existed at the point of European contact may
now be summarized by a diagram of its topologic structure (Fig. 80).
The system was oriented around the central place, Tongatapu and
specifically Lapaha, seat of the paramountship. Kinship alliances linked
the paramount lines with those of the local ruling chiefs in the core
islands and outliers. Such alliances were confirmed by marriage re¬
lations, for which exotic prestige goods were vital. In turn, the outlying
islands affirmed their inferior status and loyalty to the hau and Tu‘i
Tonga through the tribute of the ‘inasi. Thus within the chiefdom there
was a circular flow of goods, tribute inwards towards the paramounts,
prestige goods outwards to the local chiefs. Monopolization of the
sources of prestige goods by the paramounts helped to secure their
power over the system as a whole.
  To briefly sum up, over the millennia since Tonga was first colonized
by Lapita potters, its economic, social, and political svstems have
undergone major transformations, leading to the maritime chiefdom
just described. Gradual population growth clearly played an important
role in this process,' leading over perhaps 1000-2000 years to a situation
of dense settlement under an intensified agricultural regime. Com¬
petition for arable land resulted in the hegemony of one chiefly line-




            80. The topologic structure of the Tongan maritime chiefdom.
242        Transformation

that of the Tu‘i Tonga - in the core islands, and ultimately, conquest
and domination over several outlying islands. Fundamental to the
political consolidation of this large area were the development of
voyaging canoe technology and navigational skills, and control over a
system of prestige-good exchange. By the time of European intrusion,
Tongan society was marked by such factors as class stratification, a for¬
malized, dual paramountship, and a multi-tiered, decision-making,
political apparatus. These transformations are archaeologically best
reflected in settlement patterns, such as the development of Lapaha,
the chicfdom’s central place. The developmental sequence outlined in
this chapter depends in many respects, of course, on non-archaeological
data, and its further testing remains a challenge for Polynesian
prehistorians.
