           10
           Hawai‘i



The Hawaiian case differs from Tonga in at least three significant re¬
spects. First, whereas Tonga is within relatively easy voyaging contact
with the large Fijian and Samoan archipelagos, Hawai'i was truly
isolated from the rest of Polynesia. This degree of isolation is evident
not onlv in the distances involved - some 3,862 km from the Marquesas
and 4,410 km from Tahiti - but in the difficulties of long-distance
voyaging from the southern hemisphere, through the doldrums, into
the northern weather patterns (Finney 1977; Levison et al. 1973).
Second, unlikeTonga, Hawafi ranks as one of the largest archipelagos,
with a total land area second only to New Zealand within the Polynesian
Triangle. The eight major Hawaiian islands (Fig. 81) presented vast
tracts of fertile land to the Polynesian colonists, not to mention con-




           81. The Hawaiian archipelago, showing the location ol major
           sites discussed in the text.

           243
244          Transformation

siderable micro-environmental variation. Third, Hawai'i was one of the
last areas within Polynesia to be colonized, and its prehistoric cultural
sequence is onlv about 1500 years long, compared with at least three
millennia in Tonga. Thus, in Hawai‘i we have a relatively late, short
time-scale for cultural evolution, but set in the context of a vast, fertile,
and isolated archipelago.
  The archaeological data base for Hawai'i is well developed, and we
are not so dependent upon synchronic, ethnographic materials for an
analysis of prehistoric change. Since stratigraphic excavations were first
conducted on 0‘ahu Island by Emory in 1950, more than fifty
researchers have accumulated a wealth of data pertaining to several
thousand sites on all of the major islands except Ni'ihau (a privately
owned island to which no archaeologists have as yet been permitted).
Clearlv, this chapter can only touch upon a few highlights of thirty years
of intensive study (see Kirch, An Introduction to Hawaiian Archaeology,
University of Hawai‘i Press, Honolulu, forthcoming, for a more com¬
prehensive review of Hawaiian archaeology).


Colonization, adaptation, and expansion

Given the statistical uncertainty associated with UC dating and the short
tim^span of Hawaiian prehistory, not to mention the tremendous dif¬
ficulties (in an archipelago as extensive as Hawai‘i) of locating the
‘earliest' settlement site, pinning down a precise date for Polynesian
colonization mav be an impossible task. We do have evidence from at
least four islands, however, that the chain was settled by AD 300-500,
even though sparsely. The evidence includes the early stream-beach
settlement    site   at   Bellows   Beach,   O'ahu   (Pearson,   Kirch,   and
Pietrusewskv 1971), evidence of human activity on the slopes surrounding
the Kawainui Marsh (then a salt-water bay) about AD 500 (Kelly and
Clark 1980), two early dates for burning associated with agriculture in
the Hanalei and Lumahai Valievs, Kaua‘i(Schilt 1980a; Hoffman 1979),
the permanent stream-beach settlement site of Halawa on Moloka'i
(Kirch and Kelly 1975) and the Pu‘u Ali‘i sand dune site on Hawai'i
Island.'
  Excavations at the Bellows site (018) on Olahu, and at the Halawa
Dune Site (Mo-Al-3) on Moloka'i, provide the basis for reconstructing
the nature of early settlement and subsistence in Hawai'i (Pearson,
Kirch, and Pietrusewskv 1971; Kirch and Kellv 1975). Both settlements
are situated in windward locations, adjacent to permanent streams,
with large tracts of fertile alluvial and colluvial farmland available in the
immediate vicinity. Permanent residence is in both instances indicated
bv the presence of dwelling structures, cooking facilities, and a wide
range of subsistence as well as domestic activities. At Site 018, perma¬
nent residence is further indicated by the presence of burials. In the
            Hawaii                                                       245

Halawa site, stone alignments and postmoulds revealed a pattern of
small, round-ended huts; no clear pattern could be reconstructed from
the postmoulds and gravel pavements in the Bellows deposits. A
diversified subsistence base is clear for both sites, with fishing, shellfish
gathering, exploitation of wild birds, animal husbandry, and - by
various lines of inference- agriculture. The presence of both domestic
pig and dog is significant, not only because these hint at the purposive
nature of initial colonization, but because the pig certainly is a clear
signal of horticultural practice(cf. Yen 1973a; Kirch 1979c). In the 018
site, a serrated coconut grater (of Conus shell) reflects the introduction
by Polynesians of the Cocos palm, which probably had not achieved
natural dispersal to this isolated archipelago (unlike the western Pacific,
where the coconut certainly pre-dated man). There is little in either site
to indicate social differentiation, but the relatively elaborate grave
goods associated with one sub-floor burial in site 018 - a female of
about nine years with pendant, pig-tusk anklet, and red coloration
possibly indicating dyed barkcloth - do suggest high rank.
  The artifact assemblages from Bellows and Halawa, though they
share certain elements with early East Polynesian forms, already reflect
adaptation to local conditions, the first stage in the differentiation of
Hawaiian material culture as distinctive from archaic styles in the
southern homeland. Such adaptation is, for instance, evident in the
development of two-piece fishhooks of bone, a response to the lack of
suitably large pearl shell or Turbo shell. As suggested in Chapter 4, the
founder effect may have accounted for rapid cultural change, not only
in material culture, but in less durable aspects of language and
behaviour.
  The Hawaiian Islands provide an almost classic validation of the
general model of initial colonization         in fertile,   windward-valley
environments, local population growth, and subsequent expansion to
more marginal, leeward locales, as argued in Chapter 8 (Fig. 63). By
about AD 900-1100, perhaps four to seven centuries following the first
colonization of the archipelago, population in the windward regions
had increased to such a level that fissioning groups had begun to
establish permanent settlements in the more favourable leeward areas.
Examples of such settlements are the Kuli‘ou‘ou area and Makaha
Valley, on O'ahu, and at Anaeho'omalu, on Hawai'i Island.
   I have already reviewed, in Chapter 5, the evidence for prehistoric
population growth in Hawai'i. Within one or two centuries following
the establishment of permanent leeward settlements, the population of
the archipelago underwent a dramatic, virtually exponential increase.
By the AD 1400-1500s, nearly all of the lowlands including even the
most marginal regions (such as Waikoloa on Hawai'i) were under some
form of occupation, cultivation, or exploitation, and population den¬
sities in the more fertile, intensively cultivated areas had reached levels
246         Transformation

of 250 persons/km2 or more. Present evidence suggests that in some
areas, population had peaked and was declining by the time of Euro¬
pean contact; in other regions, it is likely that growth had not
reached a limit.


Local sequences of development

Rather than attempt a summary of the archaeological evidence from
the archipelago as a whole, I have chosen two local areas and take their
sequences of cultural development as reflective of more general and
widespread trends. These two cases represent some of the local or areal
variation which makes Hawaiian prehistory especially fascinating.
Halawa Valley represents the early-settled, fertile windward localities,
whereas Makaha Valley exemplifies a leeward, but not too marginal
valley setting. A third area. West Hawai'i, has already been examined
with respect to its intensive, dryland agricultural field systems (Chapter
7), and its sequence of population growth (Chapter 5).

Halawa Valley (Molokai)

Incised into the 1,170 metre high East Moloka'i mountains, Halawa is a
relatively broad valley, about 3 km deep, with two large waterfalls cas¬
cading down its amphitheatre rim, feeding a permanent stream. It was
this watercourse (with average flows of about 28 mgd), as well as the
many hectares of fertile alluvial floodplain near the valley mouth, that
must have made Halawa so attractive to the early Polynesian colonists.
The gently sloping colluvial ridges bordering the floodplain offered
excellent terrain for the cultivation of non-irrigated crops. In the early
historic period, Halawa supported a population of more than 500 per¬
sons, and the valley-bottom lands were laid out in a well-engineered
reticulate series of irrigated pondfields covering more than 22 hectares
(Fig. 55).
  Archaeological investigation of the valley, carried out in 1969-70,
focussed largely on questions of settlement pattern and human adap¬
tation (Kirch and Kelly 1975). Major projects included excavation of the
early stream-beach midden site (Mo-Al-3, described above), an inten¬
sive settlement pattern study of one inland valley locale (Kapana),
excavation of a series of inland residential sites, and an investigation of
the extensive system of irrigated fields and ditches. Based on these
studies, a local cultural sequence consisting of three prehistoric phases
was proposed, the first such sequence for anv region within the
Hawaiian chain. This phase sequence is reproduced here as Table 22.
Of particular interest is the evidence from Halawa for local changes in
settlement pattern, and the development of large-scale irrigation.
  Permanent settlement during the Kaawili Phase (AD 650-1350) was
evidently restricted to the mouth of the vallev, and the excavation at Site
            Hawaii                                                      247

Mo-Al-3 revealed an early form of the small, round-ended hut with
internal   stone-lined   hearths.   The   Kaio   Phase (AD    1350-1650),
however, marks a period of considerable change, both in domestic
architecture and in settlement pattern. An expansion of permanent
residential sites up the valley, to encompass the gently sloping colluvial
ridges, apparently mirrors the rapid increase in population witnessed
throughout the islands during this era. These residential sites are dis¬
persed throughout the inner parts of the valley, interspersed among dry
terraces and other structural modifications for slope agriculture (the
settlement of Kapana, Kirch and Kelly 1975, fig. 31, is typical of this pat¬
tern). Rectangular dwellings erected on stone-faced terraces replaced
the small, ovoid huts of the preceding phase. Separate cookhouses con¬
taining earth ovens were situated on adjacent or nearby terraces.
Several examples of sub-floor burials in both dwellings and cookhouses
were discovered. The pattern of residence established during the Kaio
Phase continued largely unchanged into the Mana Phase (AD 1650-
1800), although there is a suggestion that dwelling terraces became
larger, and more formal, incorporating stone house platforms.
  The development of religious or ceremonial architecture in Halawa
is as yet only poorly understood. Dispersed throughout the valley are
some thirteen stepped terrace sites, identified ethnohistoricallv as heiau
or temples, and with areas of about 120-150 m2. These seem to be
closely integrated with the dispersed habitations, and there is some
limited evidence that each ‘ili, or named subsection of the valley, had its
own terraced temple site. These probably functioned as agricultural
temples, and may also have incorporated aspects of the men’s house
(mua). The dispersal of sites throughout the valley is vaguely suggestive
of some kind of local corporate organization, though we have no con¬
clusive data on this point. The single stepped terrace that was test-
excavated dated to AD 1476-1532. Asaclass, these sites probably were
constructed during the Kaio and Mana Phases.
  Two larger stone temples are present in the valley, Mana and Papa
heiau. Ethnohistoric data (Stokes 1909a) indicate that these were con¬
structed during the Mana Phase, and that they were war temples
(,luakini, dedicated to Ku) built under the aegis of ruling chiefs. These
 temples cover areas of about 670 m2 and 1,600 m2, respectively, and
 are more complex in construction than their stepped-terrace counter¬
 parts. Mana heiau is reputed to have been built under the rule of
 Alapa'inui, a high chief of Hawai‘i Island, who conquered Moloka'i
 sometime around AD 1720.
   The earliest direct evidence for agriculture in Halawa Valley comes
 from a stratified series of colluvial fan deposits (Site Mo-Al-4) at the
 base of the valley’s southern ridge. These deposits reflect extensive
 forest clearance and burning on the valley walls, for shifting cultivation
 (Kirch and Kellv 1975:55-64). A basal radiocarbon date of 772 ± 90 BP
248         Transformation

            Table 22. The Halawa Valley sequence (from Kirch and Kelly 1975)


            Criteria      Kaawili Phase (AD 650-1350)        Kaio Phase (AD 1350-1650)


           Settlement     Coastal village at ecologically    Dispersed habitations, ex¬
           pattern        focal position                     panding inland, especially         '
                                                             on higher taluvial slopes
                                                             near small watercourses

           Domestic       Ovoid houses; pole-and-thatch      Simple, stone-faced, earth-
           architecture   construction; internal hearths;    filled terraces with    rec¬
                          separate cookhouses                tangular houses; hearths;
                                                             separate cookhouses         with
                                                             earth ovens

           Subsistence    Fishing important; dogs and        Increase in importance of \
                          pigs raised and eaten; shifting    dog and pig; shifting culti¬
                          cultivation and water-control      vation;   water   control    for
                          agronomic technologies             pondfield irrigation in side
                                                             streams (Tvpe 11)

           Portable       Untanged or incipientlv            Tanged rectangular and
           artifacts      tanged, reverse-trapezoidal        reverse-trapezoidal   adzes;
                          adzes;   earlv-tvpe   fishhooks;   flakes of basalt and basaltic
                          dog-tooth    ornaments;    coral   glass; basalt chisels; grind¬
                          and echinoid abraders; basalt      stones
                          and basaltic-glass flakes

           Burials        No data                            Subfloor, flexed in shallow
                                                             pit

           Ceremonial     No data                            Small, stepped-terrace sites
           architecture                                      associated with local social
                                                             groups, and shrines


           Population     AD 650: 50                         150-350
           ( estimate)    AD 1350: 150

            Type sites    A1-3                               A1-1001. -769, -1003, -770,
                                                             -30



            *Added to provide contrast with prehistoric patterns.



indicates that, by the twelfth century, shifting cultivation had begun to
initiate environmental degradation and localized erosion. Given the
expansion of permanent habitation into the upper valley at the same
time, it is likely that much of the original forest cover had been replaced
with a mosaic of second growth, grasslands, and garden plots. Exca¬
vations by Riley in various parts of the valley almost invariably showed
evidence of disturbed, charcoal-flecked subsoils underlying later, per¬
manent pondfields, and these soils have been interpreted as indicative
of widespread swidden activity.
  The development of Halawa’s water-control facilities for the perma¬
nent and intensive irrigation of taro was partly elucidated by Riley’s
            Hawaii                                                                249




 Mana Phase (AD 1650-1800)            Historic Phase* (AD 1800-Present)


 Continuation      of   the   Kaio    Settlement concentrated above pond-
 Phase pattern                        field   system,   especially   in   lower
                                      valley; nucleation around church



 Addition of stone-filled plat¬       Houses surrounded bv walled
 forms to the Kaio Phase              enclosures; wooden structures and
 pattern                              thatch structures coexisting until c.
                                      AD 1900



 Animal husbandry impor¬              New domestic animals imported;
 tant; stabilization of taluvial      intensive pondfield cultivation
 slopes with crude terracing;         stimulated by commercial
 construction of major pond-          prospects
 field systems

 Tripping club; large,         rec¬   European goods imported, replaced
 tangular, tanged adzes;              items of aboriginal material culture;
 octopus lures; very small, rec¬      glass, square nails, and flint used
 tangular adzes                       early




 Same as Kaio Phase                   Burial in separate stone cairns or
                                      in churchyard

 Addition of major ceremonial         Christian churches, Protestant and
 sites with high-rank associ¬         Catholic
 ations; continuation of
  stepped-tcrrace sites

  350-600                             AD 1836; 506
                                      AD 1972: 2

  A1-765, -1, -2                       Al-736, -101 1




work (Riley 1975), although the time-scale remains somewhat specu¬
lative. It is probable that some form of wet cultivation of Colocasia was
practised since initial settlement, and the naturally hydromorphic soils
of the alluvial floodplains would have been eminently suited to this
purpose. With the expansion of settlement inland during the Kaio
Phase, the smaller, side-valley streams were terraced for taro culti¬
vation, and some more formal modification of the lower floodplains
began. Not until the Mana Phase, however, do we have evidence that
the largest pondfield systems were constructed, incorporating as many
as 366 fields (9.5 hectares) in a single hydraulic unit, with main ditches
as long as 1.4 km. In the Kapana area, Riley’s excavations revealed how
250         Transformation

one of the larger, main-stream irrigated pondfield systems was con¬
structed over part of an earlier, side-stream irrigated complex.

Makaha Valley (0‘ahu)

On the south-western, leeward side of the Wai'anae Mountains, the
Makaha Valley has a permanent stream, but with relatively low dis¬
charge and frequent dry periods. In contrast with Halawa only small
areas of permanent pondfield irrigation were developed, in the middle
and upper reaches of the valley. Extensive colluvium and talus on the
lower valley slopes is well suited to dryland agriculture, though the
relatively low annual rainfall (500-1,000 mm annually) restricted the
cropping range, with an emphasis on sweet potatoes, yams, and similar
cultigens. Even then, cultivation was probably organized on a seasonal
basis, since most rain falls during the period from October to
April.
  Makaha’s archaeological landscape was intensively investigated from
1968-70, under the direction of R.C. Green, and a series of mono¬
graphs document the results of that project (Green 1969, 1970; Ladd
and Yen 1972; Ladd 1973; Green 1980). My discussion of the valley’s
developmental sequence closely follows Green’s (1980:71-9) recent
cultur^historical synthesis.
  Green argues, without direct archaeological confirmation, that initial
occupation in Makaha probably occurred about AD 1100, and was
focussed on the coast near the stream mouth, where a small spring pro¬
vided a suitable environment for limited wet cultivation. This settle¬
ment is viewed as part of the general process of leeward occupation
which resulted from expanding windward populations. The next stage
in Makaha’s development, which followed within one or two centuries
(and for which we do have direct archaeological support) was a regular
expansion inland from the coast. This stage is reflected archaeologically
in the modification of the lower valley colluvial slopes for dryfield
agriculture, with various temporary field shelters situated within the
field complex. Several of these C-shaped shelters were excavated, and
date to as early as 730 ± 100 BP. In Green’s words,

the first step in Makalia’s developing status as an ahupua'a was one of growth in
theswidden part of the agricultural svstem through seasonal exploitation of the
dry-land zone of the lower valley. It sustained a growing population, which
exploited a typical Polynesian territorial unit consisting of the sea, the coast,
and the inland area (1980:74-5).

Green argues that at this period Makaha comprised a territorial unit
[ahupua'a) which was still organized on an ancestral social model, with a
‘localized lineage headed bv a chief’.
  During the fifteenth to sixteenth centuries, several changes in
subsistence, population densitv and distribution, and social organiz¬
ation led to a restructuring of the valley’s ahupua'a status. This period
            Hawaii                                                      251

saw the establishment for the first time, of permanent settlement in the
dry inland and wet upper parts of the valley. Correlated with the shift in
settlement pattern was the development of irrigated wet taro systems in
the formerly unused wet upper valley. Excavations in one of these
irrigation complexes (Yen et al. 1972) firmly establishes the beginning
of inland taro cultivation by the fifteenth century AD. Subsistence did
not shift to a total dependence on irrigation, however, but rather con¬
sisted of a mixed cropping system with irrigation on the alluvial flats
and shifting cultivation on the valley slopes. This latter environment,
once stripped of its natural forest cover, was prone to erosion, leading
in at least one case to destruction of an irrigation complex (which was
subsequently    rebuilt).   Thus,   ‘forest   clearance   accompanied   and
introduced an erosional factor into an area that did not possess a great
deal of natural stability’ (Green 1980:75).
  Change in the local socio-political organization during the fifteenth
century is marked by initial construction of a major religious temple,
Kane‘aki heiau, at the division between the upper and lower valley (Fig.
82). Green interprets this event as evidence for ‘the presence in the
valley of a ranking chief able to build his own sizable lono-type heiau [a
temple to the god of agriculture], and the means for achieving a surplus
of goods for his own use by intensifying the valley’s productive capacity’
(1980:75). In short, Green sees the fifteenth-sixteenth centuries as a
period when the valley achieved the status of a ‘largely self-contained
socio-economic unit’ (1980:76). He also maintains that this phase saw
the ‘formation throughout the Hawaiian Group of two separate and
endogamous socio-economic classes, one of high-ranking chiefs or ali i
and the other of commoners or makaainana' (1980:75). The latter claim
is, of course, only indirectly supported on archaeological evidence
from Makaha.
   In the final stage of the valley’s development, which began about AD
1650, Makaha was integrated into the fabric of the large-scale ‘complex
rank social systems’ which characterized Hawai'i at European contact.
Of this phase, Green writes:

There is now evidence both of permanent housing in the form ol ordinary rt c-
tangular dwellings, and of an increasing number of religious buildings in the
form of stepped stone platforms, shrines, and other specialized structures,
some of them men’s houses. They suggest that the processes of social segmen¬
tation and stratification among the elite, known elsewhere in Hawai‘i, were
underwav within the Makaha Valley, and would have continued, had they not
been overwhelmed bv the consequences ol European contact (1980.76—7).

  There are two important archaeological signals that mark Makaha’s
 incorporation into a larger complex socio-political system. The first of
 these was the rebuilding of Kane'aki heiau (increasing its size from 400
 m2 to 1,010 m2), convening it from a Lono-class temple to 'dluakini, or
 war temple of human sacrifice (Fig. 82). Such an event can only have
252         Transformation

been directed by a paramount chief. The second important event was
the construction of a ‘main irrigation ditch down into the dry central
part of the lower valley’ (1980:77). As Green observed, the significance
of this ditch lay in its ability to further increase the productive capacity
of the valley, and to provide additional agricultural surplus to the
paramount chief and his local representatives.
  In general, the developmental sequences of Halawa and Makaha run
<losely parallel, even though the time-span for Halawa is probably 400
years longer than that of Makaha. The major themes of expanding




            82. Phases in the construction of Kane'aki heiau, Makaha
            Valley, 0‘ahu Island (adapted from Ladd and Yen 1972). The
            conversion from Phases 5 to 6 was probably correlated with a
            change in the temple’s function, from an agricultural temple to
            a war temple (.luakini).
            I lilll'dl'l                                                  253

population, movement into the upper-valley areas, onset of local
erosion due to shilling cultivation, intensification ol the means of pro¬
duction (ospee i.illv irt igation), and elaboration ol ceremonial architecture
relict live ol ranking chiefs arc remarkably similar. II we further com
pare the llalawa and Makaha sequences to the model of population
growth developed in (lhapter 5, and to the evidence for intensification
ol drylield cultivation in West Hawai'i outlined in Chapter 7, what
emerges is a cleat and consistent archaeological framework for the
transformation ol I lawaiian society from an Ancestral Polynesian base.
As indit ated in both sequences, the period from about AD 1 400 to the
advent of European contact is especially critical, for this period saw the
major elaborations in irrigation, temple building, and other signals of
socio political development. I o gain a fuller understanding of this final
period, we may turn to data provided by indigenous oral traditions of
politic al history, and to early post-contact ethnographic accounts.


Traditional accounts of political development

During the late prehistoric period the major islands were- divided into
several independent chiefdoms, the- exact configurations of which
varied with the outcomes of territorial conquests and marriage alliances.
The larger islands of Kaua'i, O'ahu, Maui, and Hawai'i were each the
central loc us of an independent political unit; Moloka'i and Lana'i were
frequent battlegrounds between the- competing paramount lines of
O'ahu and Maui. Not until late- in the eighteenth century, some years
alter Cook’s voyage, did Kamchameha succeed in subjugating and
uniting these independent chiefdoms.
   As in Tonga, a rich corpus of indigenous oral traditions recount the
genealogies and politic ,il events associated with the major ruling lines
of chiefs (Pomander 1880, 1916 -20; Kamakau 1961; I' i 1959; Beckwith
1932; Main 1951), and provides a unique body of data for understanding
political development in late- prehistoric times. 1 lere, I will use simply a
small segment of the- traditions, those pertaining to the ruling line- of
Hawai'i Island, and espec ially the- Kona Kohala chiefs, from whom
Kamchameha himse lf was descended. Hornmon(1976) has compiled
and synthesized the extensive genealogical and historical material con¬
tained in the1 traditions, and I have- drawn upon his work in this
disc ussion.
   Figure 83 A presents a condensed version of the genealogy and suc¬
cession of the I lawai'i Island paramounts, while Figure 83 B shows, on
a parallel time sc ale-, the cyc les of conquest, political amalgamation,
and fission that accompanied the succession of paramounts. The time
period represented in this c hart is about 250 years, beginning with the
rule of Liloa around AD 1550, and ending with the birth of
 Kamehameha’s heir, Liholiho, in AD 1797. In terms of our archac-
254          Transformation

ological framework, this final quarter-millennium ending with Euro¬
pean intrusion was marked by large, dense populations, and was the
period during which the leeward dryfield agricultural systems were
intensified to their productive limits.
  A perusal of Figure 83 reveals several structural patterns of great
interest.   Not only do we lack       the   kind   of systematized,   dual
paramountship of Tonga, but the Ancestral Polynesian pattern of patri¬
lineal succession seems hardly in evidence. Rather, we see a complex
picture of repeated usurpations by junior collaterals, as in the case of
‘Umi-a-Liloa(12) who seized the paramountship from his senior half¬
sibling Hakau (11) by their father Liloa (10). The story of ‘Umi
(Kamakau 1961:1-21) is of special interest in several regards, and is vir¬
tually paradigmatic. The opposition between ‘Umi and Hakau reflects
not only the rank differentiation of junior/senior (Hakau was the son of
the high chiefess Pinea, whereas ‘Umi’s mother was a commoner), but
an important distinction between a benevolent versus an oppressive
chief, a theme that permeates the Hawaiian traditions. The tendency
for ruling chiefs ‘to eat the powers of the government too much’
(Sahlins 1968:92; 1972:144), that is, to become excessively demanding
upon the general populace, provided an opportunity for junior
collaterals to foment rebellion and seize the reins of power. In ‘Umi’s
case, the strategy was aided by his control of the ‘kingdom-snatching’
war god, Ku-ka‘ili-moku, bequeathed to him by Liloa (a circumstance
repeated later by Kamehameha in his usurpation of the paramountship
from Kiwala'o). Having defeated Hakau, and offering his body at the
altar of Ku (Kamakau 1961:14), ‘Umi proceeded to appropriate the
high-ranking sister of his opponent (indeed, his own half-sister) as the
royal wife, thereby assuring the high rank of his heir.
  The political history of the Hawai‘i Island line, as of the other major
chiefdoms, is complex, and here we can only take note of several domi¬
nant themes. Most significant is the cycle of conquest, expansion to
encompass neighbouring districts, followed by collapse and retrench¬
ment; more will be said on this point shortly. Also of note is the critical
role of high-ranking women, who were more important than their male
counterparts in transmitting the sanctity of the chiefly lines. As Valeri
(1972) points out, the celebrated sibling (or, more frequently, half¬
sibling) marriages of Hawaiian chiefs must be understood not so much
on the basis of chiefly endogamy as a complex system of alliances
between various collateral segments of the ruling‘house’. Such alliances
not infrequently extended beyond the borders of single chiefdom, and
Kaua'i, 0‘ahu, and Maui chiefesses figure in the genealogy of the
Hawai'i paramounts (Fig. 83).
  The power and authority of the Hawai'i Island paramounts, and
their abilitv to mobilize corvee labour, is reflected archaeologicallv in a
series of substantial stone temples (heiau) concentrated particularly in
83. A. The genealogical relationships of the paramount chiefs of Hawai'i Island; the numbers indicate
the sequence of succession. B. The sequence of amalgamation and fission of political units on Hawai'i
Island; numbers refer to the paramount chiefs shown in A. Dashed horizontal lines indicate succession
by military conquest;   solid horizontal lines indicate peaceful transitions (charts adapted from
Hommon 1976).
256           Transformation

the Kona district. It was at one of these temple platforms, Hikiau at
Kealakekua Bav, that Captain Cook submitted to the ritual of hanaipu,
the ‘feeding of the god' in January 1779 (Beaglehole 1967:506; Sahlins
1981a:21). Perhaps the most sacred, and certainly the most extensive
temple complex is that at Honaunau (Emory etal. 1957; Ladd 1969a, b,
q Tuohv 1965; Soehren 1962). Here a massive stone wall (3.7 m high,
5.2 m wide; total length 304.8 m; total volume 5,864 m3) separates a
point of land from the surrounding terrain (Fig. 84). The enclosure was
apu'uhonua, place of refuge (see Chapter 8), as well as the site of several
great temples. Ale'ale'a temple, excavated by Ladd (1969a) was con¬
structed in a series of seven stages, beginning about AD 1475. At the
ritual ‘core’ of the Honaunau complex was the Hale-o-Keawe, a small
temple that held the skeletal remains of the deified ancestors of the ruling




                                                   PinlHONUA WALL




                  HALE-O-KEAWE
                  HEIAU
                                                            HALE-O-PAPA
                  HALE-O-PUNI



                                       ALEALEA
                                      i HEIAU




                                                   ANCIENT',
                                           V_.il    HEIAU   ’
                                                     SITE




      OCEAN




                                50m




              84. Archaeological plan of the ceremonial centre at Honaunau,
              Kona District, Hawai'i Island.
           Hawaii                                                     257

line. Although, for reasons described below, the Kona paramounts
actually resided only intermittently at Honaunau, it served as a
ceremonial centre analogous to Lapaha in Tonga. Archaeological work
to date suggests that the centre was gradually elaborated throughout
the four to five centuries prior to European contact, matching the
traditional political history of the increasing power of the Kona-
Kohala line.


Late prehistoric Hawaiian society

By the time of European contact, Hawaiian society had undergone two
fundamental departures from Ancestral Polynesian Society, which
highlight the degree of structural transformation. Both of these changes
can be couched in negative terms from the viewpoint of the common
people: they lost their genealogies, and they lost direct control of their
land. The two, of course, descent and land, went hand-in-hand in
Polynesia, and having lost one it is not surprising that they should have
given up the other. More precisely, Hawaiian society had come to com¬
prise a conical clan of chiefs superposed over a truncated class of com¬
moners who wrorked the land and paid tribute to their lords.
  The chieflv class, alii, comprised a kind of very large, segmented and
ramified conical clan; membership in this class was determined by
one’s ability to state or recount genealogical connections to a major
chiefly segment. The alii were divided into a complex series of grades
or ranks, most important being the distinction between the paramount,
alii-'ai-moku, and various sub-chiefs (often warriors) who held land sec¬
tions under the paramount (the a/u-‘ai-ahupua‘a chiefs). (For indigenous
accounts of Hawaiian chiefship and rank, see Malo 1951, Beckwith
1932, Kamakau 1964.) Direcdy administering these primary land seg¬
ments (ahupuaa) were a group of‘stewards’, themselves often chiefs of
low rank, called konohiki.
  Unlike the chiefs, commoners (noa, or more commonly, makaainana)
did not lay claim to any genealogical depth, nor were they organized on
any kind of corporate descent model. Rather, stress was laid on a net¬
work of lateral kin relationships, expressed in the classic bilateral kin¬
dred (‘ohana) described by Handy and Pukui (1958) for Ka‘u District.
Among commoners the basic unit of residence, and of production, was
the extended household, usually referred to as the group (ma) of so-
and-so, generally its prominent male leader (e.g., ‘Kainiki ma'). The
term for commoners, maka'ainana, is of particular interest, since it is the
Hawaiian reflex of Proto-Polynesian *kainanga, a corporate descent
group together with its territorial segment. As the ‘people of the land’,
the term makaainana retained one aspect of its ancient semantic value,
but the implication of corporate descent had disappeared, as had the
implication of ownership. Instead, the term had come to represent the
258         Transformation

class of people who worked the land, and who stood in opposition to the
class of landowners (hakuaina) — the chiefs — to whom the maka'ainana
owed tribute and labour.
  The system of land divisions was itself organized on the typical
Polynesian segmentary pattern. The most inclusive unit, the chiefdom
(moku) - usually an entire island - was subdivided into numerous
ahupua'a, ideally pie-shaped sections radiating from the island’s centre
and, again ideally, economically self-sufficient. Ahupua'a were sub¬
divided into smaller units, ‘ili, which themselves comprised several moo
‘aina,   each of these the unit normally worked by an extended
household. (Note that the Hawaiian term ‘aina, ‘land’, is also a reflex of
Proto-Polynesian *kainga, ‘land-holding descent group’.) At the suc¬
cession of a new paramount, and particularly following a war of
conquest, ahupua'a were redistributed by the all i-‘ai-moku to the chiefs
who supported him, both consanguines and affines (the latter often
received a greater share, so as to denv close affinal kin the opportunity
to amass a powerful economic base). These all i-ai-ahupua'a, in turn,
designated their own konohiki to be responsible for the productive use of
their lands, for the mobilization of corvee labour, and for the collection
of the annual tribute (ho'okupu) to the paramount. Valeri (1972:38) has
described the Hawaiian territorial system as ‘un squelette qui n’a pas de
correspondances genealogiques a tous ses niveaux’, and the divergence
from the Ancestral Polynesian pattern can be neatly summarized in a
simple diagram (Fig. 85). Hawai'i carried the political, territorially
based transformation of Polynesian society to its limits, though as we
shall see, it never fullv divorced the ancestral bonds of kinship between
chiefs and commoners, and thus never fully transcended the ‘tribal’
level of society (cf. Sahlins 1968, 1972).
   The Hawaiian polity can be analysed not only in terms of class
stratification and land control, but in terms of its hierarchical, decision¬
making structure (Fig. 86). Aside from the ahupua'a chiefs and their




                     Land Unit   A Chief or Land Manager   A Commoner


            85. Diagrammatic representation of the change from an ances¬
            tral Polynesian svstem of land holding, in which land segments
            are held bv corporate descent groups, to a territorial system
            like that ol protohistoric Hawai'i.
            Hawaii                                                       259

konohiki, there existed a considerable body of councillors, priests,
executants, and other retainers who formed a ‘court’ of the paramount
chief. Most important of these officials were the kalaimoku and the
kahuna nui. The kalaimoku essentially acted on behalf of the paramount
in most secular matters, and his position was in many wavs analogous
to the Tongan hau. Though the position was not hereditary it was,
significantly, often accorded to affinal relatives of the paramount.
Sahlins (1981 a:55-64), through an analysis of the Kamehameha polity,
makes the reason for this clear: by handing the secular affairs over to the
kalaimoku the paramount not only preserved his tabu status, but he kept
the power out of the hands of close consanguineal relatives, who were
always to be suspected as potential usurpers. Also vital to the operation
of government, the kahuna nui, or high priest of the order of Ku, god of
war, assisted the paramount in vital rituals, especially those pertaining
to war and conquest.



                               DEITIES

                                 A
                               mediation




           86. Hierarchical organization of the protohistoric Hawaiian
           chiefdom.
260         Transformation

  The system of tribute (hookupu) upon which the polity depended for
its economic support was bound up with another great cult, that of
Lono, god of fertility and agriculture. Collection of tribute (in the form
of barkcloth, cordage, feathers, dogs, and so on) took place in con¬
junction with the makahiki, an annual four-month-long season devoted
to the god Lono, and during which the temples of Ku were dismantled
and warfare forbidden. As Handy and Handy (1972:351) pointed out,
the makahiki had its origins in the first-fruits rites that were certainly a
part of Ancestral Polynesian ritual; its evolution as a ritualized form of
taxation arose later in conjunction with ‘the sociopolitical institutions
of the late Hawaiian feudal system’. (Firth [1967:1] has noted the
similarities between the makahiki and the annual cycle of harvest rituals
in Tikopia, while the Tongan ‘inasi is also clearly derived from the same
ancestral concept of first-fruits ritual.)
  In light of the emphasis that has frequently been placed on the con¬
cept of redistribution in chiefdom societies (Sahlins 1958; Flannery and
Coe 1968; Service 1967), it is important to point out that in Hawaifi,
redistribution of theho'okupu was essentially limited to the chiefly class.
Malo makes this perfectly clear when he states that‘the king distributed
it among the chiefs and the companies of soldiery throughout the land
... No share of this property, however, was given to the people’
(1951:143). Thus the makahiki served as a political vehicle for the
paramount to reward his supporters within the chiefly class (see also
Earle 1977). Oliver, incidentally, makes the same point for ancient
Tahitian society, that ‘goods that were left over from consumption by
those at the top of the hierarchy were either appropriated by those near
the top,   or were further redistributed in only token amounts’
(1974:1071-2). Despite such political ends, it is important to stress the
ritual character of th e makahiki. In the eyes of the commoners, indeed in
the general conception of tribute, it was as Kepelino said, na lo'ina
ho'okupu alii, ‘the royal pattern of growth-causing’ (Beckwith 1932:148;
Handy and Handy 1972:351). The ali‘i-‘ai-moku, as mediator between
the fertility-causing gods and men (and as a god on earth himself),
accepts the tribute so that the land shall yield again. That he also used
the tribute to advance his own aims and ambitions shows the extent to
which ritual, economy, and political strategy were intimately bound up
in indigenous Hawaiian society.
  We should not be misled, however, to believe that the bonds of reci¬
procity between chief and people were totally severed,             that the
Hawaiian chiefs had relinquished all obligations to support their
followers. Chiefs were, indeed, expected to take care of the people, not
only through their ritual mediation with the gods, but more tangibly in
providing the means of subsistence when shortage occurred. David
Malo, famous custodian of Hawaiian tradition, put it metaphorically:
‘As the rat will not desert the pantry where he thinks food is, so the people
            Hawaii                                                        261

will not desert the king while they think there is food in his store¬
house’ (1951:195).
  The annual makahiki hookupu, while a significant strategy of the ruling
polity for securing and utilizing surplus production, was insufficient
for the day-to-dav support of the chieflv establishment, which - with its
advisers, executants, sub-chiefs, warriors, and so forth - amounted to a
sizeable population to be continually fed, clothed, and otherwise sus¬
tained. Since tropical Oceanic crops are not readilv transformed into
storable, easily transported surplus (as in the case with seed crops), the
chiefly establishment was required to come to the loci of production,
thus creating the uniquely peripatetic nature of Hawaiian chiefs. (Among
the means used to procure the subsistence requirements of the chiefly
establishment were corvee labour, particularly the cultivation of ko'ele
fields, worked by the commoners for the chiefs.) Moving from place to
place within the chiefdom, the alii spread the burden of support more
evenly; the pattern of movement also kept the paramount in direct
communication with different regions within the whole territorv.
  The ingenious strategy was not entirely successful, and the burden
upon the makaainana for support of‘a bloated political establishment’
(Sahlins 1972:145) became, at times, oppressive.

Conscious, it seems, of the logistic burdens they were obliged to impose, the
Hawaiian chiefs conceived several means to relieve the pressure, notably
including a career of conquest with a view toward enlarging the tributarv base.
In the successful event, however, with the realm now stretched over distant and
latelv subdued hinterlands, the bureaucratic costs of rule apparently rose
higher than the increases in revenue, so that the victorious chief merely suc¬
ceeded in adding enemies abroad to a worse unrest at home (Sahlins
1972:145).

We thus begin to comprehend the motive force behind the makaainana
revolts, fomented and led by junior collaterals of the ruling faction,
mentioned earlier (see also Valeri 1972:32). As Malo put it: 'Many kings
have been put to death by the people because of their oppression of the
makaainana' (1951:195). Thus the political history of Hawai'i, at least
within the last few centuries of the prehistoric era, was characterized by
a cycle of expansion and contraction of political units (diagrammed in
Figure 83). As Sahlins so elegantly demonstrated, the Hawaiian political
cycle, and its economic base, reveal an essential truth concerning the
most highly developed of the Polynesian chiefdoms. Though the ruling
elite had managed to greatly distance themselves from the commoner
populace, and though they exercised a majority (but not a monopoly) ol
force, they never managed to completely sever thekinship bond between
chiefs and people which Hawaiian society inherited from Ancestral
Polynesian Society. ‘They had not broken structurally with the people
at large, so they might dishonor the kinship morality only on pain ol a
mass disaffection’ (Sahlins 1972:148). Thus, Hawaiian society pushed
262         Transformation

the evolution of the chiefdom polity to its structural limits, a threshold
which was the ‘boundary of primitive society itself’ (1972:148).


Hawai‘i and Tonga: a comparative note

Hawai‘i and Tonga are two of the most elaborated Polynesian chief-
doms, and convergences in their respective evolutionary pathways are
of particular interest, since (given the great isolation between the two
societies) these must have arisen from the commonly inherited struc¬
tural base, and from similar evolutionary conditions and constraints.
  On a superficial level of analysis, the political organizations of the
two societies appear quite different, especially the formal dualism of
the Tongan system, and the fluctuating usurpation characteristic of
Hawai'i. When we look more closelv at the underlying structural pat¬
terns, however, these apparent differences lose their initial significance.
Friedman and Rowlands have opined that ‘the Tongan tvpe structure
evolved from a previous structure which was closer in form to that
found in Hawaii’ (1978:231). To the prehistorian, knowing that Tonga
had perhaps two thousand years longer for its society to develop than
did Hawai'i, the idea is provocative. In Hawai'i, as we have seen, matri-
lineal relations had acquired great importance for the inheritance of
rank, a system which ultimately might have led to the kind of highly
structured bilaterality in rank determination witnessed in Tonga.
  There are significant parallels as well in the separation of sacred and
secular aspects of the chieftainship. In Tonga, this separation was
inherent in the dual chieftainship of Tub Tonga and hau (Fig. 87). In
Hawai'i, the separation is not quite so formal, but operationally we
have virtually the same separation of powers between the ali'i-‘ai‘moku


               SACRED                    SECULAR


                  A=0                        A
           TU'I TONGA                       HAU

                              TONGA




                A—O                        A
               ALI'I                 KALA1MOK.U
            'Al MOKU
                             HAWAII
           87. The structural relationships between sacred and secular
           chiefs in Tonga and Hawai'i.
            Hawaii                                                        263

and his kalaimoku. When we further realize that the office ofkalaimoku (as
well as those of the kuhina) was generally given over to affines (typically,
brothers of thfe high-ranking wife), the structural similarities between
Hawai‘i and Tonga become all the more apparent. Furthermore, the
administrative, decision-making hierarchies of both societies were
remarkably parallel as is evident in a comparison of Figures 75 and
86.
  Another area of fruitful comparison is in the ritualized, annual
tribute paid to the ruling factions in both societies. The Tongan ‘inasi
and the Hawaiian makahiki had much in common, in their annual timing,
in the ritualized nature of the tribute, in the ideological conception of
the tribute as offerings to the gods of fertility through the mediation of
the sacred chief, and in 'he institutionalized games and competitions
that accompanied both sets of ceremonials. Clearly, both the ‘inasi and
the makahiki are elaborations of an Ancestral form of first-fruits offering
to the tribal deities and the ariki (see Chapters 2, 3). In both, an
increasingly powerful class of chiefs used its control over ritual to
legitimize their control of production and appropriation of surplus.
   For the archaeologist, a comparison between the ceremonial centres
of Lapaha and Honaunau is also intriguing. The essence of both
localities lies in highly sacred sepulchres for deified ancestors of the ruling
chiefs. In Tonga, the removal of the Tu‘i Tonga from active status as a
secular ruler had turned Lapaha into a permanent residence as well,
whereas Honaunau was used only periodically as the actual residence
of the peripatetic ali‘i-‘ai-moku.
   One cannot avoid the urge to speculate on what Hawaiian society
would have looked like had Cook and his European successors not
burst through the barriers of* Kahiki’ in the late eighteenth century, and
 if the indigenous course of evolution had been allowed to proceed in
 isolation for another thousand years. Would a formalized, dualistic
 chieftainship like that of Tonga have emerged; or, given the far greater
 resources of the Hawaiian archipelago, would Hawaiian society have
 evolved even more complex forms of political organization? 1 he
 answers will always be speculative, but they are part of what makes the
 study of Polynesia endlessly fascinating.
           11
           Easter Island




In Tonga, and certainly in Hawai'i, the intrusion of Europeans disrupted
internal processes of cultural evolution that had not yet reached
endpoints of indigenous development. Easter Island, our third case
study, contrasts with the previous two in this regard, for despite certain
truly remarkable evolutionary achievements, Easter Island society had
- by the time of Roggeveen’s discovery in 1722 - already begun a
downward spiral of cultural regression. By the end of the nineteenth
century, internal strife and conflict, exacerbated by foreign diseases
and slave raids, had reduced the island’s society to a mere 111 persons,
who retained only an impoverished memory of their former state. A
brilliant job of salvage ethnography by Metraux (1940) and others, as
well as a series of intensive archaeological investigations have for¬
tunately provided a surprisingly detailed picture of the rise and fall of
Easter Island society. The fascination of Easter Island lies, not in the
purported ‘mystery5 of its stone statues or rongorongo tablets, but rather
in its evolutionary record of cultural achievements within a most
isolated Polynesian outpost, achievements which were inevitably to
crumple under pressures of over-population and environmental
degradation. Easter Island is the story of a society which - temporarily
but brilliantly surpassing its limits - crashed devastatingly.
  Situated 3,703 km west of South America, and 1,819 km east of
Pitcairn Island, Easter is among the loneliest, most isolated islands on
earth. The islanders’ own name for their land, Te Pito o te Henua, reflects
this, for it is probably best translated ‘land’s end’ (Churchill 1912:2-3).
Several geological, oceanographic, and climatic conditions render Easter
relatively marginal when compared with most other tropical or sub¬
tropical Polynesian islands. Formed by the coalescing flows of three
main volcanoes (Fig. 88), the island has aland surface of about 160 km2.
The land is undulating, with rolling hills and higher volcanic cones;
there are no permanent streams, and most rainfall sinks directly into
the porous volcanic soil. Several crater lakes provide water, but these
are far from the main settlement areas. Rainfall, which averages
between about 1,250-1,500 mm per year, is adequate for several

           264
            Easter Island                                                 265

Polynesian crops (sweet potato, yams, bananas, sugar cane), although
drought years are not uncommon. Lacking permanent watercourses,
irrigation was not technologically possible. Lying just outside the
tropics, and swept by cold-water currents from the Antarctic region, the
island has no fringing reef (although some limited coral growth is present),
and most of the coastline consists of sea cliffs. Consequently, fishing
cannot provide the same range and quantity of protein as on other
Polynesian islands. All of these environmental constraints were to play
a role in the eventual regression of Easter Island society.
  As I have noted, the ethnographic and archaeological literature on
Easter Island is relatively richer than that for many other Polynesian
islands. Archaeological work began as early as 1886, with a short
reconnaissance survey (McCoy 1979). Major strides forward in both
ethnographic and archaeological knowledge were made by Routledge
(1919; 1920), who spent seventeen months on the island in 1914-15. In
1934_5; the Franco-Belgian expedition resulted in Lavacheiys monu¬

mental study of petroglvphs and pictographs (1939), and in Metraux’s
classic Ethnology of Easter Island (1940), which synthesized all available




       Motu-iti
       Motu-nui

             88. Map of Easier Island, showing the principal localities dis¬
             cussed in the text.
266        Transformation

data on the island’s culture. The famous Capuchin priest. Father Sebastian
Englert (1948, 1970), spent many years adding to our knowledge of oral
traditions and archaeology. Barthel (197 1, 1978) has also contributed
greatly to the analysis of oral tradition, and conducted detailed studies
of the rongorongo script. Heyerdahl (1975) contributed an exhaustive
survey of Easter Island art.
  Modern investigations of the island’s prehistory began with the
Norwegian Expedition in 1955-56, organized by Thor Heyerdahl. The
four archaeologists    of this   expedition    (Ferdon,   Smith,   Mullov,
Skjolsvold) introduced techniques of stratigraphic excavation, and
applied radiocarbon and obsidian dating to produce the first cultural
sequence for Easter Island (Heyerdahl and Ferdon 1965). Although
their emphasis on the monumental ahu, and certain of their interpret¬
ations, have been justly criticized (Golson 1965), their work neverthe¬
less stands as a milestone in Polynesian prehistory. Gaps in their
pioneering work have fortunately been rectified bv subsequent studies
of additional ahu bv Mullov (1975), Mulloy and Figueroa (1978), and
Ayres (1973), bv McCov’s detailed settlement pattern analysis (1976)
and excavation of a rectangular house(1973), and by Ayres’s excavations
at a series of caves and open site dwellings (1975). A recent overview by
McCov (1979) provides a concise summary of the state-of-the-art of
Easter Island prehistory.
  The Norwegian Expedition archaeologists proposed a three-phase
cultural sequence (Early, Middle, and Late Periods) based largely upon
changes in religious architecture and statuary. More recently, Mulloy
and Figueroa (1978:131-8) have shown that many of the supposed
changes between Earlv and Middle Period architecture are not supported
on additional evidence. Ayres’s revision of the original sequence (1973,
1975), based on a reconsideration of architectural data, and incorporating
other criteria as well, appears to be the best overall schema for organizing
the time-frame for Easter Island cultural development, and has been
largelv adopted here. Fortunately, a series of more than thirty radio¬
carbon age determinations on some fifteen sites provides a reasonably
firm chronological yardstick. Most of these1 'C ages are shown in Figure
89, where they are depicted as corrected age ranges at the 95 per cent
confidence level (following Klein et al. 1982).


Colonization and early developments

Direct archaeological evidence for initial colonization and the first few
centuries of settlement in Easter Island is sadlv lacking. Linguistic
evidence, such as the retention of the Proto-Polvnesian velar nasal,
clearly indicates that the group which colonized Easter must have
departed central East Polvnesiaearlv, prior to the development thereof
numerous innovations (Elbert 1953; Green 1966). On these grounds, a
                Easter Island                                                          267

date in the first few centuries AD would be entirely reasonable. The
earliest l4C date from Easter (AD 235-615), on charcoal buried on an
original land surface beneath spoil from the Poike Ditch, is not in direct
association with any evidence for human activity. It is conceivable that
it does represent early forest clearance through burning. A further tan-

No.                                                                       Site
M-711
                                                                      ^ VINAPU 1
K-523

M-710                                                                     VINAPU 2

GaK-2866                             4
                                                                      > AHU TAHAI
GaK-2867                              I-1

GaK-2864                         I-1

GaK-2862                          I-1                                 ,AHU KO
                                                                       TE RIKU
GaK-2863                              I-1
GaK2865                                   I-1
M-1374                                      I-1
1-456                                          I-1
                                                                          > AHU-A-KIVI
M-1370                                         I-1
M-1371                                            I-1
1455                                         I-1
                                                                          ( AHU VAI
TBN-348-2                                       I-1                       [ TEKA

M-1372                                            I-1

GaK4616                                        I-1 H                       SITE 35-9

K-507                                          I-1 H                  \ RANO
                                            -1                        /RARAKU
K-521

K-520                                        I-1

T-193

K-514                                                                     >ORONGO

T-194

K-506

UGa-631                                                  4                 SITE 14-1

1-7517                                                   -1                SITE 7-1

1-7515                                                   -1                SITE 12-1

UGa-630                                                  4                 SITE 35-8

 WSU-1146                                                                  SITE 1-187

 K-502      t

 K-501                                                              „ !    POIKE DITCH



           r    T      T                         T      "T-1-1
         q§     8      8                         8      8
                                                        CO
                                                               8
                                                               00
                                                                     Sq
                                                                     O)
                TJ-    CO




                89. Radiocarbon age determinations lor Easter Island archae¬
                ological sites, plotted as 95 per cent confidence intervals based
                on Klein et at. (1982).
268         Transformation

talizing clue suggestive of early settlement lies in the stone vessels which
appear to be replicas oflate Polynesian Plain Ware ceramics. If so, the
idea of pottery must have been carried to Easter Island prior to the
cessation of ceramic use in the Marquesas (or elsewhere in central
East Polynesia).
  Either during the course of the initial colonization voyage to Easter,
or in the process of initial reassortment and adaptation to local con¬
ditions, the Polynesian crop and domestic animal roster was significantly
reduced. Among the plants not successfully transferred from the tropical
East Polynesian homeland were coconut, breadfruit, anb various fruit
trees (e.g., Inocarpus, Spondias). Of the domestic animals, only chickens
were successfully carried to Easter (along with the inadvertently
transported rat, which was to become an item of the later diet). This
reduction in the variety of domestic carbohydrate and protein sources
is particularly significant in light of the island’s restricted natural
food resources.
  Palynological investigations of the peat deposits in Easter Island’s
crater lakes, by Flenley (1979, 1981), have demonstrated that prior to
Polynesian colonization the island supported a more extensive forest
cover, quite different from the treeless landscape seen by the early
European voyagers. Thus, in the initial stages of human occupation,
one may suppose that an adequate supply of wood for fuel and indus¬
trial purposes existed, although larger trees suitable for canoe con¬
struction may have been sparse or lacking. (A significant discovery was
the presence of the totora reed, Scirpus sp., in the bog deposits dating
older than 30,000 BP. This evidence clearly shows that the totora is
indigenous to Easter, not the product of human transport from South
America as argued by Thor Heyerdahl.)
  Among the earliest archaeological materials on Easter Island are the
first construction phases of two of the larger religious sites, Ahu Tahai
and Vinapu 2 (see Fig. 89), both dating to about the ninth century AD.
As Ayres (1973) thoroughly documents, the Easter Island ahu is a
variant of the East Polynesian marae complex, with its essential
elements of enclosed court and raised altar at one end (the term ahu
refers to this altar in other East Polynesian societies, e.g., Tahiti, Emory
1933). The ahu concept was undoubtedly brought to Easter by the
initial colonists, where it was locally elaborated and developed. The
Ahu Tahai and Ahu Vinapu 2 constructions, dated to several centuries
after colonization, already reflect local developments, the most notable
being ‘dressed and fitted rectangular basalt slabs chamfered on their
inner superior edges’ (Mulloy and Figueroa 1978:128). Earlier stages of
ahu development have yet to be discovered, though future work will
doubtless reveal them. (It is possible that an early, prototypical ahu was
in fact partially exposed at Vinapu 2, although it has not been
recognized as such by the excavator [Mulloy 1965:116]. I refer to an
           Easter Island                                              269

edged pavement ofbasalt slabs buried under the'Middle Period’ ramp,
only partly excavated, and visible in Plate 11a of the excavation
report.)


The Ahu Moai Phase (AD 1000-1500)

By the beginning of the second millennium AD, the construction of ahu
in various areas around the island’s coast was in full swing (ultimately
some 245 ahu were to be built), and Ayres (1973) has termed the ensuing
period the Ahu Moai Phase, after its characteristic statues (moai) bearing
ahu. (Ayres dates the phase from AD 1000-1680; McCoy [1976] suggested
a major cultural change at AD 1550. Based on a consideration of the
radiocarbon evidence, Figure 89, I believe AD 1500 to be a better date.)
Although the large ahu vary in detail and size, all follow the same basic
architectural plan (Fig. 90). Essential to the ahu is the raised, elongate
platform, often well-faced on the seaward side, and generally oriented
parallel to the shore (some ahu may have significant solar orientations).
These flat-topped platforms (up to 60 metres long and 7 metres high)
served as the base upon which the giant statues of Rano Raraku tuff
were raised. To landward, a gently sloping ramp descends from the ahu
platform to a large rectangular plaza, usually artificially levelled. These
ramps are frequently paved with carefully positioned rows of water-
rolled beach boulders.
  The highly stylized statues which are virtually a symbol of Easter
Island were carved from the relatively soft tuff of Rano Raraku, and
transported (probably by means of fork-sledges and bipods, Mullov
1970) to the ahu. About 324 statues were actually raised on ahu, or in the
process of being transported, and another 200 in various stages of com¬
pletion have been recorded in the quarries (Englert 1970:121-3). There
has been some debate concerning the development of these statues,
and it is possible that a number of variant forms (often carved in softer
reddish tuff) may represent an earlier phase of image-making, prior to
the development of the highly stylized Rano Raraku type.
   From their careful analysis of eleven excavated and radiocarbon-
dated ahu, Mullov and Figueroa (1978:122-41) concluded that ‘all were
products of a single coherent, though evolving, cultural tradition . The
original distinction between ‘Early’ and ‘Middle’ Periods of Easter
Island culture history drawn by the Norwegian Expedition based on
ahu excavation no longer holds up on the evidence of the increased
sample of dated ahu. Nor can the suggestion that changes in ahu
architecture reflect the immigration of a second culture be supported,
since it is now clear that the Easter Island ahu sequence reflects an
‘unbroken chronological progression such as might be expected from
the architectural reflection of the activities of a single continuously
developing society’ (Mullov and Figueroa 1978:137). The Easter Island
270             Transformation

ahu complex represents a remarkably elaborate and sophisticated
development of the East Polynesian marae concept.
  Virtually all ethnographic and archaeological authorities agree that
theahu were conceived, constructed, and used by local descent groups,
and do not reflect some kind of highly centralized, island-wide political
authority. Association of various ahu with local segmentary descent
groups or lineages (ure) is clear in oral traditions, and is in keeping with
the ahu as part of an East Polynesian marae complex. The Ratio Raraku
quarry site, with its large number of unfinished projects, suggests ‘the
activities     of many         independently working crews,              probably   sent




                                                SEA WALL




           oO O OOOO—O OOOOOO OQOOOO o O
            <*oOO e> o Oo o o 90o oo,OoO o OO
                                         o u   Oo
                                             V r   oo
                                                 v » v <- o o 9°
           oOo o o o oO«* o ° op> op P o ®   OOO0O Oo OO 0 oOO
                             o Oo
           oo°oo?5>o° ° <>OO o    o* O
                               OoO.* o •O 0
                                          oOoo
                                             OOO< 0,00
                                                *.©'•'O   a©
                                                        O & a QqO
                                                              aQoo o
                                                                  o<
       o         OOtlOO 0 O o o o o 0 o ° o ° oP^c>o Q • O   OoO • o o
      ^ 0'0()#00O0O C3CDOO Q O 0 O* •        OOOOCt*




                                                       PLAZA

                 <)(}. Plan and elevation of a tvpical Easter Island ahu or temple.
            Easter Island                                             271

periodically by their kin groups, rather than the activities of a single
work force under centralized direction’ (Mulloy and Figueroa (1978:134).
The distribution of the ahu, and their integration with other com¬
ponents of the total settlement pattern (to be discussed below), further
reflect a typical Polynesian segmentary pattern, with each ahu rep¬
resenting the religious focus of an ancestor-based kin group. The
statues themselves probably commemorated ‘illustrious ancestors oi
the various kin-groups, whose manawas thought to bring benefit to the
communities’ (Englert 1970:108).
  Sahlins (1955) proposed an hypothesis regarding the ‘esoteric
efflorescence’ represented by the image-ahu, which also supports the
interpretation of these structures as products of individual ramages or
lineages. He argued that due to the rather severe ecological constraints
of Easter Island, the communal labour and specialized production
typical of a ramage organization could not be directed into major
technological improvements in subsistence production. Rather, ‘these
efforts were channeled into an esoteric domain of culture’, the carving,
transport, and erection of massive stone images (1955:1051).
   Despite the fact that the several hundred ahu and statues were built
over a period of about 700 years, a sizeable population and a well-
organized production system are both indicated. Various authors have
suggested a maximum population of about 7,000 persons (a density ol
about 49/km2) though this may be an underestimate. Given the local
environmental constraints, subsistence was based upon intensive
dryfield cultivation, particularly of sweet potatoes, yams, taro, and
bananas. The accounts of early European explorers hint at the intensive
nature of cultivation practices, though the ethnographic record on
agriculture is, in general, rather poor. Curiously, there appear to be few
stone or earthen bank field boundaries such as those described earlier
for West Hawai'i, or for the Auckland area of New Zealand (Chapter 7).
McCoy (1976:26-9, 78-86), however, does describe a range of other
sites that bespeak local adaptation of agronomic technique. These
include a series of soil-retaining terraces on the steep slopes ol Rano
Kau, artificial depressions for taro planting, and numerous stone¬
walled planting enclosures called manavai. These latter, associated with
other household features (ovens, houses, chicken houses), were an
adaptation to the open terrain and windy conditions on Easter, serving
to retain moisture and protect the crops from wind damage.            1 he
manavai may have become particularly important later on in the Eastei
 Island   sequence,   when    increasing   environmental     degradation
worsened local growing conditions.
 With fowl as the only domestic protein resource, fishing (and to an
 extent seabird and bird-egg hunting) played an important role, though
 environmental constraints were a serious factor. Avres (1979) has
 reviewed the evidence for Easter Island fishing, which utilized the
272        Transformation

techniques of angling, netting, trapping, spearing, and hand collecting.
Although exploitation of the near-shore zone was similar around most
of the island’s coast, exploitation of the deeper offshore waters was
largely a monopoly of the occupants of the western and northern areas,
particularly the high-ranking Miru clan. In part, this specialization
reflects the better offshore fishing localities (hakanononga) to leeward
(Ayres 1979, fig. 1), though it must be recognized that control of pres¬
tigious fish resources (generally the larger, pelagic, carnivorous species)
by high-ranking lines is a common phenomenon in Polynesia. Metraux
(1940:173) records that during the winter months (July-September) a
tapu on fish, particularly tuna (,kahi), was in effect, and ‘only the royal
canoe (vaka vaero) could be used’; kahi taken during this period were
given to the paramount chief and older, high-ranking men (tangata-
honui). Ayres (1979) points out the association of fishhooks with theahu
(several caches have been found in ahu crematoria), evidence, perhaps,
of the ritual legitimation of the unequal social distribution of fish.
  We have already noted the coastal distribution of the imag e-ahu, each
apparently marking the territory of a segmentary ramage; the rest of the
settlement pattern was oriented around these major lineage ‘seats’, as
illustrated in Figure 91. The radial division of land characteristic of
most Polynesian societies also pertained to Easter, and the term kainga
designated one of these ramage territories (and may originally have
designated the social group as well). Inland of the ahu, with their
landward-gazing statues, were a cluster of well-constructed, boat¬
shaped houses (hare paenga), usually with beautifully dressed and fitted
stone foundation alignments. The hare paenga were occupied by high-
ranking ramage members and probably also by the priests (ivi-atua)
who officiated at thea/zzz. A particularly large boat-shaped structure, the
hare nui, was evidently a kind of secular community house. The majority
of the lineage members resided further inland, in dispersed residences
of various kinds (rectangular, oval, round houses, and habitation caves
have all been recorded), each household being marked by a spatially
aggregated cluster of dwelling, oven house, manavai, and/or hare moa
(McCoy 1976).
  During the Ahu Moai Phase, Easter Island political organization
seems to have been dominated by a developed form of the Ancestral
Polynesian segmentary ramage system, manifested so elegantly in the
image-a/zzz themselves. One maximal ramage, the Miru- direct descen¬
dants of the colonizing chief Hotu-Matu‘a - was recognized as of
necessarily higher rank and provided a paramount chief, the ariki-mau.
This individual may have exercised more ritual than secular power,
however. Other important social categories included the priests, ivi-
atua (‘bones of the gods’), and the warriors, matatoa. As we shall see, the
succeeding phase of Easter Island prehistory was to witness a reversal of
this political system, with the rise of the matatoa to frightening power
and social control.
           Easter Island                                                                       273

  One final aspect of Easter Island’s unique esoteric efflorescence
deserves comment: the rongorongo script about which so much has been
made. Exactly when the script developed is not clear, though it likely
was an indigenous concept and quite probably dates to sometime in the
Ahu Moai Phase. The script, with its anthropomorphic and zoomorphic
glyphs, and curious reversed boustrophedon pattern, appears to be a
mnemonic device‘to aid in the presentation of oral traditions and royal
genealogies’ (McCoy 1979:158). It is significant that the term rongorongo
has close cognates elsewhere in East Polynesia. In Mangareva, the
rongorongo were a class of high-ranking experts charged with memory
and recitation of sacred marae chants (Buck 1938:304-5). Likewise, in
the Marquesas the ceremonial priest was called tuhuna o‘ono (=Proto


                     K    A I N G A
                                                                                      KEY:
                                                                                   A Dwelling (hare)
                                <a       ;•
   i                            '    X                                             X Oven (umu)
                                                        •• i                       • Manavai

                                                       • •»                        D Chicken house
   i                                                                                  (hare moa)

          /    ••'             / X \                                           C_? Hare paenga
          / A** !              : Af.* i
         ! x □ j
   i
                                                              'AX',    \
                                                              \» •
                                                                 f'/
                                          ,4 D:
   i              .'Xy •• 1|
                      A '                                                  1

                                              / Ax',
                                                  'a    v


   I                                          !        □/
                                                                               t




              91. Diagrammatic representation of Easter Island settlement
              patterns, with ahu and residences of high-ranking households
              near the coast, dispersed commoner households inland.
274         Transformation

East-Polynesian *rongorongo), and was responsible for sacred chants,
including genealogies (Handv 1923:228).         Clearly, the concept of
rongorongo is of some antiquity in East Polynesia, and was carried to Easter
Island with the initial settlement party. The unique addition on Easter
Island was the development of script-carrying tablets as mnemonic
devices (curiously, this is paralleled in the Marquesas by the invention
of knotted cords for the same purpose, cf. Handy 1923, fig. 30).


Decadent (Huri Ahu) Phase (AD 1500-1722)

By all archaeological indications and in the view of most authorities, by
the close of the Ahu Moai Phase Easter Island had reached a state of
over-population, which was the proximate cause leading to the ensuing
phase of chronic inter-tribal warfare and social disintegration (Englert
1970:138; McCoy 1976:141-7; McCoy 1979:159-61; Ayres 1975:104).
McCov (1976:145-6) stresses that this unacceptably high level of popu¬
lation density was linked with environmental deterioration in a nega¬
tive feedback cvcle. The large population which had built up during the
500 vears of the Ahu Moai Phase had increasingly cleared much of the
original forest and scrub vegetation of the island, exposing the land to
erosion, ‘resulting in the loss of a precious soil mantle ... At the same
time soil moisture was reduced, soils underwent chemical change, the
soil evaporation rate was increased, and existing fields were subjected
to the strong winds. The net effect must have been a decrease in crop
yields’ (1976:146). Forest depletion further meant that there was a
shortage of wood for canoe construction, ‘resulting in the probable
reduced intake of deep sea fish’.
   Inter-tribal conflict, the seizure of lands and property by stronger
groups from weaker, and the enslavement of conquered groups were
the outcome of this situation of an over-populated, deteriorating
ecosvstem. Archaeological signals of chronic warfare are numerous for
the Decadent Phase, beginning in the sixteenth century. The most ubi¬
quitous of these is the invention of a new implement, the rnataa, or
flaked obsidian spearhead (Fig. 92), which suddenly appears in great
profusion in sites and deposits of this Phase. Englert remarks that ‘they
used to be scattered over the surface of the island in endless numbers.
Tremendous quantities of them must have been made’ (1970:139).
Changes in settlement pattern also reflect the chronic raiding and war¬
fare; volcanic lava tubes and caves present throughout the island were
modified for use as defensible, permanent habitations, their entrances
sealed off with fortification walls, onlv a single, narrow passageway per¬
mitting single-file entrv. Several of these caves (Sites 7-1, 12-1, 14-1)
have been "C dated to the Decadent Phase (Fig. 89). Significantly, some
of these cave walls are constructed of the carefully dressed kerbstones ol
the old hare paenga houses, ripped out of their old foundations. Yet
            Easter Island                                                275

another manifestation of warfare is the Poike Ditch, a large earthwork
fortification isolating the Poike Peninsula from the rest of the island
(described in Chapter 8). A radiocarbon date from charcoal in the
ditch, AD 1420-1810, helps to fix the time period of the Decadent
Phase.
  Most striking and symbolic of the state of Easter Island society during
the sixteenth to nineteenth centuries was the cessation of new image-
ahu construction, and the deliberate destruction of the existing ahu and
tipping over of the statues. Ayres (1973:132) notes that ‘almost all the
statues were tipped over forward toward the court and large blocks of
stone were often placed on the ground in a position to decapitate the
statue when it fell on if. The beautifully dressed and fitted stones forming




            92. Obsidian spearheads (rnata'a) from Easter Island (from
            Metraux 1940).
276        Transformation

theahu platforms were violently ripped apart and hurled aside. Englert
plausibly speculates that this rampant destruction, which undid the toil
of countless ancestors of the various lineages, was the work of enemy
groups seeking to obliterate the mana of their opponents and weakening
their ability to resist by destroying the physical symbols of the ancestors
(1970:142). Then again, ‘the cause may have been only an unfocussed
desire to destroy the valued property of an enemy’. Equally plausible is
the possibility of a class revolt by the commoners against the excessive
demands by an oppressive chiefly class, particularly as the ability to
provide an agricultural surplus became increasingly difficult. The de¬
struction took place over a period of several centuries, and from historical
accounts it is clear that the last statues were pulled down between 1838-
64 (Metraux 1940:86).
  During the Decadent or Huri Moai (‘statue-toppling’) Phase the use
of ahu also changed fundamentally. Toppled statues were partiallv
covered with rude stone platforms, and burial crypts were fitted among
the stone heads (Fig. 93). A new ahu form, the ‘semi-pyramidal’ ahu, was
constructed atop the ruined platforms. Thus the ahu became essentially
sepulchres of the deceased descendants of those who originally con¬
ceived the remarkable concept of raising multi-ton monuments to the
gods. In their sequences of construction and destruction, ahu such as
those of Vinapu      encapsulate the whole cycle of Easter Island
society.
  The rise of endemic warfare led to a restructuring of the island’s




            93. A portion of ahu Vinapu, showing the use of the temple for
            burials after the overthrow of the stone statues (from
            Heverdahl and Ferdon 1961, courtesy ofT. Heyerdahl).
            Easter Island                                                   277

political organization. The warring tribes and ramages organized
themselves into a loose dual coalition, Tu‘u in the west and Hotu-Iti in
the east, the two groups constantly opposing each other. The former
secular power of the ariki-mau declined to the point where he became
solely a religious figure, a necessary' link between the gods and the
declining fertility of the land. In his place, secular power was seized by
the matatoa, members of the warrior class. Englert writes:

The most characteristic theme of the traditions of this period, as I have heard
them, is that of the ascendancv to power of the matatoa ... In these troubled
times the fear thev inspired and the prestige thev gained enabled them to
acquire ever greater control over the ariki and the priesthoods, who formerly
provided through their mana the sources of social control (1970:137-8).

The ruthlessness of the matatoa, referred to as the tangata nma toto, ‘men
with bloodied hands’, is well documented in oral tradition. It was in this
phase, also, that cannibalism developed, evidenced in such archae¬
ological sites as the Ana Kai Tangata (‘Cave of the Man Eaters’). Vic¬
torious   matatoa   and     their   groups virtually enslaved       those   thev
conquered, creating the         class of persons ‘obliged to serve their con¬
querors or to pay tribute to them with the produce of their lands
(Metraux 1940:139). As Englert summarizes the deteriorating social
situation, ‘the various communities scattered over the island became
more and more like predatory bands, and much of the older, more
ordered way of life gradually vanished’ (1970:138).
  Possibly the most intriguing of all of the changes precipitated by the
intense conflict of Easter’s final few centuries prior to European contact
was the rise of the manutara cult, a radical shift in the island’s religion.
The manutara or‘bird-man’ cult revolved around the ceremonial centre
of Orongo (Routledge 1920; Ferdon 1965; Mullov 1975), and the
offshore islets of Motu-Nui and Motu-Iti (McCoy 1978). Every year,
beginning in September, an island-wide competition was held between
the most powerful ruling factions of matatoa, to see who could find the
first egg of the sooty tern (Sterna fuscata), the manutara, which was laid on
the islets and return with it to Orongo. The winner or his warrior-chief
was declared the bird man, tangata manu, and became the sacred cult-
 leader for the ensuing year, his group taking de facto control over the
 island. The cult was under the tutelage of a great deity, the god
 Makemake, who apparently came to replace the ancestral deities as the
 primary source of mana. McCall eloquently describes the fundamental
 changes represented by this shift in religious practice:

 it is not surprising that the Rapanui, faced with an ecological ctisis that
 threatened their entire social order, if not their very lives, should take the
 initiative to fashion a new religion more suited to their precarious times.
 Instead of a king for life, thev opted for one elected by ordeal. Instead of many
 ancestors who descended from many ancestors, they propounded a single god
 [Makemake|, whose image they carved in deserted rocks, on the bases of feud-
 toppled figures, and even around water-holes       (1980:38—9).
278         Transformation

Yet, as McCall notes, the social order bestowed annually by the selection
of the bird man at Orongo was ‘as fragile as the shells of the eggs that
were the focus of the annual quest’ (1980:38).
  Such was the war-torn, debilitated society found bv the Dutch
explorer Roggeveen on Easter Dav,         1722. The ensuing relations
between Europeans and the descendants of Hotu-matu‘a is a par¬
ticularly sad and shameful chapter in Pacific history, culminating in the
Peruvian slave raid of 1862, which resulted in the extermination of vir¬
tually all of the knowledgeable elders and leaders of the society. Thus,
through a combination of internal conflict and degeneration, exacer¬
bated by foreign predation, the culture of Easter Island went full circle-
from a small band of Polynesian colonists on the shores of a new land,
through remarkable heights of cultural brilliance, to a once again small
and pitiful band striving to surmount yet another challenge to their
island lifeways.




              94. Birdman petroglvphs at the ceremonial centre of Orongo,
              Easter Island (photo by Metraux, courtesy of Bishop Museum).
           12
           Epilogue




In the preceding chapters, we examined three independent pathways
of technological, social, and political evolution which led in each
instance to a divergent transformation of Ancestral Polynesian Society.
Yet, despite the differences between the contact-period societies of
Tonga, Hawai‘i, and Easter Island, one may recognize in each the
imprint of ancestral patterns as well as the results of similar processes
(population increase, agricultural intensification, competition, and so
forth). That these three societies diverged in their evolutionary
pathways can be attributed to significant differences in the local
hierarchies of ecological constraint, and to the creativity of individual
historical actors. That these societies remained in many respects
similar, or followed parallel sequences of development, may be
attributed to the common structural base of Ancestral Polynesian
Society, and to the influence of the same major dynamics.
  As we noted at the outset of this study, one of Polynesia’s great advan¬
tages for comparative analysis is its diverse canvas of ecological settings.
The significant role of environment in the evolution of the Polynesian
chiefdoms was the hierarchy of constraints posed in each local area. Of
our three case studies, Hawai'i clearly offered the greatest range of
environmental opportunities, despite significant differences between
particular islands. The Hawaiian Islands are large, well watered, with
fertile soils, and while some human-induced degradation occurred,
this was frequently offset by the potential          for agricultural and
aquacultural intensification. Yet, in seizing certain ecological oppor¬
tunities of the Hawaiian environment, the Polynesian settlers locked
themselves into other forms of constraint. Taking advantage of the rich
alluvial floodplains to develop taro irrigation to its Polynesian apogee,
the Hawaiians simultaneously chose not to develop a magazine
economy, a course that led to the uniquely peripatetic nature of the
Hawaiian chieftainship. The Tongan archipelago offered ecological
opportunities of a different sort, and the local hierarchy of constraints
ruled out irrigation as a possible avenue of intensification. Rather, an
intensive form of drvfield cropping (focussed on yams) developed with

            279
280        Epilogue

a secondary emphasis on arboriculture. In this case storage was quite
feasible and the political svstem came to rely upon a magazine
economy, and indeed, expended considerable effort in maintaining
links with the dispersed individual units of production. In contrast with
Hawai'i and Tonga, isolated Easter Island posed far greater and more
severe ecological constraints. Due to voyaging distance and climatic
constraints, a significant percentage of the Ancestral Polynesian crop
and domestic animal roster never was successfully transferred to the
island. This limitation,   combined with an impoverished marine
environment, lack of streams, and relatively low rainfall, dictated that
production would always be a difficult task, and furthermore, effec¬
tively barred most avenues of agricultural intensification. Yet the pres¬
sures to produce were no less than elsewhere, both from population
increase and from the demands inherent in the ancestral social and
political system. Thus in Easter Island the tension between ecological
constraint and economic activity was acute, contributing ultimately to
late prehistoric social and political disintegration.
  While local ecological settings imposed highly significant constraints
on economic activity and on human numbers, an ecological paradigm
alone comes nowhere near explaining the dynamics of evolution
among the Polynesian chiefdoms. For this we must turn to other factors
and other analytical paradigms, one of which is demographic. In each
of the three cases under consideration, relatively high levels of popu¬
lation density had been achieved bv the time of European contact,
although in no case had any absolute carrying capacity necessarily been
reached. Although the data are presently skimpy, an early phase of
rapid population increase and expansion in Tonga probably con¬
tributed to the intensity of inter-group competition and unification of
the archipelago under a central polity. At contact, Tonga’s population
appears to have been relatively stable, though the cultural mechanisms
of population regulation are not fullv understood. Hawai‘i presents a
contrastive situation, for it is evident that the Hawaiian population had
not reached any limits to production, and that substantially larger
populations could have been supported in many areas. When we
examine the Hawaiian demographic situation on the local level, however,
we find an uneven geographic distribution of population, a reflection
of the local hierarchy of ecological constraints. Thus the West Hawai‘i
region, in which irrigation was not feasible, appears to have reached
.certain limits of agricultural development, which may account for a
plateau seen in the local population growth curve. Indeed, local popu¬
lation imbalances mav have been a significant dynamic factor in the
political actions of the ruling chiefs, including the strategy of inter¬
district and island conquest. Nevertheless, while we can reasonably
argue the importance of population increases in spurring on the pro¬
cess of political and social transformation, we must avoid the deter-
            Epilogue                                                    281

ministic trap of mechanical population ‘pressure’. While the West
Hawai‘i field systems mav have reached limits of agricultural inten¬
sification, thev could still have supported much larger populations if,
for example, pigs had been removed from the production system. Pigs,
however, were culturally defined as a vital component of the larger
political economy, an essential element in the rituals that validated the
paramount’s claims to divine chiefship.         In short,   it is not that
demographic pressure did not exist in Hawai'i or elsewhere in
Polynesia, but that the local demographic situation was never indepen¬
dent, and was as much a product of social and political systems as of
ecological constraints.
  In Easter Island, population increase had its most dramatic conse¬
quences as we have seen. And vet, even for this ecologically marginal
island with its limits to agricultural intensification, we have to seriously
question whether it might not have been feasible, under less competi¬
tive, alternative systems of social integration, to support a population
substantially larger than that actually achieved by the Rapanui
Polynesians.
  Population increase was surely one dynamic factor in Polynesia, but
it too is not sufficient as an explanatory mechanism, and we must widen
our scope to encompass other variables and other analytical paradigms
in our search of an understanding of particular transformations. An
important avenue is that of political economy, and here we are led back
to some of the fundamental structures of Ancestral Polynesian Society.
Neither the Tongans, Hawaiians, nor Easter Islanders invented the
position of anki or its related concepts of mana and tapu. Ancestral
Polynesian Society was already hierarchically structured, and the
demand for surplus was an integral part of the political economy. We
simply cannot attribute the existence of hierarchical political systems in
Polynesia to such functional explanations as the need for chiefs as re¬
distributors of geographically dispersed resources (cf. Sahlins 1958), or
as managers of irrigation networks which in turn resulted from ‘popu¬
lation pressure’. Rather, the argument must run, in part at least, the
other way around. Colonizing Polynesians in every case carried with
them concepts of pvramidal social structure, of first fruits and tribute as
obligatory to the chiefs, of chiefs as earthly representatives ol ancestial
deities. The principles of differential access to resources, of domination
by the chiefs over labour and the means of production, were present in
all Polynesian societies from the beginning.
   Politically motivated demands for surplus production to finance the
greater public economy, coupled with population increases, were the
 main factors which gave the spur to the intensification of agriculture
 and other components of production throughout Polynesia. The par¬
 ticular forms of intensification were constrained by local environmental
 circumstance, but also reflect such factors as symbolic and ritual svs-
282        Epilogue

terns. This is apparent, for example, in the emphasis placed on the pro¬
duction of ritually valued pigs in Tonga and Hawaifi, or of fowl in
Easter Island, even though such production had obvious demographic
costs. Likewise, the energy and effort expended in the collection or pro¬
duction of prestige goods - whether fine mats in Tonga or feather
cloaks and helmets in Hawaifi - cannot be accounted for in simple
ecological or demographic terms. Ultimately, however, the degree to
which the political elite could (whether through ritual mystification or
by outright coercion) direct the intensification of production to ever
higher levels depended on the hierarchy of local ecological constraints,
and on the critical balance between human populations and land. Thus
it is not surprising that in Hawaifi, where the opportunities for inten¬
sification were virtually unsurpassed within the Polynesian region, we
should find not onlv the most impressive technological development of
production (irrigation, fishponds), but a scheme of consumption that
was correspondingly differentiated on a hierarchical basis. To the
extent that chiefs were successful in developing and intensifying pro¬
duction, they simultaneously enhanced their own status and power. In
Easter Island, the political motivations of the chiefs ran up against the
ecological reality of a too marginal environment, but not before a growing
population had been induced to raise multi-ton monuments to the
glory of ancestral gods.
  The transformation of the Polynesian chiefdoms resulted from a
more complex set of processes than just the demands of increasing
populations, and of status-conscious chiefs, operating within the con¬
straints of local environments. There is as well the matter of com¬
petition and warfare, a most significant dynamic factor in all of the
societies we have considered. While competition can certainly be
analysed in its ecological and demographic context, and while popu¬
lation increases and the political design of chiefs for aggrandizement of
line and hegemony of power were real incentives to conquest, we must
recognize that such functionalist explanations cannot fully account for
the nature and importance of competition in Polynesia. We are again
confronted with the persistence and transformation of ancient struc¬
tural patterns, for as the linguistic evidence reveals, the concept o{toa-
ship existed before the settlement of most of Polynesia, and certainly
before the invention of local patterns of fortification or combat. The
structural opposition between ariki and toa is fundamental and ancient
in Polynesia. On the other hand, the particular wavs in which this
opposition would be worked out depended a great deal on particular
environmental and historical circumstances. That the concept of
warrior existed in Easter Island is something owed to the ancestral
Polynesian heritage, but that matatoa should rise to such a position ol
local political prominence does have a great deal to do with the par-
           Epilogue                                                      283

ticular historical interplay of population and production in a marginal,
constrained environment.
  Finally, along with the ecological, demographic, social, political, and
economic paradigms which we have to applv in order to understand
Polynesian sequences of evolution and transformation, we must add
the symbolic, a recognition of the creativity of the human mind. For
archaeologists, a symbolic paradigm is often regarded with, at best,
reluctance, or worse, outright rejection as irrelevant, given the material
nature of most archaeological data. Yet even if a symbolic or struc¬
turalist paradigm is often impossible to implement in archaeology, we
cannot afford to lose sight of the dynamic role of individual creativity in
cultural evolution. With a knowledge of Ancestral Polynesian social
structure, an understanding of the local hierarchy of ecological con¬
straints, an analysis of demographic process, and a comprehension of
the technical aspects of production, one might predict that some form
of inter-group competition was inevitable in Easter Island. But could
one on such bases, possibly explain why these people should have
turned their gazes to a sheer volcanic cliff, and imagined in its matrix
giant stone images, and furthermore proceeded to the immense task of
carving, transporting, and erecting these monoliths as their unique
expression of competition? The power of over-arching symbolic sys¬
tems, themselves the products of human creativity, to lend particular
expression and organization to the material world is something that
cannot be overlooked in our efforts to explain the human past.
  In short, if we are to understand and explain the evolution of the
Polynesian chiefdoms (or, indeed, other societies and cultures), it will
not be on the basis of a single anthropological or archaeological
paradigm. A major aim of this book has been to show the varied roles
plaved bv a variety of factors - structural,        ecological,    political,
demographic, technological, and social - but also how each of these
contributes only a partial understanding. We require synthetic expla¬
nations that integrate the several paradigms identified above, and yet
the   sociology   of contemporary     archaeologv    is   such    that   most
paradigms are constructed as alternative and competitive, rather than
suppletive and reinforcing. Keesing (1982) recently addressed this
problem in another explanatory context, and rightly observed that
‘when we commit ourselves to a paradigm, perhaps powerful but
inevitably sharply limited in scope, we try to pretend that it is global,
even total’ (1982:32). Surelv here is a challenge for prehistory', and not
onlv within the geographic confines of Oceania.
  I am under no illusion that the attempt in this book to dissect and
identify the main processes of evolution in the Polynesian chiefdoms is
anything more than one stage in a continuing endeavour. The analyses
and explanations presented here reflect very much the present state of
284         Epilogue

our data base, as well as the current theoretical and methodological
development of archaeology and anthropology. I close, therefore, w'ith
a few comments on where we might consider heading, on the kinds of
data and approaches that are necessary if we are to advance our
understanding of the prehistory of Polynesian societies.
  As this book and other recent volumes demonstrate, the past three
decades in Polynesian archaeology have seen great advances in our
knowledge of the sequence of island colonization and of basic chronology,
of sequences of prehistoric material culture, agricultural systems and
fishing strategies, faunal sequences and diet, and prehistoric settlement
patterns especially as these relate to local ecology (Kirch 1982c). Most of
our efforts have been directed at the definition of culture-historical
sequences for individual island groups and on the analysis of patterns
of settlement,    subsistence,   and   ecological   adaptation.   Although
numerous problems in these areas remain to be worked out (such as the
chronology for initial East Polynesian settlement), we already possess
an extensive and valuable data base relevant to issues of chronology,
material culture, subsistence, and settlement. It is time now to build on
this base while expanding our vision of the kinds of data and
approaches which will permit us to move boldly beyond ecological and
economic interpretations of Polynesian society.
  It is clear that we need more direct archaeological information con¬
cerning Ancestral Polynesian Society, that is, on the Lapitoid Period in
West Polynesia and even extending into eastern Melanesia. The pat¬
terns of social and political organization which were crystallized in
Ancestral Polynesian Society influenced the courses of cultural evolution
throughout Polynesia, and we must develop a clearer picture of this
ancestral baseline. Not only do we need to increase our sample of
excavated Lapitoid sites, we must consider ways to improve our
strategies of excavation, data recovery, and sampling on the regional
level. While modern excavation sampling techniques have now been
applied to a handful of Lapitoid sites, there has yet to be a single exten¬
sive areal excavation of a Lapitoid community. What insights might we
gain to Ancestral Polynesian Society if we had at hand information on
the structural layout of a community, including the intra-site distri¬
bution of faunal remains and artifacts? We might perhaps be able to
make more informed statements on the nature and composition of
ancestral household units, and on the degree of status differential. On a
regional level, we must also address the issue of interrelations between
individual Lapitoid communities; what sorts of exchange relations
bound communities together?            Did Ancestral   Polynesian Society
exhibit more highly developed lateral networks of integration than
hierarchical integration? These are profound and difficult questions
without facile answers, yet thev cry out for attention.
      Moving to the problem of cultural evolution within individual
            Epilogue                                                   285

islands and archipelagos, we need a concerted effort to develop more
extensive   and   precise   reconstructions   of prehistoric   population
growth. The Hawaiian data reported in Chapter 5 are only a pre¬
liminary attempt in this direction, and suffer from a number of
methodological problems. Nonetheless, the Hawaiian data do indicate
the potential for reconstructing the population dynamics of past
societies. In my view, establishing prehistoric growth curves and rates
of demographic change are more immediately significant problems
than obtaining precise estimates of actual population sizes, although
these too are desirable. The nature of most Polynesian structural sites
and of settlement landscapes is such that a census-taking approach in
archaeology is feasible. The task, however, will be a laborious one, for
large samples must be obtained, and the problem of local and regional
distribution of population must be dealt with.
  Also worthy of investigation is the matter of the intensification of pro¬
duction systems, and the relationships between sequences of intensi¬
fication and concomitant or simultaneous developments in demography
and socio-political organization. We have made substantial advances in
identifying, dating, and obtaining diachronic data from a variety of
agricultural and other components of prehistoric production systems.
Much of this work, however, is oriented toward functional recon¬
structions of the operation of systems at single points in time, rather
than elucidating the temporal dimension of intensification.
  Competition between social groups was a significant dynamic factor
in the trend toward rendering Polynesian societies increasingly political
and hierarchical, and the direct archaeological evidence of warfare,
especially fortifications, can certainly be exploited to greater advantage.
While single forts have been excavated in a number of localities, the
temporal problem of the development and frequency of use of forti¬
fications has not yet been seriously tackled, although the New Zealand
data are becoming increasingly relevant. One may ponder the analytical
possibilities for treating the political evolution of Rapan society, for
example, if we knew- not just the structure and layout of Moronga Uta
— but the constructional sequences and time frames for all of the major
Rapan hill forts. Again, the task is almost forbiddingly massive, since
the excavation of even a single fortress is often a major undertaking,
and we must again be concerned with sampling on a truly regional
 scale.
    Finally, we must explore new methods for exploiting our archae¬
 ological data for evidence of former patterns of social grouping, status
 differentiation, and political organization. The potential for mortuary
 analysis has hardly been explored in Polynesia, and our settlement pat¬
 tern studies have tended to stress ecological and economic analyses and
 interpretations over the spatial evidence for social grouping and
 hierarchical organization. As in other parts of the world, ceremonial or
286        Epilogue

temple architecture when dissected for sequences of construction and
elaboration may reveal clues regarding major political events or
realignments of power. In Hawai'i, where there are several thousand
heiau or temple sites which were intimately linked with the ruling elite of
chiefs and priests, we still have but a handful of excavated sites. These
few (such as Alealea at Honaunau and Kane'aki in Makaha) have
demonstrated the potential of temple architecture to pinpoint major
periods or phases of political development or integration. However,
anything like a comprehensive study of the temple architecture of even
a single Hawaiian island has yet to be seriously conceived. Nor are
mortuary or settlement pattern data our onlv sources for working out
the time frame for social and political transformation in Polynesia.
Artifacts of various sorts, most of them sitting unused in large museum
collections, have the potential to reveal regional patterns of social and
economic integration. Some work along these lines is beginning to be
formulated in Hawai‘i, where McCoy and his colleagues are concerned
with the distribution of fine-grained basalt adzes from a limited number
of large quarry sites.
  Polynesia has finallv passed through its stage of‘cowboy archaeology*
(Jones 1980). The day is gone when a lone archaeologist can step ashore
on archaeological terra incognita and, by excavating a few critically
placed sites, lay bare the outlines of an entire island sequence, at the
same time resolving age-old questions of cultural origins and time
depth. This state of affairs is not so unromantic as it mav seem, for the
ground work has simply been laid for more significant investigations
yet to come. We now have established a firm basis of culture history on
which to address more fundamental questions. The origins and migra¬
tions of the Polynesians were problems that befuddled scholars for
more than two centuries, but which have now been largelv resolved.
Although we shall probablv argue over the minutiae for decades to
come, Polynesia has far more important questions and issues to
address, issues that extend to the verv core of anthropologv and pre¬
history. It could not be a better time to open doorwavs to the
unexpected.
             GLOSSARY OF POLYNESIAN TERMS
             Terms not attributed to a specific island group are oi wide¬
             spread usage.




ahu (Easter Is.). A temple or place of worship, based on the Polynesian
  marae concept.
ahupuaa (Hawai'i). A radial land division, under the control of a chief, and
  sometimes considered to be an economically self-sufficient unit.
ali'i-'ai-moku (Hawai'i). Paramount chief.
ariki (variants: aliki, arxi, ali i, eiki). Widespread Polynesian term lor chief, head
    of a descent group.
 ariki-mau (Easter Is.). Paramount chief, usually from the Mini clan.
fahu (Tonga). A man’s sister’s child (especially male child), who has certain
    rights to appropriate the property of his mother’s brother.
fa it oka (Tonga). A burial mound, generally of sand or earth and sometimes
   stone-faced, used for multiple interments.
fono. An assembly of people (usually adult males); a decision-making bodv in
some Polynesian societies.
hare moa (Easter Is.). A stone house or coop for keeping chickens (lit. ‘house
  chicken’).
harepaenga (Easter Is.). A boat-shaped house with cut-and-drcssed foundation
  kerbstones, used bv high-ranking persons.
hau (Tonga). The secular paramount, a position held at European contact bv the
   Tu‘i Kanokupolu.
heiau (Hawai'i). A temple, shrine, or similar place of worship; the Hawaiian
   term for the East Polynesian concept of marae.
hookupu (Hawai'i). The tribute presented to a chief bv the makaainana,
   particularly during the annual makahiki festival (lit. ‘to cause growth’).
‘Hi (Hawai'i). A land division smaller than an ahupuaa in size. Ahupuaa were
    generally subdivided into a series of ‘Hi.
 ‘inasi (Tonga). An annual presentation of first fruits and other tribute to the
   sacred paramount, the Tu‘i Tonga. Usually held at Mu a.
ivi-atua (Easter Is.). The class of priests.
kahuna-nui (Hawai'i). Chief priest of the Ku cult and principal officiant at
   ceremonies involving the paramount chief.
 kai. General Polynesian term for food.
 kainga (variants: ‘ainga, kainanga, mataeinana). A land-holding, cognatic descent
    group; term often applies also to the land held by such a group.
 kalaimoku (Hawai'i). Councillor and principal executant ol the paramount
    chief.
 kalia (Tonga). A large, double-hulled canoe used for inter-island voyaging.
 kamaaina (Hawai'i). A native of a particular locality, frequently with usufruct
   land rights (lit. ‘child of the land').

               287
288         Glossary

kanawai (Hawai'i). Law, code, rule (lit. ‘pertaining to water,
kapu (Hawai'i). The Hawaiian reflex of the general Polynesian term tapu,
   sacred, prohibited.
kava (variant: ‘awa). A non-alcoholic, narcotic infusion made from the pla...
   (Piper methysticum) of the same name; also a ceremony involving the use of
   this beverage.
kio (Easter Is.). Commoners; defeated persons obliged to work, for and pay
   tribute to their conquerors, especially matatoa.
ko'ele (Hawai'i). A small unit of land (often a set of irrigated fields) worked by
   commoners for the konohiki or chief.
kolo (Tonga). A fortress or fortified village.
koloa (Tonga). Valued property, such as mats and barkcloth, traditionally used
   as items of exchange.
konohiki (Hawai'i). The steward of a chief, responsible for the administration of
   his lands, for the mobilization of corvee labour, and for the collection of
   tribute.
Ku (Hawai'i). The god of war (see luakini).
kuaiwi (Hawai'i). A low alignment of stone or earth, dividing garden plots in
   drvfield cultivation svstems (lit. ‘back bone’).
kuhina nui (Hawai'i). Powerful official during the earlv monarchv, generallv
   translated as ‘premier’ or ‘prime minister’.
kumara (variant: ‘uala). The sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), an American cultigen
   introduced prehistoricallv to East Polynesia, and an important crop in New
   Zealand, Easter Island, and Hawai'i.
kutunga (Futuna). A maximal, cognatic descent group.
langi (Tonga). Burial mounds of the sacred paramount (Tu'i Tonga) and his
   immediate family.
Lono (Hawai’i). The god of agriculture and fertility, and of the makahiki harvest
   festival.
luakini (Hawai'i). A class of temple (heiau) dedicated to Ku, god of war, at which
   human sacrifices were offered bv the paramount chief.
ma (variants: masi, mahi). Fermented, pit-ensiled, starch pastes, particularly of
   breadfruit, which will store for a number of vears.
makaainana (Hawai'i). The class of commoners (a reflex of the older Polynesian
   term *kainanga).
makahiki (Hawai'i). Annual harvest festival, dedicated to the god Lono; generallv
   beginning about mid October and lasting four months.
makatea. Upraised coral reef.
mana. Supernatural power or efficacv, transferred from the deities to the chief
   bv virtue of his descent.
manahune (Society Is.). Commoners; members of the lowest marriage class.
manavai (Easter Is.). A stone-walled, sometimes sunken, garden enclosure, used
   for cultivating taro, bananas, and other crops.
manutara (Easter Is.). The sootv tern, and a cult of the same name, based on an
   annual contest to recover the first tern’s egg.
marae (variants: malae, malae). Throughout Polynesia, a ceremonial precinct;
   elaborated in East Polynesia as a formal temple.
mataa (Easter Is.). Flaked spearhead of obsidian.
matapule (Tonga). A chief’s attendant and spokesman; generally an inherited
   position.
matatoa (Easter Is.). The class of warriors (see toa).
moa (New Zealand). A class of large, flightless, struthious birds, endemic to New
   Zealand, and now extinct.
moku (Hawai'i). The territory occupied bv an independent chiefdom, usually an
   entire island (from Proto-Polynesian *motu, ‘island’).
               Glossary                                                          289

mo'o ‘aina (Hawai'i). A land division smaller in size than an 'ili; usually cultivated
   bv a household unit.
mua (Hawai'i). Men’s eating house; also the scene of various male ceremonies
   and incorporating a kind of shrine (heiau)\ (lit. ‘front’).
muakai (Tikopia). First fruits offered to a chief (lit. ‘foremost foods’).
'oloa (Hawai'i). Fine white tapa, placed or draped over an image during
  temple ceremonies.
onge (variant: honge). Famine,      particularly that resulting from a natural
   disaster.
‘Oro (Societv Is.). A principal deity and most powerful god of war, to whom
   human sacrifices were offered.
pa (New Zealand). A fortified settlement, usually situated on a hill or headland,
   and with defensive ditches and pallisades.
pare (Rapa). A hilltop fortification or fortified village site.
patu (New Zealand). A hand club (similar clubs have been excavated in the
    Society Islands).
pi'o, ni‘aupi‘0 (Hawai‘i). Offspring of a brother-sister, or half-brother and half-
  sister union.
poahma (Hawai'i). Work done on a chief’s plantations, on a weekly basis (lit.
  ‘fifth day’).
puuhonua (Hawai'i). Place of refuge or asylum; usually also a temple.
rahui (variants: ahui, ra'ui). A chiefly interdiction or prohibition on the use of
   particular resources, frequently agricultural.
rauti (Societv Is.). Exhorters or orators of battle, who urged on the warriors.
renga (variants: lena, ‘olena). Turmeric plant (Cucurma domestica) and the orange
   dve produced from its tuber, used ritually.
rongorongo (Easter Is.). Wooden tablets bearing a script in reversed
   boustrophedon.
tangata manu (Easter Is.). Winner of the annual contest at Orongo to capture the
   first tern’s egg (lit. ‘bird man’).
tapere (Rarotonga). A radial land segment, the basic territorial divisions of
   the island.
tapu. Sacred, prohibited.
tautai. Expert navigator, seaman, or fisherman.
tehina (Tonga). Younger sibling of the same sex.
toa (variants: matatoa, koa). Warrior.
toafa (Futuna, ‘Uvea). Anthropogenic, degraded land, usually latcrized,
   supporting a terminal climax vegetation dominated by a fern (Dicranopteris
   linearis).
tufunga (variant: kahuna). Expert, particularly with regard to a special skill or
  craft (in Hawai'i, kahuna were priests).
tui (Tonga). A paramount chief; lord of a place (e.g., Tu'i Tonga, Tu‘i Ha‘a
  Takalaua).
waiwai (Hawai'i).     Property, wealth,    valued goods (reduplication of wai,
   ‘water’).
