                 HALF-LIFE           OF RADIOCARBON~
       1k
          HE half-life of radiocarbon has been measured several
          times. Table 4 gives the results obtained, together with
          the method of measurement.|It is clear at a glance that the
early measurements in which the amount of radiocarbon in the
sample being measured was based on estimated bombardment yield
gave high values. The later measurements based on mass spectro-
metric assays divide into three groups, according to the method of
measurement: (a) counting of solid barium carbonate with thin
window counters; (6) gas counting with the carbon disulfide-carbon
dioxide mixture described by Miller and Brown;! and (c) gas count-
ing with CO; either as a small additive to the standard argon—alcohol
counter gas or as CO:-methane mixture in the proportional counter. |
Miller e¢ a/.? have given evidence that the latter group is more nearly
correct. It seems on first principles that the point of 100 per cent
efficiency for ionizing radiations is most definitely settled in the case
of standard argon—alcohol gas mixtyres and probably in the case of
the proportional counting technique./The first group, using the solid
barium carbonate technique, seems to be subject to more errors in
that more serious corrections for scattering and absorption are in-
volved. The second group presents answers which are not clear in
their significance, and the discussion of Miller et al.* casts consider-
able doubt on the validity of the results obtained by this technique.
Therefore, in seeking the most probable value for the half-life of ra-
diocarbon, we select the three values determined by the gas-counting
technique with ordinary gas mixtures. They are 5580 + 45345589 +
   * See Addendum to Chapter III, p. x above.
    1. W. W. Miller, Science, 105, 123 (1947); S. C. Brown and W. W. Miller, Rev. Sci.
Inst., 18, 496 (1947).
    2. W. W. Miller, R. Ballentine, W. Bernstein, L. Friedman, A. O. Nier, and R. D.
Evans, Phys. Rev., 77, 714 (1950).
   3. Ibid.
    4. A. G. Engelkemeir, W. H. Hamill, M. G, Inghram, and W. F. Libby, Phys. Rev.,
75, 1825 (1949); A. G. Engelkemeir and W. F. Libby, Rev. Sci. Inst,, 21, 550 (1950).

                                            34
                                                TABLE      4
                     SUMMARY OF THE PREVIOUSLY PUBLISHED VALUES
                          FOR THE HALF-LIFE OF RADIOCARBON


           °           Method for Isotopic                      Method for
     ok ae                Composition of                       Radioactivity                   Reference*
       cae                    Sample                             of Sample

10°—105               Estimated bombard-)          Solid carbonate counting: CaCO; | [J]
                        ment yield                    in screen-wall counter

26,000+ 13,000}       Estimated bombard-|}         Gas counting: CO: in counter                [2]
                        ment yield

21,000+4000        | Estimated bombard-|          a) Solid sample counting: sample | [3]
                       ment yield                    with thin window counter
                                                  b) Gas counting: CO, in counter

4700 +470             Mass spectrometer | Solid carbonate counting: BaCO; | [4]
                         (1.71 per cent)”            with thin window counter

5300 + 800            Mass spectrometer | Solid carbonate counting: BaCO; | [5]
                         (3.23 and3.35per|           in low absorption counter
                         cent)

5100 +200             Mass spectrometer | Solid carbonate counting: BaCO; | [6]
                        (3.23 and3.35per|    in low absorption counter
                        cent)

7200 + 500            Mass spectrometer | Solid carbonate counting: BaCO; | [7]
                                             with thin window counter

6400
   + 200 or           Mass spectrometer         | Gas counting (Miller technique) | [8], [9], [10],
   6100 + 200                                                                                    {11], [12]
5580 +45              Mass spectrometer         | Gas counting; small amount of | [13], [/4]
eT                                                   CO, in argon—alcohol gas
5589 +75              Mass spectrometer         | Gas counting; small amount of | [15]
=                                                   CO; in argon—alcohol gas

 $513+165             Mass spectrometer | Proportional counting of meth-                   | [/6]
Se                                          ane-CO, mixture

6360 + 200            Mass spectrometer         | Gas counting (Miller technique) | [8], [9], [16]

5360+ (200)¢          Mass spectrometer         | Gas counting (Miller technique) | [8], [9], [17]

     *[(1)S. Ruben and M. D. Kamen, BOS, Rev., 59, 349 (1941); [2]M.D. Kamen, Manhattan Project Liter-
ature, A-316; [3] A.S. Langsdorf, Jr.,and R. L. Purbrick, Manhattan Project Literature, CP-G-3272; [4]A. F.
Reid, i R. Dunning, Ss Weinhouse, and A. V. Grosse, Phys. Rev., 70, 431 (1946); 5] L. D. Norris and
M.G. Inghram, Phys. Rev., 70, 772 (1946); [6]L.D. Norris       and M. G. Inghram, Phys. Rev., 73, 350 (1948);
7] L. Yaffe and Jean Grunlund, Phys. Rev., 74, 696 (1948); [8] W. W. Miller, Science, 105, 123 (1947);
 (9]S. C. Brown  and W. W. Miller, Rev. Sci. Inst., 18, 496 (1947); [10] R.C. Hawkings, R. F. Hunter, W.B.
Mann, and W. H. Stevens, Phys. Rev., 74, 696 (1948); (11) R. C. Hawkings, R. F. Hunter, W. B. "Mann,
and W. H. Stevens, Can. J. Research, B,27, 545 (1949); [12]R.C. Hawkings,R.F. Hunter, and        W. B. Mann,
Can. J. Research, B,27, 555 (1949); U3) A. G. Engelkemeir, W. H. Hamill, M. G. Inghram, and W.F. Libby,
ae Rev., 75, 1825 (1949); [14] A. G. Engelkemeira: d W. F. Libby, Rev. Sci. Inst., 21, 550 (1950); 15}
   .M. Jones, Phys. Rev., 76, 885 ee (16] W. W ieee R. Ballentine, W. Bernstein, °ot Friedman,
im‘0. Nier, and R. D. Evans, Phys. Rev., 77, 714 (1950); [17] G. G. Manov and L. F. Curtis, Abstracts,
118th Meeting, Am. Chem. Soc., (a) icago, Sept’, 1950, p. Sp.
     t The error quoted here is twice that listed in the reference and results from discussion at the meeting
at which the paper was presented.
36                           RADIOCARBON        DATING

75;° and 5513 + 165 tor a weighted average of 5568 + 30, where
the weighting was taken according to the inverse square root of the
errors quoted.
   In order to exhibit evidence as to the reliability of the half-life we
choose, we shall discuss in a little detail the methods used in our
laboratory’ to obtain the value 5580 + 45. These of course are very
similar to the method used by Jones® at Los Alamos also. The first
point is the evidence for the ability of the standard argon-—alcohol-
filled Geiger counter to record any ionization event occurring in the
gas phase except for the small volumes near the end where the electri-
cal field is reduced; in other words, the evidence for 100 per cent
efficiency as one moves from the wire to the very wall of the counter.
The proof is not completely rigorous, but the evidence strongly
favors this conclusion. In the first place, it has been known since the
discovery of Geiger counters that a counter can be made to record
photoelectrons emitted from the wall if the wall is made of the
proper materials. Photoelectrons cannot well have over 2 or 3 volts
of kinetic energy and therefore have an extremely small range of
their own and no ability to ionize the gas molecules. We therefore
conclude that single electrons introduced right at the wall are
recorded with a not negligible efficiency by a good Geiger counter.
Further evidence on this point is that counters made with ap-
propriate materials such as cesium-coated walls must be cooled
to avoid an extraordinarily high background which is presumably
due to the emission of thermionic electrons from the wall. These elec-
trons of course have even lower energies than the photoelectrons,
ranging around 0.03 ev, so again we see that electrons introduced at
the very wall with energies below ionization energies can be recorded
in these instruments. Neither of these arguments shows that the
instrument records in the low-energy range in the wall region with
 100 per cent efficiency. It does show, however, that the efficiency
is not zero for even the lowest energies.
    The argument as to efficiency rests almost entirely on two lines
   5. W. M. Jones, Phys. Rev., 76, 885 (1949).
   6. W. W. Miller, R. Ballentine, W. Bernstein, L. Friedman, A. O. Nier, and R. D.
Evans, Phys. Rev., 77, 714 (1950).
   7, A. G, Engelkemeir et al., Phys. Rev., 75, 1825 (1949); A. G. Engelkemeir and
W. F. Libby, Rev. Sci. Inst., 21, 550 (1950).
     8. Phys. Rev., 76, 885 (1949).
                       HALF-LIFE       OF RADIOCARBON                   37

- of evidence. The first is an experiment in which three counters are
  set in a line with their axes parallel and connected electrically so
  that, when the first and third counters fire simultaneously, observa-
  tion is made as to whether the middle counter fires.? The simultane-
  ous firing of the first and third counters is due to a penetrating ra-
  diation which passes through both instruments, presumably in a
  straight line, and therefore certainly passes through the middle
  counter. These observations show that the middle counter does fire.
  The middle counter then is displaced in a direction perpendicular
  to the line joining the first and third by a small amount, and the
  observation repeated. The displacement is continued until the very
  edge of the counter just is in line with the very edges of the first and
  third counters. It is then found that there is a very abrupt disappear-
  ance of sensitivity of the middle counter. Further evidence has been
  obtained in our own researches, as described later, in which we shield
  the counter measuring our samples from penetrating cosmic radia-
  tion by surrounding it with a single layer of counters in tangential
  contact. In a typical experiment we find that without the shielding
  counters connected our central working counter records a rate of
  some 120 counts per minute, whereas the rate is reduced to about
  7 counts per minute by connecting the shielding counters. The
  residual 7 counts per minute may well be due to contamination in
  our central counter or to radiation coming in the ends where our
  shielding-counter array affords incomplete coverage. We thus con-
  clude that at least 95 per cent and probably more nearly 100 per cent
  of the radiations passing through the counter bundle are recorded
  by the counter bundle and thereby written off the record. More to
  the point, however, is that experiments in which we have added a
  second layer of counters have not significantly reduced this back-
  ground. This seems to have the interpretation that counters in tan-
  gential contact possess nearly a 100 per cent efficiency throughout
  their volume.
     The second general line of evidence is the internal consistency ob-
  tained in the measurements on the half-life of radiocarbon by using
  counters of various diameters, as discussed later. If the basic assump-
  tion of limited efficiency were not true, it seems clear that the con-
  sistency would be reduced. The assumption therefore was made in
    9. K. Greisen and N. Nereson, Phys. Rev., 62, 316 (1942).
38                    RADIOCARBON      DATING

these researches that a standard brass-wall Geiger counter filled
with argon and ethyl alcohol at typical pressures of 7 cm. of mercury
pressure of argon, and 1.2 cm. of mercury pressure of ethyl alcohol
would record any ionizing event that involved so much as a single
ion pair in any part of the volume between the counter wire and the
very surface of the brass wall.
   With this assumption the task of measuring the half-life of radio-
carbon is reduced to three parts. The first is to determine the end
loss, that is, the effective volume at the ends of the counter where
the field is so weak that radiations appearing in the gas are not re-
corded. The second task is to make correction for the case in which a
radioactive carbon atom expels its beta ray in the direction of the
wall but lies so close to the wall that it does not succeed in ionizing
the counter gas before entering the wall, and then the ray enters the
wall and remains in it without ejecting secondary ions from the
wall. This is called the wall correction. The third task is of course to
measure out a known number of radiocarbon atoms into the counter
and to observe the disintegration rate. Correcting for the end and
wall losses, one then can calculate the absolute disintegration rate
and half-life.
    The method used to obtain the end-loss correction is the obvious
one of taking a set of counters of a given diameter but of different
lengths, filling them with a given pressure of radioactive carbon
dioxide, and observing the count rates. One then takes the difference
between the rates observed for counters of two different lengths as
the rate one would observe for a counter of length equal to the dif-
ference in length but with no end loss and from this calculates the
end loss observed in the two counters. Using this technique and
 counters with flat ends made of lucite plastic plugs, so the construc-
 tion of duplicate counters would be simple and the observed end
 corrections generally applicable, we have found that the end correc-
 tions are primarily dependent on the length-to-diameter ratio. For
 example, a counter 12 inches long and 2 inches in diameter has nearly
 the same percentage end loss as one 6 inches long and 1 inch in di-
 ameter. In addition, the correction is extraordinarily independent of
 energy for beta emitters up to 0.74 mev upper energy limit. Three
 substances were used for this study: A®’, which emits 2.8 kev Auger
 electrons; C' with a beta spectrum with a 154 kev upper limit;
                          HALF-LIFE          OF RADIOCARBON                               39

and Kr® with a beta spectrum of 740 kev upper limit. The results
are shown in Figure 5. The correction can be expressed empirically
by the equation
                       ysaK/(L/D=>K),                         (23)
where K has a value of 0.275 + 0.1.!°
   The second correction on the count arises from the possibility
that a radioactive carbon dioxide molecule that happens to dis-
integrate near the wall and to fire its disintegration electron in the
direction of the wall will either fail to produce a free electron in the


                                 L/D END         CORRECTIONS
                                         37
FS                                     A
i                                      cl4
                                       Kr 89
 &
 a                            SOLID CURVE - CALC. FROM WEIGHTED
 z                                          AVERAGE   K FOR A?”
                              BROKEN CURVE - CALC. FROM WEIGHTED
 =                                          AVERAGE    K FOR K®°
 E
 2
 [of
 c
 oO
 Oo


 a
 =z
 WwW




           0)       3         6         9          12      15         18     al          24
                              LENGTH        TO   DIAMETER’    RATIO
                  Fic. 5.—End-loss corrections for flat-ended gas counters

gas itself or fail to dislodge one or more from the wall. At first glance
this seems unlikely to be a serious effect, and it is indeed a small
effect, but one large enough to require a correction. It is clear that
the effect is proportional to the surface-to-volume ratio or should
vary inversely as the diameter of the counter. One therefore can
compare the observed count rates as a function of the diameter of
the counter after the rates have been corrected for the end loss and
empirically determine the magnitude of the effect. Measurements
with Kr® have given" a correction of 6.9 + 1.1 per cent for 1-inch
       10. Engelkemeir and Libby, Rev. Sc, Inst., 21, 550 (1950).            11. Ibid,
40                         RADIOCARBON             DATING

diameters, 4.6 + 0.7 per cent for 1.5-inch diameters, and 3.4 + 0.5
per cent for 2-inch diameter counters. It is also clear that the effect
should increase with the energy of the radiation emitted, since the
number of ions formed per unit length of path decreases as the energy
increases. In keeping with this, no wall loss was found for the very
soft 2.8-kev radiation from A®*’. We therefore can expect that for
radiocarbon with energy intermediate between these two substances
the correction should be of the order of 2-4 per cent depending on
the diameter of the counter. The C'* data themselves indicate this
to be so: for 1-inch diameter counters 3.5 + 1.2 per cent; for 1.5-
inch diameters 2.3 + 0.8 per cent; and for 2-inch diameters 1.8 + 0.6
per cent are the values found.
                                      TABLE    5
                         CALCULATED    WALL CORRECTIONS


                                         WALL Loss CorRECTION

                       IsoTOPE
                                    For Diameter = | For Diameter =
                                         1 Inch          2 Inches

                 CSE   Mi SDFS             0                0
                 (CM eae BGs shea     3.1% +0.8        1.5% +0.4
                 ISGin erent hia      Healy si ee!     Se)  ell 5y/



   It is possible to estimate the magnitude of this correction semi-
empirically by considering the data for the density of ionization pro-
duced by beta rays of various energies.” Using these data and aver-
aging over the known beta spectrum of radiocarbon, one calculates
the mean thickness of the gas near the wall which fails to count.
This is a fictitious physical concept, of course, since part of the gas
even next to the wall will fire its beta rays into the main body of the
counter and certainly record a count. The second component of
the semi-empirical calculation is the effect of splashing-out of
secondary electrons by the electron incident on the wall. Data for
this phenomenon are known for brass surfaces,!* since they are of
great importance in the operation of the standard photomultiplier
tube. The results of this calculation are given in Table 5.
   It is interesting to see how well the semi-empirically calculated
corrections agree with those observed experimentally. The first half-
     12. [bid.                          13. Tbid.
                        HALF-LIFE       OF RADIOCARBON                 41

. life published on the basis of the data obtained was 5720 + 47
   years,'4 in which the wall correction had not been made. The reality
   of this correction was revealed by later research,” and a correction
   of some 2.5 per cent was made to lower the value to 5580 + 45 years.
      The radioactive carbon dioxide used in the determination was ob-
   tained from the Isotopes Division of the Atomic Energy Commis-
   sion, and four master-samples of carbon dioxide of different isotopic
  composition were prepared. These were carefully analyzed for the
   C™ contents on the mass spectrograph. The four masters were then
  diluted by various factors to provide seven working samples. Since
  the. original compositions were in the range of from 1 to 6 per cent,
  dilution factors of several thousand fold were necessary to lower the
  specific radioactivity of the carbon dioxide to a measurable value.
  The dilution was accomplished by allowing part of the master-sample
  to expand from its storage bulb into a McLeod gauge. A 0.3281-cc.
  bulb had been sealed to the capillary of the McLeod, and the radio-
  active CO, was forced into this bulb by raising the mercury. The
  vacuum line was thoroughly evacuated and the pressure of CQ; in
  the bulb measured. Inert CO. was then used to flush the vacuum
  line, and a pressure of inert CO, was allowed to build up so that, as
  the mercury was lowered, inert CO, was forced through the mercury
  into the McLeod to a pressure of 40 or 50 cm. of mercury. The vacu-
  um line then was evacuated, and the total pressure in the 503.1-cc.
  McLeod volume was measured. After allowing to stand to mix, the
  diluted sample was stored in a bulb by condensation into a trap at-
  tached to the bulb using liquid nitrogen. The temperature of the room
  was recorded throughout the process, and it was considered that no
  significant error was introduced in the dilution step.
      The diluted working sample was introduced into the counter in a
  number of different ways. The most satisfactory of the procedures
  was to introduce a known pressure into a rather large bulb to which
  a known pressure of argon was then added. After thorough mixing,
  this gas mixture was then introduced into the counter, to which
  some 1.2 cm. of ethanol vapor had previously been added. The count
  rate then was determined to a fraction of a per cent error, external
  standards being used to check that the counter was operating with
  its usual efficiency and corrections being made for loss due to a count
    14. Engelkemeir ef al., Phys. Rev., 75, 1825 (1949).
    15. Engelkemeir and Libby, Rev. Sci. Inst., 21, 550 (1950).
42                           RADIOCARBON         DATING

occurring while the counter was busy with the preceding count (this
correction in general was quite small). Somewhat over a hundred
measurements of this sort were made in the course of a two-year pe-
riod, resulting in the value 5580 + 45 mean solar years.
   The agreement between our determination and those of Jones®
and Miller e¢ al.” is gratifying and leads us,to believe that the
weighted mean of these three determinations,| 5568 + 30, is prob-
ably accurate to within 50 years and almost certainly to within 100
years. The importance of an accurate value for the half-life to the
radiocarbon dating technique is obvious, it being true that a 1 per
cent error in the half-life appears immediately as a 1 per cent error
in the absolute age of any given sample{-For example, a 10,000-year-
old sample could never be measured to better than 100 years under
such conditions} It is also equally clear that a chronology could be
developed in which the radiocarbon half-life was defined to be 5568,
and questions of simultaneity would not be incorrect even though
the half-life were indeed quite erroneous.
    A further point in favor of a half-life somewhere between 5000
and 6000 years is the result obtained with ancient samples of his-
torically known age (Fig. 1). One cannot use these data to decide
definitely between the various determinations of the half-life given
in the latter part of Table 4. It is conceivable that a careful research
devoted entirely to the most careful measurement of the specific
activity of the historically dated samples would give data of such
accuracy as to distinguish between these values. Our own experience
has been that the fit of the data we obtained when we thought the
life to be 5720'8 was not any worse than the one obtained at present
with the new life 2.5 per cent lower.®
    It is to be hoped that further measurements on the half-life of ra-
diocarbon will be made, preferably by entirely different techniques,
since considerable agreement by the present technique we favor has
already been obtained. This is important not only for the radiocarbon
dating technique but for many problems in nuclear physics and
radiochemistry, where methods of measuring absolute disintegration
rates rather than relative rates are of vital importance.
     16. Phys. Rev., 76, 885 (1949).            17. Phys. Rev., 77, 714 (1950).
     18. W. F. Libby, E. C. Anderson, and J. R. Arnold, Science, 109, 227 (1949).
     19. J. R. Arnold and W. F. Libby, Science, 110, 678 (1949).
                             ey

                PREPARATION OF THE SAMPLE
                     FOR MEASUREMENT*™.
       2)                                                            ;
           NE of the principal requirements of the radiocarbon dating
   (i) technique is that the material measured contain the origi-
              nal carbon atoms present in the sample_at the time it died
   or was deposited from the exchange reservoir} This means, of course,
   that the chemical form in which the carbon is bonded may have real
   bearing on the validity of the result obtained. \Chetnical experience
   clearly indicates that the covalently bonded molecules which con-
   stitute the organic world are less susceptible of replacement of the
   carbon atoms by direct exchange than are the inorganic molecules
   such as the carbonates. One therefore does not fear particularly the
   possibility that the carbon in carbonate, bicarbonate, or carbon
   dioxide will exchange with the carbon atoms in organic structures
   such as wood or flesh or cloth or charcoal. One does worry con-
   siderably, however, about the possibility that underground waters
   washing over shell would cause an exchange.
      On the other hand, putrefaction and_chemical alteration are pos-
   sible with organic systems, and one has,to worry about whether a
   given sample has been so altered fofcobrse it is obvious that in a
   rich find where materials of various chemical forms exist one has an
   excellent opportunity to test whether alteration has occurred by ob-
   serving whether the radiocarbon ages obtained from the various
   chemicals present in the site agree, It is clear that, if agreement is
   found, alteration has not occurred, for it is extremely unlikely that
   shell and wood would be altered to the same degree, the chemical
   reactions involved being so different in character.
=     If one examines the nature of putrefaction reactions, one observes
   that, by and large, they involve a degradation of molecular weights.
   That is, large molecular structures are reduced in size, and certain
   structures are so large as to not be involved,) Among these latter,
 t charcoal is most important. One does not anticipate that charcoal
   will be altered by any sort of attack of organic systems About all
    * See Addendum to Chapter IV, p. x above.
                                        43
  44                          RADIOCARBON           DATING

   that can conceivably happen is that it would be burned to gaseous
   carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide and so escape, but it seems
   clear that, if one does find carbonized material and carefully re-
  moves other material from it, alteration in the residual carbon is
  extremely unlikely from a chemical and biochemical point of view.
*/Materials such as wood, grass, and frozen flesh are most debatable.
  However, wood consists largely of very large cellulose molecules,
  and, if one were to take care to separate the smaller molecules from
  wood, it seems very likely that alteration would be definitely ex-
  cluded. Likewise similar processing of fibrous materials such as
  grass would be a good precaution}
      In the case of shell material th¢re is no chemical guaranty that the
  material has not been altered JT does appear, however, from results
  of ours on radiocarbon content in ancient shells found together with
  organic matter, and results of Professor Urey on the O'8 content of
  the oxygen in the carbonated shells,’ that shells which appear well
  preserved physically have a good chance of being authentic.| More
  work is needed on this point, however, and at the present time it is
  difficult to say of any given case whether shells will give reliable re-
  sults! We look for evidences of alteration such as a powdery appear-
  ance or chalky consistency.}
   { Our experience on woods and grasses and even peat material has
  been quite favorable in that we have very few evidences of altera-
  tion and some rather striking examples of organic matter such as
  twigs and leaves which have lain in the ground for over 10,000 years
  and been bathed by the underground waters, which apparently give
  reliable results in that they check with well-preserved pieces of wood
  found with them\and also with the general stratigraphy and chronol-
  ogy built up by the whole set of dates. We are therefore inclined to
  recommend the materials normally found in about the following
  order:
        . Charcoal or charred organic material such as heavily burned bone
        . Well-preserved wood
         . Grasses, cloth, and peat
         . Well-preserved antler and similar hairy structures
       Oa.
       FwneWell-preserved shell

     1. H. C. Urey, Science, 108, 489 (1948); J. M. McCrea, J. Chem. Phys., 18, 849
 (1950); S. Epstein et al., Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., 62, 417 (1951); H. C. Urey et al., Bull.
 Geol. Soc. Am., 62, 399 (1951).
                                  PREPARATION                                           45

   We have had no experience with bone as such and believe that it
is a very poor prospect for two reasons: the carbon content of bone
is extremely low, being largely in inorganic form in a very porous
structure; and it is extremely likely to have suffered alteration. It
is barely conceivable that measurements on bone might reveal that
some reliability could be obtained. However, because the quantities
required are so large, and there usually are other acceptable ma-
terials associated with a find of bone, it does not seem                     to be an
urgent matter to pursue.
    Deevey et al.” have shown that a consideration of Godwin’s* may be
 important—{the assumption that the carbon entering plant material
 and organic material in general is in equilibrium with CO) of the at-
mosphere may not be justified in the case of plant material or animal
 matter living off of such plant material formed in hard waters in which
 the dissolved carbonate and bicarbonate is derived from ancient lime-
stone. Direct tests on the plants grown in such an environment
 (Queechy Lake, N.Y.) showed that the radiocarbon content was
definitely lower than normally observed in the biosphere] The condi-
 tions under which these samples were taken were rather unusual,
 and it is to be hoped that this additional source of error will not seri-
 ously restrict the samples which can be used for dating.
    It is to be realized of course that our experiences with various
types of samples must be taken in the light of the actual chemical
processing we have used in the|preparation of the samples for meas-
urement. A description of this process follows." |
-{ 1. The first step in each instance is carefully to examine the sample
and to separate out as well as possible by physical methods the ma-
terial desired. For example, a piece of wood will usually be dirty and
is cleaned physically as well as possible, and perhaps the surface re-
moved by sawing or cutting so the danger of contamination is re-
duced. In the case of finely divided charcoal from camp fires, it is
necessary carefully to remove intrusive rootlets and other matter
which might introduce modern carbon into the material.{It is hoped

   2. 1. S. Deevey, Jr., M.S. Gross, G. 1. Mutehinson, and WH. L, Kraybill, Proc, Nat.
Acad. Sci., 40, 285 (1954),                                                     3

   3. H. Godwin, Am. J. Sci., 249, 301 (1951),

   4, E. C. Anderson, J, R. Arnold, and W. I, Libby, Rev, Sct, Inst,, 22, 225 (1951),
46                     RADIOCARBON       DATING

 that eventually physical separation methods may be developed to
 the point where rather low carbon-containing soils can be examined.
  | 2. The physically cleaned sample is then tested with hydrochloric
 acid solution for calcium carbonate which may have been deposited
 in the cracks and internal fissures by underground waters. If any
 effervescence of carbon dioxide is observed on this test, the sample
 then is treated for several hours with about 1 WV hydrochloric acid
 until effervescence ceases, after which it is carefully washed and dried
 in a laboratory oven.{This is a particularly important part of the
processing and should be conducted with real care. In the case of
 materials containing considerable extraneous matter other than the
desired organic substances, the acid treatment frequently works to
purify the sample. For example, burned bone is treated with 1-3 V
hydrochloric acid for 24 or 48 hours until the bone structure is dis-
solved, and the residual carbon, which of course does not dissolve
in acid, is then removed by filtration. In one or two cases colloidal
organic substances formed as a result of treatment of charred bone,
and this material was separated by dialysis of the acid solution
which concentrated the colloidal organic material and allowed sepa-
ration and drying and use of this fraction.
    This acid treatment probably guarantees to a considerable extent
against the incorporation of putrefaction products in that it would
heavily weigh against small organic molecules in that they would be
dissolved out as gases or resist the filtration or dialysis steps.
    3. This step consists of the controlled combustion of the sample,
if it is organic in character, to form carbon dioxide, or the addition
of hydrochloric acid to evolve carbon dioxide if the sample is shell.
Figure 6 displays the apparatus in which the present step and sev-
eral of the subsequent steps in the procedure are conducted. /The
combustion of the sample is carried out in the Vycor tube. \(A).
Oxygen from a standard commercial cylinder is passed over the
sample at a pressure slightly below 1 atmosphere, and the com-
bustion gases are carried through hot copper oxide heated in a
Vycor tube by a furnace (B) to complete the oxidation by converting
carbon monoxide and possibly/other gases to carbon dioxide. The
gas stream then is led through a dry-ice trap and Drierite tube to
remove residual water! Following this the gas is led through a con-
trolling stopcock (D) into two successivd liquid nitrogen traps|(C),
                                        PREPARATION                                 -   47

- in which the carbon dioxide is condensed. The combustion is begun
  by setting the flow rate with the control stopcock (D) while air is
  passing through the system such that the pressure in the trap system
  is about 10 cm.-.of mercury with the high vacuum exhaust pump (J)
  full on Oxygen then is admitted and the flow adjusted through a
  needle valve to maintain the pressure in the combustion system at
  slightly below 1 atmosphere!  The oxidation is begun by igniting the
  sample with a torch applied externally. Some of the early combus-
  tions were conducted in an apparatus different from the Vycor
 tube (A),° in which the sample was placed on the top of a vertically




                                 PUMP   2
                                                  Gate Gn Ma) Ct)
                     Pato
    er    77777                   F
                 A

                        OXYGEN
                                            SSSSSSSSssg




                     Fic. 6.—Combustion and reduction line assembly


 traveling screw adjustable in position and the fire started on the top
 end of the sample and the screw rotated to bring fresh sample into
 the flame zone as combustion proceeded. The whole assembly was
 inclosed in a glass bulb to which the product oxygen was fed and
 from which the product gases were removed continuously. The
 oxygen was introduced with little jets near the flame zone. This ap-
 paratus is a slight modification of a standard apparatus used for ash-
 ing samples of organic matter for the detection of traces of iodine.®
 The important feature of the device is that only the portion of the

    5. E. C. Anderson, Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago (1949); Ann. Rev. Nuc. Sci.,
 2, 63 (1953).                                                                  ;

    6. G. M. Karns, Ind. Eng. Chem., Anal. Ed., 4, 299 (1932); H. van Kolnitz and
 R. E. Remington, Ind. Eng. Chem., Anal. Ed., 5, 38 (1933); F. X. Gassner, Ind. Feng.
 Chem., Anal, Ed., 12, 120 (1940).
48                   RADIOCARBON      DATING

sample actually burning is heated appreciably and that the hot gases
do not pass over the unburned portions of the sample. It was par-
ticularly valuable in the combustion of flesh and similar materials.
However, the bulk of the samples are handled in the Vycor tube (A).
   The amount of material selected for combustion, or acidification
in the case of shell, is determined by the carbon content of the ma-
terial. It must be such as to yield between 10 and 12 grams of ele-
mentary carbon, which is equivalent to some 24 liters of carbon
dioxide gas. In the case of pure charcoal,.of course, 10 or 12 grams
would be sufficient. Actually the charcoal is rarely this pure; some-
thing like a half-ounce or more is usually taken. In the case of pure
shell in which the acidification procedure is used, some 100 grams is
the minimum. As a rough rule we suggest that in the case of mate-
rials of high carbon content at least 1 ounce per sample (28 grams)
be submitted and preferably several ounces. If the carbon content is
doubtful and no accurate analysis is available, at least a pound or
more should be collected.
   4. The material condensed in the trap system at the conclusion
of a run consists not only of carbon dioxide but also of the oxides
of nitrogen, sulfur, products of incomplete combustion, and any
radon that may have been present in the sample. Radon is a noble
gas of rather high boiling point which is a radioactive disintegration
product of uranium, the ubiquitous parent of most of the radio-
activity in soils and rocks. This might well follow through the sub-
sequent steps of the procedure and lead to a falsely radioactive final
product if chemical purification were not used. The chemical purifi-
cation therefore accomplishes the removal of the bulk of contamina-
tion consisting of oxides of nitrogen and sulfur and the trace radio-
chemical contamination by radon. The purification is accomplished
in the following manner: A 1-liter flask containing 500 cc. of 6 V
NH,OH is attached to the stopcock at point Z. After the traps have
been pumped down at liquid nitrogen temperature, the Dewars are
removed and the carbon dioxide is evolved, using a flame to speed
up the process. When the pressure reaches 60 cm. of mercury, the
trap system is connected to the flask. A rapid absorption of the gas
takes place. The evolution of the gas is continued, and the flask is
shaken to insure absorption until the traps are empty. The pressure
at this point should be about 70 cm. of mercury, and the solution
                             PREPARATION                              49

- should be quite hot. A second solution consisting of 180 grams of
  CaCl,-2H2O in 180 cc. of water is heated near to boiling. The flask
  is removed from the line, and the hot calcium chloride solution is
  added slowly from a separatory funnel. Rapid precipitation of cal-
  cium carbonate takes place. It is essential that this step be carried
  out in such a way that the final temperature of the combined solu-
  tion be higher than 70° C. Otherwise a flocculent, poorly filterable
  precipitate results. The precipitate is filtered and washed free of
  ammonia, the washings being made with distilled water. It is then
  removed from the Buchner funnel used for the filtration and washed
  into a clean 1-liter flask. At this point all the oxides have been left
  behind in the form of soluble salts, and the radon has been lost
  either by gaseous evolution or in the aqueous solution.
     Carbon dioxide now is removed from the precipitate, using the
  same system employed in the combustion. A separatory funnel con-
  taining 250 cc. of concentrated hydrochloric acid is placed in the
  flask. A second lead is attached to the drying and collection system
  at F. It is important that the tube from the separatory funnel reach
  nearly to the bottom of the flask to prevent the accumulation of acid
  and uneven reaction. In the beginning of this operation the gas-
  flow rate is set as in the combustion operation. The stopcock leading
  to the flask is opened, and acid is added at a rate sufficient to keep
  the pressure in the flask slightly below 1 atmosphere.
     The gas is dried carefully and collected in the traps (C) and then
  allowed to evaporate into a system of 5-liter bulbs (G), where it is
  stored ready for the reduction step. ——
     5. Reduction is carried out in an iron tube (H), which is filled
  with about 85 grams of magnesium turnings together with 1 gram
  of cadmium powder or turnings as a catalyst. An 8-inch movable
  electric furnace capable of reaching 1000° C. is placed around the
  tube. The ends of the tube are sealed with rubber stoppers and
  deKhotinsky wax, and the reduction system evacuated and tested
  for freedom from leaks.
     Carbon dioxide is now admitted to the tube up to a pressure ap-
  proaching 1 atmosphere and external heat applied with a torch at
  one end of the magnesium filling. When a temperature near the
  melting point of magnesium (660° C.) is reached, the reaction begins
  rather violently and produces sufficient heat to maintain itself if
50                    RADIOCARBON       DATING

gas is admitted at a moderate rate from the bulbs. The chemical
reaction involved is                         "
                      2Mg+CO,=2MgO+C.                              (24)
Since the reaction involves no gaseous products, no circulation is
required, and care must be taken because the heat evolved is so large
that, unless the inflow of carbon dioxide is controlled, the reaction
will melt the iron tube. It is a practice to run in gas from one bulb in
a controlled fashion. The carbon dioxide in the storage bulbs is in-
troduced into the reduction chamber one bulb ata time until pres-
sure is reduced to about 20 cm. of mercury in each. In this way five
or six bulbs of gas can be reacted smoothly before the other end of
the magnesium filling is reached. To complete the reduction, the
remaining gas is condensed in the trap (J) and may either be ex-
panded into a single bulb or reacted directly. It is necessary to apply
external heat using the furnace to start the fire again after this col-
lection of the residual carbon dioxide in the various bulbs. When the
reaction is complete, no more than 1 or 2 cm. of mercury pressure
should remain in the manifold system, and the bulbs should be com-
pletely empty. The reduction tube then is allowed to cool, and the
carbon, magnesium oxide, and unreacted magnesium are removed
from the tube, using an iron rod as a ram.
   6. The material taken from the reduction tube is placed in a clean
3-liter beaker. Sufficient distilled water is added to dampen, and the
mixture is allowed to stand 15 minutes until the hydrocarbons which
are formed in small yield, presumably by the impurities in the mag-
nesium metal, are decomposed and evolved. Concentrated hydro-
chloric acid then is added as rapidly as possible without bubbling
over. The proper rate forthis is about 25 cc. every 5 minutes. After
about 100 cc. have been added in the first 20 minutes, an additional
700 cc. is added rapidly. It is well to have a spare 3-liter beaker
handy in case of overflow at this point.
   The acid solution is allowed to stand overnight in a hood so the
fumes evolved are exhausted from the room. It is then placed on a
hot plate with an asbestos pad over the plate at “high” heat. After
the acid is brought to a boil, about 1 liter of distilled water is added,
and the solution brought to a boil and allowed to boil for about 15
minutes. It then is filtered by the insertion of a sintered glass “filter
                             PREPARATION                                51

’ stick’”’ made by taking a coarse sintered glass suction funnel and cut-
  ting off the rim normally used to hold the solution in the funnel down
  to the level of the sintered glass plate, sealing a piece of glass tubing
  about 6 inches long on the end of the funnel, and connecting the rub-
  ber hose to a good aspirator. This device has the advantage of re-
  moving the obnoxious acid solution without mechanical lifting and
  dispersing it in the sewer system immediately after dilution. It also
  has the merit that no new glass apparatus has to be brought into the
  process with its consequent danger ‘of introducing contamination.
     After. sucking the black carbon residue dry, 1.5-2 liters of dis-
  tilled water are added and the system again brought to a boil and
  allowed to boil about 15 minutes. The filtration step is then repeated,
  and distilled water added again and brought to a boil for the same
  length of time. This washing step is then repeated a third time, at
  which point the wet carbon is transferred to a clean 400-cc. beaker
  quantitatively by washing out with distilled water and finally drying
  roughly by the use of the filter stick. It then is placed on the hot
  plate on “‘low” heat and left there for about 4 hours, until moisture
  just ceases to condense on a cold watch glass.
     After the drying operation the dry carbon is replaced in the origi-
  nal beaker, and about half a liter of concentrated hydrochloric acid
  is added, and the mixture allowed to stand about 2 hours. It then is
  brought to a boil, and the process of filtering and washing described
  above is repeated. After this the drying operation described above is
  performed again.
     The sample then is placed in a clean, weighed, dry bottle with a
  screw cap, carefully labeled, and weighed.
     7. The final step in the preparation of the sample for measure-
  ment consists of grinding in an agate mortar and pestle to a consist-
  ency approaching that of powdered sugar, returning the sample to
  the bottle and mixing it by shaking, after which about 0.5 gram are
  removed, carefully weighed, and the percentage ash in the sample
  determined by combustion. Care is taken during this operation to
  expose the sample to the air for the minimum length of time, to
  keep cigarette ashes and other room dust out of it, and not to breathe
  into it excessively. The percentage ash is necessary as a correction
 on the count rate observed, for, of course, the ash reduces the ob-
 served specific radioactivity.
52                   RADIOCARBON       DATING

   A number of precautions are taken throughout this process. Prob-
ably the most important of these is to purchase all the chemicals in
large quantities so that a single successful run with coal in which
no radiocarbon is obtained will validate the purity of considerable
quantities of chemicals. One can then feel free to seek sources other
than the chemicals for any contamination that may appear in the
sample. We have been singularly fortunate in that to date we have
observed no chemical contamination of any sort. We are careful to
use the same glassware that has been used in previous runs with coal
samples and to be extremely cautious that the carbon is exposed to
the air a minimum time while cool and dry. In fact, care is taken to
bottle the carbon or to cover it with acid solution quickly after the
drying period. The carbon produced in this reaction possesses an
extremely high specific surface area so that its power to absorb
vapors is large. Rough measurements have indicated that it possesses
something over 200 square meters of surface per gram on the aver-
age. This means that any considerable exposure to room air is
likely to lead to radon absorption and contamination. Of course it
is almost unnecessary to say that the laboratory in which the
chemical processing and the sample mounting to be described later
are performed should not contain any radioactivity that is not
tightly sealed and protected from access to the air. It is good prac-
tice to keep the laboratory clean of all radioactivities.
   There is a considerable mystery remaining about the origin of the
ash in the sample. We ordinarily find it to be less than 10 per cent,
but occasionally for some unknown reason it will approach 20 per
cent. We do find that unless the material is dried as described above
and then re-extracted with acid, the ash usually is above 20 per cent.
It is further found that a recalcitrant sample with a high ash can be
successfully reduced in ash content by heating to a dull red heat
in a quartz or heavy Pyrex test tube which is closed from the air
with a loose glass-wool plug. The heat is continued for several hours,
and acid extraction as described above is used afterward. This al-
most invariably reduces the ash below 10 per cent. A source of worry
of some importance exists in the chemical composition of the impuri-
ties which constitute the ash. The corrections as ordinarily made as-
sume that it is magnesium oxide—in other words, that it has the
same chemical composition while in the sample as it does after igni-
                                  PREPARATION                          $3

- tion. Experience has shown that this method gives results which are
  acceptable in that the same value for the specific activity of a given
  original sample is obtained from two or more portions which have
  been burned, reduced, extracted, and measured and in which the
  final carbon samples obtained from the several portions have dif-
  ferent ash contents. We would therefore suggest that the impurity
  is indeed in the form of magnesium oxide which is tightly covered
  with carbon and that the drying and heating operations described,
  which are observed to reduce the ash, essentially crack loose the car-
  bon covering from the small magnesium oxide particles. It has been
  shown that the ash does indeed consist of magnesium oxide rather
  than of other materials.
      A special equipment and chemicals list for the operations de-
   scribed above is given in Appendix A.
      The recently developed gas counting methods require appropriate
  changes in the technique of sample preparation. Suess’ describes
  preparation of the acetylene samples he uses. The initial steps in the
  process are identical with those described above through the ab-
  sorption of the carbon dioxide in the ammonium hydroxide solu-
  tion except that smaller amounts of samples can be used. The pro-
  portion is about one-third. In the next step, instead of calcium
   chloride, strontium chloride is used to precipitate the carbonate.
  The strontium carbonate so obtained, after washing and drying,
  is directly reduced with an excess of magnesium powder (80 mesh)
   to strontium carbide. If enough of the material is available, a mix-
   ture of 30 grams of strontium carbonate and 35 grams of magnesium
   is used, yielding about 2.2 liters STP of acetylene, which corresponds
   to a yield of 90-100 per cent. The reaction is carried out inside an
   evacuated stainless-steel tube (2.8 X 38 cm.) connected directly
   to a vacuum line through an O-ring seal. The mixture is ignited
   from the outside with a torch, and the reaction is completed in less
   than 5 minutes. The reaction product then is dumped into about 1
   liter of water inside an evacuated system. The gases formed are
   dried by passing them through a trap cooled by an acetone mixture
   and drierite. The acetylene is condensed in a liquid nitrogen trap,
   and some hydrogen that also forms is pumped off intermittently.
  After purification by passing over cooled charcoal, the acetylene is
    7. H. E. Suess, Science, 120, 5 (1954).
54                            RADIOCARBON           DATING

stored for 2-3 weeks to permit the decay of the few hundred radon
atoms that are sometimes present in the gas sample.
   For the carbon dioxide gas counting method, which depends
on the proportional counting technique,® it is necessary to prepare
extremely pure carbon dioxide because of the effects of electro-
negative gases on the proportional counting characteristics of the
high-pressure carbon dioxide gas used in this method. The sample
preparation technique is the same as that described above through.
the precipitation and washing of the calcium carbonate. The pro-
 cedure used is that of DeVries and Barendsen.*? Approximately 50
grams of the pure calcium carbonate is placed in a reaction vessel,
which then is evacuated and the carbon dioxide liberated by the
addition of aqueous citric acid. The gross part of the water vapor
is removed from the gas by passage through a dry-ice—acetone trap,
 and the partially dried gas is conducted into a flask containing
calcium oxide maintained at a temperature of 600° C. After the
carbon dioxide has been absorbed in the hot calcium oxide, the dry-
ice trap and reaction flask are closed off from the system. The cal-
cium carbonate—calcium oxide mixture is then subjected to alternate
periods of evacuation and standing at 600° C. During this time, water
and oxygen are effectively removed from the system with little loss
of sample. Pure carbon dioxide then is evolved from the calcium
carbonate by raising the temperature to about 800° C. The gas is
collected under continuous evacuation in a liquid nitrogen trap, from
which it is allowed to vaporize inte the counter to be used.
   Carbon dioxide used for the Geiger counter method of measure-
ment!” is prepared by a procedure simpler than that described in the
paragraph just preceding, in that the calcium carbonate, prepared
as described earlier in this chapter, is decomposed with hydrochloric
acid, and the carbon dioxide evolved is passed through two cold
traps and then frozen out with liquid nitrogen. It then is evaporated
directly into the counter for measurement.
    8. Hl. deVries and G. W. Barendsen, Physica, 18, 652 (1952); ibid., 19, 987 (1953);
H. R. Brannon, M. S. Taggart, and M. Williams, private communication; G. J. Fer-
gusson, private communication.
     9. Physica, 18, 652 (1952); ibid., 19, 987 (1953).
   10. H. R. Crane, Andover Conference on Radiocarbon Dating, Phillips Academy,
October 21-23, 1954.                                :
                           CHAPTER           V

             MEASUREMENT            OF THE       SAMPLE

           HE problem of detection and measurement of weakly radio-
           active substances is an ancient one around which a con-
           siderable lore and artistry have been built. In the case of
jradiocarbon at the levels existing in nature one needs to use the most
 sensitive techniques known. On the other hand, it is essential that
 the procedure be as simple and as reliable as possible. There are two
 obvious ways in which to proceed with the problem. One is to meas-
 ure the material in the gaseous state as either carbon dioxide or meth-
 ane, in which the sample being measured constitutes part of the
 gas phase of the detection instrument.JIt would seem wisest to use a
proportional type counter operating at as high a pressure of methane
 or carbon dioxide as feasible in which the pulses due to the radio-
carbon beta radiation were segregated to a certain extent from pulses
 of different size due to extraneous effects such as cosmic radiation
and wall contamination in the apparatus. This type of attack was
not pursued in this research, for calculations indicated that the sec-
ond obvious approach would be{somewhat more sensitive and reli-
able, though it would require somewhat larger samples. This consists
of measuring elementary carbon itself in the solid state.|
  | The construction of the instrument must be such as to insure the
maximum ratio of count rate due to the sample to count rate due to
background that is, the cosmic radiation and apparatus and labora-
tory contamination} In the first place, one immediately chooses a
Geiger counter as the detection instrument, since it is the only in-
strument which will detect a single thermal energy electron with ap-
parently 100 per cent efficiency. This establishes it as the most sensi-
tive of all instruments for detection of ionization] Having selected a
Geiger counter, which consists in essence of a cylinder with a wire
down the axis, one seeks to mount the carbon sample in the position
which will insure the maximum sample effect to background ratio!
It is clear from the geometry of the Geiger counter that there is only
                                   55
56                         RADIOCARBON          DATING

one place to do this, and that is on the wall. It is further clear that
one must not interpose between the counter gas and the sample any
more solid material than is necessary. Therefore, Jone builds the
Geiger counter essentially with the elementary carbon as the wall of
the counter. It is fortunate that elementary carbon is an electrical
conductor. {
  The next problem one faces in instrument design in this problem
is that of measuring the background without changing the counter.
gas and other critical characteristics of the instrument. In other
words, one wants to change the wall of the Geiger counter from one
material to another without changing the Geiger counter in essence.
All these things are accomplished by the instrument known as the
screen-wall counter,! an artist’s sketch of which is shown in Figure 7.
   The essential principle on which this instrument operates is that
the most important part of the counting act takes place near the
counter wire, and therefore the only essential requirement is that
the field near the wire be undisturbed by changing the counter wall
from the carbon sample to bare metal for the background measure-
ment. This is accomplished by interposing gridwork about halfway
between the counter wire and the sample cylinder which constitutes
the counter wall. One then controls the potential on the screen wall.
It then operates essentially as the wall of an ordinary Geiger counter
with respect to the wire except that it is extremely porous to radia-
tion. Radiations which miss the screen gridwork structure itself can
be recorded, providing they enter the gas at all by the interposition
of a small ‘‘drag-in’’ potential which serves to accelerate electrons
toward the screen counter structure if they are formed in the space
between the screen and sample cylinder. Conversely, if one wants to
restrict the counter volume just to the screen structure, this can be
done by using a ‘‘drag-out”’ potential. These potentials are small, of
the order of 50-100 volts. Figure 8 shows the behavior of the count
rate for a typical screen-wall counter of the dimensions and construc-
tion used in this research, as a function of the potential between the
sample cylinder and the screen. We normally operate with 90 volts
drag in potential in the radiocarbon dating work. It is obvious from
Figure 8 that there is nothing critical about this number.
    1. W. F. Libby, Phys. Rev., 46, 196 (1934); W. F. Libby and D. D. Lee, Phys. Rev.,
55, 245 (1939).
                              *   ayn]aqn} P|    °9    1330891TH
                              *   uaasospla      "7    afdures JapurfAo
                              *    UoqueD = adues“g         eIM-Io]UaD
                                                                  peo[
                              °          punoisyorg
                                                 “6     deo-puq[!®j}2ap
                              °   aztonysip      “OT       plas-u92I9S
                                                                 P¥2]
——— 0]


     “OTT   [[@M-U9019S—"*/
                 UNOD49]
58                            RADIOCARBON         DATING

   In the instrument as described, one has a cylindrical vacuum-type
space filled with counter gas, along the middle third of the length of
which Geiger counter registration of ionizing events take place, and
inside of which a sample cylinder two-thirds as long as the instru-
ment itself is placed. One half of the sample cylinder has the sample
mounted on it; in this case elementary carbon. With these dimensions




           (CPMx1I073)
           RATE
           COUNTING
              ft
              Ww
              N
              w=oO
                [e}
                wu
                 [e)
                 (e)



               fe)

              oO oO
                       DRAG—OUT     VOLTAGE          DRAG—IN       VOLTAGE
                            —                                  a
                10)
                      +300   +200    +100      °      -100    -200     ~-300
                                             VOLTS

     I'ic. 8.—Variation of counter sensitivity with potential betwcen screen and case


there are two positions, one in which the sample itself constitutes
the wall of the counter, and the other in which the bare metal of the
sample cylinder constitutes the wall of the counter. One changes
from one position to the other simply by lifting the instrument in
one’s hands and gently shaking until the sample cylinder slides to
the other end. It is purposely machined to have freedom of motion
without having excessive radial play. The procedure of measurement
                     MEASUREMENT           OF THE     SAMPLE                      59

~ then consists simply in observing the rate in the two positions with
  appropriate frequency of alteration and recording the data.
     The sensitivity of the instrument to radiocarbon radiation is best
  established by the use of a sample assayed in an absolute manner
  such as that described in chapter iii. A sample of radioactive carbon
  dioxide of accurately known specific activity used in the half-life
  determination? was taken, accurately diluted with ordinary carbon
 dioxide,   and then reduced         and converted       to a standard      carbon
  sample in the way described in the preceding chapter. This material
 then was mounted and the observed count rate taken under various
  conditions in order to determine the absolute efficiency of the instru-
  ment for radiocarbon radiation when observed from elementary car-
  bon samples. Several such standard radiocarbon samples were de-
 vised, and tests were carried out in four different screen-wall
  counters. One of the tests was made by using a sample only 1 inch
 in length. The standard sample cylinder is 8 inches in length, so the
  1-inch sample was placed in the eight different positions, numbering
 from the end farthest removed from the counter volume when the
 sample cylinder is in the ‘“‘background”’ position. The reasons for
 undertaking this test were primarily to reveal the fraction of the
 radiation which entered the counting volume from the background
 position and the variation of sensitivity at the very end of the sample
 cylinder. The data are given in Table 6.
     These data show that the efficiency rises rather rapidly as one
 moves in from the end of the sample, so that only the first 1 inch
 is appreciably lower in efficiency than the 6 inches of sample in the
 central portion. It is also clear from these data that some 3-4 per
 cent of the net sample count that would be observed, were not the
 background changed by virtue of the radioactivity of the sample,
 acts to increase the background. Therefore, in deducing the figure
 by which we are to multiply the observed difference between sample
 and background positions to obtain the absolute specific activity of
 the sample, we must take the efficiency calculated from the actual
 difference between background and sample averaged over the vari-
 ous positions. This is calculated to be 5.35 + 0.10 per cent for these
 data. One gram of carbon mounted on the 1-inch-long section of the
     2. A. G. Engelkemeir, W. H. Hamill, M. G. Inghram, and W. F. Libby, Phys. Rev.,
 57, 1825 (1949).
60                                 RADIOCARBON                 DATING

sample cylinder had an absolute disintegration rate of 1860 disinte-
grations per minute.                                                          ;
   Table 7 presents data in which a standard sample of the full 8
grams weight and mounted over the full 8 inches of length of the
cylinder was placed in four different counters. The absolute efficiency
calculated on the basis of the observed difference between sample
                                                 TABLE        6
                EFFICIENCY OF SCREEN-WALL COUNTER ALONG ITS LENGTH
                      (Counter No. 6; standard 10 cm. A + 0.5 cm. C,H,)


                                                              Net Sample                        Increase in
                     Watboceund           Sans               from Average          Per Cent     Background
     Position           ( a )              (                  Background           Absolute      (Per Cent
                        cpm                  cpm:              Positions          Efficiency    Net Sample
                                                                  1-5                              Count)

1 eeae               147.4+1.3         241.7+1.6               O5 Os Sil          Seb      ae yl cet     ieee
Vea ae          oe   146.4+1.6         257.1:61,6             110.4+1.8           ef     ee nA (EeCees
Re wa eS SY 145.8+1.7                     299.0 telino        106) Sse SS STA     ee ee  eee eee
tae eke              149.2+1.9            255.9415            109.2+1.8   Diet ewan MEL seee
Diariae eaves ae     144.9+1.5           Php heya iYrs        105.8520    S509       FRc       oes
Gt      biel eep levers a faver. sixes tered cece ts aR aE    Dees coe   eee ae     a Mae
a      ee eee        152.4+1.5            257.8+1.6           111.141.8 | 5.98            By
Site mee Ogee        169.44+1.8 | 228.44+1.4                   Sl7 IS | 14239            20.9

AVELAGE
      HRN | Mee ceswe cet(ct         rie erciee cee   eel[etree     ere ae        §.35+0.10            She

     * Taken with actual backgrounds and not the average of positions 1-5.


                                                 TABLE         7
                           EFFICIENCY        OF SCREEN-WALL             COUNTERS
                                                                   Absolute Efficiency
                                                                       (Per Cent of
                                   Counter                           Absolute Rate)
                              ee        ee ON a Pee ee               5.56+0.05
                              Cy HsuqeneeRnent (Aaa                  5.59+0.07
                              QUAI      Nee tris Men a               5.36+0.07
                              OL ed, RTT ROHE ors tats               phasiiracl LOY
                          Rings (alle O)\e emer                      Orsoe      OatO
                          Average (weighted)......                   5.46 +0.03

and background is given. This number is used to convert the ob-
served count rates to absolute disintegration rates.
   The radiocarbon radiation has a range of some 28 mg/cm’; that
is, a foil weighing 28 mg/cm? will just stop the radiation. The ab-
sorption is nearly exponential; the half-thickness, or thickness nec-
essary to absorb half of the radiation, is about 2.3 mg/cm. It is
                    MEASUREMENT           OF THE   SAMPLE             61

clear, therefore, that for our sample cylinder of 400 cm. surface area
(the diameter some 2.7 inches) a layer 2.3 mg/cm? thick or a total
sample of 0.92 gram of carbon would give half of the effect that an
infinitely thick layer would give. The formula for this is®

                                =
                                I = l—e —8.7z ;                    (25)
                                 co



 where 7 is the count rate that would have been obtained from a
 sample of infinite thickness (of thickness at least equal to the range),
 T is the-intensity observed for the sample of given thickness, and « is
 the ratio of the actual thickness used to the range of the radiation.
 The validity of this formula has been experimentally established on
 a number of occasions by carefully mounting radiocarbon samples
 of known thicknesses less than the range and plotting the count rate
 observed as a function of thickness. It is apparent, however, that
 the formula will be valid only if the sample has uniform thickness
over its entire area. Since this is a difficult condition to obtain, we
have chosen to make x so large that the count rate is essentially
equal to the rate for the infinitely thick layer and so to avoid worries
about roughness of the sample. One can show that, if the sample ap-
pears reasonably smooth to the eye, errors due to the existence of
rough spots will be very small. In general, the thickness selected has
been 20 mg/cm’, or a total sample weight of 8 grams for the 400 cm.?
area of the sample cylinder. From time to time samples have been
used which did not amount to 8 grams, the smallest being about
5 grams. These were mounted with considerable care to insure uni-
formity, and then the count rate was corrected by the small factor
given by Equation (25). It seems possible that one might measure
samples much smaller than 5 grams by developing a technique of
painting the carbon on the brass cylinder in a very reproducible
and smooth fashion.
    The carbon sample is mounted on one half of the sample cylinder
(the sample cylinder is split so that the counting operation can be
conducted with convenience and the cylinder reassembled later).
The other half of the sample cylinder remains bare. Figure 9 shows
the equipment used, together with the two halves of the brass sample
cylinder. As described earlier, the carbon sample in the screw-capped
  3. W. F. Libby, Anal. Chem., 19, 2 (1947).
Avidstp Sugunouw adwes —'6 “oly
                  MEASUREMENT        OF THE   SAMPLE                  63

. glass bottle is ground carefully in a mortar and pestle, about 8.5
  grams weighed out in a beaker, and some 50-55 cc. of distilled water
  added. The mixture then is stirred and water added until a consist-
  ency like a very thin mush is obtained. One then places a clean white
  glove on his left hand (if he is right-handed) and, holding the beaker
  and the sample cylinder in his left hand in such a way that the con-
 tents can run from the beaker into the sample cylinder, elevates it
 toward a light such as an open window so that he can observe the
 sample flow from the beaker into the cylinder and also scrape out the
 remnants with a long glass rod. He then replaces the beaker on the
 table and with the glass rod smooths the sample while rotating the
 cylinder with his left hand. He then takes the spatula and scrapes
 out the residual carbon left in the beaker (usually something around
 0.5 gram of carbon is left either in the beaker or on the rod) and
 smooths this onto the surface also. In the early work we used about
 20 cc. of 0.15 per cent agar solution to increase the adherence of the
 sample to the wall. It was found, however, that this was unnecessary
 providing one was careful not to bump or bang the instrument, and
 this potential source of contamination was thereby avoided. After
 the wet carbon sample is smoothed on the cylinder, it is placed on a
 clean piece of cheesecloth on the table and an ordinary hair-dryer
 used to blow hot air through it for about 10 minutes. This removes
 sufficient water to set the sample on the cylinder and yet does not
 dry the sample completely. It is important that the sample not be
 dried too long with the hot-air stream for two reasons. The first is
 that air contains radon, and the sample, if dried, will be extremely
 susceptible to contamination by absorption of the radon and other
 possible radioactivities in the air. The carbon samples have large
 surface areas per gram (of the order of 200 square meters). The sec-
 ond reason is that the warm air has an oxidative action on the brass
 when the metal gets warm and causes leaching of the zinc out of the
 brass into the absorbent-carbon sample, so that the ash rises to un-
 reasonable values.
    After the drying to the setting stage, the two halves of the sample
 cylinder are placed together, sometimes fastened with a small piece
 of Scotch tape if they do not fit snugly, and the sample cylinder
 placed in the counter proper. The counter cap is then placed on and
 the counter sealed closed with deKhotinsky wax. The counter then
64                     RADIOCARBON       DATING

is placed on a standard vacuum line with two liquid nitrogen traps
in series, the first of which has had the internal tube removed so
blocking by the ice condensed does not occur readily, and the system
allowed to pump for about 24 hours, the nitrogen in the traps being
renewed from time to time. At the end of this pumping period the
pressure in the line as registered by a Pirani gauge placed between
the counter and the first trap will read in the micron range. It is im-
portant to remove water to this degree, for, if it is not done, the water —
absorbed on the sample will slowly evolve and change the operating
voltage of the counter during the measurement period. After pump-
ing, 0.5 cm. of ethylene is added. The ethylene is purified by re-
peated condensation in a liquid nitrogen trap, pumping on the solid,
re-evaporation, recondensation, etc., until the vacuum obtained
while pumping on the frozen ethylene rapidly approaches a few
microns. After the ethylene is introduced, 10 cm. of argon from a
standard commercial cylinder of pure argon is added. The counter
then is allowed to stand for 2 or 3 hours for mixing, and the voltage
measured at which pulses of 6 volts height are obtained. One can
run the plateau at this stage, but it is soon found that the plateau
characteristics are very reproducible, and this step usually is not
taken. The appearance of the pulses on an oscilloscope is observed
with care. The oscilloscope is connected so the true pulse shape is
shown rather than the first time derivative. This is accomplished by
connecting the wall of the counter to ground through a resistor, the
potential drop across which is fed to the oscilloscope. Choice of the
proper resistor insures that the time constant of the oscilloscope cir-
cuit is short enough to afford faithful pulse reproduction. It is par-
ticularly important to examine the pulses for multiplicity. The oc-
currence of multiple pulses is undesirable not only because it is evi-
dence of improper gas composition but primarily because the can-
cellation of meson counts by the anticoincidence shielding counters
will not occur for multiple pulses. The first component of the
multiple pulses is canceled, but the following pulses occur later
and are not canceled. This means, of course, that the background
rate is observed to rise when impurities such as air or water vapor are
introduced into the counter gas. The instrument at this stage is
ready for placing in the shield and the beginning of the measure-
ment run.
                  MEASUREMENT        OF THE   SAMPLE                  65

    The counter construction is shown in Figure 7. Standard blue-
 prints can be obtained from the author on request. The materials
 used in the construction of the counter, and also the shield described
 later, are given in Appendix B, together with the suppliers we have
 used. The gridwork is constructed by stringing wires between lucite
 header disks and the whole assembly is supported on a post, silver-
 soldered to one of the two end caps. Lead-free brass tubing is used
 both for the material of the cylinder case and the other brass parts and
_for the sample cylinder. This precaution is taken to avoid radio-
active contamination. The cylinder wall is made as thin as con-
 venient in order to improve the efficiency of the anticoincidence
 shielding described later. A glass stopcock is fastened by deKhotin-
 sky wax to the outlet shown, and this wax is used for all the other
 closures also. We have constructed one or two instruments with
 rubber gasket seals at the ends, but in most of the counters we have
 used wax seals.
    The deKhotinsky wax used is made by cooking together approxi-
 mately equal parts of Georgia pine tar and orange shellac. The mix-
 ture is melted, heated, and stirred continuously for about 30 minutes,
 care being taken not to char. This wax is particularly strong and
 has proved eminently satisfactory. It is applied with an air-gas torch.
 One should not use an oxygen torch because charring of the wax will
 be likely. It is difficult to obtain vacuum-tight seals when the wax
 is charred. The parts to be sealed are heated above the softening
 point of the wax and the wax applied by touching to the hot metal
 or glass. One can also heat the wax stick briefly (the wax is poured
 from the cooking pot onto metal foils which are then rolled to make
 sticks about 6 inches long and 3 inch in diameter) directly and let it
 drip onto the hot metal. The counter is then rotated so that a smooth
 and uniform layer of wax is obtained, and the seal is cooled by
 blowing air on it. Our experience has been that vacuum-tight seals
 can be obtained easily in this manner, and the only difficulty en-
 countered in the use of the instrument so far as vacuum is con-
 cerned is that one occasionally breaks the wax seal by bumping the
 sample cylinder too vigorously against the end caps. This, however,
 is undesirable from the point of view of dislodging the sample itself
 and should be avoided.                      2
    The principal task in the measurement of extremely small
66                    RADIOCARBON      DATING

amounts of radioactivity remaining after one has supplied a suffi-
ciently sensitive counter is the reduction of the extraneous back-
ground count rate due to cosmic radiation and the ubiquitous radio-
active products of uranium and thorium which exist in all labora-
tories in such amounts as to give very appreciable count rates. The
latter component of the background is best removed by selecting
solid material which is free of uranium and thorium and of its dis-
integration products such as radon. Consideration of this problem,
together with the problem of cost, has led us to believe that steel
should be an excellent material for a low-level counter shield. It is
reasonably inexpensive and from the metallurgical processing in-
volved in its manufacture should be relatively free of the highly
electropositive elements which constitute the most serious radio-
active contaminates. It is reasoned that elements such as uranium,
thorium, and radium will be removed by the slagging operation. We
do not believe that lead is particularly desirable from either the cost
or the cleanliness point of view, and tests have confirmed the suspi-
cion of radioactive contamination in lead as ordinarily purchased.
We have constructed the shield as shown in Figure 10, of hot rolled
steel plate, 8 inches thick. Two types have been built, in one of
which the door is closed by the hydraulic jack shown, and another
in which the door is bisected and opened with a cantilever arrange-
ment by hand. -
   The background rate for the unshielded screen-wall counter is in
the vicinity of 500 counts per minute. Placing the instrument in the
shield with 8 inches of iron in all directions reduces this to 100
counts per minute. If instead of the 8-inch shield one uses a shield
with 4-inch walls outside of which 2 inches of lead are placed, the
background is 120 counts per minute. This residual background is
very large due to the cosmic-ray mesons whose penetrating power
is very great. It would be removed only by very great thick-
nesses of shield material. The device used to eliminate this com-
ponent of the background consists of surrounding the screen-wall
counter with a complete layer of Geiger counters 18 inches in
length, 2 inches in diameter, which are in tangential contact and are
placed as shown in Figure 11. This is an end-on view of the assembly
in place with the door of the shield open. When the shielding coun-
ters fire, the central screen-wall counter is inactivated for a small
                          MEASUREMENT          OF THE     SAMPLE              67

_ fraction of a second. This means that the meson radiation is thereby
  eliminated from the record. The aggregate count rate of the eleven
  shield counters is about 800 per minute, and the cancellation time
  is of the order of 10-% seconds so the screen-wall counter is in-
  activated for about 1 per cent of the time. This is so small as to be
  negligible, and we can conclude therefore that the sensitivity of the

                                        3 PHASE
                                         SWITCH
                                   cto A
                  )
                             |— ——SS
            LIMIT
           SWITCH
                             t=
                              Sill
                                   ——

          SHIELD               =—                  —
                               +-—_*—              <a


         OPENING             |=            @       ———
         l2xl2xX28
                               ——                  i
                             SS                    aa




                      a
                          ae
          DOOR
         GUIDES




             BUDA
          HYDRAULIC
            JACK


          ECCENTRIC
          DRIVE

                                                              3 PHASE OH.P.
                                                              MOTOR


                          Frc. 10.—Schematic of counters and shield


apparatus to the radiocarbon radiation from the sample is not appre-
ciably reduced by the use of the shielding counter area. The use of
the shielding counters reduces the background to 5 counts per min-
ute. The smaller shield mentioned above with 4-inch thick iron and
2-inch lead exterior gives 7 counts per minute. With these rates it is
now possible to measure the radiocarbon radiation to about 2 per
cent error in 48 hours. Modern wood gives 6.7 counts above the back-
ground, so that one observes a rate of 11.7 with the carbon sample in
68                    RADIOCARBON             DATING

place and a rate of 5 counts per minute with the bare cylinder in
place. The anticoincidence shielding counters are 18 inches long,
thereby considerably overhanging the sensitive volume of the screen
wall, which is 8 inches in length. We therefore have not placed a
layer of shielding counters at either end of the assembly. It is clear,
of course, that this would reduce the background further, but the




                        in Ka   atti   inte    Rh   g   l    eme
                        me




                   Fic. 11.—Counters in shield (door open)


extra mechanical difficulties involved in changing the sample cylin-
der and the small advantages to be gained by further lowering of
the background have prevented our doing so. The shielding counters
used are standard brass-wall cosmic-ray counters sold by commer-
cial suppliers.
   The operation of the screen-wall counter in the manner described
for the measurement of radiocarbon in the age-measurement pro-
                     MEASUREMENT           OF THE      SAMPLE                         69

' gram involves several sorts of difficulties, one of which is major and
  which deserves special mention. Counters which have accidentally
  been connected incorrectly so that the leads from the screen wall and
  the counter wire are interchanged, and have been maintained in this
  condition for some time, have a tendency to show spurious counts for
  some time thereafter. It seems that the only way in which this can
  be cured, other than by allowing the instrument to stand for weeks,
  is to replace the lucite insulators. This point, however, is not com-
  pletely settled; it is merely known that this accomplishes the results.
  A similar effect may be produced by erroneous application of exces-
  sive potentials so that the counter goes into essentially continuous
  discharge. One should take care to have a connector plug connecting
  the counter leads to the amplifier and recording apparatus such that
  this error is not possible.
     Any good quenching vapor is satisfactory for the screen-wall
 counter as far as counting characteristics are concerned, but a con-
 sideration of some subtility is involved which leads one to select
 ethylene. In our case, where the sample of carbon is very finely
 divided and possesses a very high absorptive power for condensible
 vapors such as ethanol, the amount of quenching gas absorbed may
 be such as appreciably to affect the fraction of the radiation which
 escapes the sample and reaches the counter gas volume. In the case
 of ethyl alcohol our experience has been that as much as 1 gram was
 absorbed on our standard 8-gram sample. This, of course, in addi-
 tion to absorbing the radiation, may introduce radiation itself, de-
 pending on whether the ethanol is grain alcohol or synthetic. The
 early measurements were made with ethyl alcohol, and the correc-
 tions for the specific activity of the ethyl alcohol and its absorptive
 action on the radiations from the carbon sample computed. The re-
 sults were acceptable, but an additional error was introduced. For
 these reasons a quenching gas of lower boiling point was sought, and
 ethylene‘ has proved to be completely satisfactory in all respects. As
 mentioned above, the standard filling is 0.5 cm. of mercury pressure
 of ethylene and 10 cm. of mercury pressure of argon.
    We have not found it necessary to purify the commercial argon
 but have taken the precaution of buying large 200-cubic-foot cylin-
 ders so that satisfactory operation is guaranteed for an extended
   4. K. H. Morgenstern, C. L. Cowan, and E. L. Hughes, Phys. Rev., 74, 499 (1948).
70                    RADIOCARBON      DATING

period if a good cylinder is obtained. It has been our experience
 that the argon available on the commercial market is sufficiently
pure.
    Interesting effects arise if the counter happens to develop a leak.
The introduction of air to the counter gas adds to the normal single
sharp pulses a group of smaller pulses following the original one after
a delay of several hundred microseconds. This may be sufficiently
long to extend beyond the cancellation period given by the anti- —
coincidence shielding counters, so that’a pulse which would nor-
mally have been canceled from the record registers. One therefore
observes a rise in background count together with a rise in the coun-
ter voltage and, at appreciable air contaminations, a decrease in the
difference between the sample and background counts. This de-
crease is apparently due to inefficiency in the counter action caused
by the presence of the air; presumably the oxygen in the air is the
active agent. The decrease probably arises in the volume between
the screen and wall, where the collecting field is lowest.
   A further effect of some importance to routine operation exists in
the temperature dependence of the operating voltage of the counter.
It is found that a temperature variation of 10° F. will cause 10 or
20 volts change in the counter voltage. This may be due to the tem-
perature dependence of the absorption of ethylene on the highly ab-
sorptive carbon sample. It means that one should take care to in-
sure that the room temperature does not vary by more than 5° F.
during long operating periods when the rate is not being: recorded.
   It has been our practice to change the sample cylinder from one
position to the other every few hours during the day and to allow
it to run during an 8- or 10-hour period overnight, arranging the
schedule so that the total time spent counting the sample and the
background will be proportional to the square roots of the rates in
the two positions. This, for example, means that for a measurement
of modern wood, where the background rate is about half the rate in
the sample position, 60 per cent of the time is spent measuring the
sample and 40 per cent measuring the background. In addition, of
course, the background count from run to run should check nearly
within the statistical error of the counts. One is tempted to cross-
average the background counts and thereby to reduce the time neces-
sary to measure. We have never done so, however, for it has been ob-
                 MEASUREMENT        OF THE   SAMPLE                   71

served that changes in the operating characteristics of the shielding
counters may occur which will affect both the background and the
sample rate in the same way and not invalidate the difference,
though it might cause as much as a half-count per minute change in
both rates.
   The final cleaning of the sample cylinder before use in the first in-
stance consists in washing in 50 per cent nitric acid, rinsing carefully
with distilled water, and drying. We have observed that cylinders
prepared in this way of lead-free brass tubing have never given a
negative count rate beyond the statistical error when used on car-
bon derived from coal or oil. They would be expected to register
negatively if the sample cylinders were contaminated, the point be-
ing that the inert carbon would absorb radiation from the brass. In
addition, we have found Armco iron and pure copper sample cylin-
ders to give the same count rate as the cleaned brass cylinders. We
therefore believe that not over 0.1 or 0.2 count per minute of con-
tamination exists on our set of sample cylinders and that it is pos-
sible to use Armco iron and pure copper as well as lead-free brass.
   The statistical error of the count is taken as the square root of the
total number of counts divided by the number of minutes during
which they occurred. This gives the standard deviation a measure
of error 1.5 times the probable error, and all of our results are
quoted with this standard error derived solely from the count rate
indicated. It has been interesting to observe that the scatter of re-
peated runs on different portions of a given sample and on recounts
of a single portion of a given sample seems not to exceed the error
due to the counting alone by any considerable factor. We therefore
are inclined to believe that the use of longer counting periods would
result in errors almost inversely proportional to the square root of
the factor by which the counting time is increased. For example, if
our present 48-hour counting interval, which gives us an error of
+200 years for a sample of a certain age, should be increased by a
factor of 4, we might be justified in assigning a +100-year error.
Only further careful investigation can test this point and fully
establish it. It does, however, seem likely that counting for periods
even as long as a month with the consequent smaller errors might be
worth while.
  Since publication of the first edition, the techniques of measure-
72                           RADIOCARBON           DATING

ment of the radiocarbon content of organic matter have been con-
siderably improved. Among the improvements for those methods
using solid carbon as the sample are (1) further reduction of the
background by the use of a mercury shield, as proved by Kulp and
Tryon;> (2) the ignition or baking of the carbon sample under con-
ditions protecting it from radioactive contamination to reduce its
specific area so that the chance of radioactive contamination during
subsequent handling is reduced to a minimum, as accomplished by
Rafter;® (3) an automatic sample changer, by Crane and McDaniel;’
and (4) the introduction of a second counter into a given envelope so
that two samples can be measured simultaneously, by Anderson
et al.’ With these improvements, the solid-carbon-sample tech-
niques continue to be reliable and useful. It does seem to be clear,
however, that some of the newer methods of gas counting, which
have been developed during the last two or three years, have po-
tentialities which exceed those of the solid-carbon counting meth-
ods. The scintillation counter also looks promising.®
   Perhaps the most promising of the gaseous counting techniques
is the acetylene method, since it has resulted in more dates than the
other methods and is better established. It seems that the only real
unexplored difficulty of the acetylene method is the possibility of
explosion, and, since the record has been good to date, one is in-
clined to believe. that this is not a serious hazard. In common with
the other gaseous counting techniques, there are difficulties which
are different from those of the solid method. Among these is, of
course, the impossibility of routinely checking the background with
the sample essentially in place. This has not proved, however, to
be so serious a difficulty as one might have feared, and the gas
 counting methods look extremely promising on the whole. Acetylene
is prepared essentially as described in the previous chapter as quoted
from the publication of Suess.!° Two groups have been involved in-
dependently in the development—a group at the United States
 Geological Survey in Washington, D.C., with Suess, and one at the
       . J. L. Kulp and L. E. Tryon, Rev. Sci. Inst., 23, 296 (1952).
        . T. A. Rafter, New Zealand J. Sci. & Tech., 35, 64 (1953).
        . H.R. Crane and E. W. McDaniel, Science, 116, 342 (1952).
        . E. C. Anderson, H. Levi, and H. Tauber, Science, 118, 6 (1953).
      wn. J.
       OonataR. Arnold, Science, 119, 155 (1954).
     10. H. E. Suess, Science, 120, 5 (1954).
                     MEASUREMENT           OF THE   SAMPLE                      73

' British Museum, with Crathorn." Suess describes the measurement
  in the following fashion. After noting that the shield is similar to
  that used with the solid-carbon counting techniques, he says that a
  linear amplifier is used for the amplification of the pulses from the
  counter, whose inside diameter is 7 cm. and whose volume is 1
  liter, with a 0.002-inch diameter center wire made of stainless steel.
  The counter is surrounded by a mercury shield 1.5 cm. in thickness.
  The pulses taken from the linear amplifier are fed into an antico-
  incidence circuit where cancellation against the surrounding anti-
  coincidence counter shield of Geiger counters occurs. He says
  that a separate negative high-voltage supply keeps the counter
  case at a potential of 2000 volts with respect to ground and that
  the case is insulated by a Teflon sheet. The center wire attains a
  positive voltage of 3000 volts with respect to ground, so that the
  total voltage across the counter when filled with the acetylene to
  about 72 cm. of mercury pressure is some 5000 volts. The method
  has proved to be stable and reliable with respect to reproducibility,
  of background and reliability of the electronic equipment. There
  seems to be no doubt at all that the acetylene technique is established
  and that only further use can disclose any weaknesses. These, how-
  ever, cannot be serious. There may be points of some minor impor-
  tance in the observed fractionation of the isotopes during the incom-
  plete conversion of the sample to acetylene. It is also to be hoped
  that the explosion hazard will not increase.
     Several groups, more or less independently, attacked the prob-
  lem of measuring carbon dioxide gas directly for its radiocarbon con-
  tent. This has been attractive because of the simplicity of the prepa-
  ration of this gas. In Holland, DeVries and Barendsen” were the first
  seriously to attack the problem of using carbon dioxide gas and to
  report success. Since their pioneering work, other groups have
  joined the development: in America, Brannon, Taggart, and Wil-
  liams, of the Humble Oil and Refining Company of Houston,
  Texas; in New Zealand, Fergusson; and, in Germany, Haxel
    11. A. R. Crathorn, Nature, 172, 632 (1953).
    12. Hl. deVries and G. W. Barendsen, Physica, 18, 652 (1952).
    13. H. R. Brannon, M. S. Taggart, and M. Williams, private communication via
 Andover Conference on Radiocarbon Dating at R. S. Peabody Foundation, Phillips
 Academy, October 21-23, 1954.
    14. G. J. Fergusson, private communication via Andover Conference on Radio-
 carbon Dating at R. S. Peabody Foundation, Phillips Academy, October 21-23, 1954,
74                         RADIOCARBON         DATING

in Heidelberg.” All these laboratories have attempted the use of
carbon dioxide as a proportional counter gas. As we remark later,
one other group at the University of Michigan, under H. R. Crane,
is using it in the Geiger counter range. The essential difficulty in the
use of carbon dioxide appears to have been established as a re-
quirement of extreme purity. Apparently impurities of the order
of parts per million will greatly reduce the multiplication factor for
the electron discharge in carbon dioxide gas. Therefore it is neces-
sary to use extreme methods of purification. The methods de-
veloped” utilize the absorption of the carbon dioxide on hot calcium
oxide which has been previously pumped while hot. After the ab-
sorption, the material is pumped further, and impurities which are
chemically distinguishable from carbon dioxide, of course, are re-
moved or else are absorbed to form compounds of a different dis-
sociation pressure from calcium ‘carbonate. After the purification
pumping, the material is heated from its pumping temperature of
about 600° C. up to a temperature of about 800° C., when the carbon
dioxide is released and stored for introduction into the counter.
This purification procedure seems to have been shown to be ade-
quate, so that reproducible multiplication factors can be obtained.
Though the counter is by no means perfectly proportional, its per-
formance is sufficiently satisfactory to enable one to use such ex-
treme pressures.as 10 atmospheres and counter voltages of 12,000
volts.!” There seems to be little doubt that this technique, when pur-
sued further, will establish a record rivaling that already established
by the acetylene method, and it does seem likely that both of them
will, perhaps, make the solid-carbon counting technique obsolete.
   As mentioned above, Crane! uses carbon dioxide as a Geiger
counter gas without the stringent purifications found necessary for
its use as a proportional counter. The calcium carbonate precipitate,
as described in a previous chapter, is acidified and the evolved
     15. O. Haxel, private communication, May, 1954,
    16. Hl. deVries and G. W. Barendsen, Physica, 18, 652 (1952); H. R. Brannon,
M. S. Taggart, and M. Williams, private communication, October 21-23, 1954; G. J.
Fergusson, private communication, October 21-23, 1954.
   17. H. R. Brannon, M. S. Taggart, and M. Williams, private communication,
October 21-23, 1954.                            é
   18. H. R. Crane, private communication via Andover Conference on Radiocarbon
Dating at R. S. Peabody Foundation, Phillips Academy, October 21-23, 1954.
                MEASUREMENT       OF THE    SAMPLE                  75

carbon dioxide dried and passed into the counter. The carbon
dioxide sample is mixed with a small amount of carbon disulfide at
a pressure of about 1 mm. of mercury. The carbon disulfide has the
function of masking the electron-capturing characteristics of the
other impurities because of its abundance. It has the additional
property of dissociating rather readily on reaching the high field
near the positively charged wire and so raising the counter efficiency
to nearly 100 per cent. The difficulty with this method of measuring
the radiocarbon content of carbon dioxide is that the pulse time is
2 or 3 milliseconds, so that for larger counters the time required in
coincidence cancellation of the pulses due to the cosmic-ray mesons
becomes appreciable. For example, a 4-inch diameter counter would
lose about 25 per cent of its counting time in this way, whereas a
5-inch or 6-inch counter would lose perhaps 50 per cent. Typical
results quoted by Crane are: A 2.5-inch diameter counter with an
effective length of 14 inches, less 0.5 inch or so at each end, has a
background rate of 5 counts per minute and a rate of 10 counts per
minute with modern carbon dioxide. A larger counter, with a
3.5-inch diameter, gives a background of 7 counts per minute and
15.5 counts per minute total with modern carbon dioxide, or a net
of 8.5 counts per minute. Each pulse is quenched electrically. There
is no real Geiger counter action, but the counter seems to operate
very reliably and satisfactorily and holds considerable promise for
the future.
                            CeHivALP ik een      vel

