         REFLECTIONS UPON THE SIGNIFICANCE
                OF RADIOCARBON DATES
                             By FREDERICK           JOHNSON


   ARCHEOLOGISTS, geologists, and pollen analysts are con-
          tinually searching for the means of improving methods of
          counting time. The commonly available relative chronolo-
gies lack precision, and it is impossible to correlate them with the
calendar, except when they may be checked with written records or
with more definite methods of counting time; for example, the
calendar based on tree-ring counts. The latter methods, how-
ever, have regional and temporal limitations. Despite such diffi-
culties, dates of varying reliability can be assigned to all major
events and a large proportion of minor ones included in the subject
matter of the several fields. The error in these dates varies from
 +150 years or less, as those of the Near or Middle Eastern civiliza-
tions, where written records supplement archeological data, to geo-
logical estimates of Pleistocene events the errors of which are often
 + 30 per cent or more.
   When first developed by Dr. Libby, the radiocarbon method
promised to become a valuable research tool, improving our knowl-
edge of chronology. This promise has been amply fulfilled. About
two thousand determinations have been listed in the dozen or more
publications from Dr. Libby’s and other laboratories.1 The ages
range from a few hundred years to more than thirty thousand years.
The dated samples have come from several parts of Europe and
Africa, the Near East, Oceania, and North, Middle, and South
America. Samples from the Arctic and the tropics as well as those
from a wide variety of intervening environmental zones have been
     1, In addition to the preliminary list published by Libby in 1950 and the five lists in
Science which are given in chapter vi, the following lists have been published: Anderson
et al., 1953; Griffin, 1952; Johnson, 1951;; Kulp, 1953) Kulp et al., 1951; Kulp e¢ al., 1952;
Ralph, 1955; and Suess, 1954.
                                             141
142                   RADIOCARBON       DATING

dated. It is apparent that there is in existence the basis for a chro-
nology which is world wide in scope. Perhaps the unique usefulness
of this chronology, in addition to its scope, is the fact that the dates
have been determined by a single method, and, without exception,
they are directly comparable. Of great significance also is the ability
to collate chronologies in several fields. The determination of the
dates is independent of hypothetical geological, archeological, or
analogous interpretations. Chronological problems which are inter-
disciplinary in nature can be solved by a direct approach.
   The preliminary lists of dates distributed by Libby previous
to 1952 raised a number of questions because the indicated ages
of some significant events were of an appreciably different magni-
tude than the current ideas concerning them. In fact, the periods
covered by several sequences were not at all concordant with
opinions concerning chronology. These circumstances were re-
sponsible for a discussion of the validity of the results of the method,
and, significantly, much re-examination of the basis for archeologi-
cal and geological chronological opinions. Out of this has come gen-
eral recognition, occasionally qualified, of the validity of the meth-
od. The body of data contributing to the proof of validity of the
method is now large and convincing in spite of instances where
claims for inaccuracy have been made. Though not always pub-
lished, the data.continue to accumulate because, in addition to the
investigation of specific problems, it is necessary to measure and
remeasure contemporary samples and those of known age in order
to test and calibrate equipment. The correspondence of predicted
to observed radioactivities in a number of samples of known age
(Fig. 1) is a primary indication of validity. Supplementary to this
are measurements by two laboratories on sections of sequoia trees.
The results are comparable to the dates determined by tree rings.
Significant, though indirect, evidence is the overwhelmingly large
proportion of dates which are accepted as accurate. One may also
refer to the number of dates which, though they are in the order
established by stratigraphy, do not correspond with some present
ideas of magnitude. Consistency is also significant. It may be clearly
seen, for example, in measurements made by different laboratories
on identical samples. The results are identical; in fact, we are not
aware of a single significant disagreement. There have been a num-
         THE   SIGNIFICANCE     OF RADIOCARBON        DATES         143

ber of experiments to test various questions and to allay certain
doubts concerning accuracy. As an example we note one of these,
the testing of rotten wood at the suggestion of Dr. Ernst Antevs
(Nos. C-763, C-764, C-771, C-777, and C-787). The results varied
from 6.39 + 0.5 to 6.83 + 0.12 counts per minute. These are to be
compared with 6.88 counts for modern world-wide assay.
   It has been customary procedure to compare historical, geological,
and archeological measurements of .time with the radiocarbon meas-
urements for the purpose of judging validity of any measurement
but with particular emphasis upon radiocarbon results. Broadly,
the procedure is justifiable, but there are significant objections to
most conclusions which have been drawn from comparisons of de-
tails. The problem is to find a basis for comparison. Historical data,
that is, measurements of time based upon a calendrical system
and dependable written ethnohistoric record, appear to be directly
comparable with the results of the radiocarbon method as ex-
pressed in number of years before the present. In other words, dates
in both systems are referable to a single method of counting time.
This is not true of geological and archeological measurements, except
in relatively rare instances. Measurements of time in these fields
are inferred from processes, the rates of change or progress of which
are not constant and which are, as yet, quite unpredictable. There
is no known standard rate for any one of these processes, and meas-
urements of time for one process are invariably relative to rates of
progress in other processes. It should be quite clear that inferred or
relative dates of this kind and chronological frameworks made up
of them are not standards of sufficient precision for judging in detail
the validity of the radiocarbon dates. It is a matter of historical
record that archeological sequences which have not been controlled
by some method of counting time, such as tree-ring dating, have
been assigned longer or shorter periods of time as various opinions
waxed and waned in popularity or as new data were presented.
Similarly, in geology several different chronologies for the Pleisto-
cene are variously based and have reputable proponents who are
fully cognizant of both the strength and the weakness of their posi-
tion. In view of this it is obvious that conclusions regarding the
validity or error in a single date or a sequence of radiocarbon dates
must be drawn with extreme care.
144                               RADIOCARBON   DATING

   There are a few geologists and archeologists who are skeptical of
the validity of all or a large portion of the results. The larger group
of scientists which question specific dates, or sections of sequences
of them, are probably closer to the actual fact. That is, some radio-
carbon dates do not indicate the age of the phenomena described
for the samples, even though such dates represent true determina-
tions of the quantities of radiocarbon in the samples. In such cases,
judgment concerning accuracy of dates is not a simple task in which
currently held hypotheses of a single field or of several fields can be
used as proof. There are several factors which require careful con-
sideration before a truly sound judgment can be made.
    The physicists and chemists involved in the laboratory research
are fully aware of certain constant errors in the method. Dr. Libby
and others have discussed the character and size of these internal
errors in some detail in earlier chapters.” In view of this we may
base our present remarks upon the virtual certainty that errors in the
method are not of an order which affects the accuracy or seriously
limits the use of the dates.
   An important source of error can be described as curatorial.
Experience has shown that it is essential to exercise great care in
cataloguing and storing samples for measurement. A perusal of the
lists of dates also shows that controversy is likely to arise over
dates on samples which were not specially collected for radio-
carbon measurement, particularly samples which have been stored
in museums or laboratories for several years or more. Perhaps the
most extreme examples of this are the dates on Tchefuncte and
Hopewell samples (Nos. C-126, C-237, C-239, C-150, and C-151).
In the light of present knowledge such samples would probably not
now be measured. Another curatorial problem is prevention of
contamination by noncontemporaneous C4. For example, steriliza-
tion to prevent fungal action is advisable, if not sometimes essential.
Prevention of mixture with other samples and exposure to dust or
other contaminants are obvious precautions, but they are really
important if an accurate measurement is to be made.
   An analysis of so-called “invalid” dates reveals that a very large
proportion of them have been determinations on samples the source
of which is questionable. An important source of errors of this kind
      2. See chaps. ii and iii.
           THE    SIGNIFICANCE      OF RADIOCARBON    DATES         145

 is contamination by noncontemporaneous root hairs, fungal action,
 or some analogous process. That such contamination is present in a
 sample is due either to unknown or to unsuspected factors which are
 not observed by the collector. As an example of this kind of error, we
 have the temerity to mention the dates on the Denbigh Flint Com-
 plex of Alaska, Nos. C-792 (3509 + 230 years) and C-793 (4658 +
 220 years). For reasons which are as yet impossible to explain, many
 dates on archeological samples from Alaska are questionable. The
 same factors may also affect the Denbigh samples; nevertheless,
archeological correlations indicate that the Denbigh Flint Complex
 is older than the material at Trail Creek, No. C-560 (5992 + 280
 years), and also other material presumably of similar age. Geo-
 logical correlations in Alaska permit two estimates of age for the
 Denbigh Complex: “More than 12,000 years (earlier than 10,000
 B.c.)” and the favored one, “‘8500 years (6500 B.c.).’’? Added to this
 is the fact that, should the present radiocarbon dates be correct,
 adjustments in the timing of many events in much of northern
 North America will be necessary. While there is nothing precise
 or even stable about the archeological correlations and the geo-
 logical estimates, the evidence that the radiocarbon dates on the
 Denbigh Complex are erroneous is strong. The reason for the error
 can probably be traced to the character of the deposit. Illustrations
 and descriptions indicate that the layer was very thin and that it
 had been covered and folded during a cold period subsequent to its
 occupation. The charcoal comprising the sample was scraped from
 the thin layer through which noncontemporary, possibly even
 modern, roots had grown. Such circumstances render the dates
 extremely unreliable indicators of the age of the Denbigh charcoal.
 This is not due to the method of dating. It is possible that satis-
 factory dates might have been determined had the samples been
 collected with extraordinarily meticulous care and subjected to
 specialized cleaning and testing in the laboratory.
    In some instances, certain dates have been declared invalid, and,
 more rarely, whole sequences have been repudiated because they
 are not in agreement with hypotheses concerning chronology based
 on other kinds of evidence. In such cases, it is necessary to examine
 closely the character and the degree of reliability of the evidence
   3. Hopkins and Giddings, 1953.
146                  RADIOCARBON      DATING

before the radiocarbon dates may be rejected. This is difficult to
do because it sometimes involves questioning the basic tenets of a
field of investigation.
    The time scales used by geologists, pollen analysts, and archeolo-
gists are, with rare exceptions, based upon stratigraphic sequences.
Dates given in numbers of years for levels in a stratification can be
misleading. With some exceptions, such dates are but convenient
ways to indicate the estimated age, and a relatively large probable ~
error is implied if not stated. Actually a date from one level indi-
 cates only its relationship to those above and below. The location
of samples in a series of levels in the ground or distributed over
historically identifiable surfaces of the earth establishes chrono-
logical relationships among samples. Knowledge of the extent of
this relationship varies with the character of subsidiary informa-
tion which may be derived from’a study of the characteristics of
several levels. As has been said so often, materials from the lowest
strata are older than the materials from higher ones, provided of
course that the whole deposit has not been overturned or otherwise
disturbed. It may be added that, where superimposition is not
directly observable, it may often be accurately deduced, thus placing
in sequence nonoverlapping strata which may even be located in
areas widely separated horizontally. Although general principles
governing such. deductions are commonly known, there are in-
stances, often due to lack of fact, where chronologies based upon
series of strata vary in degree of accuracy.
   An adequately documented relative chronology of a sequence of
geological or archeological events can be relied upon at the very
least to indicate the order of events. Frequently reliable infer-
ences concerning relative time intervals between events may also
be made. However, when it is necessary to correlate events in
one such sequence with those of another, inferences of contem-
poraneity or succession must be made with care. Such are not
dependable unless supporting evidence indicates strong proba-
bility. In the earth sciences (archeology, etc.) such inferences are
frequently made, and at times they are highly useful when properly
considered. Regardless of these difficulties with relative chro-
nologies, provable and in large measure, inferred sequences supply
a background for the determination of chronology even though
         THE   SIGNIFICANCE     OF RADIOCARBON        DATES         147

the results are not precise in terms of a limited number of years
in the Christian calendar.
   There are at least several kinds of problems in archeology. One
involves especially the older remains of man where archeological
materials can be assigned relative dates of varying degrees of re-
liability through collaboration with geology, pollen analysis, and
other overlapping fields. The second is more frequently concerned
with later cultural material found in situations having physical
characteristics which are almost wholly due to the fact of human
occupation. In such locations stratification is present, but it is fre-
quently impossible to identify it. Consequently, archeologists aug-
ment scarce, definite stratigraphic data with inferences from in-
ternal evidence, such as the evolution of styles of pottery, changes
in the form of tools, the shape of houses, etc. The resulting chrono-
logical framework is of course very insecure and is recognized as
such by any reputable archeologist. The use of such must strain
the credulity of investigators in allied fields, especially those in
possession of more precise data. Be all this as it may, certain points
in the relative time scale for recent human development in North
America have become rather firmly established, not perhaps by logi-
cal proof, as in exact science, but by the sheer weight of confirmatory
evidence. In other words, the probability of their accuracy is so
strong that the possibility of error is slight indeed. Unfortunately,
no suitable statistical expression of this can be made. Other dates,
“‘suess dates” they are called in archeological jargon, are subject
to controversies. These cannot be resolved at the present time, but
they may be reduced by a process of elimination so that either ranges
of error of these dates or hypothetical and sometimes multiple
locations upon a time scale may be postulated. It is inevitable that
further archeological research will bring to light evidence which will
remove much of the uncertainties from these estimates.
   It must be emphasized that, in spite of the lack of precision in
all cases, many dates derived from purely archeological or geological
phenomena are based upon evidence the validity of which is at
present impossible to refute. It may be observed that, in instances
where various types of evidence lead to real conclusions concerning
chronology, the radiocarbon dates are in general agreement. Where
the major difficulty actually appears is in situations where geologists
148                   RADIOCARBON      DATING

or archeologists do not agree among themsélves. In view of the
nature of the data and the character of the material with which
scientists dependent upon stratigraphy have to work, such dis-
agreements are inevitable, and only meticulous, continuing analysis
can reduce them. Nevertheless, basing statements concerning the
accuracy of radiocarbon dates upon data which are in themselves
controversial gives rise to incorrect and misleading conclusions or.
opinions. For example, in both archeology and geology it has been
held that several sequences of radiocarbon dates.do not allow enough
time for specific series of events to take place. The actual expression
of the idea is often obscured by complicated cross-reference to
specific details and the couching of arguments in the current jargon.
In geology, some but by no means all criticisms of the radiocarbon
dates are based upon inferences concerning the behavior of a pres-
ently nonexistent ice sheet. There is no way of proving or dis-
proving assumptions concerning the speed of advance or retreat of
the ice, the degree of precision of a varve record and its correlation
with the calendar, or the significance of the modifications in the
vegetation. In various ways, these factors have provided useful
opinions concerning the passage of time, such being based upon the
weight of the evidence rather than upon observable fact. Similarly
in archeology, opinions concerning time, when not based upon
geological observations, are based largely upon assumptions con-
cerning the rate of change in cultural processes. These are deduced
from many sources, such as study of contemporary primitives, com-
plicated comparisons and collations of sequences of events, etc.
These opinions have varied greatly through the years, and no way
of stabilizing them has yet been devised. Certainly a minimum of
cogitation of the basis of some criticism of radiocarbon dates
reveals the absurdity of it.
   This leads us to observe that in many instances the location of
samples providing unsatisfactory dates is incorrectly interpreted.
The sample does not represent the event which the description says
it does. This is quite frequent and understandable in situations
where stratigraphy must be inferred from deposits widely sepa-
rated horizontally. Another source of confusion is the incorporation
in the deposit, in any one of several ways, of materials which are
not contemporaneous with its development. Such sources of dis-
            THE      SIGNIFICANCE   OF RADIOCARBON    DATES         149

  agreement between radiocarbon and other dates are now being
  recognized. Revisions of opinion concerning the assignment of the
  sample is of course justifiable, and certainly the radiocarbon date
  may figure importantly in the modification of these opinions. How-
 ever, it is equally certain that such modifications of opinion must be
 based upon stratigraphic or other sequential information.
     The preceding comments outline a conviction that, within known
 limits, the method determines the age of samples which have been
 properly collected. However, it is necessary to subject all dates to
 critical interdisciplinary evaluation before they can be fully accept-
 ed. This involves meticulous examination of the process of collection
 and description of the sample and the standards upon which judg-
 ment is based. Gordon R. Willey has compiled a critique of archeo-
 logical problems and radiocarbon dates in South and Middle America
 which is an excellent example of evaluation of a wide range of
 dates, including opinions concerning the significance of the chrono-
 logical information.‘ A brief of the salient points and comments
 hardly does the work justice. Willey’s essay is concerned with four
 obvious and basic problems. First, when did man enter Middle and
 South America? And how do the dates of his entry compare with his
 first appearances in North America? Second, when and where are
 the beginnings of American agriculture? And, as a corollary to this,
what was the effect of domesticated food plants upon the growth of
 culture? Third, at what time and when did American cultures
 attain what might be called a Neolithic—or Formative—threshold,
 this threshold being characterized by stable village life based upon
agricultural food production? Fourth, when did the Classic cultures
—the “high” civilizations of Middle America and Peru—assume
definite forms? And what was the duration of their existence?
    Of the very few dates on ‘Early Man” in Latin America, the one
of greatest significance comes from the Straits of Magellan. This
date, 6688 + 450 B.c. (No. C-485), is only 1000 years later than
the Lubbock Folsom date (7932 + 350 B.c. [No. C-558]) and implies
man’s early dispersal throughout the two American continents. In
the valley of Mexico, the Younger Becerra geological formation
dates from 9000 to at least 14,000 B.c. (Nos. C-204 and C-205). A
lithic industry known as the San Juan has been associated with this
  4. Willey, 1954.
150                       RADIOCARBON   DATING

formation. However, the above dates do not pertain to the cultural
material. The Chalco lithic complex is found in a stratum overlying
 the Becerra, and a date on the complex, 4440 + 300 B.c. (No.
 C-198), is consistent with the local stratigraphy. The few early
radiocarbon dates available indicate that man entered Middle and
 South America not long after he became established in North
America. This is expectable and does no violence to recent archeo-
logical conceptions.
    Early and primitive races of maize from the simple La Perra cul-
ture in Tamaulipas, Mexico, have been dated at 2494 + 280 B.c.
 (No. C-687). At Bat Cave,     New Mexico, six levels have been dated,
the earliest being 3981 + 310 B.c. (No. C-573). Races of maize, as
primitive as the La Perra maize, are probably not so old as the above
but date from a middle-level reading about 2500 B.c. The great
importance of these dates is that they are associated with the
appearance of a domesticated food plant on an otherwise “early
Lithic”’ stage of development and that they demonstrate the pas
 sage of a good many centuries without appreciable culture change.
Undoubtedly, maize was a dynamic force in the rise of New World
civilizations, as has been thought. However, contrary to the idea
that it caused a sudden change in rate of development, maize ap-
pears to have played its role apparently without dramatic sud
denness.
    From Peru, a series of dates on the great refuse heap at Huaca
Prieta have been discussed in detail by Bird.® Willey points out that
the beginnings of an economy based on marine foods, gathering, and
domesticated plants may be seen about 2348 + 330 B.c. (No.
C-598). This is roughly equivalent to La Perra. However, Peruvian
agriculture of this time lacked maize; only domesticated roots and a
local bean were cultivated. The other dates at Huaca Prieta are
reasonably consistent with the stratigraphy. They indicate the
first appearance of plain pottery between 1200 and 1000 B.c. In the
near-by Virii Valley the radiocarbon dates for the early Guafape
culture, characterized by plain pottery, is slightly earlier, 1149 +
200 B.c. and 1849 + 150 B.c. (L-122c, L-122f).° It is important to
note that the above dates are determined from charcoal. Dates on
  5. Bird, 1951.
  6. Kulp e/ al., 1952.
              THE   SIGNIFICANCE    OF RADIOCARBON    DATES          151

shell appear to be uniformly too early. A well-developed ceramic
complex and domesticated maize is found in the following middle
Guafiape of Vird and is dated 1199 + 90 B.c. (L-122a).’ In view
of various archeological correlations, this date is rather too early.
The equivalent of this in the coast Chavin complex, called “Cupis-
nique,” is dated 715 + 200 B.c. (C-75). It should be noted that
the Cupisnique pottery and stylistic complex appears fully de-
veloped; its arrival, coincident with maize, suggests outside influ-
ences with a long previous history elsewhere.
   As was the case with Middle America, the Peruvian radiocarbon
dates on agricultural beginnings were earlier than had been antici-
pated, but their acceptance necessitated no major revisions in chron-
ological alignments. In both areas domesticated plants are recorded
as far back as 2500 B.c., or earlier, and these plants are products of
rather simple, preceramic cultures which undergo relatively little
change for several centuries. There is another parallel in the abrupt
appearance of a full-fledged Formative type culture—Cupisnique
on the Peruvian coasts—and the Pueblito pottery-agricultural
period in the Tamaulipas Highlands. The significant difference
between early agriculture in Peru and Middle America is the much
greater age of maize in the latter area.
   About ten dates on samples from various levels of the Formative,
or ‘“‘American Neolithic,” culture are not out of line with tenable
ideas concerning correlation of materials in the valley of Mexico
and the Guatemalan Highlands. At this stage, say, from about
1500 B.c. on to the younger dates determined, changes and de-
velopments in the highly organized groups were rapid. Variations
or lack of precision perhaps, amounting to 100 years more or less in
the dates, to say nothing of large counting errors, are sometimes diffi-
cult to accommodate in the short space of time available. In the
present instance, however, adjustments because of the ranges are
remarkably few.
   As Willey observes, the dates indicate that a fully developed
Formative culture was under way as early as 1500 B.c. in the valley
of Mexico and, probably, elsewhere. A terminal horizon for the
Formative is established by the various proto-Classic dates which
fall between 700 and 200 B.c. (e.g., Nos. C-422, C-426, L-113,°
   7. [bid.                   8. Kulp e/ al., 1951.
152                   RADIOCARBON      DATING

C-948, C-949, C-460, C-531, and C-685). Formative cultures have
been pushed back some 1500 years earlier than estimates of a decade
ago. This lengthening of the Formative time span downward
agrees, of course, with the early dates for American agriculture in
the preceding incipient agricultural or Preformative stage. At the
other end of the scale, however, the Middle American archeologist
runs into his first real difficulty with radiocarbon—the surprisingly
early termination of the Formative cultures and the corresponding
lowering of the beginnings of Classic civilizations. In Peru, in gen-
eral, the range of dates for the Formative is consistent within itself,
although there are some surprises. Notable among these is the
relatively early date for the very late Formative Gallinazo culture
 (682 + 300 B.c. [No. C-323]) and Paracas Necropolis (307 + 200
B.c. to A.D. 250 + 250 [Nos. C-271 and L-115]).® Gallinazo is known
to be not only later than Cupisnique (ca. 700 B.c.) but to be separat-
ed from it by another substantial period, the Salinar.
    For the most part the Peruvian dates are appreciably later than
those of the Middle American early Formative and suggest that
the formative threshold was significantly earlier in Middle America
than in Peru and that Middle American culture between the cen-
turies of 1000 and 600 B.c. may have been the source for maize,
developed ceramics, and temple-mound construction in Peru.
    Classic civilization in central Mexico and Oaxaca has two radio-
carbon dates which.are consistent with previous archeological
chronology as well as with the dates in the Formative in these
regions. The dates 294 + 180 B.c. (No. C-422) for Teotihuacén II
is a little far from but not irreconcilable with the date a.p. 298 +
185 (No. C-426) for Monte Alban III-A. The archeological cul-
tures are assumed to be contemporaneous and are considered to be
early Classic. Another Teotihuacan date, 1474 + 230 B.c. (No.
C-423) is, obviously, in error. Of extreme interest are dates on
lintels of temple doorways from the late Classic Maya site of Tikal.
The lintels have Maya dates which in the Spinden correlation are
translated as A.D. 481 and in the Goodman-Thompson correlation
as A.D. 741. The radiocarbon dates are amazingly close to the
Spinden correlation, being A.p. 481 + 120 (L-113),!° 469 + 120
B.c. (No. C-948), 433 + 170 (No. C-949). The continuation of
  9. Ibid.              10. Ibid.
         THE   SIGNIFICANCE     OF RADIOCARBON        DATES         153

the Classic Maya to a terminal date of about a.p. 650 may be ac-
complished by employing the Maya calendar. Thus there may be
suggested a range of the Middle American Classic from the last
centuries B.C. to A.D. 650 or a few hundred years earlier, as is indi-
cated by archeology, in areas outside the lowland Maya area. Dates
on Classic Mochica on the north coast of Peru and on Classic
Nasca from the south coast create an over-all impression that
Peruvian Classic cultures were, roughly, contemporaneous with those
of Middle America; that is, beginning in the late centuries B.c.
and continuing up through the first half of the first millennium a.pD.
    It is this time span of the Classic civilizations, as indicated by
radiocarbon dates from both Middle America and Peru, that has
come as the greatest surprise to most archeologists. Pushing back
the beginning of the Classic and the relatively early termination of
the Classic, at least in Middle America, produced the greatest shock.
Acceptance of the radiocarbon dates requires acceptance of the
Spinden correlation, and this creates a gap between A.D. 650 and 900.
Such an interval can be filled by drastic rearrangement of existing
ideas. It would be necessary to believe that the final centuries of the
Maya civilization witnessed a prolonged and drab decline. Otherwise
it is necessary to assume that a cultural horizon, the Tula-Toltec,
persisted for some 400 years, twice as long as previously believed.
This latter also requires a compensating drop back in time of the late
post-Classic cultures. The dilemma in Peru is quite similar, except
that there is no indigenous system of dating, and it is not so difficult
 to stretch out the Classic to cover the long span of years from late
B.C. times to about A.D. 1000. This latter is the usual estimate for the
 beginning of the Tiahuanaco horizon.
    These considerations form a basis for concluding, even in the
face of controversy, that the results of the radiocarbon dating meth-
od are, in general, sound. The examination and comparison of sev-
eral sequences in Middle and South America serve to segregate dates
on samples which are unsatisfactory or wrong and to indicate in-
compatibilities between some sequences. Importantly, however,
 the dates have contributed to ideas concerning the chronology of
 culture development in a large part of the New World. In some cases
 adjustments of archeological ideas to correspond with time determi-
 nations by radiocarbon require no drastic modification. Otherwise,
154                   RADIOCARBON       DATING

as in the question of the age of the Classic cultures, particularly
the Maya, necessary adjustments can be made, but they are far from
satisfactory to an impressive body of scholars. In view of the really
small number of dates and the character of some of the samples from
this Classic period, one can only record that full agreement between
archeology and radiocarbon results is not possible. Without much
question a clarification of this incompatibility involving the Classic
cultures of America is one of the most urgent matters requiring
the attention of both archeologists and physicists. Examination of
some above-mentioned dates which are obviously wrong gives rise
to questions concerning the assignment of the samples to specific
strata. As an example, one chooses, for Classic Mochica of the north
coast of Peru, the date a.p. 112 + 190 (No. C-619), which came from
a late Mochica burial with clearly identifiable pottery. Another date,
873 + 500 B.c. (No. C-382), is discarded, at least as a Mochica
date, for it is much too early. The latter sample is described as ash
mixed with bone. It was located on the habitation site, ground level,
beneath the pyramid Huaca del Sol at Moche, a pyramid considered
to be Mochica. This location is rather difficult to assign precisley,
and, in view of the date and its conflict with the Formative, one
can hazard a guess that, owing to difficulties of collection, the sample
does not correspond to its description. In contrast to the preceding
there are a few dates from the region which are not correct, but the
source of the error cannot be determined from available records. A
type of question also arises in considering data such as the earliest
date at Bat Cave. The date 3981 + 310 B.c. (No. C-573) was de-
termined on charcoal from a lower level in the cave. Whether or not
this actually dates the occurrence of maize is not certain, for a full
account of the excavation has not yet been published. On the basis
of other data it has been guessed that the date on corn will be
about 2500 B.c. These figures are most tenuous; possibly they should
not be published. Another error is an example of probable curatorial
problems. The date 1475 + 230 (No. C-423) for Teotihuacan III
is obviously wrong, and one needs only to read that the sample was
collected in 1921 in order to assume that it has become contaminated
in some fashion.                                 !
    The evaluation employed for the Middle and South American
 material could be expanded if space permitted. Sequences of dates on
          THE     SIGNIFICANCE    OF RADIOCARBON          DATES      155

strata in southwestern North America and on samples from caves and
other deposits in the Great Basin and the West Coast region provide
a chronological framework, particularly for the “early Lithic”’ and
“Archaic” cultures." Here we see, for example, a sequence of dates
on the stages of the Cochise culture of Arizona (Nos. C-511, C-515,
C-518, C-519, and C-556). These ages are now generally accepted
and appear to be compatible with most geological opinion as well
as with contributing archeological evidence. Similarly dates from
Nevada, Oregon, and California indicate that man was well estab-
lished in the region previous to 7000 B.c. This series of radiocarbon
dates has contributed to the steadily growing opinion that cultures
other than those of the Folsom-Yuma tradition were contemporane-
ous with it. One reads also of the opinion that Folsom may have
developed in the region east of the Rocky Mountains to move north-
ward during the latter part of its existence.
   Dates on eastern archeological complexes are as yet far too few to
permit any general regional interpretations. The initial attempts to
date Adena and Hopewell cultures and some phases of the Archaic
cultures in the Southeast were far from satisfactory, largely because
many of the samples were unsuitable for this purpose. Determina-
tions since 1952 confirm the general opinion that Adena preceded
Hopewell. In addition, the dates indicate that the two cultures
overlapped in time. Many more dates are needed, and additional
archeological analysis such as that recently published by Fowler’?
must be completed before this problem, one of many in the East,
may be solved.
   Of specific interest are two dates on the “Old Copper” culture
apparently centered in Wisconsin. Three samples produced two
dates, 3650 + 600 years (No. C-836) and 5560 + 600 years (Nos.
C-837 and C-839). The full significance of these dates is uncertain
at this writing. The culture has long been recognized as an old one.
The indicated ages are, however, a little surprising. It is possibly not
significant to comment that these are the earliest dates known for a
copper industry, at least in the New World.
   The significance to archeology of eight dates from Barbeau Creek
Rock Shelter (Nos. C-899, C-900, C-903, C-904, C-905, C-907, and
C-908) is not known, for a report on the excavation has not
  11, Willey and Phillips, n.d.       12. Fowler, 1955.
156                   RADIOCARBON      DATING

been issued. However, the dates from the lowest levels, ranging
from about 7100 B.c. to 8600 B.c., are the earliest recorded for
the presence of man in the East. Some of these are obviously of the
order of ‘‘early Lithic’’ dates, but the culture may be classifiable as
Archaic. The site ‘“‘consists of a 25.5-foot-deep midden deposit and is
situated at the base of an 82-foot sandstone bluff that projects over
and protects the site” (cf. p. 101 above). The method of collecting
the samples by ‘hand picking,” washing in water, screening, and
so on, as described in the listing of the dates, should be of particular
interest to collectors. There is considerable variation in some of the
dates, but it isnot possible to assess the significance of these, and we
await with interest the analysis and conclusions of the excavators of
the site.
    The situation in regard to dates on geological events is analogous
to that in archeology. That is, there exists, particularly for North
America, a basic but incomplete chronological framework to
which additions are being constantly made. In this, there are dates
which are either obviously wrong or subject to controversy. There
 are geologists, too, who seriously question the validity of some se-
 quences of dates. As far as it is possible for a student outside the
 field to judge, the reasons for these difficulties are quite similar to
 those mentioned for archeology. Aside from contaminated samples,
 the reason for which may or may not be discoverable, the major
 source of disagreement can be traced to the process of selection and
 collection of samples. It does appear that a large proportion of the
 controversy concerning accuracy of dates or sequences of them is
 based actually upon disagreement. concerning interpretation of the
 stratigraphy. The foregoing statement does not suggest or imply in
 any way adverse criticism, for such would be most unrealistic, if not
 illogical. At the present stage of geological knowledge there are
 numerous stratigraphic situations which are open to varying inter-
 pretation. However, it may be suggested that, given a truly repre-
 sentative sample, or preferably a series of them from a stratigraphic
 sequence, the radiocarbon dates can be of major assistance in de-
 termining the order and timing of geological events. In order to do
  this, however, it is sometimes necessary to revise a number of deeply
  intrenched and unprovable opinions concerning time required by
  geological processes, such as the advance and retreat of glacial ice.
           THE   SIGNIFICANCE        OF RADIOCARBON          DATES            157

   Of all phenomena which have been dated by radiocarbon, the
age of the Two Creeks Forest Bed in Wisconsin is the most certain.
At least seven concordant determinations have been made by two
laboratories (Nos. C-380, C-365, C-366, C-536, C-537, W-42, and
W-83).13 The age of the forest bed averages about 11,400 + 350
years (9400 B.c.). This and a number of other dates, for example,
Nos. C-674 and C-630, establishes the maximum of the Mankato
advance of the Wisconsin ice at about 10,000 years ago. It is pos-
sible to correlate a number of succeeding dates with various stages
of development of the Great Lakes and propose, as Flint has done,
a very tentative but nonetheless important and interesting account
of late Wisconsin substage and events in the northeastern United
States and southeastern Canada." In spite of uncertainties concern-
ing some details, there is considerable background supporting the
major contentions. Although these are promising as far as geology
in the East and within the boundary of the glaciated area is con-
cerned, correlations with deposits and other phenomena in un-
glaciated regions poses a number of complicated problems which
have not been solved at this writing. The dates in Danger Cave,
Utah (Nos. C-609, C-610, C-611, C-635, C-636, and C-640), chal-
lenge some previous correlations and inferred chronologies of the
various shorelines established during the history of Lake Bonneville.
By implication, this also involved interpretations of the signif-
icance of moraines and analogous deposits in the Rocky Mountains.
These are major problems which are the subject of continuing
research.
   Another series of dates contributing to closely related problems
has been published since 1952. The progress of the development of
the gas counting method has made possible the refinement of dates
which were somewhat beyond the reach of the solid-carbon method
employed by Libby. Combined with these remeasurements, addi-
tional dates on older materials begin to point to possible correla-
tions of Tazewell, Cary, and earlier stages of the Wisconsin Age.
The chronology of pre-Mankato advance and retreat of glacial ice
across Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois, Indiana, and Iowa can be out-
lined. There is some disagreement as to how the dates should be
    13. Suess, 1954.                14. Flint, 1953.                  i
    15. Andover Conference on Radiocarbon Dating. Discussions of presentations by
Flint and Horberg served to outline several points of view.
158                           RADIOCARBON           DATING

labeled and which ones are incompatible, but névertheless a reason-
able scheme can be postulated. Comparison of these dates with the
dates from layers in Searles Lake (Nos. C-894, C-895, C-896, and
C-897) supports the suspicion that dates in the East are of the
correct magnitude and that various phenomena outside the glaciated
region may be correlated with them. Such an idea is subject to con-
troversy, to say the least.!® The series of interlocking problems are
the subject of several investigations being carried out by R. F. Flint
in collaboration with M. Rubin, W. A. Gale, and others.!7
   The preceding discussions have been based entirely upon informa-
tion from the    New World, largely because the greatest number of
age determinations are from this hemisphere. A glance at the meas-
urements from the Old World reveals the fact that the status of
the method is closely parallel to that in the Americas. There are
dates of unquestioned validity; there are dates which present prob-
lems in interpretation; and there are dates which undoubtedly are
wrong for reasons which have already been explained.
   One series of dates is of great interest. The age of the Allerdd
period in Europe established initially by Libby’s measurements,
and especially as a result of research by the Carbon-14 Dating
Laboratory at Copenhagen,"* has proved that the Alleréd in Europe
was contemporaneous with the Two Creeks Forest Bed in Wisconsin.
This suggests the probability that Pleistocene events in the Old
World and the New World were synchronous. Additional but less
certain evidence of contemporaneity of events may be inferred from
the date from Poggenwisch, Holstein, Germany. The age is 15,150 +
350 years (No. W-93),!® and it is-a date for an Upper Paleolithic
reindeer-hunting culture. Also it belongs in the ‘Older Dryas’”’ level
according to pollen analysts. The sample was associated with the
drift of the Pomeranian glacier, which may, by collation of other
sequential information, be tentatively correlated with the Cary
glaciation in North America.
   The various dates from the Near East are of equal interest. Those
from samples of known age have been mentioned. Samples from
      16. See, e.g., Antevs, 1953, 1954.
      17. Personal communication, January, 1955.
      18. Flint and Deevey, 1951, p. 266; Anderson et al., 1953; Iverson, 1953.
      19. Suess, 1954.
          THE    SIGNIFICANCE          OF RADIOCARBON            DATES            159

Nippur (No. C-752) were used to test the limit of sensitivity of the
method. As a result of 1 month of steady counting time for each of
three samples the date 1993 + 106 B.c. strongly favors the younger
of the possible calendars derived from the Mesopotamian king lists.
This date serves to fix a point in “the whole interwoven fabric of
historic interrelationships of western Asia and Egypt in the early
part of the second millennium B.c.’’ Other dates from the Near East
of interest and importance are the dates on the early Neolithic site
at Jarmo in Iraq (Nos. C-113, C-742, C-743, and C-744). The dates
from the lower levels indicate the general age of the beginning of
village life at a preceramic stage of culture development in the Fer-
tile Crescent.
   To terminate here comments on the radiocarbon dates which
have been published is to provide an account having significant
lacunae. Much has been omitted concerning the Old World, but it
is expected that the development of laboratories now progressing in
Cambridge and London, Copenhagen, Goteborg, Heidelberg,
Rome, Stockholm, and Trondheim will result in reports and dis-
cussions which will fill the gap. Also, little has been said specifically
concerning the relationship between some dates and pollen chro-
nology. This has been the subject of some valuable comments,” and,
of course, some of the discussion of geological problems includes by
implication information from pollen analysis from both the Old
World and the New. Also omitted have been comments on oceano-
graphic problems,” for these are far beyond the competence of the
present author. It is to be hoped that these omissions are not
serious, since a study of world-wide radiocarbon chronology was
not the purpose of this essay. The intent was to indicate the scope
of the method and its general usefulness as a tool to be employed
by any field which was concerned with appropriate subject matter.
Dates and sequences in American archeology and geology were
briefly Jisted and discussed as examples of the usefulness of a
method having the attributes of the one under consideration. Be-
cause of the recency of the method, cogitation over the validity
of the results was inevitably a subject of much of the discussion. It
is our contention that the magnitude of the error inherent in the
  20. Deevey and Potzger, 1951; Flint and Deevey, 1951.
  21. Kulp, 1952, has a short outline of the problems in oceanography at that time.
160                         RADIOCARBON        DATING

method is not so large as the number of years quoted for the purpose
of invalidating it. It is also our opinion that, barring mistakes by
collectors and laboratory workers, the very large majority of the
errors are traceable to the process of selection and collection of
samples. Such range all the way from faulty observation of condi-
tions in the ground to controversy over the significance of a given
stratum. More than anything else the record of success is ample
proof that the superlative research of Libby and his associates have
provided science with a valuable and uniquely useful tool.


                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY
ANDERSON, E. C., Levi, HitpE, and TauBEr, H. 1953. ‘‘Copenhagen Natural
   Radiocarbon Measurements I,’’ Science, 118, 4-6.
ANDOVER CONFERENCE ON RADIOCARBON DATING, OCTOBER 21-23, 1954,
   Puittres ACADEMY, ANDOVER, MASSACHUSETTS. An unpublished steno-
   graphic record of the discussions.
ANTEVS, ERNST. 1953. “‘Geochronology of the Deglacial and Neothermal
   Ages,” J. Geol., 61, 195-230.
        . 1954. “Geochronology of the Deglacial and Neothermal Ages: A
   Reply,” bid., 62, 516-21.
Birp, Juntus. 1951. “South American Radiocarbon Dates,” in FREDERICK
   Jounson (ed.), Radiocarbon Dating: A Report on the Program to Aid in
   Development of the Method of Dating (‘Society for American Archaeology
   Memoirs,” No. 8 [Salt Lake City, 1951]), pp. 37-49.
DEEVEY, Epwarp S., JR., and Porzcrr, JoHN E. 1951. “Peat Samples for
   Radiocarbon Analysis: Problems in Pollen Statistics,” Am. J. Sci., 249,
   473-511.
DEEVEY, EDwarp S., Jr., Gross, Marsua S., Hurcutnson, G. E., and Kray-
   BILL, Henry L. 1954. ‘“The Natural C-14 Contents of Materials from Hard-
      Water Lakes,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 40, 285-88.
FLiint, RIcHARD Foster. 1953. ‘“‘Probable Wisconsin Substages and Late-Wis-
   consin Events in Northeastern United States and Southeastern Canada,”
   Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., 64, 897-919.
Frint, RicHarp Foster, and DEEVEy, Epwarp S., Jr. 1951. “Radiocarbon
   Dating of Late-Pleistocene Events,” Am. J. Sci., 249, 257-300.
Fowter, Metvin L. 1955. “Ware Grouping and Decorations of Woodland
      Ceramics in Illinois,” Am. Antiguity, 20, 213-25.
GRIFFIN, JAMES B. 1952. ‘‘Radiocarbon Dates for the Eastern United States,”
   in James B. GrirrFin (ed.), Archaeology of the Eastern United States (Chicago,
   1952), pp. 365-70. (This chapter lists, among others, a number of dates de-
   termined by the University of Michigan Memorial—Phoenix Project Radio-
   carbon Laboratory.)                                 :
Hopxins, B. M., and Gippines, J. L., Jr. 1953. Geological Background of the
      Iyatayet Archaeological Site, Cape Denbigh, Alaska. (‘Smithsonian     Mis-
      cellaneous Collections,” Vol. 121, No. 11.) Washington, D.C.
           THE    SIGNIFICANCE    OF RADIOCARBON         DATES          161
Iverson, Jous. 1953. “Radiocarbon Dating of the Alleréd Period,” Science,
   118, 4-11.
JOHNSON, FREDERICK (ed.). 1951. Radiocarbon Dating: A Report on the Program
   To Aid in Development of the Method of Dating. (‘Society for American
   Archaeology Memoirs,” No. 8.) Salt Lake City.
Kup, J. LAuRENCcE. 1952. “The Carbon-14 Method of Age Determination,”
   Scientific Monthly, '75, 259-67.
Kutp, J. LAURENCE, FEELEY, HERBERT W., and Tryon, Lansinc E. 1951.
   “Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements I,” Science, 114, 565-68.
Kutp, J. LAURENCE, Tryon, Lansinc E., ECKELMAN, WALTER R., and SNAIL,
   Witttam A. 1952. “Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements II.’ Sci-
   ence, 116, 409-14.
RALPH, ELIZABETH. 1955. “‘University of Pennsylvania Radiocarbon Dates I,”
   Science, 121, 149-51.
Suess, Hans E. 1954. “U.S. Geological Survey Radiocarbon Dates I,” Science,
   120, 467-73.
WILLEY, Gorpon R. 1954. “Archaeological Problems and Radiocarbon Dates
   in South and Middle America.”’ (Manuscript of paper presented to the An-
  dover Conference on Radiocarbon Dating, October 21-23,°1954.)
WILLEY, Gorpon R., and Puitiips, Pururp. n.d. “Methods and Theory in
   American Archaeology. II. Historical Developmental Interpretation.”
   (Manuscript.)
4                                   }                                 ,                                -
                                                                                                         : "’                                               :           7 4                            —


                  ny                               20K)                                    Seta AEAee mane

                                                                                                                                             '             aa
                                                                                                                               a                                    (eataa ma
                                                             Pr            i                       wi              pe           ty Las                             <i a.                                           ‘

                                                                                                                                y meds                          es ee a
                                                                                                                                                                      ce                               Mgt
                    (yan                           ayeabd seh Nestea,                                                                        haat                      Ll     Smead                                             ay
                                                                                   i                           #s             ws   Pz.                                     “ey i ahi kes Me Dee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                  at                           ?                              oe ont   yer                             heVx or eS         (at
                    6          Ga enti                  he7 | least t nds                                                                                       Oe                                 (aA Woot
                  ayit        4 Ags                    +>         ay-                      yet             ~        ver       TEN   at               We     al    sitly. aor              t, creer                                    i    af
                              “tt
                                             ok?
                                             Ie
                                                              aia te                                           ,              aLivens
                                                                                                                                                           jill f §dhompt,’ ryCOTE
                                                                                                                                                      Lastpae                 ey f2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                diy   re

                  "))         Cid            CRG                                       AM                  wv             riteho                     Io yigtes                ve          ow) Pip Oe               eae a
                                                                                                                                                                                           re)
                                                                                                                                                                                            5k               Ahi
                  mine                       “\l.cabets                        =                               vidio                             ae                             £OP               eo aaea

              wd                Pode                                                               2                  hte                De wale A” “ 9                                                “iAse ;
                    RE              eR ort                                         87 eh Tay                                   eens                                    iA                         hd         hiwae
                         ‘               4                                                                     bins Cn                               prarmriatree ry eri)
                  nerd                             Une                     ate ch                                  OO               ee                      A               7        if           SF eae
                        VRRP                       at                     Se) aia                                             iT Loerh                                           ge wp nA
                                                                                                                                                                                       inh
    i                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '
7                                                                 A                    io                                                                                                                   _


                                                                                                                                    rt               Vye)        ar:            sat               Ny        ef eel          a

iG                      iy
|             i          ,                         *                                       :                                                     ‘          Veet                      2s                      ia       F
                        1d          Gog            OO.                                 j                                  a              ,             a          Mepee!        gs         fa          Cr      )
                    yw              ae                                    yo                                                        Pe                            ad                      hy,                          AN
a:                      “52             7"                   of
                                                            mim
                                                                                                                                    mh               1h]           ee            e
             ~Yhangnn                   «Meme 02                                                                              2 Puevene,                         Toei,                     ely:        ieee Rade
     oe.                pS                                            ous                              «*             \/ eae +6 fake Tee”                                                              oF
                                                                                                                   ‘wat                                                 PA      Wie                TN        Ee
        <           ay?                                                    is                                        iiliait. ia lesa
        Pee    aa
          7 Push aan                                                  Ae te
                                                                                       a Na“aFRIGPigdks
                                                                                                    alitypolesaBe Mian
            Fat 2s Mimine "38.                                                                                                           UilhegRises wht Mae




                                         oidVl                                                             y~. i"
                                            ‘aioe >
                                                   ars
                           fei ed Gh)A a Bl      ea
SPECIAL EQUIPMENT AND CHEMICALS FOR THE
     C4 SAMPLE PREPARATION APPARATUS

                   Item                                   Source
Vycor combustion tubes; 25 mm. I.D.,          Corning Glass Works
  31 mm. O.D., 750 mm.
Iron tube; 30 inches, 14 O.D., 0.035 wall     Central Steel and Wire Company
Copper oxide; wire form                       Merck and Company
Hydrochloric acid, CP                         Baker and Adamson Company
Ammonia CP                                    Baker and Adamson Company
Calcium chloride, dihydrate, AR               Mallinckrodt Chemical Company
Magnesium turnings, CP                        Merck and Company
Cadmium metal                                 See Dr. Bergman (Institute for
                                                 the Study of Metals)
Furnace tubes, alumdum; 4cm. I.D., 9-inch     Norton Company
  lengths or longer
Nichrome wire, Nos. 20 and 28                 Driver-Harris Company
Pyrex fritted disks; medium; No. 39570-10     Sargent Company
Drierite; mesh No. 4                          Sargent Company




                                     163
                          ACP PEN          DHEXS B

             SPECIAL      MATERIALS FOR               SCREEN-
                          WALL COUNTER

          Item                     Source                       Type
Unleaded brass tubing      American Brass, 1327
  (direct from mill,         West Washington
  $51.70 per 100 lb.)        Street, Chicago, Illi-
                             nois (Mr. Baker)
Stainless Steel            Steel Sales                  18-8; Type 304, 302
Copper (Commercial         Chas. Besley, Chicago
  Copper)
Spool copper-clad iron-    Sylvania Electric Com-
  core wire, Nos. 28         pany
  (0.012) and 30




                                     164
                                                                                                                                                                                a                                                     i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ue



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7




                                                                                                                                                                  a                         ~                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                        3                                                                             ee



                                                                                                                                                                holt                                                                                             1



                                                                                                                                                                       ’                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                   .                            t

                                                                                                                                                                      1




           q                                                                                                                                                      »                                 1                                                                      es
       4                >    toed!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¢r


       ie
       :
       Ca’            ree
                               Lt
                                    w}
                                              3                      ole
                                                                                            )
                                                                                                                                       hire             a
                                                                                                                                                                            oe  ‘vor.
                                                                                                                                                                                 mK
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ’                        ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ce
(sue           f a id        bg Hi [ eye:                      Ss          !   .                Nis“_                                                  ihe de               1       ‘                                                 ‘2               }         ey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  oy
| Ee TL                     Oe           le                         ee             heal                           me                          i         ie                  ]                                                                               yA                      fi:
Nah gSSe                                 ee                                            ae                                                                                                                                                                             ff
oll
7
      ie                                 oe ee                                                                                  Pye               56            + Aree                                  en                        Tie                                |
 ence,
 ‘                                                We           #                                                                  ng he es                                 14                                                     bo                   Wi : A
                                                                                                                                 Abgt  ey,                                            ee                              }                                 me
 c              ry                            v
               rs           xp            i               ;                        y                         v1            :          : rf P              vt                                                                                  t                      te




  eos ty fear           15      eee               ;                 ih
                                                                                                 ;
                                                                                                         i                     Wa
                                                                                                                                 renee | |
                                                                                                                                        At
                                                                                                                                                       4 ‘
                                                                                                                                                         oe      ‘be
                                                                                                                                                                       ae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )                   i            wer

                  } hw
                  : }
                                    ee
                                     Tal                      : v
                                                                         ee, a ee                                                     pe»; cA pla? RnLt} SAN hr
                                                                                                                                                              7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 als
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c                       ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1h hie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :                    :
                            etek                      %             ey                               I                 ah             ‘ bets                    i, iP ur                        ie                    Yon             ia ny




                                                                                                                       ;       yy aun?



                                                                                                                               Wottix ei y
Tie)           ad                             f,
                                             anf       *9°. oye
                                                             eae                      i. oe
       ie                                     He            ae                        oa
       ar) |                        .                            a
                                             <q                          .


  ar                            i
  5                                                                                       i


                                                                             =)

                                                                *                             j


                                                        :   4        7
                                                  yl    i       “ie                   }

                                                                                      :



                                        ad
                        7   7            ee                                       “
                                    as    ADM
                    y                   i,   *v                                       ‘




                                                                         ark Se (hs a oe
                                                                                      tw          Fe   ify
                           INDEX          OF      SUBJECTS
Air, effects of, in counters, 70                  Dating by radiocarbon
Alcohol absorption by sample, effect of,            checks on, by materials of known age,
     on counting efficiency, 69                        10 (Fig. 1)
Anticoincidence shielding, 66-68                    immutability of decay rate for C'4, 9
                                                    principles of, 1-11
Background rates                                _ “Drag-in” voltage, effect of varying, 58
  cross-averaging of, 70, 71
  magnitude of, 68                                Error in age, method for calculating, 32
Biosphere       \
                                                    evidence for correctness of counting
                                                       error, 71
  radiocarbon content of, 14, 15
  total carbon in, 21, 22, 24
                                                    limit in principle of, 71
                                                  Exchange reservoir
                                                    effect of Ice Age on size of, 31
Cleaning of counter, 71                             temporal variation of, 31
Cosmic-ray neutrons
   average intensity of, 4, 28-30                 Gas counters
   constancy of, over last several thousand         absolute efficiency of, 39
      years, 7                                      end loss of, 37, 40
   cross-section of, for C14 formation, 2           wall loss of, 40
   effect of variation in intensity of, on
      C' content, 7                               Half-life of radiocarbon, 34, 42
   energies of, 2
   formation of tritium from, 2, 3                Isotopic fractionation, and relative spe-
  intensity variation of, with altitude, 1             cific activities of organic and inor-
  intensity variation of, with latitude, 4, 6          ganic carbon, 8
  interaction of, with atmosphere, 1, 2, 3
  secondary character of, 1                       Mean life of radiocarbon, 33
   12-minute half-life of, 1                      Mixing in exchange reservoir
Counter                                             of atmosphere, 24
  construction of, 65                               of biosphere, 24
   effects of air in filling on, 70                 of ocean, 25-28
   effects of pulse multiplicity on, 64           Mounting of sample, 60
  effects of reversing leads of, 69
  effects of varying screen bias voltage          Neutrons
      on, 58                                        formation of C*4 from, 2
  efficiency, measurements of, 60                   intensities of, from cosmic rays, 1-6,
  ethyl alcohol quenching gas, 69                      28-30
  ethylene quenching gas, 69                        radioactivity of, 1
  filling of, 64
  pulse testing of, 64                            Ocean carbonate, 18-21
  pumping of, 64
Counter shielding                                 Quenching gases, 69
  anticoincidence shielding, 66, 67, 68
  steel shield for, 66, 67, 68                    Radiocarbon
  theory of, 66, 67                                 amount of, in atmosphere, 7, 8
Counting efficiency                                 amount of, in biosphere, 7, 8
  effect of quantity of sample on, 61               amount of, in carbonate in sea, 7, 8
  for samples, 59, 60                               amount of, in organic matter in sea, 7
Counting error                                      distribution of, in nature, 4, 5, 6, 12-33
  agreement of, with scatter of results             effect of variation in cosmic rays on, 7, 8
      ay several portions of same sample,           formation of, from cosmic-ray neutrons,
       1                                               2, 3,4
  standard deviation of, 71                         half-life of, 2
Counting techniques, 72-75                          rate of formation of, 4
                                            167
168                        RADIOCARBON         DATING
Radiocarbon—Continued                       Sample cylinder
  relative abundance of, in carbonate and     cleaning of, 71
     organic matter, 8                        evidence for cleanliness of, 71
  site of formation of, 2, 4, 5             Sample preparation, details of, 45-53
  specific activity found for, 6, 7         Sample thickness, effect of, on counter
  specific activity predicted for, 6, 7          efficiency, 61
  total amount of, on earth, 4              Samples, acceptable, 44
  total annual production of, 24, 25        Screen-wall counter, 57
Rate of mixing of deep ocean water, 25-27   Sedimentary loss of radiocarbon, 24
Replacement of carbon, 44                   Steel shield, 66-68
Reservoir exchange, 31
                                            Thermal. mixing of great oceanic depths,
Sample                                           26, 27
  acid extraction after reduction of, 49
                                            Tritium
  combustion of, 46
                                              formation of, from cosmic-ray neu-
  mounting procedure for, 61-63
                                                 trons, 3, 4
  preparation of final carbon for mount-
                                              total amount on earth of, 4
     ing of, 51
  reduction of, 49
Sample alteration, 44                       Wax, deKhotinsky, preparation of, 65
                                INDEX       OF NAMES
Agnew, H. M., 1                                       Carrion, Rebecca, 133
Aldrich, L. T., 3                                     Casal, M. J. M., 84
Allain, J., 85                                        Caso, Alfonso, 140
Allen, Clifford, 123                                  Caton-Thompson, Gertrude, 77, 78
Allen, E. C., 20                                 _ Chaney, R. W., 136, 138
Anderson, E. C., v, 4, 7, 12, 28, 30, 42, 45,         Clark, J. Desmond, 136, 137, 138, 139
  47, 72,141, 158                                     Collier, Donald, v, 15, 76, 112, 133, 134
Anderson, W., 139                                     Cook, H. J., 108
Antevs, Ernst, 31, 113, 116, 143, 158                 Coon, Carleton S., 83
Arellano, A. R. V., 129                               Cooper, Paul L., 124, 127
Arkell, A. J., 78                                     Cooper, W. S., 121
Armit, Margaret, 78, 79                               Cornog, R., 3
Arnold, J. R., v, 42, 45, 72                          Cotter, John, 106
                                                      Cowan, C. L., 69
                                                      Craig, H., 8, 17
Baby, R.S., 94, 100, 104                              Crane, H. R., 54, 72, 74, 75
Baker, F. C., 98                                      Crathorn, A. R., 73
Ballentine, R., 5, 34, 35, 36                         Cressman, L. S., 119, 120, 121
Barbour, E. H., 110                                   Curtis, L. F., 35
Barendsen, G. W., 54, 73, 74                          Cutler, Hi, .G:, 133
Barghoorn, E. S., 90
Barratt, A. Frank, 93                                 Daly, R. A., 31
Barschall, H. H., 2, 29, 30                           Darlington, H. C., 105
Battat, M. E., 29                                     Daugherty, Richard, 121
Baumgartel, Elise, 77, 78                             Davis, E. Mott, 110
Beardsley, R. K., 115                                 Deason, H. J., 15
Bernstein, W., 5, 34, 35, 36                          deBono, Fernand, 77
Bethe, H. A., 29                                      Deevey, Edward S., Jr., 11, 15, 45, 85, 90,
Bird, J. B., 15, 132, 133, 134, 150                     91, 96, 122, 158, 159
Blanc, M. Severin, 85                                 DeJarnette, D. L., 106
Blau, M., 15                                          Deuel, Thorne, 95
Borbolla, D. F. R. de la, 128, 129                    deVries, Hl., 54, 73, 74
Boyes, Watson, 77                                     Dick, Herbert, 111
Braidwood, R. J., 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 84,         Dickinson, Phil, 114
   85                                                 Dietschy, Hans, 132
Braidwood, Mrs. R. J., 83                             Dreimanis, A., 91
Brailsford, J. W., 87, 88                             Dunand, M. A., 85
Brannon, H. R., 54, 73, 74                            Dunning, J. R., 35
Bretz, J Harlen, 95, 98, 99, 100, 122
Breuil, Abbé H., 85, 140                              Eckelman, W. R., 15
Bright, W. C., 1                                      Eggan, Fred, 98
Brown, H. S., 24                                      Eisely, L. C., 122
Brown, Ralph D., 135                                  Eller, E. R., 96
Brown, S. C., 34, 35                                  Emery, W. B., 77
Browne, B. C., 89                                     Emory, Kenneth P., 135, 139
Bryan, Kirk, 92                                       Engelkemeir, A. G., 5, 34, 35, 36, 39, 41,
Buch, K., 19, 20, 23                                     59
Buchsbaum, R., 32                                     Epstein, S., 32, 44
Buell, M., 122                                        Evans, Glen L., 107, 109
Bullard, E. C., 26                                    Evans, R. D., 5, 34, 35, 36
Burnet, R. M. P., 116
Burnett, E. K., 120                                   Fairbanks, Charles H., 111
Byers, H. R., 25                                      Feely, H. W., 15, 17

                                                169
170                            RADIOCARBON          DATING
Fejos, P., v.                                   Jepsen, G. L., 122
Fergusson, o J., 54, 73, 74                     Johnson, C. H., 2, 30
Firbas, F.,                                     Johnson, Frederick, v, vii, 15, 76, 90, 82,
Femie RiL, 19                                      127, 141
Flint, R. F., v, se 76, 85, 90, 97, 157, 158,   Johnson, M. W., 19
   150                                          Johnston, W. H, 4
Fowler, Melvin L., 98, 155                      Jones, W. M., 5, "35, 36, 42
Frey, David G., 105                             Jury, W., 91
Friedman, Irving, 125
Friedman, L., 5, 34, 35, 36                     Kamen, M. D., 35
Froman, D., 1                                   Karns, G. M., 47
Fryxell, R., 15                                 Kelso, James L., 84
                                                Kirshenbaum, A. D., 4
Gale, Hoyt S., 117                              Kivett, M. F., 104
Gale, W. A., 113, 114, 116, 158                 Kolnitz, H. van, 47
Garrod, Dorothy, 83                             Korff, S. A., 29
Gassner, F. X., 47                              Kouts, H. J., 30
Giddings,
     J. L., Jr., 127, 128, 145                  Kraeling, C. H., 84
Giffen, A. E. van, 89                            Kraybill, H. L., 11, 45
Gill, Edmund D., 136                             Krieger, Alex, 108
Godwin, H., 45, 88                               Kroeber, A. L., 133, 134
Goldthwait, R. P., 95, 96, 101                   Kubler, G., 133, ee
Greenberg, D. M., 20                            ‘Kuiper, G. P., 23,2
Gregg, C. C., 77                                 Kulp,J. L., 15, 17, 9, 131, 132, 141, 150,
Greisen, K., 37                                     151, 159°
Griffin, J. B., 90, 108, 141
Gross, Marsha S., 11, 15, 45                    Ladenburg, R., 1, 12, 28, 30
Grosse, A. V., v. 4, 35                         Langsdorf, A. S., Jr., 35
Grunlund, J., 35                                Lansing, Ambrose, 77
Gulbranson, E. A., 8, 17                        Larsen, Helge, 127
Gwynne, C. A., 97                               Laughlin, W. F., 127
                                                Rees D2 Ds 56
Hamill, W. H., 5, 34, 35, 59                    Leighton, M. M., 105
Harding, G. Lankester, 84                       Levi, Hilde, 72
Harrington, M. R., 117, 121                     Lowenstam, H. A., 32
Hartshorn, J., 92                               Lueninghoener, Gilbert C., 109, 110
Harvey, Cyril, 125, 126                         Lundsted, James A., 123
Hawkings, R. ‘om 35
Haxel, O., 73, 74,                              McCown, Donald E., 81, 82
Heizer, R. F590, 112) 113, 115) 116, 118;       McCrea, J. M., 32, 44
   128                                          McDaniel, E. W., 72
Hess, V. F.,. 1                                 McKinney, C. R., 32
Hessaby, M., 15                                 MacNeish, R. S., 129, 130
Hoffman, A. C., 139, 140                        Mangelsdorf, P. C., 111, 112
Hopkins, B. M., 145                             Mann, W. B., 35
Horberg, C. L., 91, 95, 98, 100, 122, 123,      Manov, G. G., 35
  126                                           Martin, Paul S., 112
Hospers, J., 89                                 Mason, R. J., 140
Howard, E. B., 116                              Matson, Frederick R., 101, 103
Howe, Bruce, 83                                 Meade, Grayson, 107
Hrdlicka, A., 128                               Melkonian, E., 29
Hubbs, Carl L., 115                             Miller, W. W., 5, 34, 35, 36, 42
Hughes, E. L., 69                               Mitchell, G. F., 87
Hunter, Fenley, 121                             Moberg, E. G., 20
Hunter, R. F., 35                               Morgenstern, K. H., 69
Hutchinson, G, E., 11, 45                       Movius, H. L., Jr., '85, 86, 135, 136, 137,
                                                   138, 139, 140
Inghram, M. G., 5, 34, 35, 59                   Mulloy, a          vey 125
Iverson, J., 158                                Murphy, B. F.,
Jacobsen, T., 77                                Nereson, N., 37
Janmart, J., 135                                Nier, A. O., 3, 5, 8, 17, 34, 35, 36
Jennings, Jesse D., 119                         Norris, L. D., 35
                                         INDEX                                         171
Oakley, K. P., 140                              Simpson, Ruth, 117
Ohga, Ichiro, 136, 137, 138                     Smiley, T. L., 134
O'Kelly, M. J., 87                              Smith, Guy D., 96
Olson, Jerry, 95                                Snell, W. E., 15
Oswalt, Wendell, 127, 128                       Spaght, M. E., 114
Overbeck, F., 86                                Spitzer, L., Jr., 25
                                                Spoehr, Alexander, 137, 138
Paneth, F., 23                                  Stevens, W. H., 35
Parker, Richard A., 77                          Stewart, T. Dale, 138
Peltier, Louis C., 106                          Strong, W. D., 133
Perry, ©. H.,.15                                Stuart, D.C., 131
Petrie, W. Flinders, 78                       » Suess, H. E., 15,53, 72, 73, 141, 157, 158
Phillips, P., 155                               Sullivan, E. F., 114
Piggott, Stuart, 89                             Sverdrup, H. U., 19, 20, 21, 25, 27
Placzek, G., 29.
Potzger, J. E., 96, 122, 159              ;    Taber, Stephen, 105
Pray, Lloyd C., 117                            Taggart, M. S., 54, 73, 74
Purbrick, R. L., 35                            Tanner, Lloyd, 109, 110, 125, 126
   i                                           Tauber, H., 72
Quimby, G., 94, 95, 106, 113                   Tench, Robert, 97
    ae                                         Terra, H. de, 128, 129, 130
Rabinowitch, E., 22                            Thorp, James, 108
Rafter, T. A., 72                              Thwaites, F. T., 122
Rainey, Froelich, v, 76, 77, 127               Troels-Smith, J., 86, 87
Ralph, Elizabeth, 141                          Tryon, L. E., 15, 17, 72
Read, W. F., 123, 126                          Tudge, Delia G., 132
Reed, E. C., 108
ely AEA, 32
Remington, R. E., 47
                                               Urey, Harold C., 32, 44, 115, 137
Revelle, R., 20, 26
Riley, G. A., 22                               Valera, Eamon de, 87
Ritchie, W. A., 92, 93                         Vaux, Pére de, 84 x
Ritzenthaler, Robert E., 126                   Vernadsky, W. J., 2 , 23
Robbins, William J., 94                            ‘
Roberts, F. H. H., 90, 104, 113, 126           Waite, H., 108
Robinson, Rooke, 140                           Webb, W. S., 90, 94, 98, 99, 106
Rosendahl, (@ 0, 121                           Wedel, Waldo R., 104, 125
Rossby C..-G., 28                              Weinberg, Saul, 77
Ruben, S., 35.                                 Weinhouse, S., 4, 35
Rubey, W. W., 28                               Wheeler, Richard P., 124, 127
Rubin, M., 158                                 White, G. W., 95
Ruhe, R. V., 103                               Wilcox, Ronald E., 97
     ;       :                                 Willey, G. R., 149, 150, 151, 155
Sayles, E. B., 113                             Williams, Howel, 115, 120, 131
Schenck, EIGS 135                              Williams, M., 54, 73, 74
Schlumberger, Daniel, 85                       Williams, Wayne, 97
Scholtes, W. H., 96, 103                       Wilson, John, 77
Schroeder, G., 22                              Wilson, L. R., 91, 122, 126
Schulman, E., 134                              Winters, H. D., 103
Schultz, C. B., 107, 108, 109, 110, 111,       Wolfgang, R. L.,4
  116, 125, 126
Schultz, Mrs. C. B., 116                       Yaffe, L., 35
Sellards, E. H., 107                           Yuan, L. C. L., 1, 4, 6, 12, 28, 30
Shook, Edwin M., 130, 131
Simpson, TEAS, Jr, alt 4, 6,127 13,175,730)     Zumberge,, J... 100
                                  INDEX             OF SAMPLES
A. SAMPLE NUMBER:                                                A. SAMPLE NuMBER—Continued:
                                                 PAGE                                                            PAGE

       1                                             77             204) V8 hs Singtelene                        129
     1D CAs          We See        piece mes aes 77                 205 SMG Noe AS            cot tae eee        129
     SOs.    faa aa ak.                              90             2OT 8 oui           soe oe ee                129
     CHAD Pe dhs hsdette eRe atesSue                 90             PAC eae MEE goer wakes a |                     94
     Stone ararc ly Okan qe Mee Reh                  90             216       5 Me tk ke                         112
     SO eS                        ode ake            90             221 baka: Asie: i cee                        117
     GO wee            ne seca ot aeaston ae         77             D224,     BY ie Saudash ae Lt ee             118
     OS      eta ee <. cigaree, Coma                106             DAT” Bias a) Ory eee ie                      118
     De Ce         ERE ET: Se            Re Fh       83             D514 = RS AEN 5 age Sogo                       94
     15 Soe                 he OEE BEL,             133             254)     4 ee a                                94
     CE ethan               Seen          ee AL 3 77                260 cai Vie          eee a      ae           127
   LO Tica ONE eo)                 See | 127                        2O6h.0.,       2 ean Bee se ome              127
   LODGE OR [an ee her ee                    ee     127             261      TL aASs < diye            oe eee      77
   103. SREY cobiy ccd, oR yeas be 134                              Og RUS sit Nene eaceaertins, Pen S40         133
   105,       Sos         eecali     de bee         105             276.2 thet ea             Weeee              118
   OSes                        Oe ey la ee 107                      Did Baca ba ye Nantr oe ayeCe                118
   LDDis center MOA ayia cen twee ect’ 2 127                        LIS      wriggle    n  peas One ae           118
   LDS RS         as. 2 Me                 A      ©  79             281, te Path             en eae              118
   CLS SES                  8. us 9)Fak we eke 79                   288.     carat      Cth      aEe gee           98
   L1G Reena                dS AL) oeae              94             DOB      ees       8   by.” coke ae et       118
   VAMC CRG aT a                is ae eee a          90             DOG TNE BR)           ar ao iecag            127
   PAU. Se           SE          ae        os ea 90                 BOL Mere ede 5) oa                  eee      128
   WDA ee            Sk SR             ee a2         90.            SO2K fs fy 5-3) oat Soe ee ee                122
   DDL al|:Set hore te Agee OR ee ee                 90             B08 aoe lis vies aot ioe cares               122
   12GF    Ree          ei     Teg.                  94             STS E bac cs Sice 5 ag Cee                   132
   TSG      er      ee          et     Matin es      94              SA        tyne tari’ alae cag cece          132
   Ueto)              ote aed ee ee ee               94             STON ern ties tear:                          132
   139: et          ROR RI Co og               kh    95              SUS) Pee Al lard pt - eee                   132
   14S SRN                   a, OP Waal.      beak 106              Sod eae ceded Lae ee, OR                     132
   ASOD Reem ee                  is So ae           106             S2oa cr come A           ee oo               133
   AST. Soe                  et AY «ssaaceeghh Gem! 106             O23) bo ules vas os          ie ace      e   133
   152.    geben           es)     oe       ee a 95                 SOLU ens Det anaes kane Ahoy Coe             122
   153%    Aken:          ©   XO Fy:5 baanee ow 108                 SOE Pe ee hee cues Ee ee ee                  121
   USA      wae BS: Bae aan. Ate bo                 106             CRE      eeni aaa           OTe ar hot         91
   159 eee eras eis br. Exaate Sages 134                            S36       ase 2 eeee ee                      105
   16S         eee               Bee. AS tae 111                    OST         Oe         ae       ee             86
   DO564:      ake       ets, eae eae 111                           SAO: nn Uc aanoh hak ee aa                     88
   U7) Ce           eet ol4 ae            eed       111             SE          igh      aly cine ee eee           88
   i       ese We Oe ce eerie a. ef 111                             GAS ba Se              Ge dans Shee            88
   L120 Opens.               sapere cL aes 111                      S47 MRP            Le     nee      ee          87
   17:Se ene                 Ssh. oein Gre talons 111               B49 Tc mbk v Sabie (eeye csab4 RT              88
   USOC        emma          8   Ss eee              94             SoS         ee aor, karo een                   88
   ee.             So es ose B 79                                   355. ¢ oh a a pe gee                 ee        87
   TSG MeW REMY <a. ch vy oh itm ane 112                            SOO" -A ot won a a. tenga                      87
   LOLS           aeee) senware 92                                   O68       A ed buat’ et ieee                   87
   ODT                ater hs dant easaeas 92                       S02 Ghee kt             zr ckes Pa           133
