                    PREFACE       TO THE       FIRST    EDITION

           |:IS a real pleasure to acknowledge the invaluable contributions
                of my collaborators, Drs. E. C. Anderson and James R. Arnold,
                in the development of the dating method. Certainly nothing
          would have been done without them. Dr. A. V. Grosse and his col-
         laborators at the Houdry Process Corporation concentrated the
         methane samples which first established the existence of radiocarbon
         in nature and laid a firm foundation for the program.
            The Committee on Carbon 14 of the American Anthropological
         Association and the Geological Society of America, consisting of
         Frederick Johnson, chairman, Donald Collier, Richard Foster Flint,
         and Froelich Rainey, in selecting the samples for measurement, ad-
         vising on priorities, and lending a friendly ear in troubled periods,
         have indeed earned our most heartfelt gratitude. We hope that the
         results of the research may in some small measure repay them for
         their efforts.
            It is also a privilege to thank the Wenner-Gren Foundation for
         Anthropological Research, formerly The Viking Fund, Inc., and its
         director, Dr. Paul Fejos, for the financial support of this research
         with two grants totaling some $35,000 in the years 1948, 1949, and
         1950. A small unexpended balance remains from these funds, which
         will be used over the years for occasional further measurements. This
         foundation, together with the University of Chicago, furnished the
         principal financial support for the entire research. We are very
         grateful indeed for this assistance.
            We also are indebted to the Air Force (Wright-Patterson Air
         Force Base, Contract AF 33[038]-6492) for a contract for the de-
         velopment of low-level counting techniques during the year 1949,
         the results of which were put to immediate use in the radiocarbon
         dating research.
            It is hoped that the present publication will contain the answers
         to most of the questions which will occur to an investigator con-
                                          Vv      Concordia Colles on
                                                   Bramaviti, Ne Ye 80
vi                  PREFACE   TO THE   FIRST EDITION

structing and operating equipment for the measurement of dates by
the radiocarbon technique. It is realized, however, that certain im-
portant details may have been omitted, and we would be pleased to
try to assist in the solution of any difficulties which other groups
may encounter.
                                                       W. F. Lipsy
     Curcaco, ILLINOIS
         PREFACE       TO THE      SECOND       EDITION

hk: improvements in the measurement technique developed
         since the first edition was published are described, and the
         hundreds of additional dates measured in our laboratory
are included in the tabulation of radiocarbon dates in chapter vi.
Chapter vii, ‘‘Reflections upon the Significance of Radiocarbon
Dates,”’ by I'rederick Johnson, has been revised and expanded.

                                                      W. F. Lippy




                                 vii
             *    0             "iy 3! Pasar *iSee viii ‘gsiaie            fins: ienkSH \ as
)        Leva!           ed              4 Ste heboidis        acy    se             ret only eaten”
          ode!           "G0         4    BP    usin   ten          erie             Ff+ ehantwarl:
                 ny!             ‘at           neabubAtbin     Fe OMe      use        “Ht of tadDebwly
                                                                      ps
          nk.                  Tee sonal                gift   AV     Adoitashtet”           ek ae
                               "le
    el           tOGRe         yrs Tea,                        Py
                                                    Moc! aes. oobitiGT Bopehtn
                                                                        o's    “
                                                                               Tae
                                                                                   = |

                                                                             au
    yet                TW                               yas                      :           7
            NOTES       ADDED         IN    1965"PRINTING



                      ADDENDUM         TO CHAPTER        I

     No important new point of principle has appeared in the last ten
  years. However, considerable refinements have developed. It now
  appears that there is some evidence for a deviation in the period
  4000-5000 z.P. (2000-3000 B.c.) in the direction of the radiocarbon
‘ dates being too young by perhaps 500 or 600 years for Egyptian
\ samples at the time of the First Dynasty (4800 to 5000 s.p.). Good
/ agreement generally has been found for the period back to about
  4000 B.p. The question of the source of the disagreement in the fifth
  millennium remains to be resolved. If it is historical, the radiocarbon
  dating method will remain unaffected. If it is in the method itself,
  grave corrections might prove necessary for all dates older than 4000
  years. (W. F. Libby, Science 140, 278 [1963].)
Ss

                     ADDENDUM         TO CHAPTER         II

        It appears that the specific activity of living matter now accurate-
     ly measured to be close to 13.56 + 0.07 disintegrations per minute
     per gram of carbon (J. Karlen, I. U. Olsson, P. Kalberg, and S.
     Kilicci, Arkiv Geophysik 4, 465 [1964]) raises the question of the
     total makeup of the reservoir. In the work described in this chapter
     and in chapter i, the total reservoir was set at 8.3 grams of carbon
     per cm? corresponding to a decay rate of 1.9 + 0.2 per cm’ per sec-
     ond. The most recent estimates of the cosmic-ray production rate is
     2.5 + 5 per cm? per second (R. E. Lingenfelter, Rev. Geophysics 1,
     35 [1963]). The entire discrepancy, if real, could be removed by
     adding some 2-3 grams of carbon per cm’ to the inventory, possibly
     as carbonate precipitation in the oceans. Owing to recent work on
     meteorites (M. Honda and J. R. Arnold, Science 143, 203 [1964]),
                                       ix
x                             ADDENDA

the evidence that the cosmic rays themselves have remained con-
stant is stronger now than ten years ago, and the only other factor
that might cause error is the earth’s magnetic field, which acts to
reduce the cosmic-ray intensity to about half the intensity a non-
magnetic earth would receive (W. Elsasser et al., Nature 178, 1226
[1956]). Some evidence exists for variation of the earth’s total
magnetic dipole (directional changes are of no importance to the
problem because of the completeness of mixing) (T. Nagata ef al.,
J. Geophys. Res. 68, 5277 [1963]).


                ADDENDUM         TO CHAPTER       III

   The half-life of radiocarbon now is accepted to be 5730 + 40
years, but for reasons of consistency in reporting, radiocarbon dates
are reported on the old value of 5570.years (H. Godwin, Nature 195,
984 [1962]).


                ADDENDUM          TO CHAPTER      IV

   The black carbon method described in chapters iv and v now is
obsolete. The present method uses pure carbon dioxide gas in a
proportional counter as described in the last paragraphs of chap-
ter iv.


                ADDENDUM          TO CHAPTER      VI

  Radiocarbon dates now are published in Radiocarbon, a supple-
ment of the American Journal of Science (Yale University Press;
Editors: E. S. Deevey, R. F. Flint, and I. Rouse). Radiocarbon now
is in its seventh year (Vol. 6, 1964).
                                  CONTENTS
    I, PRINCIPLES

   II. WoRLD-WIDE     DISTRIBUTION OF RADIOCARBON

  III. Hatr-Lire oF RADIOCARBON

SaLVs PREPARATION OF THE SAMPLE FOR MEASUREMENT

    V. MEASUREMENT        OF THE SAMPLE

   VI. RADIOCARBON DATES

  VII. REFLECTIONS    UPON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RADIOCARBON DaTES                 141
         By Frederick Johnson


                                  APPENDIXES
~ A. SPECIAL EQUIPMENT AND       CHEMICALS     FOR   THE   C!4 SAMPLE   PREPA-
     RATION APPARATUS .                                                          163
“ B. SpecIAL MATERIALS      FOR SCREEN-WALL     COUNTER      .                   164


                                    INDEXES
  INDEX OF SUBJECTS   .                                                          167

  INDEX OF NAMES                                                                 169

  INDEX OF SAMPLES    .                                                          172




                                          Xi
                                                              dese
ce
 1                                    \



     .                                                                              -




                                                                                                                             a        a               *s

                                                                                             y                               M |                    ? oe)
                                                                                                                                                      © fag                            5        shh    Ve eiper
                 l                                    ’                                 i                           gif                                    ek |                             inv?      bes     sollte vnngi
                                                                                                                                                we
                                                                                                       i            Piey't                                          l)                     Od         ae:                        i                   ¥
                                                                                            = LAA                                           A              BS        teg aU "Ty NL                          etd “2 ‘ool                          am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ts
                                                                                              1            a                 me ;                                                                            re                             bit
                                                                            :                                       ourtaay:                                        FURIAR,                             Bo ad veal ah oF
                                                                                                                                                                                                 “eG
                                                                            i               see                              ea,                    20%     Lite ar,               T09             ‘ee, Parra iy 4
                                                                                                                                          oer                                                                                               \
                                                                        ’                     ’                1
                                                                                                                     ine)                       4                                 re


         :           ee                                                                                                                                   EAU       he! Ue
                                                                                                                                                                         9                                  en re                                |
                                                          !                                                                  2,                       .         +                i i ~                      ret         @       17        ft     :

                                                  Or                        1                                      rue       i             poles           ne       -            “anges Aaae

                     ri                   ‘      Peer             he                         wey               ve            Iie urea                     ebay                   jet        ‘ ny            frvwid
                                                      pny’                                                                    yet,                                               freind, Sper                               i, a
                                                       ;                        :                                                                                                 re?      ‘                                a#3 ej


                                                                                            ee                                                                                                        et
                                  alin ames                                                                    Pine eo ’ ae                                                      is = aye!                                                Sage
                         Ma       M           Vedado              ge                          v oy                                “         baie                                 yee                                                 ne
                     sik                      taeds                ab               Sigh ine ahs iad                                                                                            aoa                         |

as                        i
                              ‘steak eka                                            x
                                                                                                                      + lta                                     he fe scans vale
                                                                                                                                                                             |                               a                   oe
                     :                    PA                      Fabs                                                       i                                                                          a          To           Wee
| ’          ,                ;
                                  iedf                        .
                                                                            nae                   mY
                                                                                                                                                                         y                       } i) a                         a
                                CHAPTER              I

                                 PRINCIPLES *

ip      “HE discovery of cosmic radiation by V. F. Hess in 1911 led
          to repeated conjectures as to possible permanent effects this
          radiation might have on the surface of the earth. The energy
received by the earth in the form of cosmic radiation is commensu-
rate with that received as starlight. It is therefore really quite small
in terms ofthe solar energy. The specific energy, that is, the energy
per constituent particle, is very much higher than for any other type
of radiation, averaging several billions of electron volts (1 electron
volt is 1.6 X 10-” ergs, which is the average energy of motion of a
gas molecule at 10,000° C.). It is conceivable, therefore, that the
cosmic radiation will alter the earth’s atmosphere in detectable ways.
   It was discovered shortly after the neutron itself had been dis-
covered that neutrons were present in the higher layers of the at-
mosphere probably 4s secondary radiations produced by the primary
cosmic rays. Measurements by cosmic-ray physicists have clearly
established that the population in the atmosphere rises with altitude
to a maximum somewhat above 40,000 feet and then falls}! This
proves the secondary character of the radiation—that it is not inci-
dent on the earth from interstellar space but is a product of the im-
pact of the true primary radiation on the earth’s atmosphere. ‘The <>»
decrease at the top of the atmosphere is due to the escape of some
of the neutrons formed from the earth. They are formed at high
velocity and will escape if they happen to fly off in an upward
direction when first produced.{ A corroborating point in this con-
nection is the recent demonstration that the neutron is truly radio-
 active with a lifetime of about 12 minutes, which of course removes
 any possibility of the neutrons having time to travel any consider-
     * See Addendum to Chapter I, p. ix above-
    1. H. M. Agnew, W. C. Bright, and Darol Froman, Phys. Rev., 72, 203 (1947)
(this paper contains references to many earlier measurements); J. A. Simpson, Jr.,
Phys. Rev., 73, 1389 (1948); L. C. L. Yuan, Phys. Rev., 74, 504 (1948); L. C. L. Yuan
and R. Ladenburg, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc., 23, No. 2, 21 (1948); L. C. L. Yuan, Phys.
Rev., 76, 1267, 1268 (1949); L. C. L. Yuan, Phys. Rev., 77, 728 (1950).

                                          1
2                          RADIOCARBON         DATING

able distance in interstellar space, though the trip from the sun
could be made without complete decay to hydrogen.
   Consideration of possible nuclear transmutations which the cosmic
rays might effect leads one immediately to consider what the neu-
trons known to be produced by, the cosmic rays might be expected
to do to the earth’s atmospherel   In the laboratory many studies have
been made of the effects of neutrons of various energies on all the
ordinary elements and especially on nitrogen and oxygen, the con-
stituents of the air. In general, the results are that oxygen is extraor-
dinarily inert but that nitrogen is reactive. It appears certain that,
of the two nitrogen isotopes, N14, of 99.62 per cent abundance, and
N®, of 0.038 per cent abundance, N" is the more reactivel With neu-
trons of thermal velocity the reaction
                               N“+n=C4+H!                               (1)
is dominant, the cross-section of the N'4 atom for a room tempera-
ture thermal neutron being in the vicinity of 1.7 X 10-*4 cm.?,
whereas the thermal neutron cross-section for reaction with O”* is of
the order of 0.1 per cent of this. It is therefore quite certain that
thermal neutrons introduced into ordinary air will react according
to Equation (1) to form the radiocarbon isotope of mass 14 and
half-life of 5568 + 30 years.
   The neutrons in the air being formed by the energetic cosmic rays
possess energy themselves, probably of the order of 5-10 mev (mil-
lion electron volts) on the average when first formed. After birth
they then collide with the air molecules and lose their energy by col-
lision, either elastic or inelastic, either reacting on one of these col-
lisions and so being absorbed or finally attaining thermal energies
where they are quite certain to be absorbed to form radiocarbon by
Reaction (1). Laboratory studies of the effects of energetic neutrons
on air again indicate that the nitrogen is the more reactive constitu-
ent. Reaction (1) is still dominant, though a second reaction,
                              N+      » = Bl + Het,                     (2)

occurs.” The latter reaction becomes dominant at energies above
1 mev but even at the most favored energies attains cross-sections
of only 10 per cent of that of nitrogen for thermal energies. Reac-
    2. C. H. Johnson and H. H. Barschall, Phys. Rev., 80, 819 (1950).
                                  PRINCIPLES                              3

tion (1), on the other hand, goes with considerable probability in |
the region of 0.4-1.6 mev.
   A third type of reaction of high-energy neutrons with nitrogen,

                              N¥+n=C®+H,                            (3)
has been reported in the laboratory.’ The nature of the laboratory
experiment was such that it was difficult to estimate the cross-section
for the reaction, but the reported value was 10-* cm.’, to an accu-
racy of about a factor of 5. It is certain from the masses of the atoms
involved in Reaction (3) that neutrons of not less than 4 mev are in-
volved, since the reaction is endothermic to this extent. The hydro-
gen isotope in Reaction (3) is the radioactive hydrogen called trit-
ium, of 12.46 years half-life, which decays to form the stable iso-
tope of helium, He*, which occurs in atmospheric helium in an
abundance of 1.2 X 10-* parts He’ per ordinary helium in atmospher-
ic air.4 It is thought that this value is accurate to about 30 per cent.
The abundance of He’® in ordinary helium from terrestrial sources
varies widely from undetectably small values in uranium ores, where
an excessively large amount of He‘ is found, to the values of
12 X 10-* parts for certain Canadian rocks. In general, however,
the He? content of helium from the earth’s crust is not over one-
tenth as large as that of atmospheric helium. Since tritium pro-
duced by Reaction (3) lasts such a short time, one knows that any
tritium produced by Reaction (3) will introduce an equivalent
amount of He* into the earth’s atmosphere, so that one possible effect
of the cosmic-ray bombardment of the earth’s atmosphere could be
the introduction of He* into the atmospheric helium. It is seen that
this may be the case, since it is observed that atmospheric helium
is richer in He* than terrestrial helium.
   Summarizing the three most probable reactions, only the first and
third lead to radioactive isotopes. It is therefore to be expected that
the neutrons produced by the cosmic radiation may produce these
radioactive materials in the earth’s atmosphere. After these points
were made,° a search in nature for both radioactivities was insti-
  3. R. Cornog and W. F. Libby, Phys. Rev., 59, 1046 (1941).
  4. L. T. Aldrich and A. O. Nier, Phys. Rev., 74, 1590 (1948).
  5. W. F. Libby, Phys. Rev., 69, 671 (1946).
4                          RADIOCARBON          DATING

tuted. Both have since been found® in amounts and concentrations
corresponding roughly to those expected.
   Therefore, we now have more confidence in the basic postulates
made in the arguments outlined above—that the behavior of the
cosmic-ray neutrons in the air is predictable from the observed be-
havior of laboratory neutrons on nitrogen and oxygen and that the
possibility of the neutrons having higher energy than laboratory
neutrons appears not to confuse the issue appreciably.
   The prediction of the expected amounts of radiocarbon and trit-
ium can be made only on the basis of some information about the
relative probabilities of Reactions (1), (2), and (3). Reaction (1) is
so much more probable, however, that it is clear that the yield of
radiocarbon will be nearly equal to the total number of neutrons
generated by the cosmic rays and retained on earth, a number
which we shall call Q in units of number per square centimeter per
second. The tritium yield, due to Reaction (3) only, is taken to be
of the order of the ratio of these cross-sections, or about 1 per cent
of Q. The latter will be considerably more uncertain than the yield
of radiocarbon, since the cross-section for Reaction (3) is much more
uncertain than that for Reaction (1) and more specifically than the
dominance of Reaction (1). If we integrate the data for the neutron
intensity as a function of altitude from sea-level to the top of the
atmosphere, to obtain the total number of neutrons, Q, produced
per square centimeter per second, and average this over the earth’s
surface according to the observed variation of neutron intensity
with latitude,” we obtain a figure for Q, the average number of
neutrons generated per square centimeter of the earth’s surface per
second by the incidence of cosmic radiation.|If we further assume 2
that the cosmic-ray production of radiocarbon is an ancient phe-
nomenon in terms of the 5600-year half-life of radiocarbon (i.e., the
cosmic rays have remained at essentially their present intensity
over the last 10,000 or 20,000 years), we can conclude that there is
some place on earth enough radiocarbon to guarantee that its rate
   6. E. C. Anderson, W. F. Libby, S. Weinhouse, A. F. Reid, A. D. Kirshenbaum,
and A. V. Grosse, Science, 105, 576 (1947); E. C. Anderson, W. F. Libby, S. Weinhouse,
A. F. Reid, A. D. Kirshenbaum, and A. V. Grosse, Phys. Rev., 72, 931 (1947); A. V.
Grosse, W. H. Johnston, R. L. Wolfgang, and W. F. Libby, Science, 113, 1 (1951).
    7. J. A. Simpson, Jr., Phys. Rev., 73, 1389 (1948); L. C. L. Yuan, Phys. Rev., 76,
1267, 1268 (1949).
                                    PRINCIPLES                                            5

 of disintegration is just equal to its rate of formation. |Evaluation of
 QO from the experimental data available gives 2.6 as a most likely
 value. Since the earth’s surface has 5.1 X 10% cm.?, the radio-
 carbon inventory must be such that 1.3 X 10!° beta disintegrations
 occur per second.
                                  C4 = B-+N"+,                                     (4)


 Since laboratory measurement of the specific disintegration rate of
 radiocarbon’ gives 1.6 X 10! disintegrations per second per gram,
 dividing we obtain 8.1 X 10’ grams, or 81 metric tons, as the pre-
 dicted inventory for radiocarbon on earth. This is equivalent to
 365 million curies (1 curie is that quantity of radioactivity which
 gives a disintegration rate of 3.7 X 10!° per second). Reasoning
 similarly, we predict a tritium inventory of about 3 million curies
 in nature.
¢ The question remains as to where the radiocarbon will occur. A
 moment’s thought answers this, however. We consider the problem
 of the ultimate fate of a carbon atom introduced into the air at a
 height of some 5 or 6 miles. It seems certain that within a few
 minutes or hours the carbon atom will have been burned to carbon
 dioxide molecule.[It is true that there are points of interest to discuss
 in the question of the kinetics of combustion of atomic carbon in the
 air, and research is necessary to supply definite answers for the many
 questions which would arise in such a discussion. It seems probable,
 however, that the carbon will not long remain in any condition other
 than carbon dioxide. Postulating that this is so (i.e., the absorption
 of cosmic-ray neutrons by nitrogen of the air is equivalent to the
 production of radioactive carbon dioxide), we can proceed to an im-
 mediate answer to the question as to'\where natural radiocarbon
 should occur on earth. Radioactive carbon dioxide will certainly mix
 with considerable speed with the atmospheric carbon dioxide, and
 so we conclude that all atmospheric carbon dioxide is rendered ra-
 dioactive by the cosmic radiation. Since plants live off the carbon
 dioxide, all plants will be radioactive; since the animals on earth
 live off the plants, all animals will be radioactive. Thus we conclude
 that all living things will be rendered radioactive by the cosmic radia-
    8. A. G. Engelkemeir, W. H. Hamill, M. G. Inghram, and W. F. Libby, Phys. Rev.,
 75, 1825 (1949); W. M. Jones, Phys. Rev., 76, 885 (1949); W. W. Miller, R. Ballentine,
 W. Bernstein, L. Friedman, A. O. Nier, and R. D. Evans, Phys. Rev., 77, 714 (1950) ;
 A. G. Engelkemeir and W. F. Libby, Rev. Sci. Inst., 21, 550 (1950).
6                          RADIOCARBON          DATING

tion In addition, there is another carbon reservoir for the natural
radiocarbon, and this is the inorganic carbon in the sea present as
dissolved carbon dioxide, bicarbonate and carbonate, for it is known
that an exchange reaction occurs between carbon dioxide and dis-
solved bicarbonate and carbonate ions. The time for radioactive
carbon dioxide in the air to distribute itself through this reservoir
probably is not in excess of 500 years. This is the so-called “‘turn-
over’’ time for the life-cycle which has been widely discussed by geo-
chemists. The estimates vary quite widely, but it does seem that this
time can hardly exceed 1000 years. Since this is a time short as com-
pared to the lifetime of radiocarbon, we conclude that any given
radiocarbon atom will make the round trip several times in its life-
time, and we therefore predict that the distribution of radiocarbon
throughout the reservoir will be quite uniform, there being little
vertical or latitudinal or longitudinal gradients left. One has some
cause to suspect that there might be variations in intensity over the
earth’s surface, for the reason that it is known that the cosmic-ray
neutron component varies by a factor of about 3.5° between equa-
torial and polar regions, the intensity being greater in the polar
regions.
   As expected, however, on the basis of the probable brevity of the
turn-over time as compared to the lifetime of radiocarbon, it has
been found that the distribution is uniform. Materials have been
selected from various points on the earth’s surface and from various
altitudes, and the specific radioactivity has been found to be identi-
cal within the error of measurement, which amounts to some 3-5
per cent.
   In order to predict the specific radioactivity of living carbon, the
amount of carbon in the exchange reservoir must be estimated.
Careful consideration of the complex biochemical questions involved
leads us to the numbers given in Table 1.
   The dominance of the inorganic material dissolved in the sea is
obvious from these numbers. This has the immediate consequence
that variations in living conditions which will lead to variations in
the amount of living matter on earth will not appreciably affect the
total carbon in the reservoir. Or, conceivably, the only possible sig-
   9. J. A. Simpson, Jr., Phys. Rev., 73, 1389 (1948); L. C. L. Yuan, Phys. Rev., 76,
1267, 1268 (1949).
                                     PRINCIPLES                                           fi

nificant variations of the quantity of carbon in the reservoir must —
involve changes in the volume, the temperature, or the acidity (pH)
of the oceans. This probably means that the reservoir has not
changed significantly in the last few tens of thousands of years,
though there is the point to consider of the effect of the glaciation on
both the volume and the mean temperature of the oceans. If the
numbers in Table 1 are correct, there are some 8.3 grams of carbon
in exchange equilibrium with the atmospheric carbon dioxide for
each square centimeter of the earth’s surface, on the average, and,
since there are some 2.6 C4 atoms formed per square centimeter per
second, we must expect that these 8.3 grams of carbon will possess

                                        TABLE      1

                                  CARBON INVENTORY
                                                                            Amount
                         Source                                            (Gm/Cm?)
             Oceanescashbonate wees .ce7 Se enc: we      eee                azo
             Ocean,;idissolyvediorganic: +4 s.c. 2aqiae
                                                     o<! cia                0.59
            IBiOSphere Site a oe      ee ar ce One ae ate                   0.33
            AA EMOSD HELE Mansi re tre’= sg shatsack cette hepreds SHAH:    Ont2

                  CRG     earn     face Ae eee         sy een   een eee     8.3


a specific radioactivity of 2.6/8.3 disintegrations per second per
gram, or 2.6 X 60/8.3 disintegrations per minute per gram. This
number, 18.8, is to be compared with the experimentally observed
value of 16.1 + 0.5.!° The agreement seems to be sufficiently within
the experimental errors involved, so that we have reason for confi-
dence in the theoretical picture set forth above.
   The agreement between these two numbers bears on another point
of real importance—the constancy in intensity of the cosmic radia~-
tion over the past several thousand years. If one were to imagine that
the cosmic radiation had been turned off until a short while ago, the
enormous amount of radiocarbon necessary to the equilibrium state
would not have been manufactured and the specific radioactivity of
living matter would be much less than the rate of production calcu-
lated from the neutron intensity. Or, conversely, if one were to
imagine that the intensity had been much higher in the past until
very recently, the specific radioactivity would greatly exceed that
   10. E. C. Anderson, Ph.D. thesis, University:of Chicago           (1949); E. C. Anderson
and W. F. Libby, Phys. Rev., 81, 64 (1951).
8                          RADIOCARBON           DATING

calculated from the observed neutron intensity. Since 5568 + 30
years will be required to bring the inventory halfway to any new
equilibrium state demanded by the change in cosmic-ray intensity,
we find some evidence in the agreement between these numbers that
the cosmic-ray intensity has remained essentially constant for the
last 5000-10,000 years. This does not mean that it could not exhibit
hourly, daily, or even annual fluctuations. It does mean, however,
that the intensity averaged over 1000 years or so has not changed.
There is the slight possibility that an approximately compensating
change in the carbon inventory has occurred, but for the reasons
mentioned above the buffering action of the great reservoir in the sea
makes this very remote.
   A further point of interest in connection with the inventory and
the observed specific assay is that the carbon isotopes apparently are
fractionated in being incorporated into the biosphere from the in-
organic world. This effect was discovered some time ago! for the
isotope C!%, which has a mean abundance of 1.1 per cent in ordinary
carbon. It was found that the ratio of the abundance of C® in inor-
ganic carbon to that in biological carbon is 1.025. On the basis of this,
one would expect a value of 1.05 for the analogous ratio for C14, radio-
carbon. Since the mass spectrographic measurements of the C18
abundance are quite accurate and the theory on which one calculates
the 1.05 ratio from the observed 1.03 ratio for C!* is quite rigorous,
we are inclined to multiply our assay of biological material by 1.05
rather than to take the mean value of the small number of measure-
ments we have made on inorganic carbon. The mean of the biologi-
cal assay is 15.3 + 0.1. Multiplying by 1.05, we obtain 16.1 for in-
organic carbon; then, averaging according to the weight factors given
in Table 1, we derive the average 16.0 for the carbon inventory as a
whole. One must remember, however, that wood or other biological
material will present an assay of 15.3 and that modern seashell will
present an assay of 16.1.
   If the cosmic radiation has remained at its present intensity for
20,000 or 30,000 years, and if the carbon reservoir has not changed
appreciably in this time, then there exists at the present time a com-

   11. A. O. Nier and E. A. Gulbranson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 61, 697 (1939); B. F.
Murphy and A. O. Nier, Phys. Rev., 59, 771 (1941); H. Craig, Geochim. et Cosmochim.
Acla, 3, 53-92 (1953); H. Craig, J. Geol., 62, 115 (1954).
                               PRINCIPLES                                    9

   plete balance between the rate of disintegration of radiocarbon atoms
   and the rate of assimilation ¢of new radiocarbon atoms for all material
   in the life-cycle. For exampld) altree, or any other living organism, is
   in a state of equilibrium between the cosmic radiation and the natu-
   ral rate of disintegration of radiocarbon so long as it is alive. In
   other words, during the lifetime the radiocarbon assimilated from
   food will just balance the radiocarbon disintegrating in the tissues.
   When death occurs, however, the assimilation process is abruptly
   halted, and only the disintegration process remains. |
 |) {It has been known for many years that the rate of disintegration of
   radioactive bodies is extraordinarily immutable, being independent
   of the nature of the chemical compound in which the radioactive
   body resides and of the temperature, pressure, and other physical
   characteristics of its environment.}The reason for this is that the
  transformation is a nuclear phenomenon involving energies very
  much larger than those corresponding to the chemical bonds and to
  the various physical influences to which matter might conceivably be
b subjected. Therefore,  \we conclude that the rate of disappearance of
  radioactivity following death corresponds to the exponential decay
  law for radiocarbon as represented by the solid curve in Figure
  which the world-wide assay of 15.3 for biological materials corre-
  sponds to zero time, and the predicted specific radioactivities for
  various times thereafter are given by the curve. The equation for
  the curve is
                      Wisaa5 13 exp (— 0.693 =368)
                                               t
                                                                       (5)
   or

                      T= 15.3 2(-#/5568) |                            (S’)

   in which ¢ is the age of the organic material in years, age being de-
   fined as the time elapsed since death occurred. The experimental
   points shown in Figure 1 are the observed assays for various samples
   of known age, discussed later. In so far as the points fit the curve,
   we have reason to believe that the method is sound and gives the
   correct ages. The errors indicated on the experimental points are
   standard deviations, and it appears that the results are favorable
   as judged statistically
   |It is obvious that we must be careful, in selecting samples, to
10                        RADIOCARBON          DATING

choose materials that contain the original carbon atoms present at
the time death occurred. In other words, samples must not have been
preserved with organic materials containing carbon of age different
from that of the sample. Care must also be taken that chemical
changes have not led to replacement of the carbon atoms. In a gen-

        16

                       SAMPLES            OF   KNOWN          AGE




                   TREE RING (1072 A.D)
                      $ TREE RING (580 A.D.)

                          TREE RING (575 A.D)
                                BIBLE (100100 B.C)

                                 PTOLEMY (200 +150 B.C)
                                    TAYINAT (675 +50 BC.)
                                     $ REDWOOD (979 +52 BC.)

                                               SESOSTRIS (1800 BC)
                                                        ZOSER (2700 +75B,C)
     (dpm/gC)
      SPECIFIC  CURVE CALCULATED
      RADIOACTIVITY
      ABSOLUTE
                FROM PRESENT DAY POINT                  SNEFERU (2625+ 75BC)
                AND HALF LIFE OF
                RADIOCARBON 5568430 YEARS             “9 HEMAKA (2950+ 200BC



                                      !        [oats tet
                 1000-2000      ~=«3000 += «4000 :+~=S«5000     +~—6000 ~~ 7000
                          HISTORICAL AGE (YEARS)
      Fic. 1.—Predicted versus observed radioactivities of samples of known age


eral way, organic materials consisting mainly of large molecules,
such as cellulose and charcoal, are favored. An example of question-
able material is shell, for it is quite conceivable that shell which is
powdery and chalky in appearance has had its.carbonate atoms re-
placed.
                                   PRINCIPLES                                       11

   It has recently been shown” that a New England lake whose bed
was entirely ancient limestone and which was fed mainly by water
leached through ancient limestone contained carbonate, bicarbonate,
and CO: whose radiocarbon content was only 77 + 2 per cent of the
value for the carbon in modern wood. Also it was shown that in this
particular lake the living material had specific activities below that
 of modern wood in the normal biosphere but not quite so low as the
carbonate, bicarbonate, and CQO: dissolved in the lake water. This
experience cautions us that materials grown under such conditions
must not be used for radiocarbon dating. Material that is likely to , .
be supported in its growth, in any significant part, by carbon fromJ
limestone is, of course, useless.
    12. E.S. Deevey, Jr., M.S. Gross, G. E. Hutchinson, and H. L. Kraybill, Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci., 40, 285 (1954).
                               CHV
                                ASEy              Rew ten

                   WORLD-WIDE DISTRIBUTION
                       OF RADIOCARBON *

  | NUNDAMENTAL to the radiocarbon dating method is the
       question of the contemporary assay of the exchange reservoir
       for radiocarbon and the uniformity over the earth’s surface of
this assay. Organic material, principally wood, was collected from
widely scattered points over the earth’s surface, and measurements
of the specific radioactivity were made. One group of samples was
concentrated near the geomagnetic equator, where the neutron flux
is at a minimum; another in high latitudes, where the neutron flux
is at a maximum. The variation in neutron intensity with latitude,
as observed by Simpson at 30,000 feet, is presented in Figure 2.?
Some consideration was given to the archeological importance of
the region with the thought that, if no uniformity were demon-
strated, these data might be utilized in age measurements where the
original assay would vary from region to region. Fortunately, this
has not proved to be necessary. Owing to the known extreme varia-
tion of neutron intensity with altitude, shown in Figure 3, in which
the data of Yuan and Ladenburg taken at Princeton, New Jersey,’
are given, two samples from high altitudes were measured. It might
be suspected that the specific radioactivity would be higher at
higher altitudes. However, the height of the timber line was of
course very small indeed compared with the 30,000-foot altitude at
which the principal radiocarbon production occurs.
   The experimental results are given in Tables 2 and 3, in which
the type of sample, the donor, the geomagnetic latitude, and the
   * See Addendum to Chapter II, p. ix above.
   1. The material on this subject has been taken largely from the doctoral thesis of
E. C. Anderson, presented to the Division of Physical Sciences, University of Chicago,
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Ph.D. degree. Cf. also Ann. Rev. Nuc.
Sct., 2, 63 (1953).
   2. Ibid.
   3. Phys. Rev., 74, 504 (1948); 76, 1267, 1268 (1949); 77, 728 (1950); Bull. Am.
Phys. Soc., 23, No, 2, 21 (1948).                        ;
                                          12
           ([S¥6T] 68EI ‘eZ “eay “skyg “af ‘uosdutg ~y ‘[ Joyyy) “A}isuezUT UoIyNEU AvI-oTUISOD Jo UOTBIRA [BUIPNIneT—Z   “OT
    Be     aca        Q1313     DILSNOVW     310d!0     ig came         ZQNLILV1       SILSNOVWO39       $33u930d)    =+—NS—>
                              OS              OV
                                                                                                                                SLNNOD)
                                                                                                                                3LOANIN   Y3d
                                                                                                                                    NOYLNIN
                                                                                                                                            ALISNILNI


                                                                                                                                 NI
                                                                                                                                 NOYLN3N
                                                                                                                                 (Y3LNNOD
              n
i    stato h te — +    ie       Ee
REBAR             auee HetBeReeeeReReRRESE                                                            SERRE).
14                       RADIOCARBON           DATING

observed specific radioactivity in absolute disintegrations per minute
per gram of carbon are recorded, Table 2 applying to the biosphere
and Table 3 to the inorganic.
   The associated error is the standard deviation calculated from
the counter statistics only. Naturally, since other errors are involved,
the true error will be somewhat larger. However, similar treatment
of the more numerous data quoted later on samples measured for
age determination seem to indicate that the scatter appears to be



                    NEUTRON DENSITY IN FREE ATMOSPHERE               vs
                       ALTITUDE AT PRINCETON, N.J.
                          (JAN. 8, 1949)




 INTENSITY




 NEUTRON




        100000] 50000        30,000
          FEET| FEET          FEET
             70000
             FEET           PRESSURE     (Cm   Hg)
     (COUNTS
     COUNTER)
     PER
     IN
     MINUTE
     THERMAL
     NEUTRON

                Fic. 3.—Altitudinal variation of neutron intensity


little more than would be expected from this source alone. So per-
haps one can conclude that this nearly represents the true standard
deviation of the measurement. The terrestrial distribution of the
samples is shown in the map in Figure 4, each dot corresponding to
a particular sample. It is of course to be realized that the geomag-
netic latitude and the ordinary latitude are not identical. The geo-
magnetic latitude is taken as being more significant in Table 2,
since the variation in neutron intensity with latitude shown in Fig-
ure 2 correlates with it.
                                                  TABLE    2
                    ACTIVITY        OF TERRESTRIAL        BIOSPHERE           SAMPLES


                                                                             Geomag- | Absolute Specific
                               Source                                          netic        Activity
                                                                             Latitude     (Dpm/Gm)

White spruce, Yukon (Frederick Johnson).............                          60°N.         14.84+0.30
Norwegian spruce, Sweden (Donald Collier, Chicago Nat-
  iralselistory Museum) cttw     ene. om          ee                          BORING        15.37+0.54
lnawoods Chicago (author) {2 ots cher sce sie cme lini nt                     53°N.         14.72+0.54
Fraximus excelsior, Switzerland (Donald Collier).......                       49°N.         15.16+0.30
Honeysuckle leaves, Oak Ridge, Tennessee (C. H. Perry,
   Clinton Laboratory)ako  hee     base     He ee ee                          47°N.         14.60+0.30
Pine twigs and needles (12,000-ft. alt.), Mount Wheeler,
   New: Mexico (Robert Fryxell)".    5 n..c¢...sk.e  see:                     44°N.         15.82+0.47
North African briar (John Hudson Moore, Inc.).......                          40°N.         14.47+0.44
Oak, Sherafut, Palestine (Donald Collier).............                        34°N.         15.19+0.40
Unidentified wood, Teheran, Iran (M. Hessaby).......                          28°N.         15.57+0.34
Fraximus mandshurica, Japan (Donald Collier).........                         26° N.        14.84+0.30
Unidentified wood, Panama (John Simpson)...........                           20°N.         15.94+0.51
Chlorophora excelsa, Liberia (Donald Collier)...........                      Ne            15.08+0.34
Sterculia excelsa, Copacabana, Bolivia (9000-ft. alt.) (Don-
   Mla @ollier) sath; ar heaters. bake ee oe          es                       1°N.         15.47+0.50
Ironwood, Majuro, Marshall Islands (Donald Collier). .                         0°           14.53+0.60
 Unidentified wood, Ceylon (Donald Collier)............                        PSs          15.29+0.67
Beech wood (’Nothafagus), Tiera del Fuego (Junius
  [REO Omer    Saas MG    Ret esa       hefe AR     ae REE         NE. a5?    45°S.         15.37+0.49
Eucalyptus, New South Wales, Australia (Donald Collier)|                      45°S.         16.31+0.43
Seal oil from seal meat from Antarctic (Byrd Expedition
  EHrOUgnyEd.) (nM CASOM) ae cates. fieeabre dh. ok asclee mes bee            65°S.         15.69+0.30
     PAVERRCEL Oak nd Meee       race Aertorns ae atic vatars eae oes |leameperacaes: x     15.3) seORL

   * Error of calibration of counter raises error on absolute assay to 0.5.



                                                  TABLE    3
                   ACTIVITY OF CONTEMPORANEOUS SHELL SAMPLES
                                          Source                                          Assay*
         Four seashells from Lower Californiaf..........                               1573-0.
         Six clam shells:frond New York... .amegeenien.:                               16.9+0.3
         Bikini coral (Halimeda debris)f................                               16.9+0.3
         Clam shells from Aleutians§......%............%                               13.3+0.5
         Eleven mollusk shells from North America, rang-
             ing from Texas, California, and Florida to
               INewe Ene lama llete ecanrrrorcksoihe ar hae                  eens      15.8+0.2
            (Excluding two high values at 17.8 and 17.2...                             15.4+0.2
         Munexishell from eRloridas  4. 4.\c..).).2e) eee                              17-1055
         Fresh ocean sediment from Bermuda............                                 17.4+0.5
         Oyster from Ghesapeake Bay, . hates) «sian eee                                U5 a1 005
             * All the analyses quoted from other laboratories are reduced by assuming that the
         modern wood assay is in perfect agreement with the average value deduced from the
         data in Table 2.
             t H. Suess, Science, 120, 467 (1954).
             tJ. L. Kulp, H. W. Feely, and L. E. Tryon, Science, 114, 565 (1951).
             §J. L. Kulp, L. E. Tryon, W. R. Eckelman, and W. E. Snell, Science, 116, 409
         (1952).                                               .
              lM. Blau, E. S. Deevey, Jr., and M. S. Gross, Science, 118, 1 (1953).
“oI   uoynquisiqG—f
        jo            snoaueioduiajuos
                              sajduies
          WORLD-WIDE          DISTRIBUTION          OF RADIOCARBON                    17

   The average specific activity of all the biosphere samples is found*
to be 15.3 + 0.5 absolute disintegrations per minute per gram. The
data seem to show no scatter appreciably larger than the expected
statistical fluctuations, indicating that the samples involved would
indeed have specific activities identical within the error of measure-
ment. The data presented in Table 3 for shell reveal that shell
carbon is probably more radioactive than organic matter. This
difference is to be expected, since it has been shown’ that frac-
tionation of the stable isotopes of carbon, C” and C", occurs in
these systems. The ratio of the C' content of carbonate to that of
organic material would be expected to be 1.05, since the careful
work on C!4 has shown a factor of 1.025.° The difference between
this factor 1.05 and the one found in the data given in Table 3 may
not be outside the experimental area. But one has the suspicion
from examining the data in Table 3 that factors are operating which
we do not understand clearly. It has been suggested’ that upwelling
of deep ocean waters which are somewhat deficient in C'*, apparently
because of slightly imperfect mixing in the greatest depths of the
ocean, may cause seashells growing in these regions of upwelling wa-
ters to be deficient in C'*. This would perhaps apply to the clam
shells from the Aleution Islands. Since the accuracy of the estima-
tion of the fractionation factor from the accurate C!® data® is better
than the precision of our measurements of the shell activity, we take
the observed value per shell to be 16.1, derived by multiplication of
the mean of the organic specific activity by 1.05. It seems that a fur-
ther investigation of the fractionation factor would be worth while
and that further measurement of contemporaneous shell samples is
definitely desirable.
   The estimation of the amount of carbon in exchange with the
atmospheric carbon dioxide is a difficult task. It is, however, neces-
sary to the striking of a balance between the observed specific ac-
   4. Earlier publications have given 12.5 for this number. The counters have been re-
calibrated for absolute efficiency since then, and the new value is derived from the old
one by correction for the more accurately determined efficiency.
   5. A. O. Nier and E. A. Gulbranson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 61, 697 (1939); B. F.
Murphy and A. O. Nier, Phys. Rev., 59, 771 (1941).
   6. H. Craig, J. Geol., 62, 115 (1954).
   7. J. L. Kulp, H. W. Feely, and L. E. Tryon, Science, 114, 565 (1951).
   8. A. O. Nier and E. A. Gulbranson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 61 (1939); B. F. Murphy
and A. O. Nier, Phys. Rev., 59, 771 (1941); H. Craig, J. Geol., 62, 115 (1954).
18                        RADIOCARBON     DATING

tivity and the cosmic radiation intensity. The results have been
given in Table 1.
   The carbon in the exchange reservoir is obviously of three prin-
cipal origins; namely, that dissolved in the oceans, the carbon of liv-
ing organisms, and atmospheric carbon dioxide itself. We shall find
that the latter two are so small as to be nearly negligible in com-
parison with dissolved material in the sea, principally carbonate and
bicarbonate. Let us consider first the amount of carbon dissolved in
the oceans as some species of carbonic acid. This amount can be
calculated from a knowledge of two factors: the alkalinity and the
pH of the ocean water. The alkalinity is the excess of positive ions
over the anions of strong acids. This difference must be made up by
the ionization of weak acids in order to preserve electrical neutral-
ity. Since carbonic acid is the principal weak acid in the ocean, the
situation is fairly simple. The total amount of dissolved carbon is
not uniquely determined by the alkalinity alone, because of its
variable equivalent nature due to the possibility of its existence in
the neutral, monobasic, and dibasic forms: H:COs, HCOs;, and
CO; . The ratio of the amounts in these forms must therefore
be specified, and this ratio is, of course, determined by the pH.
The necessary equations are
                            (H*) - (HCO;)
                               (HcO,y       =                      6)
                            (H+) + (COs) _
                            —THCO=)~ &                             ai
                 A = (HCO>) + 2 (COF)                              (8)

                 S = (H,COs) + (HCO;) + (CO;-),                    (9)
where A is the alkalinity due to carbonic acid, and S is the total
amount of carbon present in the forms indicated. These equations
can be combined to give
                   rica     Postma pelt(ES*stairBog +1].         (10)
                   a            x        tat
We must now consider the values to be adopted for the four con-
stants in this equation; namely, the alkalinity, the hydrogen-ion
concentration, and the two ionization constants of carbonic acid.
          WORLD-WIDE-DISTRIBUTION                 OF RADIOCARBON            19

     The average value of the alkalinity of the ocean seems to be well
  established as a result of numerous measurements by many investi-
  gators and has a value of 2.43 milliequivalents per liter.? The alka-
  linity is due almost exclusively to carbonate and bicarbonate, the
  amounts of phosphorus, arsenic, silicon, and other elements capable
  of forming weak acids being completely negligible. A slight correc-
  tion can be made for the amounts of boron known to be present.
  Using only the first ionization constant of boric acid and taking the
  pH of the ocean as 8.0, we find the alkalinity due to boron to be 0.06
  milliequivalents per liter.!° The alkalinity due to carbon is therefore
' 2.37 milliequivalents per liter.
     The variation in pH throughout the ocean is surprisingly small,
  and the average value is about 8.0" The small amount of variation
  found throughout the greater portion of the water map is graphically
  illustrated by the north-south section of the Atlantic Ocean given
  by Sverdrup e¢ al. as taken from Wattenberg.” It is clear that over
  the major portion of the ocean the variation is only 0.1 pH unit.
     It is of interest to compare the observed pH of ocean water with
  that calculated assuming complete equilibrium with the carbon
  dioxide of the atmosphere. The deep water which constitutes by far
  the largest fraction of ocean water is formed at high latitudes by the
  cooling of water of high salinity. Therefore we will assume Arctic
  conditions for the equilibration. For the apparent ionization con-
  stants of carbonic acid we will use experimental values which will be
  discussed below. These are Kj = 8.3 X 10-7, and K2 = 6.3 X 107°,
  and are applicable to water of chlorinity 19.0 per mil at a tempera-
  ture of 4° C. We will assume an alkalinity of 2.37 milliequivalents
  per liter and a partial pressure of CO; in the polar air of 0.23 mm. of
  mercury.'® For the solubility of CO, in sea water we will use the
  data given by Sverdrup e¢ al.'4 The result of this calculation is a pH
  of 8.10 for the water while at the surface. On sinking to the average
    9. H. U. Sverdrup, M. W. Johnson, and R. H. Fleming, The Oceans (New York:
 Prentice-Hall, 1946), p. 208.
   10. Ibid., p. 199.
   11. Ibid., p. 208.
   12. Ibid., p. 210, Fig. 43.
   13. K. Buch, Acta Acad. Aboensis, Math. et Physica, 11, No. 12 (1939).
   14. Op. cit., p. 191.
20                        RADIOCARBON          DATING

depth of the oceans (3800 meters), the pH will change to 8.01 as a
result of changes of Kj and K3 with pressure. These results are in very
satisfactory agreement with the observed pH of the deep ocean,
namely, 8.0.
   Because of the high ionic strength of sea water, namely, 0.9 molal,
and the lack of knowledge of the activity coefficients of the species
involved, it is necessary to use apparent ionization constants rather
than thermodynamic constants for carbonic acid. Fortunately the
values of Kj and Kj have been carefully investigated by a number
of investigators! as a function of pH, salinity, temperature, and
pressure in both natural and artificial sea water. In general, the
agreement among the several investigators is excellent, and the re-
sults appear to be very reliable.
   The relations which were found for the normal range of composi-
tion of sea water are
                          pK; = 6.47 ~—0.100 (Cl) 4                            ay

at 20° C. with a temperature coefficient of —0.008 per °C. and a
pressure coefficient of —4.8 X 10- per meter of depth; and
                        pK2= 10.35
                               — 0.498 (Cl) 8                                  (12)
(where pK is the negative logarithm, base 10) at 20°C. with a
temperature coefficient of —0.011 per °C. and a pressure coefficient
of —1.8 X 10-* per meter. Taking (Cl) as 1.95 per cent, the tempera-
ture to be 4° C.; and a depth of 3800 meters (the mean depth of the
ocean), we find that for average ocean water
                              Ki = 1.26 X 10-6                                 (13)
                              Ke = 441 X10.                                    (14)

    From Equation (10) it is possible to calculate the errors which
will be introduced into the value of the total carbon by errors in
Ki, Ks, and pH. If we substitute the following numerical values in
Equation (10), Ki = 1.20 X 10-*, K; = 7.41 X 10-!°, and (H+) =
10-8, we find
                  S =   7—,,         (0.00824 0.074+41).                       (15)

   15. E.G. Moberg, D. M. Greenberg, R. Revelle, and E. C. Allen, Bull. Scripps Inst.
Oceanogr., Univ. California, Tech. Ser., 3, 231 (1934); K. Buch, Acta Acad. Aboensis,
Math. el Physica, 11, No. 5 (1938); Sverdrup et al., op. cit., p. 250.
          WORLD-WIDE -DISTRIBUTION         OF RADIOCARBON               21

It is clear that Kj has a completely negligible effect on S, since it
contributes only 0.8 per cent to the last term.
   Dropping K; and expanding Equation (10) in terms of powers of
[K3/(H*)], and dropping higher powers than the first, we have, to
a good approximation,

                    s=4(1- aH) A(L— 0,074),                          (16)
The entire effect of K3 is only 7.4 per cent. If for the possible error in
K2 we allow the amount of the full range between Ky and K3, we
will estimate the possible error in S from this source as 7 per cent.
   The error introduced in the value of S by an error in pH can be
calculated by differentiating Equation (10) with respect to —log
(H+). In this way we find
                  dS                            (H*)
                   Tope
                     =~9:42 X10 eee pens                            (17)
At pH 8 a change of one pH unit gives a change of 0.36 in S, or 16
per cent. If we assume that the uncertainty in the exact average pH
of the ocean is 0.5 pH unit, we place an error of 8 per cent on the
amount of dissolved carbonate.
   The variations in alkalinity which have been observed in water
from various sources by different investigators amount to about 4
per cent. We may take this as a measure of the uncertainty in A.
Combining the errors from K3, pH, and A, by the square root of the
sum-of-squares method, we place an uncertainty of 11 per cent on
the value of S.
   Using the values of Kj = 1.26 X 10-*, K; = 7.41 X 10-”, pH =
8.0, and A = 2.37, the solution of Equation (10) gives for S a value
of 26.2 milligrams of carbon per kilogram of sea water, or 7.25 gm/
cm? of earth’s surface. This corresponds to a total mass of 3.7 * 107°
grams of carbon. In addition to the dissolved inorganic carbon, there
is found in solution in the ocean a considerably smaller amount of
organic carbon (not living). The best value for this appears to be
about 2 mg. per liter, according to Sverdrup et a/.!° This corresponds
to 0.59 gram of carbon per square centimeter of the earth’s surface.
   The amount of carbon in living material is difficult to estimate and
appears to have been grossly overestimated by some writers in the
  16. Op. cit., p. 250.
22                          RADIOCARBON           DATING

past. We will base our estimate on the rate of fixation of carbon by
photosynthesis, a quantity which appears to-be fairly well estab-
lished.” Fortunately it can be shown that biosphere carbon is small
compared with ocean carbonate, and therefore an error in the estima-
tion of it will not be of great importance to our use of this quantity.
   The total rate of fixation of carbon by land plants has been in-
vestigated by Schroeder,!® who concluded that the average annual
fixation by this source is 1.63 X 10 grams, or 3.2 mg/cm? of the
earth’s surface. Riley’® made an investigation of the fixation by ocean
plankton and arrived at a figure of 30.5 mg/cm? of earth’s surface for
the average annual rate. Rabinowitch” estimates that, on the basis
of the solar energy flux, reflection losses, and photosynthetic ef-
ficiency, not more than 60 mg/cm? of earth’s surface could be fixed
annually, indicating that Riley’s figures could not be too low by any
large factor. On the other hand, it appears that the estimate of
Vernadsky,”! who gives 2000 mg/cm? for the carbon content of the
biosphere, with renewal several times a year, is energetically im-
possible. We will use the sum of the values given by Schroeder and
by Riley as the total annual rate of fixation of carbon; namely, 33
 mg/cm? of the earth’s surface.
    The total amount of carbon contained in the biosphere at any time
will be given by the fixation rate times the average length of time
a given carbon atom spends in the biosphere, if a steady state exists.
An estimation of this time is somewhat easier than might appear on
first glance, since 90 per cent of the fixation is by ocean plankton,
which are minute organisms of very short life. Furthermore, even the
 carbon contained in longer-lived organisms does not in general
 have a time of residence in the organism equal to the life of the
 organism but rather less because the material of the organism is
 replaced a number of times during its lifetime. A maximum value for
 the average time the carbon atom spends in the biosphere seems to
    17. E. Rabinowitch, Photosynthesis and Related Processes (New York: Inter-Science
Publishers, Inc., 1945), chap. i.
     18. G. Schroeder, Naturwiss., 7, 8, 96 (1919).
    19. G.A. Riley, Bull. Bingham Oceanogr. Coll., 1, 1 (1941), quoted by Rabinowitch,
op.cit., p. 6.
     20. Op. cit., p. 6.
    21. W. J. Vernadsky, Geochemie in ausgewahlten    Kapiteln   (Leipzig: Akademische
Verlagsgesellschaft, 1930).
           WORLD-WIDE            DISTRIBUTION        OF RADIOCARBON               23

_ be a few years. Since carbon in the biosphere is such a small fraction
  of the total exchange reservoir, a more exact treatment appears un-
  necessary. Taking 10 years for the average carbon life, our calculated
  biosphere inventory will be 0.33 gm/cm? of the earth’s surface, which
  will prove to be only some 4 per cent of the total in the exchange
  reservoir, as has been shown in Table 1.
     We may check this estimate against measurements which have
  been made of the ratio of living matter to dissolved organic carbon
  in the ocean. A number of such measurements have been made by
  several observers,” and the ratio of dissolved to living matter has
  been determined to vary between 300:1 and 2:1. The low figures
  are found only in relatively small areas near shore where there is
  intense biological activity. The larger ratio, which was established
  for the deep water of the open ocean, was probably considerably
  nearer the average for the ocean as a whole. The estimates which we
  have chosen for these two quantities give a ratio of 2:1, again indi-
  cating that we have not underestimated the amount of carbon in the
  biosphere.
     The most likely way of appreciably increasing the holdup of the
  biosphere is by the assumption that a considerable portion of this
  material spends many years in slow decay as humus or ocean sedi-
  ments before it is recirculated. The available evidence for the ocean
  sediments seems to be that the major part of the dead material
  dissolves during the settling process and that little of it ever
  reaches the ocean floor.** This makes it unlikely that this factor could
  increase appreciably the importance of biosphere carbon to the size
  of the exchange reservoir.
     The amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has been deter-
  mined by several people. The values are: Buch,?! 0,12 (polar) to 0.13
  (tropical and continental); Paneth,” 0.12; and Vernadsky,” 0.12.
  We will use 0.12 gm/cm? of the earth’s surface for the amount of
  carbon in atmospheric carbon dioxide. This is equivalent to CO,
    22. Sverdrup et al., op. cit., p. 250.
    23. Ibid., p. 1012.
     24. K. Buch    4cta Acad. Aboensis, Math. et Physica, 11, No. 12 (1939).
     25. F. Paneth, quoted by G. P. Kuiper, The Atmospheres of the Earth and Planets
  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949), p. 1.
    26. Op. cit.
24                         RADIOCARBON         DATING

partial pressure of 0.21 mm.            of mercury, or a concentration of
0.028 per cent.
   In addition to the dilution of cosmic dene by the carbon of
the exchange reservoir, some is being removed constantly by incor-
poration in sedimentary rocks as they form. This rate of loss of radio-
carbon will be estimated. The rates of deposition of calcium carbo-
nate in the sea are not at all well established. Various estimates can
be made on the basis of the total amount of calcium carbonate that
has been deposited, the bicarbonate contents of rivers emptying
into the sea, and the direct observationof the rate of formation of
ocean sediments. For example, Brown”’ has calculated the following
inventory of carbon in the sedimentary rocks: in shale, 5.45 X 107
grams; in sandstone, 0.20 X 101 grams; and in limestone, 3.67 X
10” grams—a total of 9.3 X 10% grams of carbon. If we assume uni-
form deposition over a 2-billion-year period, we have a yearly loss
rate of 5 X 10” grams, which would remove only 6 grams of the
9800 grams of radiocarbon produced each year. This may be low
because recycling may be important, and the other methods give
somewhat higher figures; but it seems likely that the total removal
by formation of sedimentary deposits is probably less than about
3 per cent.
   We may consider now the question as to whether or not the vari-
ous portions of the exchange reservoir are sufficiently well mixed so
that they are completely efficient in the dilution process. The uni-
form distribution of radiocarbon throughout the reservoir will result
only if the various mixing processes are complete in a time short
compared with the average life of radiocarbon (8033 years; the aver-
age life is longer than the half-life by 1/ln 2). From the estimated
photosynthetic fixation rate given above and the total material in
the exchange reservoir, it can be calculated that a time of the order
of 250 years would suffice to turn over all the carbon through the
biosphere. This insures that the thin layer of the reservoir at the sur-
face of the earth and of the ocean will be well mixed. The main
question is whether or not the depths of the ocean and the upper
reaches of the atmosphere are mixed.
   Considering the latter first, we note that the radiocarbon is pro-
duced at great heights (Fig. 3), the neutron intensity reaching a
     27. H. S. Brown, private communication,
           WORLD-WIDE            DISTRIBUTION            OF RADIOCARBON          25

. maximum at about 40,000 feet and falling off considerably by 70,000
  feet. At this altitude the air pressure is 3.5 mm. of mercury. Excel-
  lent and rapid mixing is well established in the troposphere, the
  adiabatic portion of the atmosphere in which most weather phe-
  nomena occur. In the meteorological “standard atmosphere” the
  tropopause, or boundary between the adiabatic troposphere and the
  isothermal stratosphere, is assumed to be? at 10.8 km. (36,000 feet).
  However, the height of the tropopause varies considerably with the
  season and with latitude, reaching 18 km. (58,000 feet) in the winter
  at 40° N. latitude, while in summer it may be found at 16 km.
  (52,000 feet) as far north as 60° N. geomagnetic latitude.” Thus the
  tropopause is actually above the altitude of maximum neutron in-
  tensity some of the time each year. Even the isothermal stratosphere
  is not without vertical mixing.”
     The situation with regard to oceanic mixing is much less obvious.
  Very little indeed is known about the quantitative rates of convec-
  tive mixing of the deep ocean basins. Diffusive mixing is of course
  so extremely slow as to be out of the question.
     From studies made of the circulation of the Atlantic Ocean*! a
  very rough estimate of the mixing time can be made. These figures
  indicate that the rate of flow southward between South America
  and Africa at the equator is about 6 X 10® cubic meters per second
  at 3000 meters depth. This flow has been identified with North
  Atlantic Deep Water produced in the Arctic regions, and much of it
  reaches the Antarctic to replace water subsiding at the Antarctic
  Convergence. The situation is greatly complicated by the presence
  of some six water masses interacting in an involved circulatory
  pattern, but we may take this figure to represent the gross ex-
  change of water between the North and South Atlantic at great
  depths. The shallower water is mixed more rapidly by local complexi-
  ties in the circulation pattern, and the surface water is characterized
  by well-developed patterns of rapid currents. The Antarctic Bottom
  Water, which fills the deepest parts of most of the Atlantic, moves
    28. H. R. Byers, General Meteorology (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1944),
 p. 171.
    29. C.-G. Rossby, in The Atmospheres of the Earth and Planets, ed. G. P. Kuiper
 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949), p. 21.
    30. L. Spitzer, Jr., 2b¢d., p. 221.
    31. Sverdrup et al., op. cit., pp. 629 and 747 ff.
26                           RADIOCARBON          DATING

slowly north below the southward current and is presumably re-
turned to the Antarctic by gradual mixing with the North Atlantic
Deep Water. The rate of the return is not known, but the north-
ward flow at the equator is estimated at 1 X 10° cubic meters per
second.
   Taking the volume of the Atlantic Ocean as 3.24 X 10!” cubic
meters, we find the calculated time of circulating the entire ocean
through the entire Deep Water current to be 1700 years. About 18 —
per cent of the Atlantic is below 4000 meters. If this water has a
circulation rate of 1 X 10° cubic meters per second, the time re-
quired to circulate it is 1800 years. Less is known about the Pacific
circulation, but it is thought to be somewhat slower than that of the
Atlantic.
   For isolated seas for which the annual inflow and outflow are
known, it is possible to calculate a renewal time. Some of the figures
so obtained are: Mediterranean, 80 years; Arctic Mediterranean,
165 years; and Black Sea, 2500 years. The volume of such seas makes
their importance in a general mixing process small, but the figures
given are an indication of the order of magnitude of the time scale
involved.
   A further argument in favor of complete mixing of the ocean
basins may be based on the following considerations: It is known that
heat is being liberated from the earth’s crust at the rate of about 30
calories per square centimeter per year.*” Presumably the evolution
of heat from the bottom of the sea is of a similar magnitude, as in-
deed recent measurements by Revelle and associates in the deep
Pacific have shown.** Owing to this heat evolution, one might expect
regions of temperature inversion to develop near the ocean bottom,
especially in areas of poor circulation. To transfer this amount of
heat by molecular conduction would require a thermal gradient of
8 X 10-*°C. per centimeter, assuming the conductivity of water to
be 0.0013. If a layer 1000 meters thick at the bottom were cooled
only by molecular conduction, a temperature difference of 80° C.
would be required. Naturally, turbulent eddy circulation patterns
would be set up at much lower gradients, and a more effective
     32. I. C. Bullard, Nature, 156, 35 (1945).
    33. Roger Revelle and associates, private communication. They find 38 calories
per square centimeter per year.
            WORLD-WIDE           DISTRIBUTION   OF RADIOCARBON          27

  mechanism of eddy conduction would operate to remove the heat.
- Such eddy circulation would be equally efficacious in the transfer of
  dissolved carbonate, and a very efficient method of maintaining
  the radiocarbon equilibrium would arise. It can be calculated,
  for example, that a temperature gradient of 1.6 x 10-® °C. per
  centimeter would require a coefficient of eddy conduction some five
  hundred times the molecular coefficient for the transfer of the postu-
  lated amount of heat. This is quite small as eddy coefficients go,
  since they often range up to 10° or more times the molecular co-
  efficients. Such an eddy circulation operating at a depth below 4000
  meters can be shown to be adequate to mix the ocean depths suf-
  ficiently so that the assay of radiocarbon at 6000 meters would be
  90 per cent of normal with an integrated effect of only 1.4 per cent
  on the value of the specific activity.
     Few cases of temperature inversion in the deep ocean have been
  established. The inversion gradient shown in the above calculation
  is that observed in the Mindanao Trench* and is almost exactly
  equal to the gradient which would be produced by adiabatic com-
  pression; that is, there is no density inversion, the density of the
  water being constant with depth. However, the smaller the thermal
  gradient, the larger the coefficient of eddy conduction required to
  transport the heat. Without specifying the nature or source of the
  circulation, we merely point out that if 30 calories per square centi-
  meter per year are being evolved from the ocean floor, a certain mini-
  mum rate of circulation must exist in order to prevent the develop-
  ment of large thermal gradients. The above arguments are of course
  qualitative, since turbulent eddy circulation is not amenable to
  calculation. However, if the assumption of the specified heat evolu-
  tion is correct, the absence of appreciable thermal inversions near
  the ocean bottom would seem to indicate that the mixing is very
  good indeed on our time scale.
     It has not been possible to obtain samples of dissolved carbon
  from the very deep ocean, so that experimental evidence on the mix-
  ing time is not at hand. It would appear that measurements of this
  kind might be of considerable oceanographic interest and might shed
  some light on the problem of circulation in the deep basins. It is to be
  noted that collection of the deep water must be done with care, so
    34. Sverdrup et al., op. cit., p. 739.
28                          RADIOCARBON          DATING

that particulate material in transit from the top to the bottom and
probably in equilibrium with the biosphere will not be taken as part
of the sample proper. It seems likely that matter falling through the
deep water would not come into exchange equilibrium with dis-
solved material.
   We arrive finally, therefore, at the numbers given in Table 1 and
a total figure of 8.3 gm/cm? of the earth’s surface for the carbon in
the exchange reservoir. The uncertainty in this value for the total
carbon in the reservoir we place at about 15 per cent, most of this
error being in the estimated uncertainty in the value for ocean
carbonate, since it is the largest single item in the reservoir. It is
interesting to compare our numbers with a similar set given by
Rubey.® Dr. Rubey’s numbers are 7.85 gm/cm? for the total, con-
sisting of 6.95 for ocean and fresh water, 0.125 for the atmosphere,
and 0.775 for living organisms and undecayed organic matter.
   We shall turn now to the question of the present production rate
of radiocarbon as judged from the observed neutron intensity in the
atmosphere, assuming essentially quantitative conversion of atmos-
pheric neutrons to radiocarbon by Equation (1). As stated previous-
ly and shown in Figure 3,* the neutron intensity increases with alti-
tude from sea-level up to about 40,000 feet in an exponential fashion,
with a half-thickness of about 1 meter of water equivalent. Above
40,000 feet a maximum is reached, followed by a rapid decrease,
indicating very low intensity at the very top of the atmosphere, in
agreement with the principle that the neutrons are secondary in
origin, and escape from the earth in part. In addition to the altitude
dependence, the neutron intensity shows a strong dependence on
geomagnetic latitude (Fig. 2),3” the intensity at high latitudes being
about four times that at the geomagnetic equator.
   The measurements on neutron intensity which we use for our
calculations of total intensity have been on the thermal component
as defined by cadmium absorption for a boron detector. We shall
take this to mean that that fraction of the neutron spectrum lying
   35. W. W. Rubey, “Geological Evidence Regarding the Source of the Earth’s Hy-
drosphere and Atmosphere,’’ Science, 112, 20 (1950); and autumn, 1950, meeting of
the National Academy of Sciences.
   36. L.C.L. Yuan, Phys. Rev., 74, 504 (1948); 76, 1267, 1268 (1949); 77, 728 (1950) ;
L. C. L. Yuan and R. Ladenburg, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc., 23, No. 2, 21 (1948).
     37. E. C. Anderson, Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago (1949).
         WORLD-WIDE         DISTRIBUTION           OF RADIOCARBON                29

below 0.4 ev has been measured, and, in order to calculate the total
number of neutrons per square centimeter, Q, and its world-wide
average, 0, we must determine theoretically the probable ratio of
the total intensity to the thermal intensity. Bethe, Korff, and
Placzek** and Placzek*® have considered the problem in detail. Fol-
lowing them and using the later data of Melkonian*® together with
the data in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology volume,” we
shall assume that in the range 0.4 ev to 0.5 mev the total cross-
section in units of 10-*4 cm.’ for air is given by
                         o, = 8.56+ (0.266/E'”),                              (18)
and that the ‘capture cross-section is given by
                               oj=0.266/#1?.                                  (19)

The expression for the ratio of the total number of neutrons gener-
ated to the number which reach the thermal range is e”, where y is
given by                          Me     \                      s
                        y=ngeJf, otBs ok,                                     (20)
where the number 0.124 is the fractional energy loss in elastic col-
lision with the average air atom, the bond strength being neglected.
Integration and substitution give 0.79 for the integral and the calcu-
lated ratio of total production to thermal population of 2.20. It is
clear, however, that one must consider the effect of the very strong
bonds in the nitrogen and oxygen molecules on the cooling process.
Study of the analogous problem of the effect of binding on the neu-
tron elastic and inelastic cross-sections for hydrogen® leads us to
expect that no large error is made in neglecting the binding for cool-
ing down to the cadmium cut-off of 0.4 ev, which is 1.5 vibrational]
quanta for the average air molecule.
   It is necessary to make a correction for the absorption above 0.5
mev. It has been shown by Barschall and Battat,** Johnson and
  38. H. A. Bethe, S. A. Korff, and G. Placzek, Phys. Rev., 57, 573 (1940).
  39. G. Placzek, Phys. Rev., 69, 423 (1946).
  40. E. Melkonian, Phys. Rev., 76, 1750 (1949).
   41. Science and Engineering of Nuclear Power (Cambridge, Mass.: Addison-Wesley
Press, 1947), 1, 408-11.
  42. H. A. Bethe, Rev. Mod. Phys., 9, 122-27 (1937).
  43. H. H. Barschall and M. E. Battat, Phys. Rev., 70, 245 (1946).
30                           RADIOCARBON          DATING

Barschall,** and others,* that resonance production of radiocarbon
occurs in this range at cross-sections rising to a maximum of 0.1 X
10~** cm.” and falling to about 0.01 X 10-*4 cm.? in the range 0.5
mev to 2.0 mey. To obtain a probable upper limit for the capture
contribution in this high-energy range, we assume that only elastic
scattering occurs and that an average capture cross-section of
0.035 X 10-*4 cm.? applies throughout the high-energy interval. This
gives an additional contribution of 7 per cent to the ratio of total to
thermal neutron population. The corrected ratio is 2.36. The value
of Q is now to be obtained at any given latitude by integrating the
observed intensity under the intensity versus altitude curve (e.g.,
Fig. 3) and multiplying this observed intensity by the number
2.36. For this purpose we choose the data of Yuan and Ladenburg,”®
Figure 3, obtained at Princeton, New Jersey, which give 1.9 as the
number of slow cosmic-ray neutrons absorbed per second per square
centimeter of earth’s surface at that latitude. Using Simpson’s data‘”
(Fig. 2) for the variation of Q with latitude, and integrating over
the surface of the earth, we find for the average thermal flux 1.1
thermal cosmic-ray neutrons per square centimeter per second.
Finally, multiplying by the ratio of total production to thermal
neutron population, we obtain 2.6 as the most likely value for Q, the
average total production of cosmic-ray neutrons per square centi-
meter of earth’s surface per second. Ladenburg* and Kouts and
Yuan‘? have calculated the 0 by somewhat different methods and
 arrived at 2.4. It seems likely that their calculation is more reliable
than the one above.
   If the figure 2.4 for the average total production of cosmic-ray
neutrons per square centimeter of earth’s surface per second, Q, is
correct, and this intensity has remained constant over the last
several half-lives of radiocarbon, we can calculate an expected spe-
cific activity for the carbon in the exchange reservoir of (2.4 X 60)/
8.3, or 17.3 disintegrations per minute per gram of carbon. This
     44. C. H. Johnson and H. H. Barschall, Phys. Rev., 80, 819 (1950).
     45. Science and Engineering of Nuclear Power, 1, 408-11.
     46. L.C.L. Yuan and R. Ladenburg, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc., 23, No. 2, 21 (1948).
    47. E. C. Anderson, Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago (1949); Ann. Rev. Nuc.
Sci., 2, 63 (1953).
     48. R. Ladenburg, Phys. Rev., 86, 128 (1952).
     49, H. J. Kouts and L. C. L. Yuan, Phys. Rev., 86, 128 (1952).
          WORLD-WIDE          DISTRIBUTION         OF RADIOCARBON                   oil

 is to be compared with the observed mean value (Table 2) of
 16.0 + 0.5. Both of these numbers are for the average carbon in
 the inventory and are very close to the number expected for carbon-
 ate carbon, which is some 6 per cent higher in its radiocarbon content
 than biological carbon. The agreement between these two values is
 gratifying and suggests that no major factors contributing to the
 situation have been overlooked, although it does seem possible that
 the agreement may be due in some part to cancellation of errors.
    The possibility that the amount: of carbon in the exchange reser-
voir has altered appreciably in the last 10,000 or 20,000 years turns
 almost entirely on the question as to whether the glacial epoch,
 which as we will see later appears to reach into this period, could
 have affected the volume and the mean temperatures of the oceans
 appreciably. Antevs,°? Daly, and Flint® give 90, 85, and 102
 meters, respectively, for the lowering of the seas below the present
 level during the last Ice Age. This is to be compared with the mean
 depth of 3800 meters, so we may expect a decrease in the volume
 of the sea by about 5 per cent during this period, the actual magni-
 tude depending on the extent of the continental shelf in shallow
 regions in this sea. This effect in itself would lead to an increase in
 the specific activity of carbon formed during the glacial epoch by
 about this same percentage. In addition, there is the question of
 the mean temperature of the oceans and whether this has varied ap-
preciably. An increase in mean temperature would act to increase
 the carbon in the reservoir, and a decrease in mean temperature
would decrease the inventory. Bearing in mind that both of these
effects will be unimportant unless the altered conditions last for a
time of the order of magnitude of the mean life of radiocarbon
 (8033 + 50 years), we find it difficult at this stage to make correction
for these effects. It does seem possible, however, that the certain
decrease in volume and the possible slight decrease in temperature
might raise the specific activity of carbon in the exchange reservoir
during the glacial maximum by 5 or 10 per cent, causing an error
   50. Am. Geog. Soc., Res. Ser., No. 17, pp. 74-82 (1928).
    51. Changing World of the Ice Age (New Haven:       Yale University Press, 1934),
p. 46.
    52. Glacial Geology and the Pleistocene Epoch (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1947),
p. 435.
32                        RADIOCARBON          DATING

in the direction of making glacial material appear somewhat too
young. We can estimate from the decay equation
                                  T= Ihe-*/",                                 (21)
in which J is the original specific activity and 7 is the mean life,
that the error in the age will be given by

                          ical (ALY +
                                    +(Any,
                                      (AE                                     (22)
in which AT is the error in the determination of the specific activity
of the ancient material and AJ, is the error made in assuming that
I) has the modern value of 15.3 for organic matter or 16.2 for shell
and inorganic material. From this we see that a 10 per cent error in
To would make our glacial ages too young by some 800 years. As
further information becomes available on the chronology of the
recent ice ages, it should be possible to make a more accurate correc-
tion for this effect. It is to be hoped that Professor Urey’s determina-
tion of prehistoric temperatures by the O18 content of fossil shell®*
will give quantitative information on the mean temperature of the
oceans in recent glacial times. With such data one then can calculate
the expected change in the principal item in the inventory, the inor-
ganic carbon in the sea. The data available at present suggest that
the temperature correction will not be large, though it must be
borne in mind and considered to be a source of uncertainty.
   It seems quite likely that the amount of living matter on earth
will not seriously affect the specific activity, for the reason that it
constitutes such a small fraction of the total inventory in the reser-
voir and probably has always held this minor position. The situation
would appear to be similar for the other two items in the inventory,
the dissolved organic material in the ocean and atmospheric carbon
dioxide.
   The question of the constancy of the cosmic radiation intensity
is much more difficult to answer. One feels that it is not unlikely
that the intensity has remained constant in the sense we demand;
    53. H. C. Urey, Science, 108, 489 (1948); J. M. McCrea, J. Chem. Phys., 18, 849
(1950);S. Epstein, R: Buchsbaum, H. A. Lowenstam, and H. C. Urey, “‘The Carbonate-
Water Isotopic Temperature Scale,’ Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., 62, 417 (1951); H. C. Urey,
H. A. Lowenstam, S. Epstein, and C. R. McKinney, “Measurement of Paleotempera-
tures and Temperatures of the Upper Cretaceous of England, Denmark and the
Southeastern United States,”’ Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., 62, 399 (1951).
        WORLD-WIDE      DISTRIBUTION     OF RADIOCARBON             33

namely, variations. in the average intensity over periods commen-
surate with the lifetime of radiocarbon, since it appears to be a
phenomenon originating in the cosmos and therefore probably tied
to a time scale similar to that controlling the intensity of solar
radiation. However, it is not obvious a priori that this is true, and
we must admit the possibility of variations having occurred. About
the only sources of information on this point discovered so far have
been the agreement between the specific activity of the present-day
inventory and the observed present rate of production and observa-
tion that ancient materials of historically known age appear to
exhibit the radiocarbon content calculated on the assumption that
their original assay was identical with that of the modern reservoir.
We have seen how uncertain the experimental information on the
present rate of production is and are therefore forced to conclude
that agreement between this rate and the radioactivity of modern
material, which of course reflects the production rate as of some
8000 years ago—-since the carbon atoms now found in modern wood,
for example, are 8000 years old on an average—is not a very firm
proof of the constancy and intensity of the cosmic radiation. It does,
however, agree with this postulate. The rather satisfactory agree-
ment between the predicted and observed radiocarbon contents of
organic materials of historically known age (I'ig. 1) is somewhat
more reassuring. Taking the oldest materials with an age of some
4000 years, we observe their radiocarbon content, which was of
course due to an average production some 8000 years previous to
their existence, or some 12,000 years before the present, appears
within the experimental error to have been the same as at present.
This of course assumes that the size of the reservoir has not changed
simultaneously and in a compensating manner. However, for the
reasons given above we do not think that a significant factor of this
sort is very likely. Considering the matter empirically, we are ap-
parently justified in saying that, whatever the reasons, the specific
activity of living matter has not changed significantly in historic
times, and the problem resolves itself into consideration of possible
variations restricted to the prehistoric period encompassed by the
radiocarbon dating method.
                             CHAP          tikes bir

