Natural Symbols




There are no such things as natural symbols. Every culture natu-
ralises a certain view of the human body to make it carry social
meanings. This work focuses on how the selections from blood,
bones, breath or excrement are made. Body symbolism is always in
service to social intentions, and the body cannot be endowed with
universal meanings.
   In this now classic work Mary Douglas shows how certain
forms of social life bring forth regularly the same varieties of
symbolic expression. Hierarchy treats the body as a hierarchy; sect
treats it as a closed system; individualism treats it as pervasive
energy. Political movements as well as religions have their rituals,
medicine, ethics, educational theory, aesthetics; a huge range of
judgements falls into line behind the standard cultural bias.
   Though Natural Symbols is a book about religion, it also
concerns secular symbolism. It has stimulated new insights and
provoked re-appraisals of current orthodoxies. Above all it
provides a way to think beyond our cultural prejudices.
   As a classic, it represents a work of anthropology in its widest
sense, exploring themes such as personal identity and the image of
the body in society which are now very much in vogue in
anthropology, sociology and cultural studies.

Mary Douglas is a distinguished anthropologist. She retired as
Professor of Anthropology at University College London in 1977,
and taught in America until 1988. Her books include Purity and
Danger (1966), Essays in the Sociology of Perception (1982), How
Institutions Think (1986) and Risk and Blame (1992).
Natural Symbols




Explorations in Cosmology
with a new introduction




Mary Douglas




London and New York
First published by Barrie & Rockliff 1970
Published by Pelican Books 1973
Published by Penguin Education 1978
This edition with a new introduction first published in 1996
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2002.
© 1970, 1973, 1996 Mary Douglas
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Douglas, Mary.
   Natural symbolics: explorations in cosmology/Mary Douglas; with
new introduction,
        p. cm.
   Originally published: 2nd ed. London: Barrie and Jenkins, 1973.
   Includes bibliographical references and index.
   1. Body, Human—Religious aspects. 2. Body, Human,—Mythology.
3. Symbolism. 4. Ritual. I. Title.
BL604.B64D68 1996
302.2´22—dc20                  96–203
                                   CIP
ISBN 0-203-03605-0 Master e-book ISBN



ISBN 0-203-17636-7 (Adobe eReader Format)
ISBN 0-415-13825-6 (hbk)
ISBN 0-415-13826-4 (pbk)
Contents




   List of diagrams                  vi
   Acknowledgements                 vii
   Introduction to 1996 edition     xi
   Introduction                   xxxi

 1 Away from ritual                  1
 2 To inner experience              20
 3 The Bog Irish                    37
 4 Grid and group                   54
 5 The two bodies                   69
 6 Test cases                       88
 7 The problem of evil            110
 8 Impersonal rules               126
 9 Control of symbols             145
10 Out of the cave                160


   Bibliography                   171
   Index                          177
Diagrams




1   Family control                    29
2   Speech codes                      29
3   General cosmological ideas        30
4   Grid and group                    60
5   Three Nilotes                    103
6   From impersonal to personal      147
7   From asceticism to affirmation   148
Acknowledgements




This book is obviously not intended solely for anthropologists. I
hope it will be a bridge between anthropology and other
disciplines. Yet anthropologists must be its most important critics,
for only they can judge the soundness of my interpretations of field
reports and bring up material which can either confirm or spoil my
hypotheses. I have tried to limit myself to sources which are both
accessible and of very high quality, so that if my uses of them seem
idiosyncratic, anyone can go back to the original reports and
check. But in the long run, as the perspectives I wish to develop
have not been in the minds of field researchers, only new research,
especially devised, can test these arguments.
    It remains for me to thank those who have helped me most
directly. First I thank the Dominicans at Blackfriars, Oxford, for
inviting me to give the St Thomas Day lecture on 7 March 1968,
and for publishing ‘The Contempt of Ritual’ in New Blackfriars
(June, July 1968, 49:475–82, 528–35). Theirs was the initial
stimulus for the book. Further I thank Professor Kenneth Little
and the Court of Edinburgh University for inviting me to deliver
the Munro lectures in May 1968. For earlier work on this subject
I am grateful to the Woldingham Association Committee and
especially to Reverend Mother Eyre, Mary Don and Mona
Macmillan. The research we hoped to promote on religious
education has not yet been accomplished. At least this is offered
as a sketch of some of the issues we hoped to tackle.
    The first formal acknowledgement I must make is to Basil
Bernstein. My debt to him is very apparent and I ask his pardon
if the use I have made of his ideas is inept. I am grateful to the
Reverend Cornelius Ernst, OP, and to Peter Brown for reading
the manuscript, and to David Schneider, Victor Turner and Nur
Yalman for their discussions of lectures given on its basis in
viii Acknowledgements

Chicago this year. I am also grateful to Bryan Wilson and
Godfrey Lienhardt for kindly reading and commenting on parts
of the manuscript, and to James Woodburn and to Daniel de
Coppet for permission to quote from studies still awaiting
publication, and to Rodney Needham for a seminar paper on
natural symbols which helped me to focus my interest. I record
gratefully my husband’s unflagging attempt to keep the
argument on the track and thanks to Janet for helping with the
bibliography.

Mary Douglas
July 1969

Many difficulties and sources of confusion still remain in this
Pelican edition. To try to unify so many fields of anthropology
was a very ambitious task. Clearly another ten years of scholarly
research would have made it more presentable. However, events
move faster than study can. If this exercise in comparative
cosmology has any relevance for the way we justify our own
behaviour, it should be set forth with the least delay. Once made
public, the weakness of the argument, step by step and example
by example, could be criticized. The thesis was too complex to
unfold in less space, too difficult to discuss piecemeal without
laying down the whole, and too difficult to work out further in
private study. Therefore, I published it when I did and wish to
acknowledge my gratitude for the painstaking criticisms it has
received. Particularly Professor Robin Horton, Professor Philip
Gulliver, Dr Deane Neubauer and Mr Michael Thompson have
been most constructive. I wish also to thank Professor Thomas
Luckmann for encouraging me to make a revised edition at once
and for his suggestions about how to set about it. It will be
apparent that I have not been able to avail myself of all the
helpful criticisms. The main difference between the two editions is
the attempt to clarify the central dimensions of ‘grid and group’
on which the rest hangs. Instead of indicating a separate quadrant
for each type of society, I am now thinking of scatter patterns
across the diagram to show the group pressures and the coherence
of the classificatory scheme which can be assessed from
ethnography or historical biography. If the reasoning is sound, we
can go a great deal further than the phenomenologists who have
been saying for some time that the perceived universe is socially
constructed. We should be able to say what kinds of universe are
                                              Acknowledgements ix

likely to be constructed when social relations take this or that
form.
    Now that Professor Bernstein’s work Class Codes and
Control (1971) is published, my book shows up more obviously
as the other side of his thesis. This meets a criticism from those
who felt I had not fully explained the relevance of his work to
my ideas. The revised grid and group is derived from his
discussion of the ways the curriculum can be constructed. He
has been interested in revealing how speech forms, and now the
curriculum, encode the pattern of social relations, mediate and
reinforce it. Any given curriculum is justified by a cosmology
which states the ultimate principles in the universe, and which
derives from these principles the proper way to teach human
beings. As he looks beneath the curriculum to the pattern of
power which is being hammered out in bargaining over the staff-
meeting table, so I try to look beneath the overt cosmology to
the pattern of power which it realizes. And one step further, I
have tried to identify with the type of cosmology and social
pattern a distinctive coding of ritual forms. The coding of ritual
forms corresponds to the coding of speech forms in Basil
Bernstein’s earlier work. The curriculum is seen as a system of
boundaries: likewise the tribal culture. His study of the
curriculum examines the main varieties which differ in the
strength of the boundaries used. The difference between strong
boundary maintenance and weak boundary maintenance in
education is analogous to the difference between ritual and anti-
ritual in types of religion. This theme of the variable strength of
the boundaries of cognitive systems I was forced to explore after
writing Purity and Danger (1970). For in that study I
emphasized the communication function of all boundings of
experience, without facing the empirical fact that some societies
persist very well without strongly bounded cognitive categories
and some tolerate anomaly more easily than others. Natural
Symbols is an attempt to answer questions raised by myself from
the programme of the earlier book.
    Basil Bernstein says of the curriculum that it is a scheme for
fitting together bits of knowledge. As they are connected in the
curriculum so they enter the minds of the pupils, and, though the
details of the content will fade, the connections are likely to guide
their judgements and perpetuate the system of power which the
curriculum represents. This feedback, which gives stability to
educational systems, also stabilizes cosmologies. The cosmological
x Acknowledgements

scheme connects up the bits of experience and invests the whole
with meaning; the people who accept it will only be able to justify
their treatment of one another in terms of these ultimate
categories. Unless we can make the process visible, we are the
victims.

Mary Douglas
December 1971
Introduction to 1996 edition




Natural Symbols was an immediate follow-up on Purity and
Danger and, as a product of the 1960s, the sense of urgency, the
desire to join an intensely exciting worldwide conversation, shows.
That was twenty-five years ago, and rereading it now I discover
the mine of ideas that I have been quarrying for practically
everything that I have written since. So I am grateful to Routledge
for deciding to reprint it and glad to have the chance to write a
new introduction. I should add however that the diagrams I used
seem very complicated now: later versions are much simpler.
Whom should I imagine myself now to be addressing? Any one
who is interested in ritual, anyone interested in theology, in
shifting values, or stable values, in personal identity, or in history.
I still would like to persuade them not to try to do their work
without establishing a basis for comparisons.
   So many things have changed since 1970. In the 1960s it was
understood that social anthropology would have to be
comparativist or nothing. Obviously a method would be
necessary to avoid subjective bias. Anyone writing about
emotions needs to establish the basis for their comparisons, lest
they fall into the trap of being surprised that Frenchmen talk
French. This is Joyce Carey’s phrase, worth quoting, from the
novel Prisoner of Grace (1952):

  You would say he was a sentimental man, and so he was, but so
  were most young men in those days. They would cry like
  fountains at a play called East Lynne when a little boy died. Of
  course, it is sad when little children die, I mean permanently
  sad; and so I can see why young people nowadays laugh at
  plays like East Lynne—they don’t want to lose their dignity. But
  I think they ought to excuse men like Jim for crying, for, after
xii Introduction to the 1996 edition

  all, they would not laugh at a Frenchman for talking French…
  (1952:51)

Comparison depends on theory for saying what should be
compared and how. Where religion is concerned there is no theory
comparing dogmas that does not take its own position for dogma.
This will be abundantly illustrated in the pages to follow. Where
psychology is concerned it is still acceptable to sound off about
emotional responses without taking local thresholds into account.
The central project of this book is to enable comparison to be less
subjective and relativist by establishing something about different
social environments.
   This book started as a comment on student revolt against dead
ritual and meaningless forms. But it was not only students who
protested, nor only students who transformed the Western world
through the 1970s and 1980s, until we found ourselves where we
are now. This world we are in still longs for sincerity, and for
simple and direct dealings between equals. It still rejects the
outward forms of social distinction, and still finds that differences
of power and wealth are as effective as barriers to direct
communication as ever. At that time, in America, the battles were
about Black and White segregation, on buses, in swimming pools,
in schools. In the background of all of this they were about
guerrilla warfare in Vietnam. In the Catholic Church they were
ostensibly about anti-ritualism, about how the Letter lived while
the Spirit died. Vatican II attended to the rituals, but in the
background the strife was about a hierarchical Church that was
too remote to hear the voice of its congregation.
   I saw the problem, but as an anthropologist I doubted the
remedy. The mood was to sweep away rituals, sweep away the
institutions, and let the people be free to speak from the heart…as
if they would automatically love each other if not prevented by
institutional dead wood. Attacking rituals was attacking the
surface. The real problem for everyone was to find better
institutions. For social theory the problem was to find a better way
of thinking about institutional life. And for me it was a route for
developing the analysis that I had started with Purity and Danger
(1966) and which I have been working on ever since.
   Looking back on it now with an invitation to write a new
introduction I see that my intentions with regard to the sociology
of religion were subversive and with the times. I wanted to free it
from subservience to confessional loyalties embedded in ancient
                                Introduction to the 1996 edition xiii

institutions. At the same time my intentions with regard to
anthropology were distinctly reactionary. Instead of turning over
the old order the aim was to rehabilitate an old theoretical
approach, Durkheimian, and make it available for our
understanding of ourselves. In one sense the book was counter-
cultural, since I was less interested in attacking forms when they
have lost their meaning and suffocate the people involved in them
before they die, and much more interested in discovering how they
ever get any meaning at all in the first place.


BEGINNINGS IN RELIGIOUS COSMOLOGY
It is situated as a book about religious cosmology, but I sometimes
wonder whether religion is too sacred a topic for sociological
enquiry. When Natural Symbols first appeared the sociology of
religion was very much a world of its own, and somewhat under
suspicion from the other students of religion—historical or literary
or denominational. Admittedly to some degree the other
specialized sociologies were equally enclaved in the mainstream of
their subject. The sociology of science and the sociology of art, for
instance, occupied and still do occupy small niches each dealing
with a specialized field. Someone coming in from outside that field
is understandably bewildered by the special language and concepts
and only a lot of reading and talking will enable him find out what
it is all about. But religion is a big unspecialized field and needs
more than a niche. In social anthropology it permeates the whole
subject.
    When I wanted to turn the experience of anthropology to
modern industrial society I was balked by the separate and isolated
compartments within the social sciences (Douglas and Ney,
forthcoming). There was an enormous literature on religion in the
modern world, but little guidance on how to relate its under-
standings to the other branches of social thought. The historians
understandably enough tended to identify the social events and
institutions in the contemporary confessional terms of their period,
a practice largely followed by sociologists writing about sects,
churches, denominations. The movements within and between
these units were described in the vocabulary that is used for the
local controversies—Manichaean, pelagian, monophysite in
ancient history, revivalist, millennial, traditional in modern times.
To move out of a religious congregation was to ‘lapse’, recruitment
was ‘conversion’, new recruits were ‘neophytes’ or ‘novices’. The
xiv Introduction to the 1996 edition

varieties of religions were described in doctrinal terms—mystical,
monotheist, polytheist—or by the names of founders—Calvinist,
Lutheran—or by the form of ministry, such as evangelist,
sacramental—or by the relation of one unit to the others, such as
non-conformist, primitive or protestant. And naturally the
objectives of religion were defined by doctrine.
    This is very understandable, but a separate vocabulary implies a
separate conversation, and it is fair to say that the sociology of
religion, despite the work of great masters, was a separate enclave
in the mainstream of social thought more deeply embedded and
less interested in making any abstraction from the subject under
study. To a large extent this is still true to this day. The study of
religion is mainly located in the seminaries, or else, if it is
deliberately freed from denominational bias so as to be offered as
a university subject, it is located in the humanities, with literature,
history, philosophy, and oriental languages. Though the journals
which are consecrated to the sociology of religion are not
obviously preaching higher values, they do clearly dissociate
themselves from market and politics by writing in the special
language of religion.
    A fence protects virtue from the rougher world of
socioeconomic and political studies, but the fence is kept up from
both sides. Max Weber drew his ideal types from the prominent
secular institutions of his own culture, market and legislature, each
operating with its distinctive institutional rationality. The two
voices of market and bureaucracy confronted one another in
European political controversy in those days as they still do now.
Many churches are very bureaucratic in both doctrine and
structure, as Weber showed in his work on India and Judaism, and
there is a strong market aspect to Church organization. But when
it came to religion he dropped the institutional element and used
the concept of charisma, invoking interpersonal processes. Since
then much clarification and insight has been devoted to
bureaucracy and market, but religious forms of organization have
effectually been left to one side of the secular theory of society.
Perhaps this was wise. When Durkheim laid profane hands on
religion he got into trouble for his boldness.
    There are real problems in talking about religion in comparative
terms. Trying to get a common vocabulary means forcing formal
definitions where they have not been needed before: ‘What do you
mean by “spirit” or ‘spiritual”?’ Or ‘What do you mean by
“rational”?’ And it is not just a problem of translation. At worst,
                                Introduction to the 1996 edition xv

talking about other people’s religions risks offending
susceptibilities. At very least, the moral bias has to be unloaded,
and the language of exhortation and reprimand needs to be
cooled. Appeal to the emotions has to be eliminated. This is
precisely what Durkheim tried to do when he asked us to pay
attention to ‘social facts’ and to abjure basing explanations on
‘psychology’. Wanting to establish a unified theory of society and
knowledge, he needed to tidy up the language, to uncover hidden
emotional cargoes and throw them overboard. The aim is still far
from achieved, and we are hampered in following him by his own
psychologistic waverings.


SOCIAL FACTS LEANING ON PSYCHOLOGY
Durkheim proposed to speak only about social facts, but he
based his whole theory of the Sacred on two psychological
factors. One was emotional effervescence, the idea that rituals
rouse violent, ecstatic feelings, like crowd hysteria, which
convince the worshipper of the reality of a power greater than
and beyond the self. The other was the emotion of outrage, the
idea of sacred contagion and consequent dangers to the
community unleashed by breach of cherished norms. Putting
them together he produced a theory of social solidarity: first the
loosely associated crowd recognizes its unity in ritually aroused
emotions, and then it proceeds to harness the whole universe in
an intellectual drive to attribute sacred contagion to individual
deviation from its norms.
   Both fear and emotional effervescence are psychological
concepts. The former idea—emotional response to sacred
contagion—does not present a problem to an anthropologist who
really likes Durkheim and expects to make his theory work. Fear
of sacred contagion can be transposed from the language of
emotions to the sociological language of claims and counter-
claims. Zeus’s thunderbolts, Appollo’s arrows, the floods and
plagues of the God of Exodus, when interpreted as punishments,
form the distinctively religious part of the local theory of
causation. Like the theory of the person, sacred contagion is a
moral theory of connections and causes. By its means the members
of a community manipulate one another. Sacred contagion serves
the oblique objective of making a group of persons into a
community; it is a means of mutual moral coercion and is
susceptible of analysis in political and social terms.
xvi Introduction to the 1996 edition

   It is not so easy to transpose Durkheim’s theory of ritual from
psychology to social fact. When I first read The Elementary
Forms I felt puzzled by his description of rituals and the alleged
exciting effect on the congregation. That ritual should be seen as
a rabblerouser was a surprise as my upbringing had given me
quite another experience of the big rituals of the Roman rite.
Dignified, but tedious, slow and elaborate, this is the Corpus
Christi procession that used to wind its way down the sidewalks
of Hampstead, or the long Easter Vigil at St Josephs, Highgate.
Think of the high degree of co-ordination required to bring in
every participant at the right moment. The ordered use of
flowers, bells, lights and organ music, and the separation of
consecrated from unconsecrated elements; it is all too careful and
precise to be interrupted by volleys of spontaneous ‘Alleluiah’
and ecstatic shouting and dancing. Everyone is worried about
getting the timing right and fitting in the highly classified parts of
the congregation. The choir boys have to be separated from the
girls, the Embroidery Guild has to be given a place, but is it
before or behind the Knights of St Columba? And where do the
Friends of St Vincent of Paul go? The Boy Scouts have to line up
with their banners, there must be seats for the old age pensioners.
Where is the tea? Where are the matches? Nothing must be left to
chance.
   When agnostic colleagues sit through a Catholic wedding, they
are invariably disappointed by so much circumspection. I do not
know what they hope to see, but at a Nuptial Mass they will find
ritual, but no rolling in the aisles or spontaneous witnessing in the
Spirit, even the singing tends to be dispirited. The Catholic rituals
I know are not conducive to the arousing of emotion which
Durkheim seemed to think is the function of ritual. Something is
wrong, either Durkheim or the religion. Being of a loyal nature I
tried in this book to save them both. Australian totemic dances
cannot do for a model of ritual in all situations. The answer is not
that Durkheim was wrong or that the Catholics are failing in their
ritual duties; the idea of the dangerous and powerful Sacred is
indeed formed by living together and trying to coerce one another
to conform to a moral idea. But the Sacred can be engraved in the
hearts and minds of the worshippers in more ways than one: there
are several kinds of religion. Some ritualists plan to achieve
spontaneity, others aim at co-ordination. Rituals don’t wave
around in the blue: if we want to explain why some rituals are
ecstatic and others not we need to go into comparisons of
                               Introduction to the 1996 edition xvii

organizations and their objectives. This is what the grid-group
analysis proposed in this book was intended to do.


THE FORENSIC APPROACH TO RELIGION
At the Sorbonne at the end of the nineteenth century a new
initiative in comparative religion began to develop a theory of
sacrifice that would hold good for Judaism, Hinduism and
Christianity. The general scheme envisaged two worlds: one, the
world of mundane experience which is under the regular
constraints of space and time; the other, a sacred world of
transcendant powers manifested by non-corporeal beings. Half of
the work of religion was seen as harnessing these divine powers to
the benefit of human concerns. On the cornucopia side, blessings
and graces or more miraculous benign interventions could be
produced by the right words or gestures. On the side of hellfire and
thunderbolts, religion warns and protects from hurtful divine
interventions. In this perspective Durkheim developed his forensic
theory of sacred contagion.
   In the 1940s and 1950s, when I was a student, a programme lay
invitingly ahead for the social anthropologists who would follow
this line of interpretation. It would be a programme for tracing
how shifts in organization or in external conditions are
accompanied by shifts in the forensic uses of sacred contagion. We
would not explain witchcraft by individual emotions such as envy
or fear, witch-doctoring by cunning or greed for clients’ fees. We
would look at the uses of illness and misfortune in providing
causes for blame—we would be interested in the uses of divination
for inculpating or exonerating, and in the uses of rituals for
deflecting anger and reconciling. Our attention would not be
directed solely to the individual case, but to the pattern of
accusations and explanations. We would show how the beliefs
about the universe were shaped by the kind of society that
members were trying to make together.
   It is a pity that this aspect of our work was so dominated by
esoteric examples, since the forensic approach has in its gift the
possibility of a Durkheimian analysis of the whole cosmology,
with direct implications for theories of cognition, the philosophy
of belief (Douglas, 1970) and of classification (Douglas and Hull,
1993). By thus relating morals with knowledge, the totalizing
ethnography envisaged by Marcel Mauss would become possible.
It also has wide explanatory power, for example for the loss of
xviii Introduction to the 1996 edition

religious commitment and acounting for the bias of religious
beliefs in modern industrial society.
   We have plenty of disasters, floods, famines, plagues, but we no
longer consider them caused by sin. Sacred contagion and the
lightning-conductor role of expiatory rituals have withered. There
is a common self-congratulatory idea that the decline of
superstition is due to the growth of science, literacy and
technology. On Durkheim’s thesis these factors would only work
indirectly; if you want to explain how sacred contagion is
delegitimated, you should look to the dissolution of closed
communities and the weakening of the coercive control their
members exert on each other. The more open a community, the less
its members are coerced by common beliefs about dangers that
defend the community-defined definitions of sin. The idea applies
with special force to the theories of disease and natural contagion,
as Mark Pegg has shown with regard to the times when leprosy
was regarded as a sexually transmitted disease (Pegg, 1990;
Douglas, 1993c).
   So secularism, on this view, is a consequence of a social factor,
openness. The freedom of individuals to move out if they are being
harrassed by neighbours is a freedom to disbelieve the divine
punishments that afflict those who defy the community standards.
The freedom to say goodbye and walk away does not necessarily
imply a loss of religious belief, but it does shake the walls of
established religions. Open society leads to private religion. Sacred
contagion could be expected to change its bias from thunderbolts
to cornucopias. The closed-community religions would associate
punishment with divinity because they would be hearing about it
every day, and the private religions of those who have escaped
from community controls would expect divine interventions to be
benign. This suggests that we should be able to test some of
Durkheim’s ideas by comparing the shift of religious bias between
thunderbolts and cornucopia according to degrees of closure or
openness in the community. But this is more taxing than it sounds.
   Religious sociology needs to take several kinds of organization
into account. It ought to avoid using the prominent institutions of
our own culture as units of analysis. In order not to select
arbitrarily, not to be unfair on market, not to import political bias,
not to be too kind to religion while trying to explain social forms
and religious ideas, the task needs an impartial model of society.
The model needs to be able to organize a rich store of information,
be flexible, and dynamic, so capable of incorporating change. This
                                 Introduction to the 1996 edition xix

was my objective in setting up a two-dimensional diagram of
cultural bias. On one dimension is variation in constraints on the
individual imposed by group membership. On the other the
constraints of structure are assessed—that is, rules, classifications,
compartments.
   The theory is that each type of organization has advantages for
surviving in an appropriate environment, and each has its
characteristic disadvantages. Two of them are individualist
cultures, two of them are communitarian. In an individualist
culture the worshipper tends to confront God and the universe as
an individual. When religion is private, grace can be as sporadic or
chancy as you like; by definition these people are not intent on
persuading each other to combine in long-term association. They
do not need to explain their misfortunes as punishments, and they
are not going to need to use sacred contagion to bring recalcitrant
followers to heel.


FROM SECT TO ENCLAVE
To develop comparisons between religions we have to develop the
concepts and the words. It is not only a matter of clearing out
adhering local commitments and emotional bias. We also have to
have a theory about how the doctrines relate to social
organization. This book offered a preliminary exploration of the
ways in which openness limits the growth of public, standardized
doctrine. Sectarian doctrines are typically expected to be more
intransigent, more intolerant of deviation, harsher to outsiders, as
well as affording consolation and joy to their adepts. If
sectarianism interests us, then the first words we have to examine
are ‘sect’ and ‘sectarian.’
   After some sorry misunderstandings of the earlier editions of
Natural Symbols I have recently come to abjure the word ‘sect’. As
it has become a term of reproach or even of contempt applied by
members of the Church to dissenters it should be ruled out of our
discourse. We need a neutral term to refer to the social
environment constituted by a strong group boundary and weak
internal distinctions.
   By definition this is a bounded group, and egalitarian. For
talking about the Second Temple Community in Judah in the fifth
century, I have come to use ‘egalitarian enclave’ (Douglas, 1993a).
However, I still retain the word ‘sectarian’ and all of its
unfavourable associations as a description of a tendency or
xx Introduction to the 1996 edition

cultural bias which might take over in favouring conditions.
Sectarian bias means polarized arguments, persons shown in black
and white contrasts, evil and good, and nothing in between; it
means adopting a psychologizing and idealizing approach to
political and social problems; often a simplistic metaphysics, even
an anti-intellectual and anti-theoretical stance, and an
uncompromising ruthlessness towards opponents. The question in
this perspective is to understand how such an outlook should be
harboured in an enclave.
   There are some loose ends to be tidied up with changing the
terminology. ‘Sect’ was originally used to refer to social units that
were internally undifferentiated and dominated by a strong
boundary against the rest of the world, and if enclave is to be
substituted for it, the same attributes should be apparent. It is not
the fact of being physically enclaved in a larger society that brings
on the symptoms of sectarianism.
   There can be enclaves that are hierarchically organized. This is
a source of strength, hierarchy is good for solving co-ordination
problems. But how do they manage to develop and hold to a
hierarchical organization? If they can afford to organize
hierarchically it means that for some reason they have less trouble
with controlling their members, less reason for worrying about
defection. Let us not call them enclaves, if we are to specialize that
word for dissenting egalitarian groups. Let us simply call them
hierarchical groups, and expect them to show a typically
hierarchical culture. The problems start with a cultural enclavism,
an initial decision to withdraw as a group from the wider society
of which it was a part. The true enclave is in disagreement with the
outside world.
   It does not matter where you start, with the group withdrawal,
or with whatever caused that, or with weakness in face of
defection, or the egalitarian system adopted to resolve the other
difficulties, or with the lack of leadership, the organizational
problems that such a community has to solve are very great
(Douglas, 1987, ch.3). Neither smallness nor intimacy is enough to
explain the peculiarities of enclave culture. I ascribe its distinctive
culture to its egalitarian organization, which in turn I see as a
result of its weakness in holding its membership and resisting the
seductions of the larger society, and this weakness in turn I would
explain by its principled opposition to the larger society in which it
keeps itself as an enclave. The more that such a community has
dissident views, such as refusing military service, demanding
                                  Introduction to the 1996 edition xxi

separate education, refusing to vote or serve in public office, the
less can it count on outside help. It cannot bring in the police to
enforce what is not enforceable in the larger society.
    The dissenting enclave cannot usually have significant
patronage to bestow. All the really powerful positions stand
beyond the confines of the enclave, and all the log-rolling and
nepotism and big opportunities for amassing wealth are outside
too. The enclave’s distinctive attitudes to money and markets may
often entail pecuniary loss for loyal individuals. The enclave may
have to tell its members that they should not defile themselves with
material rewards. If it claims to control the sexual life of its
members and expects the young to marry in, there is another
whole field for conflict and stress. Disciplinary problems loom
large on the border between belonging and not belonging, and this
is the point to look for the explanations of enclave culture,
otherwise called sectarianism.
    An enclave starts to polarize its world when it has to worry
about the defection of its members. The big organizational
problem and the distinctive anxiety of the enclave is about
defection. If discipline is threatened against challengers, the latter
can threaten to move out. No one can stop them. If they all defect,
the group is doomed. There can be no show of power, and
authority has to be exerted with great care: hence the insistence on
equality. The leadership is very aware that it must avoid looking as
if it is free-riding on the efforts of the rank and file, so no privilege
of rank, and generally no rank either. All this applies at a fairly late
stage after the founding of the group; at the beginning all is hope
and love, but after the death of the founder charisma falters,
problems of succession raise jealousies and schism threatens.


TYPICAL STRATEGIES
Enclaves have typical strategies to overcome these difficulties. One
is to adopt a rule of rigorous equality. The result of this is to enhance
ambiguity and increase the weakness of leadership. Equality plus
weak leadership make for poor co-ordination. The typical enclavist
difficulties of organization produce the typical sectarian anger
against outsiders, and well-known intransigence in debate.
    The main disadvantage of the enclave is that it is prone to
internal factions which eventually lead to splitting. It is well-
devised for protest but poorly devised for exercise of power.
Another disadvantage is its tendency to cherish irreconcilable
xxii Introduction to the 1996 edition

enmities and to see moral issues in rigid black and white. Note also
the enclave’s weakness in negotiation, its inability to delegate, its
administrative muddle, and its difficulty in assuring support for
long-term policies. All of this applies to dissenting minorities
whether they are religious or secular. The main focus of enclave
organization is the integrity of its borders—a polite way of saying
that it is very concerned that its members should not defect or run
away. The anxiety to prevent leakage turns attention to dissipation
of power if ever it is seen to accumulate. Intuitively it may seem
that equality is a natural condition, easy to maintain. To be
disabused on that score, read Steve Rayner (1988) on ‘The rules
that keep us equal’.
    Trying to be equal, leadership is deliberately and necessarily
weak. The result is a fragile organization. The community which
has this culture well represented may reap advantages, for it
speaks with the voice of conscience. Its opposition to hierarchy
makes it a strong spokesman for the underclass, its reproaches
against pomp and waste and its suspicion of intellectual pretension
raise the normative dialogue to a higher plane.
    We can generalize: whenever a group has to recruit its members
competitively it will tend to worry about its future existence, and
whenever it is particularly disadvantaged in the competition so
that its main concern comes to be concentrated on defection, then
enclavism will set in, and sectarian intransigence follow. It just
happens by a quirk of intellectual history that the study of sects
has been assigned to the sociology of religion, consequently the
general understanding of enclaves as organizational forms with
particular problems of authority has been fragmented. There are
theories of hierarchy and of market, but no secular theory of this
third kind of organization. This illustrates the difficulties in the
way of sociological generalization about religions. The
classifications of society have been made to clarify other kinds of
problems in the social sciences, so the study of religion is left with
its own language redolent of pulpit and altar.


SECTS CAN LOOK LIKE HIERARCHIES FROM
THE OUTSIDE
A religion can be organized according to hierarchical principles,
like the Roman Catholic Church, and can spread over the globe,
planting little hierarchical segments in hostile cultures. If they
should happily be rich enough and powerful enough not to be
                                  Introduction to the 1996 edition xxiii

endangered by defection, they will probably remain hierarchical in
doctrine and interpretation, as well as in the division of labour and
prestige. The Mormons are a case in point. Thus it is that there can
be a hierarchical community which is withdrawn from the larger
society and yet has little sectarian bias. It is not a contradiction in
terms and it does not produce a problem for the theory of enclaves.
It is more puzzling the other way around: the outposts of
hierarchical religions can find themselves in enclave situations, and
tend under stress to show that same sectarian anxiety about divine
punishment, the same anger against outsiders and defectors, and
the same intensified contrast of heroes and villains as any
egalitarian enclave. It is the openness of the boundary and their
unsuccessful efforts to close it that puts them in the same situation
as an enclave, albeit preaching some hierarchical doctrines.
    The unsuccessful attempt to achieve closure against the outside
is just as influential for the bias of religious doctrines in the case of
threatened hierarchies as in the case of threatened egalitarian
communes. Telling examples are Ireland and France. The French
Catholics described by Richard Griffiths (1966) at the end of the
nineteenth century up to the 1930s, exemplified the intolerance
and heroic exaltation typical of sectarianism. The recent record of
the Catholic Church in Ireland to this day is irrevocably associated
with sectarian violence.
    The Israeli historian, Emmanuel Sivan (1995), has taken this
point and applied it to the history of religions in modern times. In a
sense, he argues, the growth of science and secular culture have put
the old religions—Christian, Hindu, Muslim—into a enclave
posture. They have been marginalized in a rich and powerful outside
world. They now suffer the disabilities of dissenting minorities even
though traditionally they have been established and mainstream. In
consequence, he shows, there is a strong sectarian bias in
contemporary religious thought, and established religions are
heavily attracted to fundamentalist forms of organization.


HIERARCHY AND ITS RIVALS
Enclave is a good solution for organizing protest and dissent.
Hierarchy is a good solution for problems of co-ordination. It is run
on principles of order, symmetry and balance. Its rules are formalized,
it plans for the long term, and justifies what it does by reference to
tradition. Its advantages are in its clearly stratified and specialized
pattern of roles: it can organize effectively; it is resilient and tenacious
xxiv Introduction to the 1996 edition

in the face of adversity. It tries to conciliate its rival units. Because of
stability and specialization a hierarchical Church will be able to hold
to an elaborate doctrine that is heavy with the history of its first
formulation. And because of its capacity for elaborate doctrine, it
values and rewards intellectual achievement.
    Its conspicuous disadvantages are over-formalization and excessive
trust in routine and regulation, which make it slow to respond. There
is also a pathological tendency to try to control knowledge—for new
knowledge is the biggest threat to its ordered rankings. Assimilating
new knowledge so that it does not destroy the painstakingly preserved
order requires a big input of energy. It seems very predictable that in
modern industrial society where individuals are drawn away from their
primordial roots in family and neighbourhood, trained and selected
to serve as mobile units anywhere in the globe, hierarchy is bound to
be losing out, and either dissenting groups or individual religions are
likely to gain.
    Some kinds of hierarchy are less effective or desirable than
others. It is understandable that the common idea of hierarchy is
nowadays very unattractive, given the movement of cultural bias
in the individualist directions I have discussed. Hierarchy is
presented as a simple monolithic centralized top-down command
system, like a caricature of General Motors in the 1960s. However,
other kinds of hierarchy emerge spontaneously in families or small
groups, or are enshrined in ancient communities or monarchical
systems (Douglas, 1993a). I find proto-hierarchy a good term for
uncentralized hierarchical systems. These have multiple peaks of
authority, and balanced juxtaposition of ordered units, taking
precedence in alternating spheres of control: the King and the
Commons, the Church and the State, the Pope and the Emperor,
the husband and wife, and so on. The World Council of Churches
and the international fellowships which non-conformist and
egalitarian churches develop may well have a co-ordinating
function at the top level, holding the disparate units together
loosely in a proto-hierarchy.


FROM STATIC TO DYNAMIC
These are the main ideas, presented as I see them now. The book
was an attempt to develop Durkheim’s programme for a
comparative sociology of religion so that it could apply as well to
Australian totemism as to modern industrial society. This meant
taking seriously the central theme that ideas emerge from the
                                Introduction to the 1996 edition xxv

process of organizing, as also do classifications and values. It
called for a major intellectual investment in distinguishing kinds of
organization and speculating systematically on the kinds of values
that would flourish in each kind. I hoped that the sketchy
beginning would be taken up and developed, and I have not been
disappointed—on the contrary, I have been delighted by aid from
very unexpected quarters.
   The first task was to strengthen and refine the comparisons of
social organization and the different levels at which personal
behaviour is influenced by the social environment (for a method,
see Gross and Rayner, 1985). The second was to prevent the
analysis from becoming static. And the third to make sure that it
was always able to be checked empirically. I had no idea of how to
do all of this. Originally my own approach was entirely static. It
seemed enough to have proposed a map of social environments
and to project upon it the different clusters of moral ideas that
would do well in each place. Peter Brown’s studies of the ‘debate
on the Holy’ in the third and fourth centuries suggested how to
make it dynamic (Brown, 1978). He described shifts in religious
style responding to shifts in a lively competition for power; the
activating factor was the disruption and decline of the Roman
Empire. Control of the religious life of the community was the
prize in an ongoing, three-sided tussle. For example, he saw
attacks on sorcery as a ‘muffled debate on the exercise of different
forms of power in small groups’ (ibid.: 20). Subsequently Michael
Thompson was to take the flat and static map and turn it into a
more powerful model, with the struggle for control as the third
dimension (Thompson, 1982). Far from muffled, the strident
international debate on the environment now provides rich
material for grid-group analysis.
   Two seminars, one in University College London and one in
New York at the Russell Sage Foundation were the basis of the
modest volume, Essays in the Sociology of Perception (Douglas,
1982) which boosted the exploratory essay to the status of a
theory that could be expanded and modified. Of the fascinating
applications of the grid-group measurements, too many to be
itemised here, certain seminal contributions became the basis of
most subsequent work. I mention Michael Thompson’s three-
dimensional model; James Hampton’s operational definition;
David Ostrander’s identification of the positive diagonal running
between hierarchy and entrepreneurial individualism; Steve
Rayner’s comparison of perceptions of time and space, and David
xxvi Introduction to the 1996 edition

Bloor’s comparison of the research agendas of nineteenth-century
mathematical departments, which was complemented by Martin
Rudwick’s comparison of cognitive styles in geology.
   This was followed up by an exercise in methodology—Steve
Rayner’s collaboration with the mathematician, Jonathan Gross,
produced a how-to-do-it handbook, with a sophisticated EXACT
model for assigning the members of a community to points on the
grid-group diagram (Gross and Rayner, 1985).
   In 1977 I joined Aaron Wildavsky when he became President of
the Russell Sage Foundation, to ‘head up’, as he put it, the
programme on Culture. It seemed to be a wonderful opportunity
to organize some empirical research to test the ideas of Natural
Symbols. I thought to meet the Foundation’s strong eleemosynary
objectives by sponsoring work in the sociology of food, and at the
same time do a good turn to the theory of culture. It would be very
helpful to comparisons of culture to be able to say unequivocally
whether (other things being equal) one set of behaviours was more
or less structured than another. The occasion of eating in a
hierarchy would always be made to carry a load of symbolic
structure which would not be necessary or possible in any other
kind of culture. This made it interesting and possibly important to
know the non-alimentary uses to which food is being put.
Jonathan Gross in the mathematics department of Columbia
University devised an ingenious measure of relative intricacy of
structure. Field studies by three teams of American anthropologists
who studied the food systems of Sioux Indians, Italians in
Philadelphia, and North Carolina Black Americans, were
published (Douglas, 1984). Sadly, after only a few months, and
before our research got up any momentum, Aaron Wildavsky’s
Presidency came to an untimely end, so that it was impossible to
develop the early ideas. Though the individual essays have been
used a little, the attempt to establish a dimension of structure has
not had any currency.
   Aaron Wildavsky became the principal inspiration and
promoter of cultural theory. He returned to the Graduate School
of Public Policy at Berkeley when he left the Russell Sage
Foundation. He grasped with enthusiasm the forensic approach to
attitudes to risk, which then as now was a topic fraught with
political tension, and he welcomed the possibilities of using the
grid-group scheme to analyse politicians’ thinking. At that time the
psychologists who analysed public opinion polls simply assumed
one basic kind of human person with personality quirks which
                                Introduction to the 1996 edition xxvii

accounted for changes in attitudes to risk. Adding the cultural
element meant looking for organizational pressures on opinion. It
meant not treating attitudes to risk as free-floating psychic items
liable to change capriciously, but supposing that attitudes to the
long term, or attitudes to loss and gain, would be affected by the
social environment. We worked out together a distribution of risk
beliefs according to social and cultural predilections which
explained American attitudes to technological risk better than the
personality types of the reigning paradigm.
   To some extent Aaron Wildavsky liked grid-group analysis
because it seemed to justify his prejudices: against hierarchy as a
top-down, bureaucratic, oppressive form of government, and
against sectarianism as politically irresponsible; this left
individualism as the cultural bias with most in its favour. As for
the isolates, by definition they were not interesting from the policy
point of view.
   I myself like the theory of cultural bias because of its promise of
objectivity, and Wildavsky liked it because it proved there was
only one, right, truly liberal way to organize society, that is, from
the corner of individualist culture. With such different outlooks it
was extraordinary that we were able to collaborate, or rather it
would seem extraordinary to anyone who had never worked with
Aaron Wildavsky but only knew him as passionate in conviction
and merciless in controversy. It is a tribute to his scholarly
generosity, which is also famous, that after enjoying heroic bouts
of argument we were able to produce Risk and Culture together
(1983). He used to say: ‘Grid/Group is the best game in town,’ and
then add wryly: ‘Pity nobody’s playing it!’ Meanwhile he and
Michael Thompson got together and pioneered the cultural
approach to environmental controversy, summarized in another
collaborative work on method and theory (Thompson and
Wildavsky, 1991). Between them they recruited other scholars in
political science in different countries, notably Denis Coyle and
Richard Ellis (1994) in California, Per Selle and Gunnar
Grendstad in the Norwegian Centre for Organization and
Management, and Manfred Schmutzer at the Institute of
Technology and Society in Vienna. Tragically, Aaron Wildavsky
died in 1993.
   Cultural theory can also throw light on thought style as a collective
product. Steve Rayner has carried this interest forward, developing a
cultural theory of social constraints on forgetting and remembering,
cultural bias in styles of thinking and argumentation (Rayner, 1988,
xxviii Introduction to the 1996 edition

1991a and b, and 1994). Two pieces of research in Late Antiquity start
close to the original project but go much further than I could have
expected: Sarah Coakley’s historical study of the christological
controversies—the development of the doctrine of the Trinity seen in
a feminist perspective (1992); also Richard Lim’s cultural analysis of
public disputations on theology in late antiquity, and why they became
so violent that they had to be banned (1995). With different applications
for different fields, it is not surprising that the grid-group diagram never
looks exactly the same. It is not necessarily that we have changed our
minds—a thought that seems to have worried James Spickard (1989)—
or that we are quarrelling. Simply, trying to work in two dimensions
is extremely difficult, and we are continually moving on, simplifying,
shifting the axes, or rotating the diagram. I hardly recognize them, but
there is no point in my trying to correct the diagrams that are in this
book to make them match something that is being done in the 1990s.
There have been great developments. The only thing that matters is
the collaborative effort to think about life and human values with a
tool that systematically questions the thinker’s own starting point. We
scout out alternative visions of reality, real alternatives.
    These studies will surely help to bring the sociology of religion
into the mainstream of social thought. In the end I have to admit
that my preference for religious studies with a solid
methodological foundation is based not so much on theoretical
concerns as on a boundary problem. When the study of religions is
conducted in the language of the pulpit and dominated by the
language of moral regeneration anthropology is excluded, and that
can’t be good.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
BLOOR, DAVID: ‘Polyhedra and the abominations of Leviticus’, Essays
   in the Sociology of Perception
, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982.
BROWN, PETER:
The Making of Late Antiquity, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University
   Press, 1978.
CAREY, JOYCE: The Prisoner of Grace, London, Harper, 1952.
COAKLEY, SARAH: Douglas, M. (ed.), London, ‘Three Personed God: a
   Feminist Exploration in Théologie Totale’, The Hulsean Lectures,
   Cambridge, 1992.
COYLE, DENIS and RICHARD ELLIS: Politics and Culture, Berkeley,
   Cal., University of California Press, 1994.
DOUGLAS, MARY Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of
   Pollution and Taboo, London, Penguin, 1966.
                                 Introduction to the 1996 edition xxix

——(ed.): Witchcraft Accusations and Confessions, ASA, London,
  Tavistock Publications, 1970.
——Essays in the Sociology of Perception, New York, Routledge &
  Kegan Paul with the Russell Sage Foundation, 1982.
——Food in the Social Order, New York, Russell Sage Foundation, 1984.
——Risk Acceptability in the Social Sciences, London, Routledge, 1986.
——How Institutions Think, New York, Syracuse University Press, 1987.
——In the Wilderness, the Doctrine of Defilement in the Book of
  Numbers, Sheffield, Sheffield Academic Press, 1993a.
——Risk and Blame, Essays in Cultural Theory, London, Routledge,
  1993b.
——‘Witchcraft and Leprosy, two strategies of rejection’, Risk and Blame,
  essays in cultural theory, London, Routledge, 1993c.
——Thought Styles, Critical Essays on Good Taste, London, Sage, 1996.
DOUGLAS, MARY and DAVID HULL (eds): How Classification Works,
  Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press, 1993.
DOUGLAS, MARY and S.NEY: Well-Being, Berkeley, Cal., California
  University Press, forthcoming.
DOUGLAS, MARY and AARON WILDAVSKY: Risk and Culture, an
  Essay on the Selection of Technological and Environmental Dangers,
  Berkeley, Cal., California University Press, 1983.
GRIFFITHS, RICHARD: The Reactionary Revolution: the Catholic
  Revival in French Literature, 1870–1914, London, Constable, 1966.
GROSS, JONATHAN and S.RAYNER: Measuring Culture, a Paradigm
  for the Analysis of Social Organisation, New York, Columbia
  University Press, 1985.
JOCHIM, CHRISTIAN: ‘“Great” and “Little”, “Grid” and “Group”:
  defining the Poles of the Elite-Popular continuum in Chinese Religion’,
  Journal of Chinese Religions 15. 18–42, 1987.
LIM, RICHARD: Public Disputation, Power and Social Order in Late
  Antiquity, Berkeley, Cal., University of California Press, 1995.
MARS, GERALD: Cheats at Work, an Anthropology of Workplace
  Crime, London, Allen & Unwin, 1982.
PEGG, M.G.: ‘Le corps et l’autorité: la lèpre de Baudouin IV’, Annales
  ESC 2. 265–87, 1990.
RAYNER, S.: ‘Risk and Relativism in Science for Policy’, in The Social
  and Cultural Perception of Risk. Essays on Risk Selection and
  Perception, B.Johnson and Vincent Covello (ed.), Dordrecht, D.Reidel,
  1987.
——‘The rules that make us equal’ in Rayner, S. and Flanagan, G.J. (eds)
  Rules, Rulers and Ruled in Egalitarian Collectives, Farnborough,
  Gower Press, 1988.
——‘Expertise et Gestion de l’Environnement Global’ in Theys, J. (ed.)
  Environnement, Science, et Politique: Les Experts sont Formels, Paris,
  Germes, 1991a.
xxx Introduction to the 1996 edition

——‘A Cultural Perspective on the Structure and Implementation of
   Global Environmental Agreements’, Evaluation Review 15.1:75–102,
   1991b.
——‘Governance and the Global Commons’, Discussion Paper 8, The
   Centre for the Study of Global Governance, London School of
   Economics, 1994.
RAYNER, S. and G.J.FLANAGAN (eds): Rules, Rulers, Ruled in
   Egalitarian Collectives, Farnborough, Gower Press, 1988.
SIVAN, EMMANUEL: ‘The Enclave Culture’ in Marty, M.M. (ed.),
   Fundamentalism Comprehended, Chicago, Ill.: Chicago University
   Press, 1995.
SPICKARD, JAMES: ‘Guide to Grid/group Theory’, Sociological Analysis
   50(2), 1989.
THOMPSON, MICHAEL: ‘A Three Dimensional Model’ in Douglas, M.
   (ed.) Essays in the Sociology of Perception, London, Routledge &
   Kegan Paul, 1982.
THOMPSON, M. and M.SCHWARZ: Divided We Stand: Redefining
   Politics, Technology and Social Choice, Brighton, Harvester
   Wheatsheaf, 1989.
THOMPSON, M. and WILDAVSKY, A.: Cultural Theory, Boulder, Col.,
   Westview Press, 1991.
THOMPSON, M., M.WARBURTON and T.HATLEY: Uncertainty on a
   Himalayan Scale: an Institutional theory of Environmental Perception
   and a Strategic Framework for the Sustainable Development of the
   Himalaya, London, Ethnographica, 1987.
Introduction




The title of this book would seem to hold a contradiction. Nature
must be expressed in symbols; nature is known through symbols
which are themselves a construction upon experience, a product
of mind, an artifice or conventional product, therefore the reverse
of natural. Nor can there be sense in speaking of natural symbols
unless the mind tends in some natural way to use the same
symbols for the same situations. This question through the ages
has been deeply explored and the possibility of natural symbols is
rejected. A symbol only has meaning from its relation to other
symbols in a pattern. The pattern gives the meaning. Therefore no
one item in the pattern can carry meaning by itself isolated from
the rest. Therefore even the human physiology which we all share
in common does not afford symbols which we can all understand.
A cross-cultural, pan-human pattern of symbols must be an
impossibility. For one thing, each symbolic system develops
autonomously according to its own rules. For another, cultural
environments add their difference. For another, the social
structures add a further range of variation. The more closely we
inspect the conditions of human interaction, the more
unrewarding if not ridiculous the quest for natural symbols
appears. However, the intuition against such a learned negative is
strong. This book attempts to reinstate the intuition by following
the line of argument of the French sociologists of L’Année
sociologique. For if it is true, as they asserted, that the social
relation of men provide the prototype for the logical relations
between things, then, whenever this prototype falls into a
common pattern, there should be something common to be
discerned in the system of symbols it uses. Where regularities in
the system are found, we should expect to find recurring, and
always intelligible across cultures, the same natural systems of
xxxii Introduction

symbols. Society was not simply a model which classificatory
thought followed; it was its own divisions which served as
divisions for the system of classification. The first logical
categories were social categories; the first classes of things were
classes of men into which these things were integrated. It was
because men were grouped and thought of themselves in the form
of groups that in their ideas they grouped other things. The centre
of the first scheme of nature is not the individual; it is society
(Durkheim and Mauss, 1903:82, 87). The quest for natural
symbols becomes by the force of this argument the quest for
natural systems of symbolizing. We will look for tendencies and
correlations between the character of the symbolic system and
that of the social system.
   The easiest to recognize of these tendencies can be expressed
as the rule of distance from physiological origin. I have argued
elsewhere (in Purity and Danger, 1966) that the organic system
provides an analogy of the social system which, other things
being equal, is used in the same way and understood in the same
way all over the world. The body is capable of furnishing a
natural system of symbols, but our problem is to identify the
elements in the social dimension which are reflected in one view
and another of how the body should function or how its waste-
products should be judged. In that book I made some
suggestions, but the subject is very complex. According to the
rule of distance from physiological origin (or the purity rule) the
more the social situation exerts pressure on persons involved in
it, the more the social demand for conformity tends to be
expressed by a demand for physical control. Bodily processes are
more ignored and more firmly set outside the social discourse,
the more the latter is important. A natural way of investing a
social occasion with dignity is to hide organic processes. Thus
social distance tends to be expressed in distance from
physiological origins and vice versa.
   Maimonides, the twelfth-century Jewish philosopher, explains
the anthropomorphic reference to God in this idiom. Organs of
locomotion or of sensation or of speech are figuratively ascribed to
God, to express his agency in certain results. The Lord has a
powerful voice (Psalms xxiv, 4), his tongue is a devouring fire
(Isaiah xx, 27), his eyes behold (Psalms ii, 4). The external organs
have a straightforward figurative sense, since power to act and to
know are among God’s attributes. But a problem arises when
internal organs have to be interpreted:
                                                    Introduction xxxiii

  In phrases like ‘my bowels are troubled for him’ (Jeremiah xxxi,
  20); ‘The sounding of thy bowels’ (Isaiah lxiii, 15), the term
  ‘bowels’ is used in the sense of ‘heart’; for the term ‘bowels’ is
  used both in a general and in a specific meaning; it denotes
  specifically ‘bowels’ but more generally it can be used as the name
  of any inner organ, including ‘heart’. The correctness of this
  argument can be proved by the phrase ‘And thy law is within my
  bowels’ (Psalms xl, 9), which is identical with ‘And thy law is
  within my heart’. For that reason the prophet employed in this
  verse the phrase ‘my bowels are troubled’ (and ‘the sounding of
  thy bowels’); the verb hamah is in fact used more frequently in
  connection with ‘heart’ than with any other organ; compare ‘My
  heart maketh a noise (homeh) in me’ (Jeremiah iv, 19). Similarly,
  the shoulder is never used as a figure in reference to God, because
  it is known as a mere instrument of transport, and also comes
  into close contact with the thing which it carries. With far greater
  reason the organs of nutrition are never attributed to God; they
  are at once recognized as signs of imperfection.
                                              (Maimonides, 1956:61)

The possibility of imagining God with organs of digestion and
excretion is out of the question for this divine. Indeed it is not
entertained at all for the Jewish religion. But this is not a universal
tendency. Many religions worship gods who are incarnate in every
sense. The Incarnation is the central, distinctive doctrine of
Christianity. A basic question for understanding natural symbolic
systems will be to know what social conditions are the prototype
for the one or the other set of attitudes to the human body and its
fitness or unfitness for figuring godhead. What are the limits
within which the disdain of organic processes can be used as an
idiom for social distance? Great methodological difficulties are
encountered in any attempt to answer these questions.
   One of the most intractable difficulties is the problem of
holding other variables steady while we compare a piece of
behaviour in one culture with a parallel one in another. Take the
case of laughter, for instance. In any of a number of social systems
the idea of loud vociferous laughter may be unseemly in polite
company. But what counts as loud and vociferous may vary
greatly. In her Book of Manners for Women (1897:12) Mrs
Humphry described rather unkindly the laughter of a theatre
audience of whom very few ‘know how to indulge themselves in
the expression of their mirth’.
xxxiv Introduction

  For every one whose laughter is melodious, there will be found
  a dozen who merely grin and half-a-dozen whose sole relief is in
  physical contortion. Some of the latter bend forward, folding
  themselves almost double, then spring back again, and repeat
  this jerky and ridiculous movement at every joke. Others throw
  their heads back in a way that disagreeably suggests dislocation.
  A few are so put to it to give vent to their overwhelming sense
  of amusement that they violently slap themselves, twisting
  about the whole as though they were undergoing tortures.
  Cachinnations in every key resound on all sides, varying from
  the shrill and attenuated ‘He! he!’ to the double chuckle ‘Ho!
  ho!’ fired off like postmen’s knocks, at a tremendous speed, so
  as to be ready, decks cleared, for the next joke. Cackling
  suggestive of the farmyard, and snorts not unreminiscent of pig-
  styes, produce variety.

Mrs Humphry disapproved of dislocation, violence, jerks,
uncontrolled cachinnations, snorts and cackles. In a chapter on
learning to laugh, she stated: ‘There is no greater ornament to
conversation than the ripple of silvery notes that forms the perfect
laugh.’ But what passes for a ripple in one culture can be taken for a
series of uncouth jerks in another. This is the central problem of
comparison that has shackled the attempt to compare rules of bodily
behaviour between different societies or different historical periods
of the same people. If we are trying to compare forms of expression,
we are involved in assessing behaviour in the physical dimension.
The range of physical variables is so astonishingly great that it
obviously contains a large cultural element. As Lévi-Strauss has said:

  The thresholds of excitement, the limits of resistance are
  different in each culture. The ‘impossible’ effort, the
  ‘unbearable’ pain, the ‘unbounded’ pleasure are less individual
  functions than criteria sanctioned by collective approval, and
  disapproval. Each technique, each item of behaviour,
  traditionally learnt and transmitted, is based on certain nervous
  and muscular syndromes which constitute true systems, related
  within a total sociological context.
                                            (Lévi-Strauss, 1950: xii)

It follows that no objective physiological limits to the range from
most complete bodily control to most utter abandonment are
relevant. Similarly for all the possible range of symbolic
                                                    Introduction xxxv

expressions: each social environment sets its own limits to the
modes of expression. From London to the north standard
stimulants shift from beer to whisky, between some social circles
they shift from weak tea to coffee, to shandy. And with these shifts
go special ranges of noise and quiet, and of bodily gesture. There is
no way of controlling the cultural differences. And yet, without
some method, the cross-cultural comparison falls to the ground
and with it the whole interest of this exercise. If we cannot bring
the argument back from tribal ethnography to ourselves, there is
little point in starting it at all. The same goes for the experience of
social control. What it feels like to have other people controlling
one’s behaviour varies with the quality of restraints and freedoms
they can use. Each social environment sets limits to the possibilities
of remoteness or nearness of other humans, and limits the costs
and rewards of group allegiance and conformity to social
categories. To compare across cultures is like trying to compare
the worth of primitive currencies where no common standard of
value applies. And yet the problem is basically the same as that
faced by linguists in comparing tonal languages in which the
variations in tone occur within a range of relative pitch and not in
relation to absolute pitch. One way to solve the comparative
problem is to limit the predictions of a hypothesis to any given
social environment. Even here the difficulty of defining a social
environment is great. The methodological rule is merely a rough
kind of safeguard against the wildest kinds of cultural selections.
    It serves to counter the effects of Bongo-Bongoism, the trap of
all anthropological discussion. Hitherto when a generalization is
tentatively advanced, it is rejected out of court by any fleldworkers
who can say: ‘This is all very well, but it doesn’t apply to the
Bongo-Bongo.’ To enter this present discussion the Bongoist must
precisely specify the cultural field within which his comparisons
are drawn.
    The hypothesis which I will propose about concordance
between symbolic and social experience will always have to be
tested within a given social environment. One of the arguments
will be that the more value people set on social constraints, the
more the value they set on symbols of bodily control. The rule of
comparison will not allow me to compare Lloyd George’s unruly
hair with Disraeli’s flowing locks, for they belonged to different
cultural periods in English history. Strictly it should not allow me
to compare Lloyd George with a younger generation of more
close-cropped contemporaries. The latitude allowed by the term
xxxvi Introduction

‘given social environment’ is a matter of discretion. The more
limited the cultural ranges within which the comparison is made,
the more significant the results.
   Bearing these rules of method in mind, I will try to identify four
distinctive systems of natural symbols. These will be social systems
in which the image of the body is used in different ways to reflect
and enhance each person’s experience of society. According to one,
the body will tend to be conceived as an organ of communication.
The major preoccupations will be with its functioning effectively;
the relation of head to subordinate members will be a model of the
central control system, the favourite metaphors of statecraft will
harp upon the flow of blood in the arteries, sustenance and
restoration of strength. According to another, though the body will
also be seen as a vehicle of life, it will be vulnerable in different
ways. The dangers to it will come not so much from lack of co-
ordination or of food and rest, but from failure to control the
quality of what it absorbs through the orifices; fear of poisoning,
protection of boundaries, aversion to bodily waste products and
medical theory that enjoins frequent purging. Another again will
be very practical about the possible uses of bodily rejects, very cool
about recycling waste matter and about the pay-off from such
practices. The distinction between the life within the body and the
body that carries it will hold no interest. In the control areas of this
society controversies about spirit and matter will scarcely arise.
But at the other end of the spectrum, where the vast majority are
controlled by these pragmatists, a different attitude will be seen.
Here the body is not primarily the vehicle of life, for life will be
seen as purely spiritual, and the body as irrelevant matter. Here we
can locate millennial tendencies from our early history to the
present day. For these people, society appears as a system which
does not work. The human body is the most readily available
image of a system. In these types of social experience, a person
feels that his personal relations, so inexplicably unprofitable, are
in the sinister grip of a social system. It follows that the body tends
to serve as a symbol of evil, as a structured system contrasted with
pure spirit which by its nature is free and undifferentiated. The
millennialist is not interested in identifying enemies and disabling
them. He believes in a Utopian world in which goodness of heart
can prevail without institutional devices. He does not seek to
cherish any particular social forms. He would sweep them all
away. The millennialist goes in for frenzies; he welcomes the
letting-go experience, and incorporates it into his procedure for
                                                 Introduction xxxvii

bringing in the millennium. He seeks bodily ecstasy which, by
expressing for him the explosive advent of the new age, reaffirms
the value of the doctrine. Philosophically his bias is towards
distinguishing spirit from flesh, mind from matter. But for him the
flesh does not suggest temptation to lust and all physical delights.
It would more likely represent the corruption of power and
organization. For him spirit is found working freely in nature and
in the spirit of the wild—not in society. By this avenue of thought
anthropologists can relate their field material to the traditional
subject matter of the history of religions. For it uncovers implicit
forms of the great theological controversies. According to some
religions gods and men can have sexual intercourse; in others too
great a barrier separates them; in others the god can take human
form, only in appearance, not in the reality of flesh; in others the
god is incarnate, but not by the normal physiological process. Here
we have an index, as Leach has pointed out in discussing dogmas
of virgin birth, of the way in which spirit and matter are
categorized. For some people the categories are very distinct and it
is blasphemous to mix them, for others the mixing of divine and
human is right and normal. But I hope to show that dimensions of
social life govern the fundamental attitudes to spirit and matter.
Chapter 1
Away from ritual




One of the gravest problems of our day is the lack of commitment
to common symbols. If this were all, there would be little to say. If
it were merely a matter of our fragmentation into small groups,
each committed to its proper symbolic forms, the case would be
simple to understand. But more mysterious is a wide-spread,
explicit rejection of rituals as such. Ritual has become a bad word
signifying empty conformity. We are witnessing a revolt against
formalism, even against form. ‘The vast majority of my classmates
just sat through four years.’ So wrote Newfield of what he called
the ungeneration of his college year: ‘They didn’t challenge any
authority, take any risks or ask any questions. They just
memorized “the given”, not even complaining when instructions
turned them into mindless tape-recorders, demanding they recite
rather than reason’ (Newfield, 1966:41). Shades of Luther! Shades
of the Reformation and its complaint against meaningless rituals,
mechanical religion, Latin as the language of cult, mindless
recitation of litanies. We find ourselves, here and now, reliving a
world-wide revolt against ritualism. To understand it, Marx and
Freud have been invoked, but Durkheim also foretold it and it
behoves the social anthropologist to interpret alienation. Some of
the tribes we observe are more ritualist than others. Some are more
discontented than others with their traditional forms. From tribal
studies there is something to say about a dimension which is
usually ignored—the band or area of personal relations in which
an individual moves. But in trying to say it, we are handicapped by
terminology.
   Many sociologists, following Merton (1957:131ff.), use the
term ritualist for one who performs external gestures without
inner commitment to the ideas and values being expressed. Thus
these apathetic students would be ritualists. There is some analogy
2 Away from ritual

in this to the usage of zoologists. For example, when an animal is
said to make a ritual attack the zoologist means that a sequence of
movements is initiated which, if completed normally, would end in
aggression; the function of the animal ritual is communication, for
when the other animal receives the signal, it changes its behaviour
into ritual submission, thus inhibiting and checking the sequence
of aggressive actions. This seems to be a perfectly legitimate way
of distinguishing between symbolic and other behaviour in
animals. A form of communication is identified; no judgement is
implied about the value of the ritual as compared with other forms
of communication. However, when this usage is transferred to
human behaviour, ritual, defined as a routinized act diverted from
its normal function, subtly becomes a despised form of
communication. Other symbolic acts accurately convey
information about the intentions and commitments of the actor:
ritual does not. The ritualist becomes one who performs external
gestures which imply commitment to a particular set of values, but
he is inwardly withdrawn, dried out and uncommitted. This is a
distractingly partisan use of the term. For it derives from the
assumptions of the anti-ritualists in the long history of religious
revivalism. The sociologist may maintain that the emotional
legacy does not disturb his cool objectivity. He cannot deny
however that it leaves him without convenient terminology for
describing the other kind of symbolic action which correctly
expresses the actor’s internal state. It would be decidedly
cumbrous to use anti-ritualism for the positively committed use of
symbolic forms in order to keep ritualism in its pejorative,
sectarian sense. There is another reason for using ritual in a
neutral sense. Anthropologists need to communicate with
sociologists as well as with zoologists. They are in the habit of
using ritual to mean action and beliefs in the symbolic order
without reference to the commitment or non-commitment of the
actors. They have a practical reason for this usage. For in small-
scale, face-to-face society the gulf between personal meanings and
public meanings cannot develop; rituals are not fixed; discrepancy
between the situation being enacted and the form of expression is
immediately reduced by change in the latter. Primitive
jurisprudence sees no gap between law and morality, because there
are no written precedents and because small changes in the law
can be constantly made to express new moral situations and
because such changes, being unrecorded, are unperceived. The idea
of an immutable God-given law is in practice compatible with a
                                                   Away from ritual 3

changing legal situation. If this is so in the formal situation of
specialized tribal law courts, how much more so in the public use
of religious symbols in primitive society. However earnestly the
anthropologist is assured that the worship of the gods follows an
immutable pattern from the beginning of tribal history, there is no
justification whatever for believing what the performers
themselves believe. Primitive religions are fortunate in that they
cannot carry a dead weight of ‘ritualized’ ritual (to adopt the
sociologist’s usage). Therefore anthropologists have not needed so
far to consider the difference between external symbolic forms and
internal states. It is fair enough that ‘ritualized’ ritual should fall
into contempt. But it is illogical to despise all ritual, all symbolic
action as such. To use the word ritual to mean empty symbols of
conformity, leaving us with no word to stand for symbols of
genuine conformity, is seriously disabling to the sociology of
religion. For the problem of empty symbols is still a problem about
the relation of symbols to social life, and one which needs an
unprejudiced vocabulary.
   The anthropological usage relates the discussion more honestly
to the historical controversies in religion. Ritual in the positive
sense corresponds to ritualism in Church history, and allows us to
identify ritualists and anti-ritualists in terms which they themselves
would use. We are thus able to reflect upon ourselves and consider
the causes of anti-ritualism today.
   An instructive example is the recent concern of the Roman
Catholic hierarchy in England with Friday abstinence. This is a
rule which, on the one hand, is dear to large sections of the
Catholic population. They adhere to it, confess its breach with
contrition, generally take it seriously. On the other hand it is not
highly regarded by the clergy. In their eyes the avoidance of meat
on Fridays has become an empty ritual, irrelevant to true religion.
In this argument the anti-ritualists are the clergy and the ritualists
a type known patronizingly as the Bog Irishmen. Bog Irishism
seems to be a highly magical, irrational, non-verbal culture.
Paradoxically the Bog Irish are found, not so much in Ireland, as in
London parishes. Friday abstinence is the core rule of their
religion: it is a taboo whose breach will bring automatic
misfortune. It is the only sin they think worth mentioning in
confession and they evidently believe that it will count against
them more heavily on the day of judgement than breach of any of
the ten commandments. To bring them nearer to the true
doctrines, the rule of Friday abstinence has now been abolished in
4 Away from ritual

England and an active movement of new catechetics attempts to
wean their offspring from magicality and bring them to a superior
form of worship.
   When I ask my clerical friends why the new forms are held
superior, I am answered by a Teilhardist evolutionism which
assumes that a rational, verbally explicit, personal commitment
to God is self-evidently more evolved and better than its alleged
contrary, formal, ritualistic conformity. Questioning this, I am
told that ritual conformity is not a valid form of personal
commitment and is not compatible with the full development of
the personality; also that the replacement of ritual conformity
with rational commitment will give greater meaning to the lives
of Christians. Furthermore if Christianity is to be saved for
future generations, ritualism must be rooted out, as if it were a
weed choking the life of the spirit. We find in all this a mood
which closely parallels the anti-ritualism which has inspired so
many evangelical sects. There is no need to go back to the
Reformation to recognize the wave on which these modern
Catholics are rather incongruously riding.
   Today, as much amongst us as the immigrant Irish, are the
thriving, numerous Protestant sects which each arose in turn by
rejecting ecclesiology, and by seeking to return to the primitive
purity of the Gospel message, speaking straight to the heart of the
worshipper without intervening ritual forms.
   Is this move against ritual to be seen as a matter of swings of the
pendulum? Such an approach implies that any strong impulse
towards ritual must eventually be countered by an impulse in the
other sense. One of the usual explanations of the regular renewal
of anti-ritualism is that revolts against established hierarchical
systems of religion come from the disinherited. A popular
combination of Freud and Weber, it assumes that the principal
religious function is to cope with psychological maladjustment and
that as this function becomes more or less established, so the social
forms become more or less routinized. A movement which begins
as a sect expressing the religious needs of the poor gradually
moves up the social scale. It becomes respectable. Its rituals
increase, its rigorous fundamentalism in devotion to the Word
becomes as weighted with magic as the sacramental edifice it
started by denying. With respectability comes ritualism. With loss
of good fortune comes anti-ritualism and the new sect. This is the
assumption underlying many of the contributions to Patterns of
Sectarianism (ed. Wilson, 1967). Wilson expresses it very clearly
                                                 Away from ritual 5

himself when he offers a maladjustment theory for the
development of anti-ritualist sects. Maladjustment is bound to
follow from social change. Hence the impulse to new sects grows
with the speed of change.

  The specific factors of stimulus of sect emergence are usually
  found in the stresses and tensions differentially experienced
  within the total society. Change in the economic position of a
  particular group (which may be a change only in relative
  position); disturbance of normal social relations, for instance in
  the circumstances of industrialization and urbanization; the
  failure of the social system to accommodate particular age, sex
  and status groups—all of these are possible stimuli in the
  emergence of sects. These are the needs to which the sects, to
  some extent, respond. Particular groups are rendered marginal
  by some process of social change; there is a sudden need for a
  new interpretation of their social position, or for a
  transvaluation of their experience. Insecurity, differential status
  anxiety, cultural neglect, prompt a need for readjustment which
  sects may, for some, provide.
                                                          (ibid.: 31)

And so on.
   The argument which seeks to explain behaviour by reference to
maladjustment, compensation, deprival is always fair game. When
it rears its head among empirical sociologists it is a particularly
pleasant duty to give chase. The psychoanalysts, who popularized
this equilibrium model of human nature, based their case on its
therapeutic value. The question of forming scientifically verifiable
propositions was not their primary concern. But for a sociologist
to seek the origins of a class of religious movement in terms of
maladjustment and readjustment is to abdicate his role. Either he
must use the proposition to prove its own premise, or he must
admit it is valueless for explaining negative instances. What about
the Bog Irish? Are they not dispossessed, deprived, suffering
disturbance of normal social relations? When they find themselves
labouring in London, or, rather, queuing outside labour exchanges,
do they not feel a sudden need for a new interpretation of their
social experience? For what status could be more insecure, more
marginal and anxiety-prone than that of the immigrant unskilled
worker in London? Yet there they are, clinging tenaciously to their
ancient ecclesiastical organization and elaborate ritualism from
6 Away from ritual

which far less obviously marginal and socially insecure preachers
strive to dislodge them. We can be dissatisfied, therefore, with this
as an explanation of anti-ritualism.
   The deprivation hypothesis has its roots deep in our cultural
heritage. Perhaps Rousseau gave the first and most emphatic
vision of the individual enchained by society and liable to revolt
after a certain pitch of humiliation and despair has been reached.
The assumption that has bedevilled sociology ever since is that
deprival and strain can be measured cross-culturally. In my
Chapter 3 below I attempt to establish methodological limits
within which these notions can be applied. Anyone who uses the
idea of strain or stress in a general explanatory model is guilty, at
the very least, of leaving his analysis long before it is complete, at
worst, of circularity. Smelser, for example, puts the factor of strain
into his explanation of mass movements, panics, crazes and
religious movements. Strain, for him, results from discontinuity
between roles and performance (Smelser, 1962:54), but as this
discontinuity cannot be assessed he proceeds to postulate its
emergence as a result of social change. He detects structural strain
when large classes of unattached persons flood into towns, or
equally in what he calls ‘pinched’ groups (ibid.: 199 and 338). So
we are little further in locating causes of mass movements of
different kinds. The emotional content of a word like ‘strain’
inhibits analysis as much as maladjustment, deprivation,
frustration and the rest. A further difficulty lies in concentrating
on change and movement, for these can always be presumed to
start in a state of disequilibrium. It is more revealing to identify in
certain kinds of collective action both the distinctive social
structure and the correlated symbolism which are found in the
steady state in some small-scale primitive societies.
   Even amongst ourselves, there is a long-term tendency to be
reckoned with. A trend towards unritualistic forms of worship is
found not merely among the dispossessed and disoriented.
Contemporary Catholicism in America displays an

  individual emphasis, found also in Protestant spirituality,
  focuses on a personal type of religious experience in which the
  individual considers himself and God to the relative exclusion
  of his neighbour.

For those who get their spirituality in the form of reading, the
sociologist of religion goes on to say,
                                                   Away from ritual 7

  the bulk of spiritual reading recommended to Catholics for two
  centuries has emphasized this private spirituality…. In Gospel
  language, this means that the role of Mary took…precedence
  over that of Martha.
                                               (Neal, 1965:26–7)

Let me use this excerpt to signpost three phases in the move away
from ritualism. First, there is the contempt of external ritual forms;
second, there is the private internalizing of religious experience;
third, there is the move to humanist philanthropy. When the third
stage is under way, the symbolic life of the spirit is finished. For
each of these stages social determinants can be identified. Loyalty
to my Bog Irish ancestors would not in itself lead me to defend
ritualism. Without being Irish, any anthropologist knows that
public forms of symbolic expression are not to be despised. The
reformers who set low value on the external and symbolic aspects
of Friday abstinence and who exhort the faithful to prefer
eleemosynary deeds are not making an intellectually free
assessment of forms of worship. They are moving with the secular
tide along with other sections of the middle classes who seek to be
justified in their lives only by saving others from hunger and
injustice. There are personal experiences which drive people in our
society towards justification by good works. But at this point
notice also that the Irishism which clings to ritual forms is itself
also socially determined. The Friday abstainers are not free to
follow their pastors in their wide-ranging philanthropy. For each
person’s religion has to do with himself and his own autonomous
needs. There is a sad disjunction between the recognized needs of
clergy, teachers, writers and the needs of those they preach, teach
and write for.
   I hope to disclose these social determinants by considering
small-scale, primitive cultures. The problem in hand is the central
problem of religious history and it amazes me that anthropological
insights have not yet been systematically used to resolve it. So little
has been done to extend the analysis across modern and primitive
cultures that there is still no common vocabulary. Sacraments are
one thing, magic another; taboos one thing, sin another. The first
thing is to break through the spiky, verbal hedges that arbitrarily
insulate one set of human experiences (ours) from another set
(theirs). To make a start I shall take ritualism to signify heightened
appreciation of symbolic action. This will be manifested in two
ways: belief in the efficacy of instituted signs, sensitivity to
8 Away from ritual

condensed symbols. The first is the sacramental, and equally the
magical, theology. I see no advantage for this discussion in making
any distinction between magical and sacramental. I could be
talking about an historic shift in Europe from an emphasis on
ritual efficacy before the Reformation to an emphasis on
spontaneous, commemorative rites. Or I could be referring to the
variation in tribal religions from strong to weak beliefs in magical
efficacy. Let it make no difference to the argument whether I use
the word magic or sacrament.
   Ritualism is most highly developed where symbolic action is
held to be most certainly efficacious. Between Catholic and
Anglican celebrations of the Eucharist there is a shift from the
emphasis on ritual efficacy in the first, to the emphasis on a
commemorative rite in the second. This is a fine difference in the
series (ranging from magical to unmagical ritual) whose social
origins we are considering. The difference is perhaps most easily
identified in attitudes to wrong-doing. Where symbols are highly
valued and ritualism strong, then the idea of sin involves specific,
formal acts of wrong-doing; where ritualism is weak, the idea of
sin does not focus on specific external actions, but on internal
states of mind: rituals of purification will not be so much in
evidence.
   Before I launch into a comparison of primitive religions, I
must recall the delicacy of the line on which a sacramental
religion rests. Sacraments, as I understand, are signs specially
instituted to be channels of grace. The whole material world is
held to be sacramental in the sense that material signs and
channels of grace are everywhere, always available; but the
sacraments are specially instituted. The Christian who
approaches a sacrament must fulfil stipulated ritual conditions. If
these, for one reason or another, cannot be met, he can have
recourse to the more diffuse sources of grace. Instead of actually
going through the instituted form of confession and absolution,
he can make an inward ‘act of contrition’; instead of Eucharistic
communion he can make an ‘act of spiritual communion’. The
devotion to the sacraments, then, depends on a frame of mind
which values external forms and is ready to credit them with
special efficacy. It is such a general attitude which commits the
ritualist to sacramental forms of worship. And vice versa, a lack
of interest in external symbols would not be compatible with a
cult of instituted sacraments. Many of the current attempts to
reform the Christian liturgy suppose that, as the old symbols
                                                  Away from ritual 9

have lost their meaning, the problem is to find new symbols or to
revivify the meaning of the old ones. This could be a total waste
of effort if, as I argue, people at different historic periods are
more or less sensitive to signs as such. Some people are deaf or
blind to non-verbal signals. I argue that the perception of
symbols in general, as well as their interpretation, is socially
determined. If I can establish this, it will be important for the
criticism of maladjustment or strain theories of religious
behaviour.
    First, to dispose of the popular idea that all primitive
religions are magical and taboo-ridden. Robertson Smith
(1894) voiced this impression that there has been, through the
centuries, a progressive decline of magic accompanying the
growth of civilization. He was not altogether wrong. But the
great secular movement he describes, if it is not an optical
illusion, at least has been frequently interrupted. Among
primitive cultures far removed from industrial progress we find
non-ritualists.
    Ritualism is taken to be a concern that efficacious symbols be
correctly manipulated and that the right words be pronounced in
the right order. When we compare the sacraments to magic there
are two kinds of view to take into account: on the one hand the
official doctrine, on the other the popular forms it takes. On the
first view the Christian theologian may limit the efficacy of
sacraments to the internal working of grace in the soul. But by this
agency external events may be changed, since decisions taken by a
person in a state of grace will presumably differ from those of
others. Sacramental efficacy works internally: magical efficacy
works externally. But this difference, even at the theological level,
is less great than it seems. For if the theologian remembers to take
account of the doctrine of the Incarnation, magical enough in
itself, and the even more magical doctrine of the Resurrection and
of how its power is channelled through the sacraments, he cannot
make such a tidy distinction between sacramental and magical
efficacy. Then there is the popular magicality in Christianity. A
candle lit to St Anthony for finding a lost object is magical, as also
a St Christopher medal used to prevent accidents or the
expectation that meat eaten on a Friday would bring one out in
spots. Both sacramental and magical behaviour are expressions of
ritualism. What we learn about the conditions in which magic
thrives or declines in primitive cultures should apply to
sacramentalism among ourselves and should apply equally to the
10 Away from ritual

turning away from magic and ritual which was expressed in the
Protestant Reformation.
   The advantage of taking belief in efficacious signs as the focus
of the comparison is that other aspects of religious behaviour
largely coincide with variations on this score. I have mentioned
how ideas of sin tend to vary with ideas of magicality. The
concept of formal transgression can take on a very magical
aspect indeed, and again, the more magicality, the more sensitive
the perception of condensed symbols. All communication
depends on use of symbols, and they can be classified in
numerous ways, from the most precise to the most vague, from
single reference signs to multi-reference symbols. I ask you here
to be interested in a variation, within the class of multi-reference
symbols, which runs from the most diffuse to the most
condensed. For examples of highly condensed symbols, read
Turner’s interpretation of Ndembu rituals. This people in
Zambia experiences human society as a complex structure of
descent groups and local groups stratified by age and cult
associations. To symbolize this they fasten on the colours of the
juices in the human body and in the earth and trees. The active
principles in humans are black bile, red blood and white milk; in
the world of living nature there are trees with milky saps and red,
sticky resins and charred black wood; likewise, minerals include
black earth, white and red clay. From these colours they work
out a complex representation of male and female spheres, and
destructive and nourishing powers, interlocking at more and
more abstract and inclusive levels of interpretation. So
economical and highly articulated is this system of signs that it is
enough to strike one chord to recognize that the orchestration is
on a cosmic scale (Turner, 1968). For Christian examples of
condensed symbols, consider the sacraments, particularly the
Eucharist and the Chrisms. They condense an immensely wide
range of reference summarized in a series of statements loosely
articulated to one another. By contrast, for diffuse symbols, take
as an example the Mbuti pygmies’ word for ‘joy’, described by
Turnbull as the focusing element of their system of values, or the
words ‘human values’ in contemporary BBC culture. The ideas
are comprehensive enough in reference; they produce a standard
emotional response. But it is difficult to analyse their
connotation precisely. I am suggesting that the rule of Friday
abstinence is a minor condensed symbol for the exiled Irish in
London, as abstinence from pork has become a symbol of the
                                                  Away from ritual 11

Law for Jews everywhere. Some English Catholics and Jews feel
no response to these condensed symbols and are more moved by
general ethical principles. My hypothesis is that these responses
are respectively aspects of particular kinds of social experience.
Implicitly I find myself returning to Robertson Smith’s idea that
rites are prior and myths are secondary in the study of religion.
For it would seem that the recent shifts in Christian doctrine
which are taking place in the long theological debate since the
Reformation are attempts to bring intellectual positions into line
with deeply imprinted, personal attitudes to ritualism. A full
development of this argument should enable us to assess the
social context of anti-ritualist movements and of their periodic
defeat by ritualism.
   At the present stage of ethnographic reporting it is not reliable
enough a basis for comparison to look for the presence or absence
of condensed symbols. For there is the nagging possibility that if a
fieldworker of the calibre of Victor Turner or Raymond Firth went
to the pygmies and carried out his customarily intensive
investigation, he would discover as condensed a set of symbols as
any on the seven hills of Rome. Some symbolic scheme of
orientations may be necessary for people to relate to one another
in time and space. This would not in itself necessarily mean that
their beliefs take on a sacramental form. Since I am developing a
sociological approach to the problem, let me concentrate, not on
the other characteristics of the belief system, but only on the kind
of use to which people put their symbols in everyday life, as
regulators or as channels of power. That is, we should attend more
to their ideas about ritual efficacy, and less to the structure of their
orientations.
   Take first the case of a tribe whose traditional religion was
magical, and where a sizable minority switched to a Protestant-
like reform of ritual and conscience. David Aberle writes:

  The traditional Navaho fears error in his rituals and
  particularly error in the fixed prayers which chanter and patient
  must repeat in the course of a ceremony. Error may not only
  render the ceremony ineffectual but may cause illness to the
  patient years later…. Navaho supernatural power is likely to
  harm man when man breaches various taboos, but these taboos
  have almost nothing to do with the moral order. If a man were
  to commit murder, he might have ghost trouble—but so might
  he if he worked in a hospital or happened to burn wood from a
12 Away from ritual

  hogan where someone had died. His ghost trouble stems from
  ritual contamination, not from God’s curse or the ghost’s
  vengeance. Theft, adultery, deceit, assault and rape have no
  supernatural sanctions…. True, ceremonies are impaired if the
  singer becomes angry or if there is quarrelling at the ceremony.
  In this sense there are supernatural sanctions against
  misbehaviour—but only while the ceremony continues. On the
  other hand, the Navaho must fear the consequences of many
  accidental breaches of taboos.
                                                    (Aberle, 1966)

From this position of extreme ritualism a large minority of
Navaho have adopted a religion centred on the ritual eating of
peyote. The religion of the peyotists differs utterly from the
traditional one, in their ritual, their ideas of sin and of God. The
peyotists value spontaneity in their prayers and insist there is no
fixed pattern in them. As Aberle puts it, the traditional Navaho
tries to bind power by formulae while the peyotist tries to sway
God by his fervour. The peyotists’ God is interested in morality.
Confession of sin is necessary to gain God’s blessing and aid.
   Full details of this religious change are given in David Aberle’s
remarkable book. Here I need only indicate the change in social
conditions which accompanied the change of religious worship.
Navaho life was based on sheepherding in very arid, difficult
conditions, mainly in Arizona and New Mexico. A man with many
sheep used to gather round him other families who managed
portions of his herd for him and in return were given part of the
yield. These units must have been extremely cohesive, the basis for
economic aid in crises and for revenge and moral control.

  The largest organized unit of Navaho kinship was a group of
  local matrilineal kinsmen who actually co-operated and assisted
  one another on a day to day and year to year basis…. A man
  might lose his accumulated wealth through a bad winter or a
  dry summer. Hence an ethic of sharing was general, with
  primary dependency on matrilineal kin but secondary
  dependence on many other kinsmen as well, including affines.
  The wealthy were supposed to be generous, the poor
  unremitting in their pressures for generosity. Mutuality among
  kinsmen was reinforced by …the process of regulating disputes:
  here self help and compensation were the rule. A headman
  could only arbitrate, and kinsmen were needed for support in
                                                 Away from ritual 13

  case of feud, pressure for compensation or need to pay
  compensation.
                                                (ibid.: 44)

How tight this community life was and what strong controls to
conform were exerted by the sanctions of reciprocity in hardship
may be seen from the attitude to moral rules. European inquirers
were apparently surprised to find that Navaho ethical standards
were supported not by love of virtue but by fear of reprisals, fear
of withdrawal of support and fear of shame. Aberle’s book is a
documented study of the gradual breakdown of the basis of
community moral control. American law and order substituted for
vengeance groups.

  Clan cohesion was impaired as the possibility of mutual aid was
  reduced. Fear of loss of support in the community also became a
  lesser threat. And fear of loss of face or shame depends on the
  degree of involvement in the face-to-face community. Not only
  was intra-community interdependence lessened and
  enforcement of morality impaired, but extra-community
  dependence on wage work, and familial economic autonomy,
  was increased.
                                                    (ibid.: 200–1)

This one example suggests that when the social group grips its
members in tight communal bonds, the religion is ritualist; when
this grip is relaxed, ritualism declines. And with this shift of forms,
a shift in doctrines appears. The social experience of the
traditional Navaho man conditioned him to automatic response to
his community’s demands. Abstract right or wrong, internal
motives, these were much less important to him than knowing to
which vengeance group he belonged and to whom he was bound in
a web of reciprocities. But the new Navaho, impoverished by
enforced de-stocking, inadequately involved in the American wage
and cash economy, had to learn to discriminate between the
obligatory claims of his family and optional claims of charity.
Private judgement controlled his behaviour, not blind loyalty. He
could not count on his kinsmen, nor should they on him. He was
alone. Eating peyote gave him a sense of greatly enhanced personal
worth and a sense of direct communion with the supernatural.
Notice that his God has become like himself, no more coerced by
powerful symbols of reciprocity and allegiance. He judges
14 Away from ritual

intentions and capacities. He does not apply fixed rules
automatically but pierces behind the symbolic façade to judge the
inner heart of man. God has turned against ritual. Here is a
fascinating small-scale model of the Protestant Reformation, well
worth exploring further. I shall return to the Navaho peyotist
again. But as their anti-ritualism is a response to modern
conditions, it does not satisfy my need for primitive models.
   For these I turn to an African study, Colin Turnbull’s on the
pygmies of the Ituri forest. From this I derive my initial thesis that
the most important determinant of ritualism is the experience of
closed social groups.
   The pygmies represent the extreme case. So little ritual do they
perform that their first ethnographers assumed that they had, to all
intents and purposes, no religion, no culture even, of their own. All
that they had was borrowed from the Bantu. Turnbull’s work is
inspired by the need to assert that their very lack of ritual is an
aspect of an independent culture of their own. He draws a picture
of pygmies, irreverently mocking solemn Bantu rites into which
they have been drawn, uncomprehending the magic for hunting
and fertility which their Bantu neighbours offer them, overcome
with giggling during Bantu attempts to divine for sorcerers, quite
unconcerned about incurring pollution of death. They perform no
cult for the dead, they reject the Bantu idea of sin. The whole
paraphernalia of Bantu religion is alien to them. Seen from the
Bantu point of view they are ignorant, and irreligious. But they do
not have any alternative set of paraphernalia, equally elaborate
and imposing, but different. Their religion is one of internal
feeling, not of external sign. The moods of the forest manifest the
moods of the deity, and the forest can be humoured by the same
means as the pygmies, by song and dance. Their religion is not
concerned with their correct orientation within elaborate cosmic
categories nor with acts of transgression, nor rules of purity; it is
concerned with joy (1965:289). It is a religion of faith, not works,
to use an ancient slogan.
   As to their social groupings—so fluid and so fluctuating is the
band that a given territory witnesses ‘a continual flux of individuals’
(ibid.: 109). Bantu farmers consider that certain pygmies are
attached to their villages by hereditary right and would very much
like to know their whereabouts. But, Turnbull says:

  So with every lineage, as with every individual, there is an
  infinity of territories to which he may move if it pleases him,
                                                 Away from ritual 15

  and the system such as it is, encourages such movement to the
  point that no (Bantu) villager can ever be sure of what Mbuti
  lineages are hunting in ‘his’ territory.
                                                      (ibid.: 109)

A camp of net hunters moves its site roughly every month. During
that time newcomers are arriving and original members moving
out, so that the composition is not the same throughout the
month. Seven men are needed for the hunting season, and a camp
of over twenty huts is counted as a large one. In the honey season
such camps fragment into much smaller units.

  The pygmies seem bound by few set rules. There was a general
  pattern of behaviour to which everyone more or less
  conformed, but with great latitude given and taken.
                                             (Turnbull, 1961:80)

In such a society a man can hardly need to be preoccupied with the
formalities of social intercourse. If a quarrel arises, he can easily
move away. Loyalties are for the short term. Techniques of
conciliation need not be elaborate or publicly instituted. I am not
merely saying that the people’s behaviour to their god corresponds
to their behaviour to each other, though the truism could well be
underlined. I am saying that religious forms as well as social forms
are generated by experiences in the same dimension. Pygmies move
freely in an uncharted, unsystematized, unbounded social world. I
maintain that it would be impossible for them to develop a
sacramental religion, as it would be impossible for the
neighbouring Bantu farmers, living in their confined villages in
forest clearings, to give up magic.
   We can have confidence in the pygmy example because of the
obviously high quality of the ethnography. If Turnbull had been
careless, left gaps, seemed not to be aware of the implications of
what he has observed, if he had not followed up his statements with
such a wealth of secondary material, pygmy religion would be of no
interest. The same value attaches to studies of Nuer and Dinka,
pastoralists in the Sudan. I shall say more in Chapter 6 about these
peoples. As far as religious behaviour goes, neither tribe seems to be
as Low Church as the pygmies. Yet their ethnographers have both
had trouble, when asserting the non-ritualist quality of their
worship, in convincing their colleagues that a tendency to idealize
has not distorted their reporting. This is the fate of every
16 Away from ritual

ethnographer who tries to describe an unritualist, primitive religion.
I have never known what to reply to anthropologists who have
suggested that his own religious affiliations may have coloured
Professor Evans-Pritchard’s (1956) interpretation of Nuer religion. I
have heard them question Nuer disregard of fetishism, alleged to be
a foreign new importation (ibid.: 99). As for the Nuer God, his
intimacy with his worshippers, his refusal to be coerced by sacrifice,
his aptness for being described in Christian theological forms, how
far he seemed from the traditional gods of primitive religions.
Similarly for the God of the Dinka (Lienhardt, 1961:54, 73). I have
even wondered whether Robin Horton was perhaps justified in
chiding Godfrey Lienhardt for playing down the magical content of
Dinka ritual behaviour.

  There is an occasional failure to call a spade a spade. For
  instance, though it seems clear from the material offered that
  the Dinka think certain actions symbolizing desired ends really
  do help in themselves to achieve those ends, the author seems at
  times to want to rationalize this magical element away.
                                                (Horton, 1962:78)

The book thus reviewed draws a very subtle, delicate line between
the expressive and efficacious functions of Dinka ritual. In my
view, Lienhardt offers a brilliant insight into the way in which
symbolic action controls experience. But is he guilty at the same
time of overplaying the expressive and underplaying the magical
element? Robin Horton read the Dinka book from his perspective
in the steamy mangrove swamps of the Niger Delta where local
communities are closed in and where magic is indubitably magic.
But magic may be less important in open savannah lands.
   My considered view now is that magical rites are not the same
the world over and that interest in magical efficacy varies with the
strength of the social ties. Those who doubt the existence in their
own right of primitive, unritualist religions are in the position of
old Father Schebesta (1950). He assumed that if pygmies had no
ritual elaborations as magical and complex as those of the Bantu,
it must be proof that a former pygmy cultural heritage had been
lost. So the sceptics suggest that something of magicality has been
lost in the reporting of Dinka and Nuer religions. They betray the
assumption that all primitive religions are equally magical. The
case of the pygmies and of the old and new Navaho provide a basis
for asserting that there are unritualist primitive religions. The
                                                 Away from ritual 17

difficulties of the ethnographers of the Nuer and the Dinka in
convincing colleagues that their rituals are not very magical
suggest that there is a real dimension to be investigated along a
series from high to low ritualism in primitive cultures.
   Secularization is often treated as a modern trend, attributable to
the growth of cities or to the prestige of science, or just to the
breakdown of social forms. But we shall see that it is an age-old
cosmological type, a product of a definable social experience,
which need have nothing to do with urban life or modern science.
Here it would seem that anthropology has failed to hold up the
right reflecting mirror to contemporary man. The contrast of
secular with religious has nothing whatever to do with the contrast
of modern with traditional or primitive. The idea that primitive
man is by nature deeply religious is nonsense. The truth is that all
the varieties of scepticism, materialism and spiritual fervour are to
be found in the range of tribal societies. They vary as much from
one another on these lines as any chosen segments of London life.
The illusion that all primitives are pious, credulous and subject to
the teaching of priests or magicians has probably done even more
to impede our understanding of our own civilization than it has
confused the interpretations of archaeologists dealing with the
dead past. Very differently, for example, would Harvey Cox surely
have described the secular trends of today if he had realized how
closely the following words parallel accounts of some New Guinea
tribal beliefs.

  In the age of the secular city, the questions with which we
  concern ourselves tend to be mostly functional and operational.
  We wonder how power can be controlled and used responsibly.
  We ask how a reasonable international order can be fashioned
  out of the technological community into which we have been
  hurried. We worry about how the wizardry of medical science
  can be applied to the full without creating a world population
  constantly hovering on the brink of famine. These are
  pragmatic questions, and we are pragmatic men whose interest
  in religion is at best peripheral.
                                                  (Cox, 1968:93)

Secularism is not essentially a product of the city. Secular in the
sense of this-worldly, secular in the sense of failing to transcend the
meanings of everyday, secular in the sense of paying no heed to
specialized religious institutions, there are secular tribal cultures.
18 Away from ritual

Until he grasps this fact, the anthropologist himself is at a loss to
interpret his own material. When he comes across an irreligious
tribe, he redoubles the vigour and subtlety of his inquiries. He tries
to squeeze his information harder to make it yield that overall
superstructure of symbolism which his analysis can relate all
through the book to the social substructure, or he dredges for at
very least something to put in a final chapter on religion. So
thwarted in this exercise was Fredrik Barth when he studied a
group of Persian nomads that he was finally driven to write a
special appendix to clear himself of the possible charges of
insensibility to religious behaviour or of superficiality in his
research.

  The Basseri show a poverty of ritual activities which is quite
  striking in the field situation; what they have of ceremonies,
  avoidance customs and beliefs seem to influence or be expressed
  in very few of their actions. What is more, the different elements
  of ritual do not seem closely connected or interrelated in a
  wider system of meanings; they give the impression of occurring
  without reference to each other or to important features of the
  social structure….
                                     (Barth, 1964, Appendix: 135)

The Basseri would apparently endorse this view, as they see
themselves as slack Moslems, ‘generally uninterested in religion as
preached by Persian mullahs, and indifferent to metaphysical
problems’. Good marks to Barth for so frankly recording his own
surprise and professional frustration. He tries to solve the problem
which still remains (because of his assumption that tribal society
must have a straight Durkheimian religious expression) by trying
to refine the conceptual tools of analysis: he has been led to look
for expressive action specialized and apart from instrumental
action; can it be possible that the distinction is not always
valuable? Perhaps the symbolic meanings are implicit in the
instrumental action, and that for the Basseri the meanings and
values which make up their life are fully expressed in the richly
dramatic sequence of their migrations: ‘…this value is not in fact
expressed by means of technically unnecessary symbolic acts and
exotic paraphernalia…the migration cycle is used as a primary
scheme for the conceptualization of time and space’. He suggests
rather weakly after this that meanings can be implicit in the
sequence of activities because of the ‘picturesque and dramatic
                                                 Away from ritual 19

character of these activities, which makes of their migrations an
engrossing and satisfying experience’ (ibid.: 153). The criterion of
picturesqueness, however, would be difficult to apply to similar
phenomena in urban America, even were it to fit pig-feasting in
New Guinea. The meanings of the migration may well be
expressed implicitly in the migration itself, but this says nothing
about the meanings of society. Should not one suppose that a
society which does not need to make explicit its representation of
itself to itself is a special type of society? This would lead straight
to what Barth says of the independence and self-sufficiency of the
Basseri nomadic household which, enabling it to survive ‘in
economic relation with an external market but in complete
isolation from all fellow nomads, is a very striking and
fundamental feature of Basseri organization’ (ibid.: 21). These
features will become more prominent as an explanation of
secularity as my approach to the question is developed in this
book. For one of the most obvious forms of religious behaviour,
which Barth was looking for and failed to find, is the use of bodily
symbols to express the notion of an organic social system. But it
would seem that unless the form of personal relations corresponds
in some obvious way to the form or functions of the body, a range
of metaphysical questions of passionate interest to some people
becomes entirely irrelevant.
Chapter 2
To inner experience




Those on the New Left who are in revolt against empty rituals do
not readily see themselves walking in the footprints of Wycliffe
and of ardent Protestant reformers. Yet if we can make the leap
from small exotic cultures to our European religious tradition, we
can make the easier transition between anti-ritualism in a secular
and in a religious context. We are then able to see that alienation
from the current social values usually takes a set form: a
denunciation not only of irrelevant rituals, but of ritualism as
such; exaltation of the inner experience and denigration of its
standardized expressions; preference for intuitive and instant
forms of knowledge; rejection of mediating institutions, rejection
of any tendency to allow habit to provide the basis of a new
symbolic system. In its extreme forms anti-ritualism is an attempt
to abolish communication by means of complex symbolic systems.
We will see, as this argument develops, that it is a viable attitude
only in the early, unorganized stages of a new movement. After the
protest stage, once the need for organization is recognized, the
negative attitude to rituals is seen to conflict with the need for a
coherent system of expression. Then ritualism re-asserts itself
around the new context of social relations. Fundamentalists, who
are not magical in their attitude to the Eucharist, become magical
in their attitude to the Bible. Revolutionaries who strike for
freedom of speech adopt repressive sanctions to prevent return to
the Tower of Babel. But each time this movement of revolt and
anti-ritualism gives way to a new recognition of the need to
ritualize, something has been lost from the original cosmic
ordering of symbols. We arise from the purging of old rituals,
simpler and poorer, as was intended, ritually beggared, but with
other losses. There is a loss of articulation in the depth of past
time. The new sect goes back as far as the primitive church, as far
                                              To inner experience 21

as the first Pentecost, or as far as the Flood, but the historical
continuity is traced by a thin line. Only a narrow range of
historical experience is recognized as antecedent to the present
state. Along with celebrating the Last Supper with the breaking of
bread, or the simplicity of fishermen-apostles, there is a squeamish
selection of ancestors: just as revolutionaries may evict kings and
queens from the pages of history, the anti-ritualists have rejected
the list of saints and popes and tried to start again without any
load of history.
   But swings of the pendulum do not take us far enough in the
interpretation of anti-ritualism. There is still the long secular
trend to be accounted for which has resulted in a lack of
sensitivity to condensed symbols, and at the same time a general
preoccupation with lack of meaning. The move away from ritual
is accompanied by a strong movement towards greater ethical
sensitivity. Thus we find Christian denominations in the United
States less and less distinguishable from one another and from
the Jewish community, less and less willing to refer to doctrinal
differences, and all equally committed to programmes of social
betterment. This trend has been well described by Herberg in his
Protestant, Catholic, Jew (1960) and documented by intensive
research by Neal (1965). To understand it, however, I find myself
drawn to the work of another sociologist whose research is
specially relevant.
   Ritual is pre-eminently a form of communication. Socio-
linguistics provide us with an angle of approach. Basil Bernstein is
a sociologist whose thought descends through Durkheim to Sapir
(Bernstein, 1965:148). His special concern is to discover how
speech systems transform the experience of speakers. By a line of
inquiry as subtle in its perception as it is powerful in scope he seeks
to apply Sapir’s insight about the controlling influence of language
on culture.

  It is quite an illusion to imagine that one adjusts to reality
  essentially without the use of language and that language is
  merely an incidental means of solving specific problems of
  communication or reflection. The fact of the matter is that the
  real world is to a large extent unconsciously built up on the
  language habits of the group…. We see and hear and otherwise
  experience very largely as we do because the language habits of
  our community predispose certain choices of interpretation.
                                            (Sapir, 1933:155–69)
22 To inner experience

This present book is an essay in applying Bernstein’s approach to
the analysis of ritual. It will help us to understand religious
behaviour if we can treat ritual forms, like speech forms, as
transmitters of culture, which are generated in social relations and
which, by their selections and emphases, exercise a constraining
effect on social behaviour. Even when we have summarized a little
of what Bernstein has said, and then applied it to ritual as a
medium of communication, we are still a long way from using his
insights to understand anti-ritual. To this I hope to return in the
last chapter.
   Bernstein very cogently distinguishes his argument from that
of Whorf (1941) and others who have treated language as an
autonomous cultural agent and failed to relate its formal patterns
to the structure of social relations. Indeed, before Bernstein it
was difficult to see how such a relationship could be established.
For certainly, in large areas of its internal development, language
follows its own autonomously given rules. It is not surprising, as
he has alleged (1965), that contemporary sociologists often seem
to ignore the fact that humans speak, unless the sociologists are
specially concerned with speech, in which case they emphasize its
integrating or divisive functions. Speech tends to be treated as a
datum, something taken for granted. If it is true that the analysis
of speech as a social institution (one as basic as family and
religion) has scarcely been broached, anthropologists are in no
way to feel smug about the analysis of ritual. They do not make
the mistake of neglecting this field; nor do they suppose that
ritual is merely divisive or integrative in social relations. The
data are piled up in great stacks of analysis of particular tribal
symbolic systems which express the social order. But why some
tribes should be pious and others irreverent or mercenary, why
some are witch-ridden and others not, are questions which have
only been entertained in sporadic fashion. As for the deeper
question of whether symbolic forms are purely expressive,
merely ‘the means of solving specific problems of
communication or reflection’ as Sapir put it, or whether they
interact on the social situations in which they arise, and
whether their effect is constraining and reactionary—these
questions are not systematically approached. Still less have
anthropologists developed a frame of discourse in which their
tribal studies can be related to ourselves. This is the point at
which a revolutionary insight into language as a social process
can help us.
                                              To inner experience 23

   Bernstein starts with the idea that there are two basic categories
of speech, distinguishable both linguistically and sociologically.
The first arises in a small-scale, very local social situation in which
the speakers all have access to the same fundamental assumptions;
in this category every utterance is pressed into service to affirm the
social order. Speech in this case exercises a solidarity-maintaining
function closely comparable to religion as Durkheim saw it
functioning in primitive society. The second category of speech
distinguished by Bernstein is employed in social situations where
the speakers do not accept or necessarily know one another’s
fundamental assumptions. Speech has then the primary function of
making explicit unique individual perceptions, and bridging
different initial assumptions. The two categories of speech arise in
social systems which correspond to those which Durkheim
indicated as governed by mechanical and organic solidarity. So
Bernstein would deserve the attention of anthropologists if only
because he is sympathetic to a Durkheimian sociology of
knowledge, one which was originally worked out by comparing
ritual as a medium of communication in tribal and in industrial
society. He says that:

  different speech systems or codes create for their speakers
  different orders of relevance and relation. The experience of the
  speakers may then be transformed by what is made significant
  or relevant by different speech systems. As the child learns his
  speech, or, in the terms I shall use here, learns specific codes
  which regulate his verbal acts, he learns the requirements of his
  social structure. The experience of the child is transformed by
  the learning generated by his own, apparently voluntary acts of
  speech. The social structure becomes in this way the sub-
  stratum of the child’s experience essentially through the
  manifold consequence of the linguistic process. From this point
  of view, every time the child speaks or listens, the social
  structure is reinforced in him and his social identity shaped.
                                             (Bernstein, 1970:124)

He distinguishes two different types of linguistic code. One he
calls the elaborated code, in which, as he says, the speaker selects
from a wide range of syntactic alternatives, which are flexibly
organized; this speech requires complex planning. In the other,
which he calls the restricted code, the speaker draws from a
much narrower range of syntactic alternatives, and these
24 To inner experience

alternatives are more rigidly organized. The elaborated code is
adapted to enable a speaker to make his own intentions explicit,
to elucidate general principles. Each type of speech code is
generated in its own type of social matrix. As I understand it, the
differences between the two coding systems depend entirely on
the relation of each to the social context. The restricted code is
deeply enmeshed in the immediate social structure, utterances
have a double purpose: they convey information, yes, but they
also express the social structure, embellish and reinforce it. The
second function is the dominant one, whereas the elaborated
code emerges as a form of speech which is progressively more
and more free of the second function. Its primary function is to
organize thought processes, distinguish and combine ideas. In its
more extreme, elaborate form it is so much disengaged from the
normal social structure that it may even come to dominate the
latter and require the social group to be structured around the
speech, as in the case of a university lecture.
   It is essential to realize that the elaborated code is a product of
the division of labour. The more highly differentiated the social
system, the more specialized the decision-making roles—then the
more the pressure for explicit channels of communication
concerning a wide range of policies and their consequences. The
demands of the industrial system are pressing hard now upon
education to produce more and more verbally articulate people
who will be promoted to entrepreneurial roles. By inference, the
restricted code will be found where these pressures are weakest.
Professor Bernstein’s research in London schools and families finds
that the codes are instilled into children from their earliest infancy
by their mothers. Each speech system is developed in its
corresponding system of family control. He asks mothers of
working-class and middle-class families how they control their
children under five; what happens if the child won’t go to bed?
won’t eat? breaks the crockery? From their detailed responses he
constructs a distinctive pattern of values, a distinctive concept of
the person and of morality.
   Let me describe the two kinds of family role system. Restricted
codes are generated in what he calls the positional family. The
child in this family is controlled by the continual building-up of a
sense of social pattern: of ascribed role categories. If he asks ‘Why
must I do this?’ the answer is in terms of relative position. Because
I said so (hierarchy). Because you’re a boy (sex role). Because
children always do (age status). Because you’re the oldest
                                             To inner experience 25

(seniority). As he grows, his experience flows into a grid of role
categories; right and wrong are learnt in terms of the given
structure; he himself is seen only in relation to that structure. The
child’s curiosity in working-class or some aristocratic families is
harnessed to the task of sustaining his social environment. Let me
quote briefly from Bernstein himself. Differences in speech are
taken to be

  indices of a particular form of communication; they are not in
  any sense accidental but are contingent on a form of social
  structure. These differences I shall argue indicate the use of a
  linguistic code. It is a (restricted) code which does not facilitate
  the verbal elaboration of meaning; it is a code which sensitizes
  the user to a particular form of social relationship which is
  unambiguous, where the authority is clear-cut and serves as a
  guide to action. It is a code which helps to sustain solidarity
  with the group at the cost of verbal signalling of the unique
  difference of its members. It is a code which facilitates the ready
  transformation of feeling into action. It is a code where changes
  in meaning are more likely to be signalled non-verbally than
  through changes in verbal selections…. How does this way of
  translating experience come about? What in the culture is
  responsible for the speech system? …Different social structures
  will generate different speech systems. These speech systems or
  codes entail for the individual specific principles of choice
  which regulate the selections he makes from language at both
  the syntactic and lexical level. What the individual actually
  says, from a developmental perspective, transforms him in the
  act of saying.
     As the child learns his speech or in our terms learns specific
  codes which regulate his verbal acts he learns the requirements
  of his social structure. From this point of view every time the
  child speaks the social structure of which he is a part is
  reinforced in him, and his social identity develops and is
  constrained. The social structure becomes for the developing
  child his psychological reality by the shaping of his acts of
  speech. If this is the case, then the processes which orient the
  child to his world and the kind of relationships he imposes are
  triggered off initially and systematically reinforced by the
  implications of the speech system. Underlying the general
  pattern of the child’s speech are initial sets of choices, in-built
  preferences for some alternatives rather than others, planning
26 To inner experience

  processes which develop and are stabilized through time—
  coding principles through which orientation is given to social,
  intellectual and emotional referents.
                                         (Bernstein, 1964:56–7)

  When a child learns a restricted code he learns to perceive
  language in a particular way. Language is not perceived as a set
  of theoretical possibilities which can be transferred into a
  facility for the communication of unique experience. Speech is
  not primarily a means for a voyage from one self to the other. In
  as much as this is so then areas of the self are not likely to be
  differentiated by speech and so become the object of special
  perceptual activity. It is also likely that the motivations of
  others will not serve as starting points for inquiry and verbal
  elaboration. Of some importance, the identity of the individual
  will be refracted to him by the concrete symbols of his group
  rather than creating a problem to be solved by his own unique
  investigations…. A critical aspect of the family is the means of
  expression of authority, particularly the type of verbal
  interaction authority relationships create. I shall argue that
  associated with parents limited to a restricted code is a specific
  form of authority relation. Authority can be expressed so as to
  limit the chances of verbal interaction with the relationship, or
  authority can be expressed so as to increase verbal interaction.
  The area of discretion available to the child may be reduced to
  an uncompromising acceptance, withdrawal or rebellion within
  the authority relationship, or the social context of control may
  permit a number of responses on the part of the child…. If the
  appeals are status-oriented then the behaviour of the child is
  referred to some general or local rule which constrains conduct,
  ‘shouldn’t you clean your teeth’, ‘you don’t behave yourself like
  that on a bus’, ‘children in grammar schools are expected to
  behave rather differently’. Status appeals may also relate the
  child’s behaviour to the rules which regulate his conduct with
  reference to age, sex or age relationships, e.g. ‘Little boys don’t
  play with dolls’, ‘you should be able to stop doing that by now’,
  ‘you don’t talk to your father, teacher, social worker, etc., like
  that’. These are important implications of status appeals. If they
  are not obeyed the relationship can quickly change to reveal
  naked power and may become punitive. Status appeals are
  impersonal. They rely for their effectiveness upon the status of
  the regulator. The effect of these appeals is to transmit the
                                             To inner experience 27

  culture or local culture in such a way as to increase the
  similarity of the regulated with others of his group. If the child
  rebels he is challenging very quickly the culture of which he is a
  part, and it is this which tends to force the regulator into taking
  punitive action.
                                                       (ibid.: 59–60)

By contrast, in the family system which Professor Bernstein calls
personal a fixed pattern of roles is not celebrated, but rather the
autonomy and unique value of the individual. When the child asks
a question the mother feels bound to answer it by as full an
explanation as she knows. The curiosity of the child is used to
increase his verbal control, to elucidate causal relations, to teach
him to assess the consequences of his acts. Above all his behaviour
is controlled by being made sensitive to the personal feelings of
others, by inspecting his own feelings. Why can’t I do it? Because
your father’s feeling worried; because I’ve got a headache. How
would you like it if you were a fly? or a dog? The child tends to be
controlled by person-oriented appeals:

  In these appeals the conduct of the child is related to the feelings
  of the regulator (parent) or the significance of the act, its
  meaning is related explicitly to the regulated, to the child, e.g.
  ‘Daddy will be pleased, hurt, disappointed, angry, ecstatic if you
  go on doing this’. ‘If you go on doing this you will be miserable
  when the cat has a nasty pain’…. Control is effected through
  either the verbal manipulation of feelings and through the
  establishment of reasons which link the child to his acts. In this
  way the child has access to the regulator as a person and he has
  access to the significance of his own acts as they relate to him as
  consequences…. The status-oriented appeals rely for their
  effectiveness upon differences in status whereas the person-
  oriented appeals rely more upon the manipulation of thought
  and feeling.
                                                           (ibid.: 60)

In this way the child is freed from a system of rigid positions, but
made a prisoner of a system of feelings and abstract principles.
The personal system of family control is well adapted to develop
verbal skills: the child will do better in school examinations as a
result of his control of the elaborated code. He may shoot
forward to the top of the wider society, become Prime Minister,
28 To inner experience

Head of UNO; the sky’s the limit. Underlying this family system
is anxiety about the child’s development and educational success.
It is probably not inspired by ambition. More likely it is inspired
by the knowledge that in a changing world the only ticket anyone
can hold for staying in a privileged niche is education. The child
is being educated for a changing social environment. As his
parents move from one town or country to another in response to
the need for professional mobility, the child grows in a family
system which is relatively unstructured, a collection of unique
feelings and needs. Right and wrong are learnt in terms of his
response to those feelings. Instead of internalizing any particular
social structure, his inside is continually stirred into a ferment of
ethical sensibilities. We can immediately and from our own
experience recognize this as the basis for the move from ritual to
ethics. There is no need to indicate the clichés from the literary
and philosophical output of the last 100 years which validate the
system.
    To sum up Basil Bernstein’s approach in diagrams: in diagram 1
the horizontal arrow expresses the way that patterns of family
control are progressively detached from the immediate social
structure of the family and local community and progressively
coordinated with the demands of the wider industrial social
structure (Bernstein, 1970). Diagram 2 studies the effect of the
same industrial pressures upon speech. Verbal communication is
progressively detached from its service to the immediate social
context and elaborated for its use in the widest social structures of
all. In the process, note that as speech sheds its social harness, it
becomes a very specialized, independent tool of thought. Basil
Bernstein has plausibly suggested that the emancipation of speech
from social control underlies some variations in religious worship.
Diagram 3 is the result of our discussions together. It is very
impressionistic and designed more than anything to help follow in
imagination the kind of transitions that can be studied in this
framework.
    Admittedly, there are several difficulties about this diagram. To
understand it we should look first at squares A and B. A represents
most primitive cultures in which speech forms are firmly
embedded in a stable social structure. The primary use of language
is to affirm and embellish the social structure which rests upon
unchallengeable metaphysical assumptions. In such a system we
would expect to find that the admired virtues are those which
unquestioningly uphold the social structure, and the hated sins are
                                              To inner experience 29




Diagram 1 Family control




Diagram 2 Speech codes




transgressions against it. Since individual motivation is irrelevant
to the demand for performance, we would expect to find little
reflection on the notion of the self; the individual is hardly
concerned as a complex agent. On the contrary, the self is seen as a
passive arena in which external forces play out their conflicts. This
would be the social structure to give rise to totemic thought
systems and to art forms which celebrate social dichotomies and
confrontations. In these the relation of the individual to society is
hardly considered. This general class emerges as appropriate
wherever literacy is low and the social structure stable.
   In square B, speech and thought have been elaborated as
specialized tools for decision-making, but the social structure still
retains a strong grip on its members, even to the extent that its
underlying assumptions are not challenged. Elaborated speech in
this case is still in the service of the social structure, but uses the
philosophical reflections at which it has become adept for
examining and justifying those assumptions. This would be the
square for Aristotle. The result of this reflection of speech and
thought on the social structure would be an awareness of the
demands of the latter upon the individual and of the possibility of
the individual not responding adequately. Truth and duty would
be the primary virtues. They express the confidence that the social
30 To inner experience

                     (i)     cardinal virtues
                    (ii)     cardinal sins
                    (iii)    the idea of the self
                    (iv)     art form

                                Speech
                            socially restricted




                            Speech elaborated
    Diagram 3 General cosmological ideas
                                            To inner experience 31

structure rests upon a rational foundation which justifies its claim
to allegiance. As a result of the capacity for reflection and as an
expression of the new independence of thought, we would expect
the self to be accorded a much more active role. The danger of the
individual rejecting the claims of society would here be recognized,
though condemned. Does it help to suggest that classical drama,
Oedipus and El Cid, depicts these attitudes?
   In squares C and D the social structure has lost its grip. Square
C, according to Bernstein, is unstable, a transitional phase. For
example a mother belonging to the professional classes by her own
education and aspirations, married into a working-class
environment, might bring up her children by the techniques of
personal control, but through the rest of their social relations they
would be obliged to use speech of the restricted code. Here the
individual is valued above the social structure; hence the literature
of revolt, Rimbaud, or D.H.Lawrence.
   In so far as there is a literature for this square, we have to
assume that individuals reared in it have made in their lifetime the
move from C to D, have become verbally articulate in elaborate
codes.
   We can understand square D most easily, for it includes
ourselves. I cannot go further without trying to be more specific
about who, in our contemporary society, fits into squares B and
D. What is the distribution of people using elaborated speech
codes between positional and personal family control systems?
Start with square B. The positional family develops on the
assumption that roles should be defined clearly and the
elaboration of speech, in so far as it is used to sustain role
patterns, reduces ambiguity. Here we would expect to find
aristocracies whose aspirations are relatively fixed and whose
role structure is clearly ascribed. Also certain sections of the
middle class will be here. The military profession, for example,
demands unambiguous allocation of roles; the legal profession
lives by reducing role ambiguity. There are other highly educated
sectors of modern society whose profession encourages them to
favour positional control systems. The work of engineers,
concerned primarily with abstract relations between material
objects, does not lead them to use the elaborated code to reflect
critically on the nature of social relations. That they should tend
towards positional family systems becomes clearer when we see
how the other square, D, is filled. Here are the people who live
by using elaborated speech to review and revise existing
32 To inner experience

categories of thought. To challenge received ideas is their very
bread and butter. They (or should I say we) practise a
professional detachment towards any given pattern of
experience. The more boldly and comprehensively they apply
their minds to rethinking, the better their chances of professional
success. Thus the value of their radical habit of thought is
socially confirmed, and reinforced. For with the rise to
professional eminence comes the geographical and social
mobility that detaches them from their original community. With
such validation, they are likely to raise their children in the habit
of intellectual challenge and not to impose a positional control
pattern. How much more likely are they to prefer personal forms
of control if the area of their professional thinking deals with
human relations: psychologists, anthropologists, novelists,
philosophers, political scientists. The professions which deal with
the expression of personal feelings rather than with abstract
principles are also found here. This is the square in which ideas
about morality and the self get detached from the social
structure. This would be the niche in which to consider
Existentialism and the deep pre-occupation of our day with the
technical process of artistic creation.
   The positional child, who knows the pattern in which he
belongs, cannot understand the anguish which Sartre has described
so poignantly in Words, the biography of his first ten years of life
(1967). In the home of his domineering and histrionic grandfather
he and his widowed mother were appendages, serving mainly to
provide the grandparents with emotional satisfaction. From
infancy he was tormented with the consciousness that his existence
had no justification. There was no society organized in general
categories of age, sex and hierarchy in which his developing role
could be seen as necessary to some overall pattern. Only the
promise of personal success, the renown of future genius, could
justify his life in the patternless adult world which made such
unconvincing pretence of valuing him for his loveable personality.
This dominant anxiety of childhood is clearly related to his later
philosophical position. Bernstein suggests that problems of self-
justification arise in the personal family—and was not the
Reformation about self-justification?
   Some may argue that Bernstein’s contrast of positional with
personal family is no different from the old distinction between
achieved and ascribed status. This is an error. The positional/
personal contrast rides at a higher level of abstraction. In the
                                              To inner experience 33

personal family, true enough, all roles have to be achieved, but
the converse does not hold good. In some positional families,
within the ascribed framework, important roles have to be
achieved. For example in military families there is a strong
emphasis on achievement. The contrast of achieved/acquired
status needs to take account of the different realms of
achievement.
   For reasons which may now be clear, it is easier for us (writers
and readers) to recognize and sympathize with the aspirations of
one raised in a personal family than with the person raised in the
positional family. Certainly I believe that the Bog Irish have
suffered from such a blank in the imaginative sympathy of their
pastors, whose personal outlook conforms to their special niche in
the professional ladder. The latter might take a more generous
view of tenacious ritualism if they saw the impoverished power of
response to condensed symbols of all kinds which lies in the
direction they are leading and if they could value ritualistic forms
of commitment as such. It must be difficult for the child reared on
abstract principles in the personal family to draw moral lines, to be
bound by promises—for unquestioned boundaries have never been
part of his upbringing. The child in the positional family grows
into a set of unchallenged categories, which are expressed by non-
verbal symbols as well as by words.
   Bernstein’s work on the social structuring of speech in London
families challenges the anthropologist in many, very difficult, fields.
At first sight all ritual would seem to be a form of restricted code. It
is a form of verbal utterance whose meanings are largely implicit;
many of them are carried along standardized non-verbal channels.
Indeed, since Malinowski no one has thought to interpret the
language of magic apart from the symbolic actions and apart from
the whole social context. Ritual is generally highly coded. Its units
are organized to standard types in advance of use. Lexically its
meanings are local and particular. Syntactically it is available to all
members of the community. The syntax is rigid, it offers a small
range of alternative forms. Indeed so limited does the syntactic
range tend to be that many anthropologists find that a simple binary
analysis is sufficient to elucidate the meanings of myth or ritual
symbols. Bernstein himself has suggested that his definitions should
be applicable to other symbolic forms—he has suggested music
(1965:166). He has also recognized that in any one case elaboration
and restriction will be relative. Obviously there are technical
difficulties in applying this comparison of speech and ritual forms.
34 To inner experience

However, at first glance we seem to have a ready-made solution to
our opening question. The causes of anti-ritualism today in
middleclass European and American communities would appear to
be a predictable result of a process of socialization in which the child
never internalizes a pattern of social statuses and never experiences
authoritative control which exalts the self-evident property of a
social system to command obedience. Symbols of solidarity and
hierarchy have not been part of his education. Consequently a form
of aesthetic experience is closed to him. As Bernstein emphasizes:

  It is important to realize that a restricted code carries its own
  aesthetic. It will tend to develop a metaphoric range of
  considerable power, a simplicity and directness, a vitality and
  rhythm; it should not be disvalued. Psychologically, it unites the
  speaker to his kin and to his local community.
                                                        (ibid.: 165)

It is tempting to equate the restricted code with ritualism and to
leave the matter there. In many anthropologists’ accounts of a
pastoral or hunting economy there appears the outline of an ox or
wild pig or antelope quartered and subdivided, with a legend
indicating the category of kin to which each segment is allocated.
Such a chart showing the correct distribution of game or of
sacrificial meat summarizes the main social categories. Similarly
the first fruits celebrations of agriculturalists. Each feast reaffirms
the categories visibly and publicly. Primitive rules of purity also
support the social categories and give them external, physical
reality. Clearly the words which accompany these distributions
carry a small part only of the significance of the occasion. The
comparable situations in family life would be the spatial layout of
chairs in the living room which convey the hierarchy of rank and
sex, the celebration of Sunday dinner, and for some families,
presumably those in which a restricted code is used, every meal
and every rising, bathing and bed-time is structured to express and
support the social order. Bernstein’s fully personal family, then,
would be one in which no meals were taken in common and no
hierarchy recognized, but in which the mother would attempt to
meet the unique needs of each child by creating an entirely
individual environment of time-table and services around each one
of her brood; early supper for this one to go to choir practice, late
supper for that one coming back from an excursion, hospitality for
that other one’s friends and so on; food selections too would be on
                                              To inner experience 35

an individual basis. How could such a child ever learn to respond
to a communally exerted authority? His ears would not be attuned
to catch the unspoken messages of a restricted code. Hence some
of the deafness and antipathy to ritualism in our day.
   This would be fine and an end of the argument if, as was
commonly held, all primitive peoples were ritualist and if the
movement away from magicality were indeed able to be plotted
along a graph showing more and more the effects of the division of
labour on family behaviour. But I have mentioned already the
unritualistic pygmies; then there are the Basseri who have so little
that can be called religion, the Anuak who are much more
interested in counteracting witchcraft than in worshipping God or
indulging in metaphysical speculations, and probably a host more
of so-called primitive tribes who share with the most industrially
advanced nations a lack of interest in ritual. We shall need to look
closely at the social structures of these tribes, to find a set of
variables which will be consistent both with the Bernstein effect
among ourselves and with what is known about primitive social
structure and cosmology. This exercise will take us a long way
from Bernstein’s analysis, but I intend to return to it at the end. No
doubt readers are more interested in themselves than in exotic
tribesmen and I regret that I am not able to develop more fully the
parallel between the positional home and the primitive ritualist.
Let me at least include some suggestions thrown out by Bernstein
(in a personal communication) on the types of religious behaviour
he would expect to be associated with types of family control. The
primitive ritualist, in his ascribed social system, expresses cosmic
orientations and moral directives in condensed symbols. The home
which is organized around positional values has comparable
methods of explanation and control. In a community composed of
such homes God would be also known through the restricted code.
Theological concepts about him would not be fully elucidated, he
would be known by his attributes as manifested in the social
structure. Knowing God would be subject to the same restrictions
as knowing the mother: the code of speech would not provide
means for reflecting upon or inspecting the relationship verbally.
The religious cult would be expected to correspond in style to the
family rituals and therefore to be fixed and ritualistic. Similarly the
definition of sin would be more concerned with specific external
actions than with internal motivation.
   In diagram 3 the idea of the self was progressively detached
from the social structure. So, as ritualism declines, the Idea of God
36 To inner experience

becomes more intimate. But as God comes nearer he is diminished
in glory and power. This hypothesis can be recognized as
thoroughly Durkheimian. For the cosmology, based on its
particular hierarchy of values and upholding a particular pattern
of behaviour, is derived from society. As the grip of his immediate
society on the individual tightens or slackens something happens
to his religious attitudes.
   There is an awkward paradox in this presentation. For as a
Londoner gets drawn more and more into the vortex of industrial
society his religious ideas seem to approximate more and more to
those of the pygmy. He believes in spontaneity, friendship,
freedom, and goodness of heart: he rejects formality, magic,
doctrinal logic-chopping and condemnation of his fellow humans
for their wrong-doings. This paradox is due to a distortion in the
comparison caused by the effects of the division of labour. Pygmies
cannot be equated with preachers, journalists and dons. The
argument will have to go a long way before we can pick up this
paradox and resolve it. In the meanwhile, note what the Bernstein
effect amounts to. As a result of definable pressures on home and
school there is an increasing tendency to rear children by personal,
elaborated speech code methods. This produces a child acutely
sensitive to the feelings of others, and interested in his own internal
states. It follows that such an education will predispose a person to
ethical preoccupations, for while it opens up his vocabulary of
feeling it also denies him any sense of pattern in his social life. He
must therefore look for some justification of his existence outside
the performance of set rules. He can only find it in good works on
behalf of humanity in general or in personal success, or both.
Hence the drive towards a purely ethical religion.
Chapter 3
The Bog Irish




The Bog Irishman in his faithfulness to the rule of Friday
abstinence is undeniably like the primitive ritualist. Magical
rules have always an expressive function. Whatever other
functions they perform, disciplinary, anxiety-reducing, or
sanctioning of moral codes, they have first and foremost a
symbolic function. The official symbolism of Friday abstinence
was originally personal mortification, a small weekly
celebration of the annual celebration of Good Friday. Thus it
pointed directly to Calvary and Redemption. It could hardly
have a more central load of meaning for Christian worship. In
reporting that it has become empty and meaningless, what is
meant is that its symbols are no longer seen to point in that
direction or anywhere in particular.
   Yet symbols which are tenaciously adhered to can hardly be
dismissed as altogether meaningless. They must mean something.
We can start by asking what are the most poignant experiences of
the Irish girl who has left her home to do service in London hotels
or hospitals, or of the Irish man who arrives looking for big, quick
money in construction work. If they have friends and kin to find
them lodgings, their sense of exile is softened by a sense of
continuity, the Irish newspapers sold outside Church after Mass,
the weekly dances in the parish hall. There is a sense of belonging.
If no such welcome is arranged, they are likely to see on the doors
of lodging houses: ‘No Irish, no coloured’. Then the sense of exile
and of boundary is sharper. This is what the rule of Friday
abstinence can signify. No empty symbol, it means allegiance to a
humble home in Ireland and to a glorious tradition in Rome. These
allegiances are something to be proud of in the humiliations of the
unskilled labourer’s lot. At its lowest it means what haggis and the
pipes mean to Scots abroad on Burns’ night. At its most it means
38 The Bog Irish

what abstaining from pork meant to the venerable Eleazar as
narrated in 2 Maccabees.
   The Catholic hierarchy in England today is under pressure to
underestimate the expressive function of ritual. Catholics are
exhorted to invent individual acts of almsgiving as a more
meaningful celebration of Friday. But why Friday? Why
celebrate at all? Why not be good and generous all the time? As
soon as symbolic action is denied value in its own right, the
flood-gates of confusion are opened. Symbols are the only
means of communication. They are the only means of
expressing value; the main instruments of thought, the only
regulators of experience. For any communication to take place,
the symbols must be structured. For communication about
religion to take place, the structure of the symbols must be able
to express something relevant to the social order. If a people
takes a symbol that originally meant one thing, and twists it to
mean something else, and energetically holds on to that
subverted symbol, its meanings for their personal life must be
very profound. Who would dare to despise the cult of Friday
abstinence who has not himself endured the life of the Irish
labourer in London?
   Friday abstinence must be interpreted under the same rubric as
Jewish abstinence from pork. In Purity and Danger I argued that
the dietary rules in Leviticus xi afford a shorthand summary of the
categories of Israelite culture. The pig is not singled out for special
abhorrence more than the camel and the rock badger. The dietary
rules, I suggested, should be taken as a whole and related to the
totality of symbolic structures organizing the universe. In this way
the abominations are seen as anomalies within a particular logical
scheme (Douglas, 1966: ch. 3). Since writing this, useful criticisms
have been made. Dr S.Strizower (1966) has pointed out that I
overlooked the importance of restrictive dietary rules in setting the
Israelites apart from other people and in expressing their sense of
apartness. Ralph Bulmer has argued that if my interpretation of
the whole set of rules as carrying a condensed classification of the
universe be conceded, it still does not explain the particular
abhorrence of the flesh of the pig (1967:21). Why should this one
animal be singled out to be the chief representative and vanguard
of all other abominations? The answer to both would seem to be in
the two books of Maccabees. This is the narrative of how Judas
Maccabeus led the people of Israel against their conquerors, the
Greeks.
                                                 The Bog Irish 39

     1 Maccabees i, 21. And after Antiochus had ravaged Egypt in
  the 143rd year, he returned and sent up against Israel…23. And
  he proudly entered into the sanctuary and took away the golden
  altar…26…. and there was great mourning in Israel …29. And
  all the house of Jacob was covered with confusion. 32–8. He
  attacked and destroyed the city, threw down the walls, took the
  women captive…and built the city of David with a great and
  strong wall and with strong towers and made it a fortress for
  them…39…and defiled the holy place…40. And the inhabitants
  of Jerusalem fled away by reason of them, and the city was
  made a habitation of strangers; and she became a stranger to
  her own seed and her children forsook her.

Not content with political and military victory, King Antiochus
ordered all the nations under him to leave their own laws.

    45…And many of Israel consented to his service: and they
  sacrificed to idols and profaned the Sabbath.

Throughout the subsequent narrative of the overthrow of the
invading armies and the purification of the temple three themes are
treated as co-ordinate symbols:

  defilement of the temple
  defilement of the body
  breach of the law.

The temple is finally rebuilt and rededicated, with high walls
and strong towers round about (1 Maccabees iv, 60); a
necessary military precaution. But the leaders of Israel also
took as drastic precautions against the defilement of their
bodies (2 Maccabees v, 27):

     But Judas Maccabeus…had withdrawn himself into a desert
  place, and there lived among the wild beasts in the mountains
  with his company: and they continued feeding on herbs, that
  they might not be partakers of the pollution.

Those who circumcised or observed the Sabbath in secret were
brutally killed by the conquerors. It is clear here that any of the
rules, dietary and other, and any among the dietary rules, were
equally held sacred and their breach equally held polluting. But
40 The Bog Irish

Antiochus ordered swine to be immolated on their altars (1
Maccabees i, 50) and took eating of swine’s flesh as a symbol of
submission (2 Maccabees vi). So it was he, by this action, who
forced into prominence the rule concerning pork as the critical
symbol of group allegiance. Circumcision, after all, is a private
matter concerning the private parts of a person. Observing the
Sabbath, also, does not necessarily impinge on other people’s lives
or at least only periodically. Refusal of commensality is a more
total rejection of social intercourse. If the heathen eat pork, the
pork-avoiding Israelite cannot join their meals. In a greatly
lessened degree, if a Catholic is invited out to dine on Friday, his
ritual allegiance may be an affront to his hosts, only because it is
not one they share. Thus pork avoidance and Friday abstinence
gain significance as symbols of allegiance simply by their lack of
meaning for other cultures. The splendid passage describing
Eleazar’s trial explains how eating pork came to be abhorred as an
act of betrayal as well as of defilement.

     2 Maccabees vi, 18. Eleazar, one of the chief of the scribes, a
  man advanced in years and of a comely countenance, was
  pressed to open his mouth to eat swine’s flesh. 19. But he,
  choosing rather a most glorious death than a hateful life, went
  forward voluntarily to the torment…21. But they that stood by,
  being moved with wicked pity, for the old friendship they had
  with the man, taking him aside, desired that flesh might be
  brought which it was lawful for him to eat, that he might make
  as if he had eaten, as the king had commanded, of the flesh of
  the sacrifice. 22. That by so doing he might be delivered from
  death. And for the sake of their old friendship with the man
  they did him this courtesy. 23. But he began to consider the
  dignity of his age and his ancient years and the inbred honour of
  his grey head and his good life and conversation from a child:
  and he answered without delay, according to the ordinances of
  the holy law made by God, saying that he would rather be sent
  into the other world. 24. For it doth not become our age, said
  he, to dissemble: whereby many young persons might think that
  Eleazar, at the age of fourscore and ten years, was gone over to
  the life of the heathens: 25. And so, they, through my
  dissimulation and for a little time of a corruptible life should be
  deceived, and hereby I should bring a stain and a curse upon my
  old age…27. Wherefore, by departing manfully out of this life, I
  shall shew myself worthy of my old age. 28. And I shall leave an
                                                    The Bog Irish 41

  example of fortitude to young men, if with a ready mind and
  constancy I suffer an honourable death, for the most venerable
  and most holy laws. And having spoken thus, he was forthwith
  carried to execution.

Notice that it is not one law, but all the laws for which he dies, and
that the execrable character of pig itself as an animal or form of
food does not enter into the discussion. Nor does it enter into the
next chapter in which seven brothers and their mother were
apprehended and compelled by the King to eat swine’s flesh. In all
the gruesome description of how their tongues were cut out, their
heads scalped and their bodies fried alive in huge frying pans to the
merriment of pagan onlookers, nothing is said whatever about the
abominable character of pig. But after such historic acts of
heroism, no wonder the avoidance of pork became a specially
powerful symbol of allegiance for the Jewish people and so
attracted the later hellenizing exegesis that looked to the moral
attributes of the pig. Whereas this symbol in origin owed its
meaning only to its place in a total pattern of symbols, for which it
came to stand, as a result of its prominence in persecution. We
belong to a generation whose perception of symbols is blurred
except in familiar social contexts. So it may be easier to
sympathize with the irritation of the cook in King Solomon’s
Mines at the unswerving obedience of the Zulu, Umslopogas, to
his dietary laws. If two symbolic systems are confronted, they
begin to form, even by their opposition, a single whole. In this
totality each half may be represented to the other by a single
element which is made to jump out of context to perform this role.
Other people select among our external symbols of allegiance
those which offend or amuse them most. So Shifra Strizower is
right. Further account of the apartness of the people of Israel and
of their beleaguered history would have given more meaning to
their dietary laws. The story of Maccabees teaches that the
Israelites took the purity of the temple and the purity of the human
body to represent adherence to all the details of the law and so a
total turning of each person in his own body and of the whole
nation in the temple and in the law towards God. For when they
cleansed and rebuilt the temple (1 Maccabees iv, 42) ‘he chose
priests without blemish whose will was set upon the law of God’.
The high walls they built around Mount Sion and the strong guard
they set upon their mouths were the symbolic ramparts of their
commitment to their religion.
42 The Bog Irish

   Perhaps it is true that Friday abstinence became a wall behind
which the Catholics in England retired too smugly. But it was the
only ritual which brought Christian symbols down into the kitchen
and larder and on to the dinner table in the manner of Jewish rules
of impurity. To take away one symbol that meant something is no
guarantee that the spirit of charity will flow in its place. It might
have been safer to build upon that small symbolic wall in the hope
that eventually it could come to surround Mount Sion. But we
have seen that those who are responsible for ecclesiastical
decisions are only too likely to have been made, by the manner of
their education, insensitive to non-verbal signals and dull to their
meaning. This is central to the difficulties of Christianity today. It
is as if the liturgical signal boxes were manned by colour-blind
signalmen.
   I will now give some space to the question of Friday abstinence
to demonstrate that there is indeed a clear movement in educated
Catholic circles in England, a move from symbolic to ethical
action. But it is a less important example than my second one, the
change in the attitude to the Eucharist. Friday abstinence was
never anything more than a disciplinary rule. No special
sacramental efficacy was officially imputed to the act, negatively
or positively, whereas the doctrine of the Eucharist is as magically
sacramental as any tribal religion.
   Some anthropologists reading this may be as confused as to the
nature of Friday abstinence from meat as the most benighted of
the faithful. They may even share Goodenough’s belief that the
focus of the ritual is not on penitence, but on a positive celebration
of fish as against meat. He has argued ingeniously (1956:50ff.)
that fish, which Catholic housewives queue for on Fridays, is a
powerful condensed symbol of Christ and that herein lies the true
explanation of the observance. However there is no rule about
eating fish; only a rule about abstaining from flesh meat. In
February 1966 Pope Paul VI issued a decree on fasting and
abstinence. He expounded the tradition of penitence, ‘a religious
and personal act which has as its aim love and surrender to God’.
Citing numerous Old Testament instances of the fast as pleasing to
God, and citing Christ’s example in the New Testament, he
describes acts of penance as ‘participating in a special way in the
infinite expiation of Christ…. Thus the task of bearing in his body
and soul the death of our Lord affects the whole life of the
baptized person at every instant and in every aspect.’ He goes on
to condemn any form of penitence which is ‘purely external’.
                                                   The Bog Irish 43

Recognizing that very different conditions prevail in rich and poor
countries, he proceeds to revise the Church laws on fasting and
abstinence, concentrating them in the season of Lent and
otherwise requiring abstinence only on Fridays. These minimal
penitential days and seasons are intended to ‘unite the faithful in a
common celebration of penitence’. At the same time he invites the
Bishops to substitute wholly or in part other penitential exercises
(Paenitemine, 17 February 1966).
   An article in L’Osservatore Romano (20 February 1966) by W.
Bertrams (a canon lawyer at the Gregorian University) comments
on the decree and gives it a little extra twist away from ritual and
towards ethics and social justice:

  Indeed, the faithful must be taught that the Christian spirit of
  penitence demands also the voluntary privation of things which
  are not absolutely necessary, so that the money which would
  have been spent in obtaining them may be used instead for
  works of charity.

A year later the English hierarchy takes up the invitation to
adapt the penitential legislation to local conditions. A letter is
issued from the Archbishop’s house, Westminster (21 July
1967) seeking the views of all clergy and laity. The letter shows
no sense of history or of the value of symbolic action; moreover
it shows a strange ambivalence to the subject in hand. It starts
firmly by announcing that there is no question of simply
abolishing Friday abstinence, but of asking whether an
obligatory rule of Friday abstinence achieves its purpose today.
What the purpose is, the letter treats very summarily, and goes
on with:

  Some consider that the obligation should be abolished and
  instead Fridays should be marked by prayer, voluntary
  abstinence or other penitential exercises. It is argued that
  obligatory Friday abstinence is not necessarily a penance and
  that modern conditions make it difficult to observe it. For the
  most part, professional and working people have their midday
  meal away from home, often in a canteen. Again, social events
  are often fixed for a Friday. And whilst an alternative dish is
  often available, it is questioned whether it is advisable in our
  mixed society for a Catholic to appear singular in this matter.
  Non-Catholics know and accept that we do not eat meat on
44 The Bog Irish

  Fridays but often they do not understand why we do not, and in
  consequence regard us as odd.

Echoes of the Reformed Synagogue! Arguing that it is not a
hardship to avoid meat, and then adding that there is too much
hardship for those eating away from home and social
embarrassment for those dining out, this seems an inadequate
statement to use for consulting the mind of the faithful. When the
consultation was concluded, the following was issued from
Westminster:

  As respect for the moral law decreases, the need for self-denial
  grows greater. Many Catholics have begun to ask themselves if
  going without meat on Friday is penance enough. Some find it
  no penance at all. Meanwhile, in Asia, Africa and South
  America many Catholics have to go without meat not only on
  Friday but every day. Millions are starving or at least underfed.
     The Bishops have therefore decided that the best way of
  carrying out our Lord’s command to do penance is for each of
  us to choose our own way of self-denial each Friday…
                                             (31 December 1967)

Thus was the old ritual abolished. In the old days the child
admonished to eat his tapioca for the sake of starving millions
would be puzzled to know how this obedience would benefit the
hungry. The problem of how to benefit the hungry by not
abstaining from meat does not arise. The Catholic Institute for
International Relations quickly produced a collecting box marked
‘Friday fund. One meal a day’, and sent it around with an appeal:
‘Friday Apathy or Friday Action: Will you put a little away for
others each Friday? Boxes from CIIR’. Now there is no cause for
others to ‘regard us as odd’. Friday no longer rings the great
cosmic symbols of expiation and atonement: it is not symbolic at
all, but a practical day for the organization of charity. Now the
English Catholics are like everyone else.
   Interestingly, the American bishops did much better (from the
ritualist, anthropological point of view) than the English in their
handling of the same opportunity. There is no down-grading of the
symbolic function, more sense of history, more recognition of the
need for symbolic solidarity with the past and present body of the
Church. Their pastoral statement begins with admirable
directness:
                                                    The Bog Irish 45

  Christ died for us on Friday. Gratefully remembering this,
  Catholic peoples from time immemorial have set apart Friday
  for special penitential observance by which they gladly suffer
  with Christ, that they may one day be glorified with him. This is
  the heart of the tradition of abstinence from meat on Fridays.
  …Changing circumstances, including economic, dietary and
  social elements, have made some of our people feel that the
  renunciation of the eating of meat is not always and for
  everyone the most effective means of practising penance.

Their sense of liturgical continuity comes out in a list of
recommendations which start by saying ‘Friday should be in each
week something of what Lent is in the entire year. For this reason
we urge all to prepare for that weekly Easter by freely making of
every Friday a day of mortification in prayerful remembrance of
the passion of Jesus Christ.’ Thus the liturgical year is
encapsulated in the liturgical week. They go on specially to
commend voluntary abstinence from flesh meat as a means of
observing Friday:

  (a) We shall thus freely and out of love of Christ crucified show
  our solidarity with the generation of believers to whom this
  practice frequently became, especially in time of persecution
  and of great poverty, no mean evidence of fidelity to Christ and
  His Church.
  (b) We shall thus also remind ourselves that as Christians,
  although immersed in the world and sharing its life, we must
  preserve a saving and necessary difference from the spirit of the
  world. Our deliberate personal abstinence from meat, more
  especially because no longer required by law, will be an
  outward sign of inward spiritual values that we cherish.
      (Pastoral statement of Conference of Catholic Bishops on
  Penitential Observance, Washington, D.C., 18 November 1966)

It is easy to recognize in the banality of the English hierarchy’s
attitude the working of the Bernstein effect, surely not among all
the Bishops, but certainly among their advisors. It is puzzling to
know how the American hierarchy came to take a different view of
symbolic action. It is unlikely that their secretariats are not equally
staffed by new men, reared in personal homes and masters of the
elaborated code. It may be that the greater sociological awareness
of the Americans makes the difference. For the sociologist of
46 The Bog Irish

religion would be superficial indeed if he were not aware of the
power of symbols to order experience. No one would deny value in
its own right to the symbolic function who takes time and
perspective to reflect objectively on the issue. Those who belittle it
are responding shortsightedly to their own subjective situation in
home and in society.
   I seem to have taken a very heavy hammer to crack a small
liturgical nut. Friday abstinence is a disciplinary rule, a mere
detail. Although this book is not intended primarily for
anthropologists, I have written about this theme at length for
their interest. For anthropologists often exhort one another to
turn to contemporary religions for their material and particularly
to Christianity. Dietary restrictions are deep in their traditional
subject matter and I wish to show that modern examples are as
susceptible to the modes of analysis we employ as are primitive
ones. Why not? The only difficulty hitherto has been the lack of a
frame of analysis for comparing ourselves and tribal societies
along the series from high magicality to low. In the 1960s
Bernstein’s work on ourselves and Turnbull’s work on the
pygmies enable this framework to be set up. The discussion can
begin.
   Now I turn to the other example of how messages about
symbols issue from the Vatican only to be decoded here as
messages about ethics. The celebration of the Eucharist is central
to Catholic dogma. If this gets bowdlerized, then the tendency
which Herberg describes for denominations to become social
compartments empty of distinguishing doctrines will have worked
its way right through the modern world. Historic, sacramental
Catholicism will have faded out.
   To introduce the problem, I take Pope Paul’s Encyclical letter
Mysterium Fidei (1965). Here he refers, as his reasons for pastoral
concern and anxiety, to current disquieting views on the Eucharist.
Among these, he notes that it is not

  right to be so preoccupied with considering the nature of the
  sacramental sign that the impression is created that the
  symbolism—and no one denies its existence in the most holy
  Eucharist—expresses and exhausts the whole meaning of
  Christ’s presence in this sacrament. Nor is it right to treat of the
  mystery of transubstantiation without mentioning the
  marvellous change of the whole of the bread’s substance into
  Christ’s body and the whole of the wine’s substance into his
                                                   The Bog Irish 47

  blood, of which the Council of Trent speaks, and thereby to
  make these changes consist of nothing but a ‘trans-signification’
  or a ‘trans-finalization’, to use these terms. Nor, finally, is it
  right to put forward and to give expression in practice to the
  view which maintains that Christ the Lord is no longer present
  in the consecrated hosts which are left over when the sacrifice of
  the Mass is over.
                                               (Paul VI, 1965:7–8)

Here is a doctrine as uncompromising as any West African
fetishist’s that the deity is located in a specific object, place and
time and under control of a specific formula. To make the deity
inhabit a material object, whether shrine, mask, juju or piece of
bread, is ritualism at its starkest. The condensation of symbols in
the Eucharist is staggering in its range and depth. The white circle
of bread encompasses symbolically the cosmos, the whole history
of the Church and more, since it goes from the bread offering of
Melchisidech, to Calvary and the Mass. It unites the body of each
worshipper to the body of the faithful. In this compass it expresses
themes of atonement, nourishment and renewal. Such intensive
condensation is hard for anyone to stomach who has had a highly
verbal, personal upbringing. But this is not all. Symbolizing does
not exhaust the meaning of the Eucharist. Its full meaning involves
magical or sacramental efficacy. If it were just a matter of
expressing all these themes, symbolizing and commemorating,
much less blood and ink would have been spilt at the Reformation.
The crux of the doctrine is that a real, invisible transformation has
taken place at the priest’s saying of the sacred words and that the
eating of the consecrated host has saving efficacy for those who
take it and for others. It is based on a fundamental assumption
about the human role in religion. It assumes that humans can take
an active part in the work of redemption, both to save themselves
and others, through using the sacraments as channels of grace—
sacraments are not only signs, but essentially different from other
signs, being instruments. This touches on the belief in opus
operation, the efficacious rite, whose very possibility was denied
by Protestant reformers. In Catholic thought there is an economy
of mediation through the Church, through the sacraments and
especially through the Mass as the Eucharistic counterpart of
Calvary. Dr Francis Clark goes to the root of this question in his
admirable survey, The Eucharistic Sacrifice and the Reformation,
from which I quote now. Protestantism rejected mediation equally
48 The Bog Irish

through the instrument of things as through the instrument of
persons. For Luther, and above all later teachers,

  there was no place for any created reality to mediate to men
  God’s salutary action, nor for the active sharing by men in the
  dispensation of grace. His cardinal objection against the
  traditional doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass was that it was
  a ‘work’, something which belonged to that whole order of
  instrumental mediation and of man’s active participation in the
  economy of grace that was anathema to the Reformer…. The
  celebration of the Lord’s supper was a promise and a testament
  of that pardon to the individual communicant; it could not ‘do’
  anything for others nor could it ‘offer’ anything to God…. In
  the Babylonian Captivity he insisted:

     God does not deal, nor has he ever dealt with man in any
  other way than by the word of his promise. So too we can never
  have dealings with God in any other way than by faith in that
  word of promise.
                                 (Werke, Weimar, VI: 516, 521)

  This radical opposition of inner ‘word’ to sacramental ‘work’ is
  the theological key to the understanding of the storm of
  hostility to the Mass which swept across Europe.
                                              (Clark 1960:106–7)

He goes on to quote Dr J.Lortz, saying:

  It was a direct attack on the traditional sacramental concept, that
  is, against the objectivity of the divine life operative in the
  Church’s liturgy. Here the resolution of Christianity into a
  religion of inner feeling was achieved at the very point at which
  its victory would have the greatest impact. Here was assailed the
  secret centre of the Church’s unity…. For the Catholic Church, it
  was not the attack on the Papacy that was the most fateful event
  which has happened in the Reformation, but the emptying out
  from her Mysteries of the objective source of power.
            (Die Reformation im Deutschland, 2nd edn, I, p. 229,
                                                  quoted ibid.: 107)

No wonder that Pope Paul is worried by contemporary theologians
who whittle down the Eucharist’s meaning and who by ambiguous
                                                     The Bog Irish 49

terms such as ‘trans-signification’ and ‘trans-finalization’ threaten to
reduce it from an efficacious source of power to a mere symbol. Two
years after his Encyclical, the Sacred Congregation of rites issued an
Instruction on the Eucharistic Mystery (1967). Here it propounds
four different modes of Christ’s presence, recognizes them all, but
exalts above all the presence in the Eucharist. Christ is present in the
body of the faithful gathered in his name. He is present in his Word.
He is present in the person of the minister, ‘and above all under the
species of the Eucharist. For in this sacrament Christ is present in a
unique way, whole and entire, God and man, substantially and
permanently.’ This is the message that is sent out. By the time it
reaches the faithful it is emasculated more than somewhat. For the
writers of popular catechisms and prayer books have evidently been
through Bernstein’s personal upbringing. They prefer to expatiate
verbally on their inner feelings, at a cosier, more intimate level. My
comparison with primitive religions would probably disgust them.
Great magical acts of worship, which make humble and noble
analogs congruent in ever more inclusive patterns, leave them cold.
So we find that the New Catechism, in the chapter on the Eucharist,
gives to the doctrine of the real presence only as much attention as it
gives to the commemorative aspect of the rite. It says rather more
about the Eucharist as a thanksgiving, about the togetherness of the
people who celebrate it, and the symbol of the common meal and
nourishment. The doctrine of the transformation of the bread into
divine body is played down and the other modes of Christ’s presence
(particularly the ‘Word’) played up (Higher Catechetical Institute,
Nijmegen, 1967:332–47). They can’t take it, the Dutch bishops who
issued this catechism and the open-minded English teachers who
seize on it as a watered-down expression of a faith that has
practically lost meaning for them. The mystery of the Eucharist is
too dazzlingly magical for their impoverished symbolic perception.
Like the pygmies (I say it again, since they seem often to pride
themselves on having reached some high peak of intellectual
development) they cannot conceive of the deity as located in any one
thing or place.
   But, if my interpretation of Bernstein’s research is right, vast
unlettered flocks scattered over the globe do not share this
disability. By reason of their positional upbringing and social
experience they are capable of responding profoundly to symbols
of orientation and boundary. I will show in Chapter 5 that they
already use their own bodies as symbolic analogs for thinking
about society and the universe. They respond less strongly to
50 The Bog Irish

verbal exposition. They probably feel less need for personal
justification by good works. What is too strong meat for their
pastors is their natural food. ‘The hungry sheep look up and are
not fed.’ There is no question now that the flocks are neglected
by jolly, hunting parsons bent on pleasure. But there seems to be
a case for arguing that serious, well-intending pastors
misunderstand the need for a nourishing food, because it does
not seem to suit their own digestive systems. But this would still
not be pitching the case against them strongly enough. There is
no person whose life does not need to unfold in a coherent
symbolic system. The less organized the way of life, the less
articulated the symbolic system may be. But social responsibility
is no substitute for symbolic forms and indeed depends upon
them. When ritualism is openly despised the philanthropic
impulse is in danger of defeating itself. For it is an illusion to
suppose that there can be organization without symbolic
expression. It is the old prophetic dream of instant, unmediated
communication. Telepathic understanding is good for brief
flashes of insight. But to create an order in which young and old,
human and animal, lion and lamb can understand each other
direct, is a millennial vision. Those who despise ritual, even at its
most magical, are cherishing in the name of reason a very
irrational concept of communication.
   I have dared to compare Christian ritual with magic and
primitive notions of taboo. I am aware that the argument will
hardly serve to recommend ritual to the non-ritualist. Yet his
contempt both for magic and rules of impurity is based on
ignorance. The drawing of symbolic lines and boundaries is a way
of bringing order into experience. Such non-verbal symbols are
capable of creating a structure of meanings in which individuals can
relate to one another and realize their own ultimate purposes.
Learning and perception itself depend on classifying and
distinguishing. Symbolic boundaries are necessary even for the
private organizing of experience. But public rituals which perform
this function are also necessary to the organizing of society. One
could suppose that industrial society, which is organized by
economic exchange, does not need to be activated by symbols
necessary to create solidarity in small communities. This might
account in straight Durkheimian terms for the withering away of
interest in ritualism today. It does not at all account for the lack of
ritual in some tribal societies. But if the argument works for
ourselves there is a dreary conclusion for those who turn to good
                                                     The Bog Irish 51

works to solve problems about their own identity. They are liable to
be frustrated on every count. First, it would seem that they must
give their good causes over to the bureaucratic energies of industrial
organization, or they will have no effect. Second, although any
office or clinic is capable of being organized by positional symbolic
patterns, since these people are incapable of appreciating the vale of
symbolic behaviour they will never be able to arrange their personal
relations so that a structure of non-verbal symbols can emerge. We
all know the seminar chairman who takes a different seat every
week so that no symbols of authority or precedence can invest the
spatial relations of the group. Some of us may even know the small
publisher’s office where the office boy has to be consulted now and
again about the quality of a book and where the manager makes the
tea because it is felt that solidarity requires continuous confusion of
roles. An anthropologist told me that his inhibition against
exercising authority was so strong that his first fieldwork had to be
made extremely difficult by his refusal to employ a servant. These
very people, who prefer unstructured intimacy in their social
relations, defeat their wish for communication without words. For
only a ritual structure makes possible a wordless channel of
communication that is not entirely incoherent.
   The confirmed anti-ritualist mistrusts external expression. He
values a man’s inner convictions. Spontaneous speech that flows
straight from the heart, unpremeditated, irregular in form, even
somewhat incoherent, is good because it bears witness to the
speaker’s real intentions. Either he is not a man who uses speech as
a façade to conceal his thought, or on this occasion there was no
time for polishing it up: incoherence is taken for a sign of
authenticity. In the same way, leaders in a Pentecostal church
compete to demonstrate their holiness by ‘talking with tongues’,
that is by pouring out a stream of incoherent speech. The more
unintelligible, the more evident to the congregation that the gift of
tongues is present. At the same time the anti-ritualist suspects
speech that comes in standard units, polished with constant use;
this is the hard coin of social intercourse, not to be trusted as
expressing the speaker’s true mind.
   In rejecting ritual forms of speech it is the ‘external’ aspect which
is disvalued. Probably all movements of religious renewal have had
in common the rejection of external forms. In Europe Manicheeism,
Protestantism and now the revolt of the New Left, historically they
all affirm the value of the follower’s inside and of the insides of all
his fellow members, together with the badness of everything
52 The Bog Irish

external to the movement. Always we find bodily symbolism
applied, from the values placed on internal and external parts of the
body, on reality and appearance, content and form, spontaneity and
established institutions. David Martin has recently written of
contemporary religious existentialists in these terms:

  Radicals tend to reject ‘religion’ by comparison with the gospel.
  Religion is a complex of institutions built around an idol ‘God’
  who is falsely regarded as an existence alongside other
  existences. The proper use for the word ‘God’ is to refer to the
  qualitative aspect of all existence. Religion obscures Him in
  forms and formulae, ritualizes him sacramentally when in truth,
  He can only be known experimentally and experientially. Only
  thus can He become true for the individual person. Bound up
  with false religion is morality, understood as a body of rules
  rather than as genuine personal responses to the uniquely
  situational character of moral choice…The existentialist
  movement expresses an ageless tension between the experiential
  and the formalized, the objective and the personal, the
  individual and the institutional.
                                           (Martin, 1965:180–81)

Why the elect always carry in themselves a confidence in their own
inner purity and their capacity for direct, unmediated access to
God is something best accounted for by the psychoanalysts. But it
is a paradox of this study that those who most readily despise
ritual should not be exempt from the longing for non-verbal
communication. Melanie Klein, writing of the close contact
between the unconscious of the mother and of the child, said:

  However gratifying it is in later life to express thoughts and
  feelings to a congenial person, there remains an unsatisfied
  longing for an understanding without words—ultimately for the
  earliest relation with the mother.
                                                (Klein, 1963:100)

And again, of an infant’s attitude to the breast of his mother:

  I would not assume that the breast is to him merely a physical
  object. The whole of his instinctual desires and his unconscious
  fantasies imbue the breast with qualities going far beyond the
  actual nourishment it affords.
                                                    The Bog Irish 53

     Footnote: All this is felt by the infant in much more primitive
  ways than language can express. When these pre-verbal
  emotions and phantasies are revived in the transference
  situation, they appear as ‘memories in feelings’, as I would call
  them, and are reconstructed and put into words with the help of
  the analyst.
                                                     (Klein, 1957:5)

If it is true that we are moved all our lives by longings for an ideal,
impossible harmony derived from memories of the initial union
with the mother in the womb, then it is understandable that we
should also idealize non-verbal communication. Alas for the child
from the personal home who longs for non-verbal forms of
relationship but has only been equipped with words and a
contempt for ritual forms. By rejecting ritualized speech he rejects
his own faculty for pushing back the boundary between inside and
outside so as to incorporate in himself a patterned social world. At
the same time he thwarts his faculty for receiving immediate,
condensed messages given obliquely along non-verbal channels.
Chapter 4
Grid and group




It is illuminating to consider ritual as a restricted code. But more
problems arise in applying this insight than I am ready to handle.
Bernstein argues that the restricted code has many forms; any
structured group that is a group to the extent that its members
know one another very well, for example in cricket, science or
local government, will develop its special form of restricted code
which shortens the process of communication by condensing
units into pre-arranged coded forms. The code enables a given
pattern of values to be enforced and allows members to
internalize the structure of the group and its norms in the very
process of interaction. Much of the writings and conference
proceedings of anthropologists, or of every other body of
scholars, would have to be classed as ritualistic or restricted code
in so far as the citing of fieldwork, the reference to (often
impossible) procedures, the footnotes etc., are given as pre-coded
items of social interaction. Allegiances, patronage, clientship,
challenge of hierarchy, assertion of hierarchy and so on, these are
being obliquely and silently expressed along the explicit verbal
channels. If this is so, then Bernstein, by working within the
broad framework of a dichotomy of restricted and elaborated
codes, is at the stage of Durkheim when he distinguished
mechanical and organic solidarity, or of Maine, distinguishing
societies governed by contract or by status. As he himself says,
the distinction between restricted and elaborated codes must be
relative within a given culture or within the speech forms of a
given group. Thus the question of whether there are primitive
cultures in which all speech is in the restricted code is
meaningless, since it ascribes absolute value to the definition.
Bernstein would suppose that in any social group there are some
areas of social life more responsible for policy decisions and more
                                                Grid and group 55

exposed to the need to communicate with outsiders. Therefore in
any tribal system he would expect to find some people who had
been forced to develop a more elaborated code in which universal
principles can be made explicit and meanings detached from a
purely local context. I am not convinced of this myself. If the
situations requiring policy decisions were only part of a repetitive
cycle it would be possible to discuss them fully in terms of
preorganized units of speech. Only the need for innovation in
policy would call forth the effort to use an elaborated speech
code. This question poses intriguing problems of method for the
ethnolinguists. But it is not central to my theme. More pertinent
is how to use the idea of the restricted code to interpret different
degrees of ritualization.
   If ritual is taken to be a form of restricted code, and if the
condition for a restricted code to emerge is that the members of a
group should know one another so well that they share a
common backcloth of assumptions which never need to be made
explicit, then tribes may well vary on this basis. One can well
suppose that the pygmies might never get to know each other
very well. Their social intercourse might be likened in intensity
and structure to that of the provisioners of a French seaside
resort who move down from Paris in June to open their shops
and hotels for the tourist season. They know each other quite
well, there is a field of common assumptions to be sure, but it by
no means exhausts their interests. They could be expected to
develop a restricted code with reference to their local concerns.
So we can also suppose that the pygmies and the Persian nomads
who join their respective hunting or pastoral camps for a season
and may not necessarily be together for next year, use one
restricted code for those of their common concerns to which an
enduring social structure corresponds, and variant forms of
restricted code for communication within their own families.
This analogy from speech codes suggests good reason for the
poverty of ritual forms in the two cases. It fits the Durkheimian
premise that society and God can be equated: to the extent that
society is confused in its structure of relations, to that extent is
the idea of God poor and unstable in content.
   The restricted code is used economically to convey
information and to sustain a particular social form. It is a system
of control as well as a system of communication. Similarly ritual
creates solidarity and religious ideas have their punitive
implications. We would expect this function to be less and less
56 Grid and group

important the less is effective social coherence valued. We cannot
therefore be surprised that the pygmies have not developed the
punitive aspects of religion. They are content with a minimal
level of organization. Here again a range of comparison is
suggested which would predict something about the presence and
absence of ritualism in human societies. We need some way of
comparing the value set on organization and social control. It is
all very well to illustrate my theme by references to exotic tribes.
At some point the problem of comparison must be brought under
control. Not only is it dubious practice to compare preachers
with pygmies. It is just as dubious to compare hunters with
pastoralists, or hunters in Africa with hunters in Australia. I will
try to control this problem of cultural variation by staying as
much as possible within a given culture. But first, the task is to
adapt Bernstein’s diagram of systems of family control. It was
designed to reflect the increasing influence of the division of
labour in industrial society on two variables, speech and
techniques of control. Our first step, then, is to eliminate the
effect of the division of labour by choosing slightly different
variables. Since Bernstein’s work relates to the structure of
London families it is concerned with personal face-to-face
relations. Consequently it needs very little adaptation for tribal
society. His two lines measure different aspects of what he calls
positional behaviour in families. Where the division of labour has
least effect, the speech code and the control system support a
differentiated structure of relations in the family. If we want to
follow his work closely we must first do violence to the subtlety
of his thought. In Bernstein’s diagram (p. 30), speech codes
respond to the pressure exerted from the decision-making areas
at the centre-top of industrial society for more and more verbal
articulateness. Family control systems respond to the same set of
pressures demanding children capable of mastering intellectual
abstractions concerning human behaviour. His quadrant was
designed to show how the two responses are not produced in the
same combination in all sectors of industrial society. The area of
maximum structuring of social relations in the family is on the
left: the area of maximal openness and freedom from structuring
is on the right. In the bottom right the individual emerges as free
as possible from a system of socially structured controls. His
diagram illustrates some effects of a single pressure to move from
the positional to the personal control system. The vertical line
expresses changes in the use of speech. It shows the possibility of
                                                  Grid and group 57

speech being used as an intensifier of positional control, with this
possibility diminishing as the central pressure to be intellectually,
verbally and symbolically free of the local positional structure
develops. The people who have been freed most completely from
structured personal relations are among those most involved in
the complexity of modern industrial structure. Inevitably this
model has to be dismantled to be adapted to tribal society. In
what follows we are working with only a very crude and limping
parody of his idea.
   The task can be simplified if we recall what it is essentially that
he is doing. He is deriving cosmology from control systems, or
rather showing how cosmology is a part of the social bond,
according to the following principles. First, any control system,
since it has to be made reasonable (be justified, validated or
legitimated as Weber put it), must appeal to ultimate principles
about the nature of man and of the cosmos. This applies even at
the family level. Second, that the control system interacts with the
media of control (speech, ritual). Third, that certain consistencies
hold between the coding of the medium and the character of the
control system. That they should match is a long-run prediction. In
a short run the transition process might obscure the match. Our
task starts therefore by identifying the control aspects of the
cosmology.
   Somewhere far away from the level of the English family and
home, some machinery is grinding out a set of social pressures.
Naked power is decently clothed and made legitimate. Its demand
to be made legitimate reaches into the most intimate recesses, even
into the dealings the English mother has with her own child. She
learns to assert her control in certain ways and to justify her
authority by reference to general principles. The child is thus
indoctrinated into the assumptions of his society. His curiosity is
checked or roused, his expectations for himself are set in the most
hidden way—not by the overt doctrines handed out, but by what is
left implicit. Bernstein exposes two implicit world views carried in
our styles of speech. He finds them generated in two
distinguishable systems of control. To match his exercise, we
should look to systems of control and the hidden assumptions
which validate them. We are not ready to deal with how the media
vary. This is for the next chapter. So, leaving aside speech codes, at
this stage I would need to produce a comparison of control
systems which will contrast an entirely personal form of
relationships, unstructured by fixed principles, with a system
58 Grid and group

equivalent to his positional family. We can concentrate, it seems,
upon the interaction of individuals within two social dimensions.
One is order, classification, the symbolic system. The other is
pressure, the experience of having no option but to consent to the
overwhelming demands of other people. Consider order first.
Social relations demand that categories be clarified and
orientations given. Order is the basic requirement for
communication. It could conceivably be possible to compare
symbolic systems according to the clarity of definition given to the
categories used. There is a hint of such a programme in the first
pages of Primitive Classification.

  For us, in fact, to classify things is to arrange them in groups
  which are distinct from each other and are separated by clearly
  determined lines of demarcation…. At the bottom of our
  conception of class there is the idea of a circumscription with
  fixed and definite outlines. Now one could almost say that this
  conception of classification does not go back before Aristotle.
  …Not only has our present notion of classification a history, but
  this history itself implies a considerable pre-history. It would be
  impossible to exaggerate, in fact, the state of indistinction from
  which the human mind developed. Even today a considerable
  part of our popular literature, our myths, and our religions is
  based on a fundamental confusion of all images and ideas. They
  are not separated from each other, as it were, with any clarity.
  …If we descend to the least evolved societies known, those which
  the Germans call by the rather vague term Naturvölker, we shall
  find an even more general mental confusion.
                                  (Durkheim and Mauss, 1903:5–6)

The authors go on to compare this weakness of definition to the
growth of consciousness in the individual from childhood to
adulthood: distinctions when they first appear are fragmentary
and unstable; only gradually does a steady circumscription of
elements of experience lead to classification. However this is not
the basis for a comparison of classification systems which I
propose to use here. I shall take it as axiomatic that the clarity of
bounding of different categories within the total system does not
vary, or that, if it does become fuzzy here and rigid there, this is
not a difference which I wish to take into account. I shall instead
try to compare the overall articulation of the categories which
constitute a world view. A classification system can be coherently
                                                     Grid and group 59

organized for a small part of experience, and for the rest it can
leave the discrete items jangling in disorder. Or it can be highly
coherent in the ordering it offers for the whole of experience, but
the individuals for whom it is available may enjoy access to
another competing and different system, equally coherent in itself,
from which they feel free to select segments here and there
eclectically, not worrying about the overall lack of coherence.
Then there will be conflicts, contradictions and uncoordinated
areas of classification for those people. In effect, loss of coherence
results in a narrowing of the total scope of the classification
system. We can therefore take the scope and coherent articulation
of a system of classification as one social dimension in which any
individual must find himself. I shall call it grid.
   As Durkheim himself has powerfully argued, any given
classification system is itself a product of social relations. Bernstein’s
example of the positional family above shows people putting
pressures on one another in terms of classifications. When the
pressures are strong and when they uphold a set of classifications,
then a process of mutual reinforcement is at work. Such a social
system is likely to remain stable, unless counter-pressures develop
from outside or unless new knowledge weakens the credibility of the
classifications. In either case, the social change will be wrought in
the other dimension, that of action or pressure. To draw the
dimension of grid vertically up from zero towards more and more
comprehensive articulations allows us to consider what absence of
classification would mean. The zero would represent a blank, total
confusion with no meaning whatever. Rulelessness could be anomy,
the suicide’s doubt. It could be the mystic’s moment of dissociation
when all classifications are in abeyance. It could also represent, as
the quotation from Primitive Classification suggested, the child’s
first undifferentiated awareness. To distinguish among these
possibilities a little, let us separate the publicly accepted
classification system from the private one. An increasingly coherent
but entirely private system of classification would point away from
communication with others, eventually to madness. This world of
private thought we draw downwards from zero.
   On the horizontal axis, draw pressure, increasing from zero to
the right. At zero, no demands are made on the individual. He is
free of pressure. This means he is alone. But another case would
have to be located on the vertical line. When pressures and
counter-pressures completely balance out, the point of indecision
would be recorded here. It is the moment before conversion and
60 Grid and group




Diagram 4 Grid and group



commitment. Towards the right he is increasingly under the bond
of other people. For reasons which will be clear later, I call the
tendency towards the maximum personal control the line of group.
A child’s life starts far along that line (since he is completely
controlled by others) and low on the line of grid: as he grows he
may be progressively freed from personal pressures and
progressively indoctrinated in the prevailing classification system.
If he is clever at internalizing the categories and their implications,
he can turn them to his own defence against personal tyranny. He
can even use them to tyrannize. To allow for this, we can extend
the horizontal line from zero to the left. On this side the individual
has escaped pressure from other people. He is exerting pressure on
them.
   Although the public grid of classifications is used by other
people to control the individual, he can evade it if ever the
insulation breaks down. The mutual reinforcing of grid and group
keep the system stable only if it is perfectly insulated. But perfect
insulation is rare and there is some scope for change. We have now
in hand a device which could consider social change as a dynamic
process. We can see the individual under strong pressure to accept
a system of classification which degrades him and commits him to
a life of servitude. We could assess the other options open to him,
and the relative weight of competing pressures. But this is not the
exercise I am attempting. Our problem is to find some relation
between cosmological ideas and characteristics of social relations.
I shall argue that several systems which spread in different patterns
                                                   Grid and group 61

across the diagram are liable to develop recognizable trends in the
way that the universe is constituted. The first task is to investigate
more closely the properties of the chart.
    Above the horizontal line is the area of public classification.
The social system will always be centred here. Close to the line
and below it lie the fringe elements, the marginal sectors of
society: the more to the right they are found, the weaker their
option not to be exploited by others to the left operating the
public system of classifications; towards the left and zero are the
voluntary outcastes, tramps, gipsies, rich eccentrics, or others
who retain their freedom, at a cost. This line across the page
separates the area of conformity from innovation. Given the way
we have defined the vertical dimension we are not suggesting that
anyone is dreaming up new conceptual systems from scratch.
What is private and innovatory is the way the common cultural
categories are articulated. Progress further down that line to
greater coherence of the private philosophy depends on an
accompanying isolation from social pressures. Beyond a certain
point of originality the thinker can give up any reasonable
expectation of his ideas being received. This follows from the
relation between grid and group above the horizontal line of
zero. The framework of institutional life and the distribution of
power is the result of a long-term adaptation between social
pressures and classification. The big push that changes
classification must be big enough to redistribute power as well.
To the far right the fringe area of private thought is socially null.
It is under more pressure than it can exert. Far to the left it is in
high public esteem: hordes of people to the far right would be
applauding each new impulse emanating from the far lower left.
It is worth pausing to consider how a person can be located in
that quadrant. A musician can innovate, a painter, inventors and
writers too. If his idea be ignored, he is still on the right. For most
of his long working life the Flemish painter James Ensor endured
that fate and revenged himself on the public that denied him
honour by cruel caricatures. If successful, though, the innovator
may see the public system of classification change in his own
lifetime. If he wants to stay original, he will have to keep
thinking of something new to surprise them with, or devise a
technique for maximizing the unexpected, as John Cage has done
for his music. To remain free of the public system of
classification, the person needs above all not to covet its rewards.
Every glance he cocks towards the prize-giving juries makes him
62 Grid and group

vulnerable to their criticisms and liable to be sucked into the
general grid. Thus, though it is difficult to stay there, it is
possible for people to pass in their lifetimes through different
points in the bottom left quadrant.
   The bottom right quadrant can be filled for infancy. Here is the
personal family in which the child is controlled by being made
sensitive to an inventory of his parent’s aches and pains: no public
system of classification is used to explain the universe and his
place in it, but (theoretically at least) he is taught to develop a
classificatory system of his own. However, publicly known
categories implicitly underline their behaviour and he is quick to
deduce them as he grows older. It is surely impossible for an adult
to accept heavy social pressure and yet to develop a privately
articulated philosophy. If he wishes to have intellectual privacy he
must inevitably achieve a solitary state, and so the tendency would
be for such a person to move across from right towards the vertical
line of no control.
   This leads us to considering further the relations between the
distribution of power and the coherence of public classifications. It
is axiomatic that a steady pattern of control is needed for a
coherent system of classification. The more distinguishable places
in the control system and the more these are co-ordinated into a
lasting hierarchy of responsibilities, the more the public
classification system differentiates its categories. So a society
spread across the diagram from the highest point mid-way
between public grid and group on the right and across to some
high point mid-way at the top left is a complex social system. Time
depth and corporate institutions are implied in that pattern.
Conversely, one political shake-up makes many classifications
irrelevant and drags down the coherence of the symbolic system;
the expectation of continuing change sets the level lower still. A
society that is spread across the diagram at a low level of
classification is likely to become one that is continually subject to
political upheaval and a changing profile for the distribution of
authority. This will be important for our theme.
   We should now examine the different ways these dimensions
organize our material. Some tribal systems will be spread mostly
through the top right-hand side of the diagram without showing
on the left. A classic instance of high classification which
anthropologists would recognize are the Tallensi of the Volta
Region of Ghana as described by Meyer Fortes in the colonial
period. Here the public system of rights and duties equips each
                                                 Grid and group 63

man with a full identity, prescribing for him what and when he
eats, how he grooms his hair, how he is buried or born. Most
Tallensi, probably all, are under pressure from the others. The
chiefs and priests are no exception. The person whose soul is in
revolt is regarded as abnormal and needing special ritual curing
(Fortes, 1959). In this society piety is the order of the day, piety
towards senior kinsmen and piety to the dead, even though the
ancestors are seen as aggressive punishers. The only enemy is the
rank outsider, bound by no ties of clanship. A few miserable old
women outlawed as witches are either hounded from village to
village or merely tolerated. Who knows their thoughts? If they are
totally mystified by the public grid which rejects them we could
locate them below the horizontal line, though far to the right
where options are weakest. I will argue later that a social system
characterized by high classification would display the same
cosmological bias. Strong grid and strong group will tend to a
routinized piety towards authority and its symbols; beliefs in a
punishing, moral universe, and a category of rejects.
   Any bureaucratic system which is sufficiently secure and
insulated from criticism will tend to think the same way. This is the
monastic life, or the military society. Most clearly it is the stable
tribal system discovered by anthropologists in Africa in the
colonial era just before and after the Second World War. It is no
accident that a functional analysis produced an equilibrium model
of primitive society at that time. For the colonial regime itself
provided the insulation and protection from the effects of war and
famine. It tended to freeze the native social systems into patterns
of reinforcement and stability.
   However the effect was not the same in Central Africa as it was
in Ghana. Here the long nineteenth-century wars with Arabs and
other slave-raiders had already broken up the local social
structures before the colonial freeze came down. The tribes in the
region around Lake Nyasa are very differently characterized in the
writings of the 1950s when labour migration, cash crops, and
taxation accelerated the process of change. Here we also find small
communities. But as to grid they come much lower on the line of
coherent classification than the Tallensi. Their culture promises
them contradictory rewards and holds out impossible goals. They
believe that it is good to be loyal and obedient and never to split a
village into factions. They also believe that the proper ambition of
every man is to become head of his own village—impossible
without disloyalty and friction. They put immense pressure on one
64 Grid and group

another and strive incessantly to define and close the circle of their
friends. Accusations of witchcraft are the political idiom of out-
casting and re-definition of social boundaries. The broad,
normative concept of a human being for whom moral obligations
are binding is contrasted with that of the man-eating witch. To
convict a rival of witchcraft is to finish him politically. This is the
second of the main types of social environment I shall refer to
throughout the book. For convenience I shall call it small group. It
is a social system which clusters low on the right side of the
diagram. Its members know one another and can count their ranks
and prospects of promotion. They are not conscious of remote
control by leaders located far to the left. Hemmed in and face to
face, their destiny is in their own hands and they meet it with
intrigue and jealousy. The contrast of small group with the
previous case of high classification ranges over many aspects. For
example, high classification requires a well-defined category of
rejects and anomalous persons. But small group broadens the
category of potential rejects to include the whole range of
acquaintance, male, female, kinsman and unrelated.
   The third type to distinguish from these two is the society which
spreads widely across our diagram instead of being tidily clustered
on the right. The leaders in the small-group case are down in
among their community, struggling against their peers. In this third
case which I shall call strong grid, the leaders are remote powerful
beings, rarely seen face to face. We shall need to deal separately
with the social environment of the leaders and of those who are
subject to them.
   During the colonial period, for reasons we have suggested,
anthropology was much concerned with the properties of
corporate groups and with rights and duties transmitted down
enduring channels of control. Colonialism itself checked internal
evolution and limited tribal political systems to the mere
replacement of personnel in a fixed pattern of office. But research
in newly independent countries, and above all in newly
discovered New Guinea, has focused attention on what is called
the network of links a man has to a circle radiating out from
himself. In a complex society, networks are the minimum level at
which social relations can be investigated. They are the
sustaining base line of social ties from which corporate
institutions arise. But if corporate organization is so weak that
each man has to muster support ad hoc for every venture, a
system of networks and temporary action-sets may describe the
                                                   Grid and group 65

way the whole society functions. Philip Gulliver has summarized
ably the problems of description and analysis which the
anthropologist faces in such societies (1971). I wish to
concentrate on one of two possible variations of the network. In
the case which Philip Gulliver himself describes, of the
Ndendeule in Tanzania, no person stays in any position of
eminence over others, there are no chiefs and there are no
effective boundaries to the spread of the open network in all
directions. For each man the meanings of society are centred
upon himself but the meanings are the same for him as for others.
By contrast, in other variants, it is possible for leaders to become
effective and to entrench their power in their lifetime at least.
Such a leader will gather his own network of allegiances
powerfully round himself and create a centre offeree for the rest
of society. The Big Man system, as it is called in New Guinea, is
found all over the world, in Indonesia, among northern
Californian Indians, in the Philippines. I take it for my fourth
social type, to contrast with the other patterns. Its interest is the
wide spread across the diagram of grid and group at a low level
of classification. Success breeds. There are few overriding
community interests to check the leader’s impetus. The greater his
influence, the more support he attracts. A positive feedback
propels him further out to the left; it increases the subjection of his
followers, so they move to the right. If his success in wealth and
war encourages him, he may end by eroding their existing system
of obligations and become a law unto himself. Then the inevitable
trend would be to lower the level of classification for everyone in
his orbit. He has made their lineages and ancestral shrines less
meaningful for them than his own favour. The big categories
however, solvency, worth, equity, remain as containers into which
a changing synthesis of meaning is poured from year to year.
However, the leader has to reckon with rivals creeping near to him
in eminence. The world of his peers is a sparse and fluctuating
scene of coalitions. Each is bent on success. If they are realistic,
their followers recognize that right goes with might and line up
accordingly. This type of social system in its various stages has
now been frequently and well described. There are many more
examples from New Guinea. The interesting difference between
them is the range within which the competition of Big Men must
use existing corporate institutions or can override them and in
doing so attaches large parts of the public system of classification
to the whims of the Big Men themselves.
66 Grid and group

   We have now distinguished three types of social environment:
high classification, small group, strong grid which includes the
heroic society of competing Big Men and that of their followers.
The latter come low on the vertical line of classification because
coherence is achieved only at some very general level of
abstraction which is compatible with the syncretizing rivalry of
distant giants. But the spread across the diagram expresses the
strong control which these people experience. Recruited and
harnessed to a competition which seems to hold glittering
rewards for all, they find themselves trying to work a complex
system of rules. In the name of the rules the Big Men justify their
demands. Whether it be rules of monetary exchange, debt and
credit, or rules of etiquette and hospitality, the system constitutes
an oppressive grid. Londoners too know what this can mean. As
a system of control industrial society is impersonal. Some more
than others feel their lives controlled, not by persons, but by
things. They wander through a forest of regulations,
imponderable forces are represented by forms to complete in
triplicate, parking meters, inexorable laws. Their cosmos is
dominated by objects of which they and fellow humans are
victims. The essential difference between a cosmos dominated by
persons and one dominated by objects is the impossibility of
bringing moral pressures to bear upon the controllers: there is no
person-to-person communication with them. Hence the paradox
that some of the people whose metaphysics are most fuzzy and
who respond only to very diffuse symbols—in short, who in their
cosmology are most like pygmies and Arizona peyotists—are
those who are much involved in certain sectors in industrial
society. To this paradox I shall return.
   For the leaders who have spiralled down far to the left the same
impersonal rules of exchange are made like rungs on a ladder of
promotion. The Big Men live in a world of noble pacts, hard
bargains, dastardly betrayals and revenges. Apart from the exotic
cases given, there are examples nearer home. Our ancient Anglo-
Saxon vengeance and inheritance laws defined a set of responsible
kin radiating from each particular individual. The Norse sagas
expressed a corresponding world view.
   With these four social types distinguished it will be possible to
show that they generate distinctive cosmologies. The system of
control is validated by a typical bias in the system of belief. These
tendencies are the subject of this book, for they make their own
typical demands on the media of expression and thus produce
                                                   Grid and group 67

natural systems of symbolic behaviour. A brief summary of the
types of belief would go as follows. With high classification, piety
and sacralized institutions, strong boundaries between purity and
impurity; this is the prototype, the original Durkheimian system in
which God is Society and Society is God, where all moral failings
are at once sins against religion and the community. With small
group there is less confidence in the power of God to protect the
faithful, a dualist cosmology reckons with the power of demons
and their allies; justice is not seen to prevail. Strong grid tends to a
pragmatic world view, sin is less understood than shame for loss of
personal honour, face or solvency. In the first type a profit and loss
calculus applies to the spiritual economy of the whole community;
strong grid focuses on the honour of the individual, the number of
supporters he can summon up, the control he has over his women
folk. Strong grid divides between the heroic society of the Big
Men, and the recurrent millennial tendencies of their subjects.
Finally the positions near and around zero should be specially
noticed. When public classification and pressures are withdrawn
or cast aside, the individual left alone with himself develops a
distinctive cosmology, benign and unritualistic.
   As Durkheim suggested, this experience is the beginning of
consciousness, with all the emotional force that that implies. The
sense of escape from others and of self-discovery is possible with
any shift towards the left of the diagram. Out here, especially
below the vertical line, where the individual is articulating his own
classificatory system, the thinker does not see his fellow human
beings as the principal determinants of social life. Fellow humans
do not put their imprint on the world as models of controlling
influence. In consequence the cosmos is not anthropomorphic.
There is less call for articulate forms of social intercourse and no
need for a set of symbols with which to send and receive specific
communications. Thus we have already identified one area of the
diagram in which there will be less regard for ritual. Furthermore,
it suggests another dimension which is not on the diagram, that
lying between density and sparsity. When populations are sparse
and social relations infrequent, interrupted and irregular, a person
does not have the impression of inhabiting a man-dominated
world. What preoccupations about his fate he may entertain
concern drought, pasture, livestock, movements of game, pests or
growth of crops. He is controlled by objects, not persons. Objects
do not respond to personal modes of approach. Fellow humans are
fellow sufferers.
68 Grid and group

   It is tempting to try to assimilate whole cultures to the general
outlook of individuals dropping to near zero. But sparsity conceals
too many variables; better to stick to those on the diagram. There
is ample material there for explaining the similarity between the
world view of pygmies in the Ituri forest and that of certain
Londoners deeply implicated in industrial society. First we should
turn to the media of social relations. If the pattern of social
relations put their stamp upon speech forms, as Bernstein’s work
shows, they no doubt put a pattern upon non-verbal forms of
communication as well. If the speech forms thus produced
themselves control the kind of social responses possible in a given
social environment, we should expect the usage of the body for
communication to exert a parallel constraint.
Chapter 5
The two bodies




The social body constrains the way the physical body is perceived.
The physical experience of the body, always modified by the social
categories through which it is known, sustains a particular view of
society. There is a continual exchange of meanings between the
two kinds of bodily experience so that each reinforces the
categories of the other. As a result of this interaction the body itself
is a highly restricted medium of expression. The forms it adopts in
movement and repose express social pressures in manifold ways.
The care that is given to it, in grooming, feeding and therapy, the
theories about what it needs in the way of sleep and exercise,
about the stages it should go through, the pains it can stand, its
span of life, all the cultural categories in which it is perceived, must
correlate closely with the categories in which society is seen in so
far as these also draw upon the same culturally processed idea of
the body.
    Marcel Mauss, in his essay on the techniques of the body
(1936), boldly asserted that there can be no such thing as natural
behaviour. Every kind of action carries the imprint of learning,
from feeding to washing, from repose to movement and, above
all, sex. Nothing is more essentially transmitted by a social
process of learning than sexual behaviour, and this of course is
closely related to morality (ibid.: 383). Mauss saw that the study
of bodily techniques would have to take place within a study of
symbolic systems. He hoped that the sociologists would co-
ordinate their approaches with those of perception theory as it
was being developed then by Cambridge psychologists (ibid.:
372). But this is as far as he got, in this gem of an essay, to
suggesting a programme for organizing the study of ‘I’homme
total’.
70 The two bodies

   Whereas Mauss was concerned to emphasize the culturally
learnt control of the body, other scholars, before and after, have
noticed unconscious correspondences between bodily and
emotional states. Psychoanalysis takes considerable account of
what Freud called ‘conversion’ of the emotional into the physical
condition. This insight has had immense therapeutic and
theoretical importance. But the corresponding lessons have not yet
been drawn for sociology. Many scholars have made shrewd
observations of unconscious bodily enactment. I cite as an isolated
example Rudolph Otto’s idea of ‘natural magic’:

  Modes of behaviour exhibiting some simple analogy and
  carried out quite unreflectively and without any basis in
  theory…. It may be noticed on any skittle-alley or bowling-
  green. A bowler aims and plays his ball, wishing it to run true
  and hit the jack. He watches eagerly as it rolls, nodding his
  head, his body bent sideways, stands balancing on one leg, jerks
  over violently to the other side as the critical point is reached,
  makes as though to push the ball on with hand or foot, gives a
  last jerk—and the end is reached. Its hazards past, the ball rolls
  safely into position.
                                              (Otto, 1957:117–18)

Such observations do not remotely approach a general sociological
theory such as Mauss was seeking. Nor, in my opinion, does Edward
Hall’s contemporary research in bodily symbolism amount to a
theory. The Silent Language (1959) deals with well-observed
differences of convention in the use of space, time and gesture. But
that is all. There is no attempt at a hypothesis by which cultural
variations can be explained. Lévi-Strauss’s monumental analysis of
the structure of symbolism does not come much nearer to the
programme enjoined by Mauss. For though he promises to
incorporate into the analysis of symbolic structures culturally
specialized attitudes to mobility and immobility, eating and fasting,
cooking and not cooking and so on, he is seduced away from this
programme by his interest in a universal structure of thought
common to all mankind. He seems to offer a perspective in which
social controls on the human body can be included in a vast psycho-
sociological analysis of controlling schemata (Mythologlques, 1964,
1966, 1968), but he cannot come up with anything interesting about
cultural variations (which are local and limited) since his sights are
set on what is universal and unlimited to any one place or time. His
                                                   The two bodies 71

analysis of symbolism lacks an essential ingredient. It has no
hypothesis. Its predictions are impregnably, utterly irrefutable.
Given the materials for analysis (any limited cultural field), given
the techniques of analysis (selection of pairs of contrasted
elements)—there is no possibility of an analyst going forth to
display the structures underlying symbolic behaviour and coming
home discountenanced. He will succeed, because he takes with him
a tool designed for revealing structures and because the general
hypothesis only requires him to reveal them. He is not asked to
correlate particular kinds of symbolic structures with predicted
social variables. He will inevitably bring out of his research a series
of structured oppositions which are all finally resolvable into the
contrast of culture with nature. Lévi-Strauss has given us a
technique. It is for us to refine it for our own problems. To be useful,
the structural analysis of symbols has somehow to be related to a
hypothesis about role structure. From here the argument will go in
two stages. First, the drive to achieve consonance in all levels of
experience produces concordance among the means of expression,
so that the use of the body is co-ordinated with other media. Second,
controls exerted from the social system place limits on the use of the
body as medium.
   The first point is a familiar principle of aesthetics. The style
appropriate to any message will co-ordinate all the channels along
which it is given. The verbal form, syntactically and lexically, will
correspond to the kind of situation to be expressed; tautness,
slackness, slowness, speed, will give further information of a non-
verbal kind; the metaphors selected will add to the meaning, not
diminish it.

  Then let us give praise to the Lord, brethren, by our lives and by
  our speech, by our hearts and by our voices, by our words and
  by our ways. For the Lord wants us to sing Alleluia to Him in
  such a way that there may be no discord in him who gives
  praise. First, therefore, let our speech agree with our lives, our
  voice with our conscience. Let our words, I say, agree with our
  ways, lest fair words bear witness against false ways.

So preached Augustine in Carthage in the year 418. The sermon is
quoted more fully by Auerbach and analysed as an example of a
peculiar kind of rhetoric (Auerbach, 1965:27–36). Augustine’s
problem was how to present the enormously difficult paradox of
Christianity as if it were something obvious and acceptable. He
72 The two bodies

tried to solve it by combining the grand sweep of Ciceronian
rhetoric with robust simplicity. Cicero had taught that there are
three distinct levels of style, the sublime, the intermediate and the
lowly; each level was supposed to belong to its own class of subject
matter, so that some situations and things were noble in themselves
and should be spoken of in the sublime manner and others too
humble for anything but the lowly style. The unquestioned
assumptions on which such values could be assigned imply a
restricted code. But Augustine argued that Christianity turned all
previous values around: the most humble objects became sublime.
He therefore proceeded to detach the styles of rhetoric from classes
of things and acts and related them firmly to the social relations
holding between speaker and listener. The sublime style was for
rousing emotions, the intermediate for administering praise or
blame and the lowly for teaching. It is wholesome for
anthropologists struggling to interpret ritual to recall this long
tradition of inquiry into the relation of style to subject matter and
social relations. Auerbach’s book is devoted to the study of what
changes in the traditional form of discourse occurred under the
impact of Christian ideas. Note too that the lowly style was called
lingua humilis, related to humus, soil, and meaning literally low,
low-lying and of small stature. Christian teaching attacked the
established pattern of values by mixing the humble style with the
sublime. So the manner itself in which the message was given
added more of the same meaning. In the same way Barthes (1967)
writes of a French editor of a revolutionary journal opening his
editorial with a sprinkling of obscenities. They were only relevant
to the matter being discussed in that their style had the same
revolutionary impact. In any kind of communication whatever, if
more than one band is being used, ambiguity would result if there
was no smooth co-ordination of meanings. Hence we would
always expect some concordance between social and bodily
expressions of control, first because each symbolic mode enhances
meaning in the other, and so the ends of communication are
furthered, and second because, as we said earlier, the categories in
which each kind of experience is received are reciprocally derived
and mutually reinforcing. It must be impossible for them to come
apart and for one to bear false witness to the other except by a
conscious, deliberate effort.
   Mauss’s denial that there is any such thing as natural behaviour
is confusing. It falsely poses the relation between nature and
culture. Here I seek to identify a natural tendency to express
                                                  The two bodies 73

situations of a certain kind in an appropriate bodily style. In so far
as it is unconscious, in so far as it is obeyed universally in all
cultures, the tendency is natural. It is generated in response to a
perceived social situation, but the latter must always come clothed
in its local history and culture. Therefore the natural expression is
culturally determined. I am merely relating what has long been
well known of literary style to the total bodily style. Roland
Barthes gives a contemporary description of style as a non-verbal
channel of meaning.

  Imagery, delicacy, vocabulary spring from the body and the past
  of the writer and gradually become the very reflexes of his art.
  Thus under the name of style a self-sufficient language is
  evolved which has its roots only in the depths of the author’s
  personal and secret mythology, that sub-nature of expression
  where the first coition of words and things takes place, where
  once and for all the great verbal themes of his existence come to
  be installed whatever its sophistication. Style has always
  something crude about it: it is a form with no clear destination,
  the product of a thrust, not an intention, and, as it were, a
  vertical and lonely dimension of thought…. It is the private
  portion of the ritual, it rides up from the writer’s myth-laden
  depths and unfolds beyond his area of control.
                                            (Barthes, 1967:16, 17)

Such bodily styles as we are writing of arise spontaneously but are
also interpreted in the same spontaneous way. Read the impression
made by John Nelson Darby, a leader of the Brethren movement in
the 1820s:

  A fallen cheek, a bloodshot eye, crippled limbs resting on
  crutches, a seldom-shaved beard, a shabby suit of clothes and a
  generally neglected person, at first drew pity, with wonder to
  see such a figure in a drawing-room…. With keen logical
  powers, he had warm sympathies, solid judgment of character,
  thoughtful tenderness and total self-abandonment. He before
  long took Holy Orders, and became an indefatigable curate in
  the mountains of Wicklow. Every evening he sallied forth to
  teach in the cabins, and roving far and wide over mountains
  and amid bogs, was seldom home before midnight…. He did
  not fast on purpose, but his long walks through wild country
  and indigent people inflicted on him much severe deprivation….
74 The two bodies

  Such a phenomenon intensely excited the poor Romanists, who
  looked on him as a genuine ‘saint’ of the ancient breed. The
  stamp of heaven seemed to them clear in a frame so wasted by
  austerity, so superior to worldly pomp and so partaking in their
  indigence…. I was at first offended by his apparent affectation
  of a careless exterior. But I soon understood that in no other
  way could he gain equal access to the lower and lowest orders,
  and that he was moved not by asceticism, nor by ostentation,
  but by a self-abandonment fruitful of consequences.
                       (Quoted from Francis William Newman, in
                                              Coad, 1968:25, 26)

Note how the word self-abandonment occurs twice in this passage.
Nelson Darby through all his life wrote against organization as if
it were the greatest betrayal and sin for the Brethren to organize
themselves into a Church (ibid.: 127).
   Now for the second stage of the argument. The scope of the
body as a medium of expression is limited by controls exerted
from the social system. Just as the experience of cognitive
dissonance is disturbing, so the experience of consonance in layer
after layer of experience and context after context is satisfying. I
have argued before that there are pressures to create consonance
between the perception of social and physiological levels of
experience (Douglas, 1966:114–28). Some of my friends still find
it unconvincing. I hope to bring them round by going much
further, following Mauss in maintaining that the human body is
always treated as an image of society and that there can be no
natural way of considering the body that does not involve at the
same time a social dimension. Interest in its apertures depends on
the preoccupation with social exits and entrances, escape routes
and invasions. If there is no concern to preserve social boundaries,
I would not expect to find concern with bodily boundaries. The
relation of head to feet, of brain and sexual organs, of mouth and
anus are commonly treated so that they express the relevant
patterns of hierarchy. Consequently I now advance the hypothesis
that bodily control is an expression of social control—
abandonment of bodily control in ritual responds to the
requirements of a social experience which is being expressed.
Furthermore, there is little prospect of successfully imposing
bodily control without the corresponding social forms. And lastly,
the same drive that seeks harmoniously to relate the experience of
physical and social, must affect ideology. Consequently, when once
                                                 The two bodies 75

the correspondence between bodily and social controls is traced,
the basis will be laid for considering co-varying attitudes in
political thought and in theology.
   This approach takes the vertical dimension of experience more
seriously than the current trend in the structural analysis of
symbolism which requires meanings to be found horizontally, as it
were, by the relation of elements in a given pattern. It is what
Rodney Needham, following the phenomenologists and Bachelard,
has called analysis in depth (1967:612). In linguistics it may well
have been a blind alley to seek to interpret the selection of sounds
by reference to their physical associations. Structural analysis of
language has foregone considering whether sibilants have
onomatopoeic associations with running water, snakes and the
like. Structural analysis should, perhaps, not be interested in the
psychological significance, or social, of a particular symbol. But
when anthropologists apply this technique to the analysis of ritual
and myth, the vertical references to physical and social experience
are generally slipped in, without apology, as extensions of the total
structure. Surely the account we take of the vertical dimensions of
analysis must be made explicit, in order to understand the basis of
natural symbols. A study of anti-ritualism must focus on the
expression of formality and informality. It seems not too bold to
suggest that where role structure is strongly defined, formal
behaviour will be valued. If we were to proceed to analyse a range
of symbolism under the general opposition of formal/informal we
would expect the formal side of every contrasted pair to be valued
where role structure is more dense and more clearly articulated.
Formality signifies social distance, well-defined, public, insulated
roles. Informality is appropriate to role confusion, familiarity,
intimacy. Bodily control will be appropriate where formality is
valued, and most appropriate where the valuing of culture above
nature is most emphasized. All this is very obvious. It goes without
saying that any individual moves between areas of social life where
formality is required and others where it is inappropriate. Great
discrepancies can be tolerated in differently defined sectors of
behaviour. And definition may be in terms of time, place or
dramatis personae, as Goffman showed when he considered what
criteria women use to decide when it is and is not permissible to
walk in the street in slippers and hair nets (1971:127). Some
individuals groom their whole appearance to the same pitch of
formality, while others are careful here and relaxed there. James
Thurber once remarked that if some writers dressed as carelessly
76 The two bodies

as they wrote they would be prosecuted for indecency. This range
of personal experience can build up a demand for more and more
formal symbols of distance and power where a crescendo is held
appropriate—and vice versa a diminuendo in symbols of formality
on other occasions. The need and ability to switch from the one set
of symbols to its contrary is often discussed in terms of reversals.
But here I am concerned not with reversal, but with the possibility
of a fading out of control, a general détente, and its symbolic
expression.
   So far we have given two rules: one, the style appropriate to
a message will co-ordinate all the channels; two, the scope of
the body acting as a medium is restricted by the demands of the
social system to be expressed. As this last implies, a third is that
strong social control demands strong bodily control. A fourth is
that along the dimension from weak to strong pressure the
social system seeks progressively to disembody or etherealize
the forms of expression; this can be called the purity rule. The
last two work together, so I shall deal briefly with purity first,
before illustrating how they dictate the bodily media of
expression.
   Social intercourse requires that unintended or irrelevant organic
processes should be screened out. It equips itself therefore with
criteria of relevance and these constitute the universal purity rule.
The more complex the system of classification and the stronger the
pressure to maintain it, the more social intercourse pretends to
take place between disembodied spirits. Socialization teaches the
child to bring organic processes under control. Of these, the most
irrelevant and unwanted are the casting-off of waste products.
Therefore all such physical events, defecation, urination, vomiting
and their products, uniformly carry a pejorative sign for formal
discourse. The sign is therefore available universally to interrupt
such discourse if desired, as the editor of the revolutionary journal
mentioned above knew. Other physiological processes must be
controlled if they are not part of the discourse, sneezes, sniffs or
coughs. If not controlled, formal framing-off procedures enable
them to be shorn of their natural meaning and allow the discourse
to go on uninterrupted. Lastly, and derived from the purity rule,
are two physical dimensions for expressing social distance; one is
the front-back dimension, the other the spatial. Front is more
dignified and respect-worthy than back. Greater space means
more formality, nearness means intimacy. By these rules an
ordered pattern is found in the apparently chaotic variation
                                                  The two bodies 77

between diverse cultures. The physical body is a microcosm of
society, facing the centre of power, contracting and expanding its
claims in direct accordance with the increase and relaxation of
social pressures. Its members, now riveted into attention, now
abandoned to their private devices, represent the members of
society and their obligations to the whole. At the same time, the
physical body, by the purity rule, is polarized conceptually against
the social body. Its requirements are not only subordinated, they
are contrasted with social requirements. The distance between the
two bodies is the range of pressure and classification in the society.
A complex social system devises for itself ways of behaving that
suggest that human intercourse is disembodied compared with that
of animal creation. It uses different degrees of disembodiment to
express the social hierarchy. The more refinement, the less
smacking of the lips when eating, the less mastication, the less the
sound of breathing and walking, the more carefully modulated the
laughter, the more controlled the signs of anger, the clearer comes
the priestly-aristocratic image. Since food takes a different place in
different cultures this general rule is more difficult to see at work
in table manners than in habits of dress and grooming.
   The contrast of smooth with shaggy is a member of the general
set of symbolic contrasts expressing formal/informal. Shaggy hair,
as a form of protest against resented forms of social control, is a
current symbol in our own day. There is no lack of pop-sociology
pointing a moral which is fully compatible with my general thesis.
Take the general run of stockbrokers or academics; stratify the
professional sample by age; be careful to distinguish length of hair
from unkempt hair; relate the incidence of shagginess in hair to
sartorial indiscipline. Make an assessment under the division
smooth/shaggy of other choices, preferred beverages, preferred
meeting-places and so on. The prediction is that where the choices
for the shaggy option cluster, there is least commitment to the
norms of the profession. Or compare the professions and trades
one against another. Those which are aiming at the centre top,
public relations, or hair dressing, and those which have long been
fully committed to the main morality, chartered accountants and
the law, they are predictably against the shaggy option and for the
smooth drink, hair style, or restaurant. Art and academia are
potentially professions of comment and criticism on society: they
display a carefully modulated shagginess according to the
responsibilities they carry. But how shaggy can they get? What are
the limits of shagginess and bodily abandon?
78 The two bodies

   It seems that the freedom to be completely relaxed must be
culturally controlled. What do we make, therefore, of the fact that
most revivalist movements go, in an early phase, through what
Durkheim called ‘effervescence’? Emotions run high, formalism of
all kinds is denounced, the favoured patterns of religious worship
include trance or glossalalia, trembling, shaking or other
expressions of incoherence and dissociation. Doctrinal
differentiation is deplored. The movement is seen to be universal in
potential membership. Generally the stage of effervescence gives
way to various forms of sectarianism or to the growth of a religious
denomination. But it is not true that effervescence must either be
routinized or fizzle out. It is possible for it to be sustained
indefinitely as the normal form of worship. The only requirement is
that the level of social organization be sufficiently low and the
pattern of roles sufficiently unstructured. We do not have to look for
strain, change, deprivation or tension to account for effervescent
religious forms. They can be found in steady state religions. Talcott
Parsons’s definition of the contrast of structured and unstructured
helps to identify those tribes which celebrate social solidarity by the
greatest abandonment of conscious control.

       In a highly structured situation there are a minimum of possible
       responses other than the ones required by the norms of the
       situation; adaptation is carefully defined; and usually the
       situation is not very confusing psychologically.
                                       (Parsons and Smelser, 1956:236)

The less highly structured, the more the value on informality, the
more the tendency to abandon reason and to follow panics or
crazes, and the more the permitted scope for bodily expressions of
abandonment. We can summarize the general social requirements
for ritualism on the one hand and effervescence on the other:

SOCIAL DIMENSION                    SYMBOLIC ORDER
A    Conditions for Ritualism
 (i) high classification, strong    condensed symbolic system;
     control                        ritual differentiation of roles
                                    and situations magical efficacy
                                    attributed to symbolic acts (e.g. sin
                                    and sacraments)
(ii)     assumption that inter-     symbolic distinctions between
         personal relations must    inside and outside
         be subordinate to public
         pattern of roles
                                                      The two bodies 79

(iii) society differentiated and      symbols express high values set on
      exalted above self              control of consciousness
B     Conditions for
      Effervescence
 (i) weak control by grid and         diffuse symbols; preference for
      group                           spontaneous expression, no interest
                                      in ritual differentiation; no
                                      magicality
(ii)  little distinction recognized   no interest in symbolic expressions
      between interpersonal and       of inside/outside
      public patterns of relations
(iii) society not differentiated      control of consciousness not
      from self                       exalted

The second case provides the social conditions for a religion of
ecstasy as distinct from a religion of control. Ethnographic reading
suggests that the attitude to consciousness is not merely neutral, as I
have written it here, but that there is a positive affirmation of the
high value of consciousness whenever the corresponding social
structure demands control of individual behaviour. So we tend to
find trance-like states feared as dangerous where the social
dimension is strongly controlled. According to my general
hypothesis, the inarticulateness of the social organization in itself
gains symbolic expression in bodily dissociation. The religious cult
of trance is material especially suitable to the present thesis. When it
occurs at all, the reporting tends to use very vivid language, the
ethnographer trying to convey something of ecstasy or fear. The
general atmosphere and mood are on record. It is usually quite clear,
when trance takes place, what the onlookers think about it. Among
the Samburu trance occurs regularly, but is not part of religion, no
beliefs are connected with it (Spencer, 1965:263). Among Nuer, it is
held to be dangerous; among Dinka it is held beneficent. Trance is a
good point on which to test my hypothesis. The prediction is that, as
trance is a form of dissociation, it will be more approved and
welcomed the weaker the structuring of society.
   Raymond Firth has distinguished three kinds of trance states.
To his classification I will add a fourth class. His series runs
from minimum to maximum control by the human group of an
invading spirit. First, there is spirit possession in which a
human passively loses control to the spirit. The latter is in
power. The friends of the possessed person try to pacify it and
send it away. Then there is spirit mediumship, in which the
invading spirit speaks through the possessed person, and the
80 The two bodies

group tries to get occult information and power from it. Third
is shamanism. Here the spirit is to a large extent domesticated
and made to do the will of the human host (Firth, 1967:296).
Significantly, perhaps, an entirely distinct category of trance
has been omitted. It may happen that the human person loses
consciousness, but the state is not regarded as undesirable or
dangerous; the onlookers may make no attempt to control and
try to use, nor to change the state, pacify or send away the
invading influence. They assume that it is a channel of benign
power for all. This is the positive cult of trance as such. I would
only expect it to take place in the main morality cult where
social life comes closer to the zero. Let me give two vividly
described examples which are worth quoting.
   The Western Dinka pay cult to the divinity, Flesh, which
manifests itself in a red light. A hymn begins: The Flesh kindles
like fire. Yet Flesh confers judgement and truth, it shows itself in a
cool heart, peacefulness, harmony and order. Godfrey Lienhardt
describes a sacrifice thus:

  As the invocations proceeded, the legs of some of the masters of
  the fishing-spear began to tremble, a trembling which came
  from the quivering of the upper leg and thigh. This, it was said,
  was the divinity Flesh, which was beginning to awaken (pac) in
  their bodies.
     The divinity Flesh was specially manifested in this
  quivering of the legs and thighs, which sometimes spreads
  further to the whole body. The masters of the fishing-spear
  continued to invoke with the mounting force of Flesh in
  them. They did not become ‘hysterically’ possessed, as do
  those who are possessed by free-divinities. Two young men,
  members of these spearmaster clans though not themselves
  masters of the fishing-spear, then also began to show signs of
  the ‘awakening’ of Flesh in them. They were much less
  controlled, and their arms and legs were soon trembling
  violently. One was sitting, one standing, and both gazed
  blankly before them with their eyes open and turned slightly
  upwards. It was possible to go up to them and stare closely
  into their faces without either registering that he saw
  anything.
     Nobody at this stage paid much attention to them; it was
  said that when thus possessed by Flesh in the homestead, they
  were safe, and that if the condition persisted for too long the
                                                The two bodies 81

  women would put an end to it by venerating the divinity Flesh
  in their bodies, giving those possessed by it their bangles, and
  kissing their hands. Later, women did kiss the hands of these
  possessed men, but bangles were not offered.
     As the invocations increased in speed and intensity an older
  man became overpowered by the divinity Flesh, and staggered
  about among the invoking masters of the fishing-spear, slapping
  and leaning on the bull-calf and jostling people. His behaviour
  was that of a man who is very giddy. At this stage visiting
  masters of the fishing-spear were in turn pouring libations of
  milk from a ring-decorated gourd over the peg to which the calf
  was tethered. Each made his libation, kissing his own hands
  before and after handling the gourd of the Flesh, the gourd
  reserved for libations to this divinity. When one master of the
  fishing-spear returned from this act of veneration, he told me
  that his own Flesh was ‘waking up’, though he behaved with
  self-control for the rest of the ceremony.
     The mounting or awakening of the divinity Flesh in the
  body seems to be a well-known sensation to all adult male
  members of spear-master clans. Females do not have it. A
  Christian Dinka of the Pakwin clan told me that he dared not
  draw near when a beast was being sacrificed to his clan-
  divinity, as the awakening of the Flesh in him brought on a
  sensation of faintness, which might result in his falling
  unconscious.
                                           (Lienhardt, 1961:136–8)

The veneration of the divinity Flesh in the bodies of those who
manifest it, at least from the ethnographer’s viewpoint, is the most
solemn religious act of these people.
   Here is an account of a possession cult in which the invading
spirit is not feared, not pacified or driven off, not made use of as
an oracle, nor for healing specific sickness. The visitation of the
spirit is respectfully venerated, the presence is sought for its own
sake, for an unmediated form of communion between a god and
his worshippers.
   But what can I say of the social structure of the Western Dinka
which would relate their cult of trance to my argument? Nothing
but a close examination of grid and group as they apply to these
Dinka, and to other Dinka and to other Nilotes in their region, will
be relevant. It should turn out that these Dinka are less closely
controlled by social constraints than other peoples sharing the
82 The two bodies

same cultural postulates but differing in their attitude to trance.
This I will broach in the next chapter.
   After this, it is easy to recognize a rather more ambivalent
attitude to trance. According to Lorna Marshall the !Kung
Bushmen of the Nyae-Nyae region of the Kalahari desert
consider total unconsciousness as dangerous, but intermediate
stages of semi-conscious trance they hold to be the proper
means of procuring health and blessing. Their ceremonial
curing dance is the one religious act which has form and in
which the people are united. Its purpose is general: to cure
sickness and drive away evil. The men wear rattles; the women
clap loudly and sharply.

  The clapping and stamping are of such precision that they
  give the effect of a well-played battery of percussion
  instruments producing a solid structure of intricate rhythm.
  Above the percussion sounds, the voices of the men and
  women weave together in parts, singing the ‘medicine
  songs’…. After several dances have been danced the medicine
  men begin to cure. Almost all the !Kung men are medicine
  men. They do not all choose to practise, for one reason or
  another, but there are always several in a band who are
  active. Medicine men receive no rewards other than their
  inner satisfactions and emotional release. I know that some
  of them feel a deep responsibility for the welfare of their
  people and great anxiety and concern if their curing fails,
  and a corresponding satisfaction if it prevails. Others of
  them appear to be less concerned about the people whom
  they try to cure and more inwardly turned. When the
  medicine men are curing, all of them experience varying
  degrees of self-induced trance, which includes a period of
  frenzy and a period of semi-consciousness or deep
  unconsciousness. They may become stiff or froth at the
  mouth or lie still as if in coma. Some of them habitually
  remain in trance for only a short time, others for hours. One
  man used to remain in a semi-trance for most of the day
  following a dance…. After the curing has been going on for
  some time, medicine men begin to reach their state of frenzy.
  They no longer go around to the people, their spasms of
  grunting and shrieking become more frequent and violent,
  their stomachs heave, they stagger and sway. They rush to
  the fire, trample it, pick up the coals, set fire to their hair.
                                                  The two bodies 83

  Fire activates the medicine in them. People hold them to keep
  them from falling and beat out the flames…they may fall into
  deep unconsciousness or sink down semi-conscious, eyes
  closed, unable to walk.
     The medicine men who have not reached their full frenzy or
  who have passed through it attend to those who are in it. The
  !Kung believe that at such a time the medicine man’s spirit
  leaves his body and goes out…. They call this ‘half-death’. It is a
  dangerous time and the man’s body must be watched over and
  kept warm. The medicine men lean over the one who is in
  trance. They shriek and gurgle. They blow in his ears to open
  them. They take sweat from their armpits and rub him. Some
  fall over him in trance themselves and are in turn rubbed and
  cared for by the others. The women must sing and clap ardently
  while the man is in deep trance. He needs the good medicine of
  the music to protect him.
     The curing dance draws people of a Bushman band together
  into concerted action as nothing else does. They stamp and clap
  and sing with such precision that they become like an organic
  being. In this close configuration—together—they face the
  gods. They do not plead, as they do in their individual
  supplications, for the favour of the divine, all-powerful beings,
  and do not praise them for their goodness. Instead, the medicine
  men, on behalf of the people, releasing themselves from
  ordinary behaviour by trance and overcoming fear and
  inaction, throw themselves into combat with the gods and try to
  force them with hurled sticks and hurled words to take away
  the evils they might be bringing.
                                         (Marshall, 1962:248–51)

Here, though trance is courted and held to be benign in effect, it is
not regarded as altogether safe. Several new intensive studies of
other Bushmen bands are now being made. These may give an
opportunity for the comparisons within a given social environment
which I am hoping will test my thesis. I would ask for study of the
positive cult of trance among different Bushmen groups to work
out detailed variations along the lines of social control by grid and
group. As to the cult of trance itself, I would ask about the way the
roles are distributed: whether it is practised by all, by all males or
by all females, by specialists chosen by birth or by trained and
initiated specialists. About the trance state, I would be interested
in attitudes to varying degrees of bodily control and abandonment,
84 The two bodies

their danger, whether to the person in trance or to others. About
the beneficent powers attributed to trance, I would ask how
general or how specific they are held to be. I would expect more
highly specialized trance roles, more sense of danger in trance,
more specific, narrowly defined benefits attributed to trance where
social control by grid and group is more intense. Referring back to
the diagram of the last chapter, shifts towards zero should allow
the body a fuller range of expression for a smaller range of
intentions. Its full abandon is made available in this direction.
   Where trance is not regarded as at all dangerous, but as a
benign source of power and guidance for the community at large, I
would expect to find a very loosely structured community, group
boundaries unimportant, social categories undefined, or distant
control but impersonal rules strong. Take for example Calley’s
(1965) account of West Indian sects in London. The rule of
limiting the comparison to persons interacting in the same social
field would certainly allow me to compare their bodily techniques
of expression with Pentecostalists in Trinidad or Jamaica where
they share a cultural tradition. But I should also be able to
compare them with the transport workers and others with whom
they interact, at work or in pubs and labour exchanges in London.
Calley finds that the theory of compensation for poverty and
distress does not explain the religious behaviour of West Indians,
who were materially richer in London than at home. But his
account of these London Pentecostal churches gives a clear picture
of the fluid, ever-shifting social units to which individuals were so
loosely attached. A founding minister of a new Church had a hard
task to maintain a stable congregation. Rivalries easily led to a
splitting into two or more groups. The temporary tenure of their
meetingplaces (ibid.: 107) corresponded to the temporary tie of
individuals with their work (ibid.: 140). Calley implicitly makes
the comparison with the tendencies to fission and fusion in
primitive society. But I shall simply compare their state of social
flux with the steady allegiances of the Londoners among whom
they lived. For the Pentecostalists, as the name implies, the greatest
gift of the Holy Spirit is the gift of tongues, which gives insight,
foresight and healing. But, paradoxically, the gift of tongues is
recognized by totally inarticulate gabbling of Allelujahs. The more
he is inarticulate the more proof that the speaker is unconscious
and not in control of what is being imparted to him.
Inarticulateness is taken as evidence of divine inspiration. So also
are ‘dancing in the Spirit’, involuntary twirling and prancing, and
                                                The two bodies 85

involuntary twitching and shuddering taken to be a sign of
blessing (ibid.: 80–1).
    I imagine the English in this same environment spend their
Sunday mornings polishing their cars, or neatly trimming their
lawns and window boxes, or correctly repeating the Lord’s
Prayer in unison. Compared with these English, these West
Indians are weakly structured in several senses. Their groups are
ill-defined; they have no common provenance from a single
country of origin, no common organization; amongst themselves
their social categories are weakly formed, their allegiance to local
groupings undetermined; in relation to the other inhabitants of
their London environment they have few close or permanent
contacts with the representatives of power and authority. There
are few West Indian school teachers, policemen, social workers.
By contrast the non-West Indians with whom they come into
more than casual contact are more clearly categorized and have
more permanent attachments to jobs and homes, and often a
more secure relation with the sources of control. On my thesis, it
is expected that the London West Indians should favour symbolic
forms of inarticulateness and bodily dissociation more than the
Londoners with whom they interact. Their religion is not a
compensation, but a fair representation of the social reality they
experience. If this general correlation between social and bodily
forms of control is to be a useful insight, it must be made clear
that it does not predict anything about the occurrence of
physiologically defined trance states. It is a prediction about
attitudes to bodily dissociation and whereas the attitudes can be
assessed by the ethnographer, the degree of bodily dissociation
has to be taken in the first instance as a construct of the local
culture. It would be inconsistent with the whole argument about
the culturally conditional experience of the body if we seemed to
be asserting something absolute about the place of trance in
religion. What I am saying is that the full possibilities of
abandoning conscious control are only available to the extent
that the social system relaxes its control on the individual. This
has many implications for the deprivation approach to religious
behaviour. For religious movements which take this form are
expressing social solidarity without differentiation: the question
of whether this state occurs as a result of deprivation must be
considered separately in each instance.
    We can add this case to other ranges of symbolic behaviour in
which a tendency to replicate the social situation is observed. Van
86 The two bodies

Gennep (1960) first discerned the common form in all ceremonies
of transition. Where the transfer from one social status to another
is to be expressed he noted how material symbols of transition
were inevitably used and also how the rite itself takes the form of
preliminary separation from and re-integration into the
community. As this applies across cultural boundaries it is a
natural symbolic form. At a more profound level, the social
experience of disorder is expressed by powerfully efficacious
symbols of impurity and danger. Recently I have argued that the
joke is another such natural symbol (Douglas, 1968c). Whenever
in the social situation, dominance is liable to be subverted, the joke
is the natural and necessary expression, since the structure of the
joke parallels the structure of the situation. In the same sense, I
here argue that a social structure which requires a high degree of
conscious control will find its style at a high level of formality,
stern application of the purity rule, denigration of organic process
and wariness towards experiences in which control of
consciousness is lost.
    A friend, criticizing the first version of this argument,
reproached me for trying to stand Freud on his head. I am indeed
insisting that the social imagery which the body carries be
recognized. This is not reversing or taking anything away from
psychoanalytic theory but expanding the social perspective in
which it is set. Psychoanalysis takes account of a very restricted
social field. It makes of parents and siblings the social framework
into which all subsequent relationships are slotted. The restriction
gives it great theoretical elegance and power. But it is difficult to
extend its categories in a controlled way to the wider experience of
society. Those who have tried a macro-application of
psychoanalytic theory to nations and cultures can interpret
imaginatively as they will; anyone else is free to come up with a
contrary diagnosis of the same events. Grid and group are offered
as tools for describing in a more controllable fashion the way that
social pressures reach an individual and structure his
consciousness. The vertical distance between zero and the most
coherent set of classifications offered by his culture is the range of
sublimation possible in it. The span across the diagram from left to
right represents the possibilities of frustration for those with the
fewest options. A society huddled together in the right quadrant,
with strong face-to-face pressure and low classification, will go on
stoking the sibling jealousies of childhood. Strong group and
strong grid working together will uphold the strength of paternal
                                               The two bodies 87

authority. It should be interesting to place the classic psychoses
upon the diagram. But this is a digression.
   The main burden of this chapter is to take up the theme of the
book’s title. Natural symbols will not be found in individual
lexical items. The physical body can have universal meaning only
as a system which responds to the social system, expressing it as a
system. What it symbolizes naturally is the relation of parts of an
organism to the whole. Natural symbols can express the relation
of an individual to his society at that general systemic level. The
two bodies are the self and society: sometimes they are so near as
to be almost merged; sometimes they are far apart. The tension
between them allows the elaboration of meanings.
Chapter 6
Test cases




At a stage in her life when she had cut herself free from social ties,
Simone Well (1951) reproved the ancient Israelites for their
adherence to rule, for the legalism of the priests and their rejection
of the Dionysian mystery cults. But it was all very well for her to
make the judgement. It would be impossible for the leaders of an
occupied but still resisting nation to adopt an effervescent form of
religion. To expect them to stop preaching a stern sexual morality,
vigilant control of bodily boundaries, and a corresponding
religious cult would be asking them to give up the political
struggle. So long as they were set upon that, the choice was no
more open to them to worship God with wine, song and dance
than it was open to Simone Weil herself to make a strict religious
commitment when she had relaxed her own commitment to
society.
   The principle of symbolic replication of a social state leads us to
a different view of revivalist movements among the poor and
oppressed. Compensation theory too glibly explains by reference
to physical suffering and deprivation of civil and economic rights.
Then it finds this explanation does not cover the throng of well-to-
do women who so often predominate in these movements. So it
turns to sexual frustration. In the following passage Norman Cohn
adopts a simple Freudian approach to explain the female element
in millenarian movements:

  …emotional frustration in women of means and leisure but
  without social function or prestige. Throughout the history of
  Christianity this circumstance has contributed to the rise of
  revivalist movements and it still does so today. What ideal such
  a movement sets itself seems to depend chiefly on personal
  factors—in the first place on the particular personality of the
                                                        Test cases 89

  prophet, which will appeal only to certain types of women. The
  antinomian and erotic millenarism of the Brethren of the Free
  Spirit does however indicate one recurrent possibility…. Do
  comparable movements occur in societies where sexual life is
  less guilt-ridden than it has usually been in Christendom?
                                                  (Cohn, 1962:41)

The answer is yes: the tendency to celebrate sexual promiscuity is
not a response to repression; it is more likely to be found where
repression is least in evidence. Cohn also mentions as alternative
causes, political oppression and sudden catastrophe (see Chapter 9
below).
   My explanation of effervescent religious revivalism is tidier
since it uses only one hypothesis to predict its occurrence both
among the poor and deprived and among the females of the rich
and privileged classes, and also its likely development following
catastrophe. In all cases, it is the lack of strong social articulation,
the slackening of group and grid which leads people to seek, in the
slackening of bodily control, appropriate forms of expression. This
is how the fringes of society express their marginality. It is enough
to say that the experience of a certain kind of structuring of society
gets expressed in a certain way, without invoking the emotionally
distracting principle of deprivation. In relation to established
authority, his area of the social structure is the wilderness from
which prophets and new cults are observed to arise. The collection
of essays on Spirit Mediumship and Society in Africa (ed. Beattie
and Middleton, 1969) is a rich mine of examples. Robin Horton
makes this very point in his contribution on the main varieties of
spirit possession in Kalabari religion. He contrasts possession by
big spirits and minor spirits.

  Possession by the big spirits is subject to a public scrutiny and
  control which discourages any departure from a traditionally-
  prescribed content. Its principal significance is that it reminds
  people, sometimes at recurrent intervals and sometimes at times
  of communal crisis, of the presence and attributes of the spirits,
  and of the values they support. Its general setting leaves little
  room for individual innovation on the part of the medium.
  Possession by the minor water-spirits, on the other hand, is
  virtually free from public scrutiny and control. Although it too
  serves to remind people of the presence and attributes of the
  spirits, it has a much wider range of significance. Thus it
90 Test cases

  provides a means of personal adjustment for those whose
  ascribed position in society is excessively irksome to them. It
  also provides the occasion for both narrative and dramatic art.
  Finally, it provides a means for the propagation of new ideas
  about the world. In all these contexts, the impress of individual
  innovation is very evident.
      These differences are, I think, fairly readily explained. First
  of all, doctrines relating to the founding heroes and the big local
  water-spirits occupy a crucial place in the community’s world
  view. They both interpret, validate and indicate means for the
  perpetuation of the established order of society and ecology.
  Any change in such doctrines is potentially a grave threat to the
  established order of things. Hence there is continual public
  scrutiny to insure that no such change takes place. Since
  possession by the big spirits gives dramatic reminders and
  illustrations of these doctrines, it must be included in the
  scrutiny.
      Doctrines relating to the minor water-spirits are, by contrast,
  rather marginal to the community’s world-view. Collectively, it
  is true, these minor spirits have an important part to play in the
  explanation of the peculiarities of individual life-courses. But no
  one spirit is involved with more than a few individuals. Again,
  these minor spirits are by definition the owners of distant creeks
  with which the community is not practically concerned.
  Particular spirits of this class, then, are important neither to the
  community as a whole nor to any considerable section of it.
  Hence doctrines concerning them are free from the scrutiny and
  control applied to doctrines concerning the big spirits. And this
  freedom extends to possession by them.
      One consequence is that possession by the minor water-
  spirits comes readily under the influence of a variety of desires
  and needs other than those concerned with the explanation,
  prediction and control of the world. Thus it becomes caught up
  in the struggle to find a way round uncongenial ascriptions of
  status, and again in the struggle to elaborate forms of both
  narrative and dramatic art. Another consequence is that the
  individual ‘carrier’ is free to make his personal contribution to
  the content of possession: a freedom which has been amply
  exploited in both of these contexts.
      This freedom also makes possession by the minor water-
  spirits a promising channel for innovations in belief and
  doctrine which may eventually come to assume importance in
                                                     Test cases 91

  the community at large. Since the utterances of these spirits on
  the heads of their carriers are virtually free from public scrutiny
  and control, they can serve as vehicles of new ideas which
  would be scotched at birth if they came from one of the big
  spirits. Remember how, during the time of the first Christian
  conversions, it was a minor water-spirit that went about telling
  people to join the churches since the day of the oru was over.
     Through the same freedom, it is even possible that these
  marginal spirits may provide the material for renewing and
  readapting the very core of the community’s world view. We
  don’t have much evidence on this; but one case is suggestive.
  This is the case of the spirit carried by one of the two men in our
  sample of people possessed by ‘women’s oru’. This spirit was
  first announced as the owner of a distant creek, far away from
  the community’s own sphere of interest and operations. Later, it
  came to announce itself as a controller of local waters who
  acted together with the established water-spirit Duminea.
  During a visit by a Shell prospecting party, it assumed
  responsibility for the oil resources of the neighbouring creeks;
  and when oil was found, the community gave it the credit for
  the discovery. For some time now, the community has been on
  the brink of treating it as an object of public cult.
     With this case in mind, we may look again at some of the
  myths which tell how village heroes originally came out of the
  world of the water-people to live with men. I have already
  offered an intellectualist interpretation of such myths. But it
  would seem possible to supplement this with a more historical
  (though highly speculative) interpretation. It is that the heroes,
  and other big spirits, were originally introduced to the
  community as minor water-spirits on the heads of oru kuro
  people; and that they stayed incubating on the sidelines until, at
  some time of social upheaval and change requiring new
  interpretative concepts, they came out to make grander claims
  for themselves. Elsewhere, I have described how in former times
  Kalahari got rid of spirits who seemed to have no further
  usefulness to the community. We may have a clue here as to
  how they got themselves new spirits to meet new challenges to
  their way of life.
                                                (Horton, 1969:45–7)

In his Malinowski lecture on Spirit Possession (1966) loan Lewis
applies the useful distinction between the main morality cult and
92 Test cases

peripheral cults: he finds that people who are peripheral to the
central focus of power and authority tend to be possessed by
spirits who are peripheral to the main pantheon and whose
morality is dubious. So the allocation of spiritual powers reflects
the location of people along a dimension from the centre to the
margins. So women subject to their husbands, serfs subject to their
masters, indeed any in a state of subjection, constitute his category
of the peripheral. For lack of a hypothesis about why these people
should incline towards cults of bodily dissociation, the argument
insidiously slides towards deprivation as the explanation and
means of recognizing peripheral possession cults. But what about
the Bog Irish of London? The argument is unable to deal with the
many cases of people who are obviously and consciously deprived,
and yet do not react in the predicted way.
    It is no accident that women so often form the main
membership of possession cults. The social division of labour
involves women less deeply than their menfolk in the central
institutions—political, legal, administrative, etc.—of their
society. They are indeed subject to control. But the range of
controls they experience is simpler, less varied. Mediated through
fewer human contacts, their social responsibilities are more
confined to the domestic range. The decisions they take do not
have repercussions on a very wide range of institutions. The web
of their social life, though it may tie them down effectively
enough, is of a looser texture. Their social relations certainly
carry less weighty pressure than those which are also
institutional in range. This is the social condition they share with
slaves and serfs. Their place in the public structure of roles is
clearly defined in relation to one or two points of reference, say
in relation to husbands and fathers. As for the rest of their social
life, it takes place at the relatively unstructured, interpersonal
level, with other women in the case of women, with other slaves
and serfs in the case of slaves and serfs. Of course I would be
wrong to say that the network of relations a woman has with
others of her sex is unstructured. A delicate patterning certainly
prevails. But its significance for society at large is less than the
significance of men’s relations with one another in the public role
system. A quarrel between women has not anything like the same
repercussions as a quarrel between their husbands. If they want
to give their social relations with one another a more central
structuring, they can only do so by embroiling their menfolk.
Their links with one another are only as strong as the links
                                                      Test cases 93

between the menfolk to whom they are attached. Women, serfs
and slaves (especially released slaves), are inevitably pinned only
weakly into the central structure of their society. A small setback
can harm them more irrevocably than those whose more complex
links give a better chance of recovery. Their options are few.
They experience strong grid. Therefore they are susceptible to
religious movements which celebrate this experience. Unlike
those who have internalized the classifications of society and
who accept its pressures as aids to realizing the meanings they
afford, these classes are peripheral. They express their spiritual
independence in the predicted way, by shaggier, more bizarre
appearance, and more ready abandonment of control.
   I do not wish to embark on the difference between male and
female dress in expressing this difference. For it is complicated
by sexual functions. Instead, consider the distinctive
appearance of prophets. They tend to arise in peripheral areas
of society, and prophets tend to be shaggy, unkempt individuals.
They express in their bodies the independence of social norms
which their peripheral origins inspire in them. It is no accident
that St John the Baptist lived in the desert and wore skins, or
that Nuer prophets wear beards and long hair in a fashion that
ordinary Nuer find displeasing. Everywhere, social
peripherality has the same physical forms of expression, bizarre
and untrimmed.
   It is necessary all the time to remind ourselves that we are only
dealing with distant ages and remote places in order to understand
ourselves. The ceteris paribus rule allows me to use a more local
example. In noticing that Lloyd George wore his hair long and
loose it is relevant only in that it was longer and looser than other
members of his cabinet, not that it was longer than Roundheads or
shorter than Royalists wore it two centuries earlier. It becomes
extremely interesting that the verdict of two contemporaries on
this long-haired premier ranges him clearly with other peripheral
prophets. It is argued that he would never have come to power but
for the national chaos of mid-war in 1916 and that only recurring
crises of great magnitude kept him in power until 1922. Even
within the political scene, he owed his promotion to a ‘revolt of the
cabin-boys’ (Taylor, 1970:189), a phrase which suggests a
desperate abdication of reason and control to someone from the
margins. He was the only politician who retired far richer than he
began. The irregularity of his personal life is no secret. Not for him
the main morality cult. When he made a speech he trembled and
94 Test cases

poured with sweat as if the divine afflatus was on him. Keynes,
who saw him at the Peace Conference of 1919, wrote:

  How can I convey to the reader, who does not know him, any
  just impression of this extraordinary figure of our time, this
  syren, this goat-footed bard, this half-human visitor to our age
  from the hag-ridden magic and enchanted woods of Celtic
  antiquity? One catches in his company that flavour of final
  purposelessness, inner responsibility, existence outside or away
  from our Saxon good and evil, mixed with cunning,
  remorselessness, love of power, that lend fascination,
  enthralment and terror to the fair-seeming magicians of North
  European folklore.
                                              (Keynes, 1933:36–7)

Here is a stirring description of a peripheral prophet-leader which
corresponds closely to the ethnographic examples in respect of
appearance, morality and social provenance. Having illustrated it I
shall now attempt to test my hypothesis more rigorously. It requires
that peoples sharing a common culture who differ radically in social
organization along the specified dimensions shall show the predicted
variations in religious behaviour. If I concentrate on variations in
terms of the original diagram, I will try to contrast different possible
patterns across the top right-hand quadrant. I will seek to contrast
weaker and stronger control by grid and group. As an illustration I
will compare the Nuer and Dinka, two neighbouring Nilotic tribes
who are radically different in the crucial aspects of their religious
behaviour. For the Western Dinka, the state of trance is treated
positively as a central cult, the source of blessing and strength. For
Nuer, trance is dangerous. I shall look for objectively definable
social variables to account for the difference.
   Those neighbouring tribes of pastoralists who raid one another,
capture and enslave one another and speak related Nilotic
languages are both organized on the basis of agnatic lineages. The
Nuer have been observed in a number of short visits by Evans-
Pritchard and their published record is now very full. Before he
wrote a large volume on Nuer religion, he produced monographs
describing their ecology, political institutions and kinship and
marriage, and while this work was in production, he also
published numerous short articles on diverse aspects of their life.
One supposes that the problem his pupil faced as ethnographer of
the Dinka was delicate and complex. First, it could be tedious to
                                                       Test cases 95

recite at length the parallel chronicle of the Dinka, noting both
where their practice conformed to and diverged from Nuer
practice. Second, such a programme would not allow for the
different perspective of a younger man, seeing the culture from the
shoulders, as it were, of his teacher. This perspective might light
upon different aspects, it might be more profound, and still be
perfectly compatible with the earlier work on the Nuer. On the
other hand, discoveries about how Dinka institutions worked
might produce an embarrassing situation in which one or other or
both of the two friends might find that his work discredited the
findings of the other. To such a complex of delicacies we can
attribute the various emphases and omissions in Godfrey
Lienhardt’s Dinka studies.
   As far as ecological pressures and political institutions are
concerned, he has adopted the alternative of summarizing very
comprehensively the differences between the two peoples (1958).
As far as family structure, incest, exogamy, marriage are
concerned, he adopted the solution of omission. As far as religion
is concerned, he adopted his own original perspective, taking the
interpretation of symbolic behaviour to profound, new levels. My
puzzle about whether Nuer and Dinka social experience is
different in ways which would account for the difference in their
symbolic order is therefore complicated by lack of detailed
information about marriage regulations. From the pattern of the
rest of their social and symbolic behaviour I will hazard a guess
that Dinka observe less stringent, less far-reaching rules of incest
and exogamy and are less consistent in using the pattern of their
cattle transfers to define their categories of permitted and
prohibited sexual relations.
   But first let me fill in the contrast at the symbolic level, in what
concerns their attitudes to spirit possession. The Nuer regard it as
dangerous. Evans-Pritchard says, ‘Seizure of a man by a spirit may
be temporary or permanent. When it is permanent the possessed
person becomes a prophet…’ (1940a). Sickness is often attributed
to temporary spirit possession: sacrifice is made to the spirit to
appease it, and the victim, once cured, must continue to make
sacrifices ‘to let it know that he has not forgotten it. Otherwise it
may cause trouble again.’ The process of cure, apart from
sacrifice, includes a séance of singing, drumming, rattling and
clapping until someone close to the victim becomes possessed. In
the case he describes it is the sick man’s father who becomes a
medium to make known the demands of the spirit. I quote:
96 Test cases

  As the singing, rattling and clapping continued, Rainen began
  to twitch and shake from head to foot and then suddenly leaped
  into the air and fell back on the floor of the hut where he lay
  stiff as though in a paroxysm. After lying tense and prostrate
  for a while he sat up, but shortly afterwards collapsed again.
  Then for about a quarter of an hour he threw himself wildly
  about the hut, writhing and twitching as though in agony. He
  reminded me of a hen which has had its throat cut in the
  Muslim way, and is thrown on the ground to die. If the people
  around had not broken most of his falls he might have injured
  himself. As it was, he complained to me on the following day of
  the soreness of his arms and legs. Every now and again he
  barked like a dog. In describing these spasms Nuer say that the
  spirit wrestles with the man it possesses.
                                       (Evans-Pritchard, 1956:36)

Note that the occasion of a spirit possessing a man is first known
by the illness of the latter: in the next stage it possesses someone
else with whom it wrestles violently, before it discloses its name
and demands gifts. Then after some hard bargaining, the spirit is
persuaded to go. The séance is in the charge of a prophet, one
whose state of possession is permanent. And note the strange
picture of a Nuer prophet (ibid., facing p. 306) which shows the
unkempt hair and beard ‘both of which are objectionable to
ordinary Nuer’. Their prophets stand outside the structuring of
normal Nuer society. A prophet who is inspired by a spirit must
give it a name

  which distinguishes it as his particular spirit from the spirits of
  other prophets of his neighbourhood who are his rivals for
  renown and influence; for the attachment here is to individuals
  who built it up through a personal following and not, at least
  primarily, to social groups.
                                                         (ibid.: 117)

To this extent they sustain my thesis that bodily control tends to
be relaxed where social control is weak. The Nuer prophets look
strange and unkempt; they operate outside the normal social
structure, competing with one another for influence in a social
dimension peculiar to themselves and distinct from the balanced
opposition of lineage segments. By normal Nuer values, prophets
have different moral standards. They are greedy, grasping and
                                                      Test cases 97

eccentric. They cure sickness caused by spirits and state their
price in terms of cattle to be dedicated to spirits. Spirit-dedicated
cattle represent transfers which restrict the flow of wealth
through the secular channels of marriage payments and
compensations. In fact, though individual prophets do well
enough by their vocation, spirits are distinctly a nuisance to the
general run of Nuer who would like their help but would also
like them to stay away.
   To sum up, using loan Lewis’s terms, spirit possession is not
part of the main morality cult of the Nuer but a peripheral cult.
Whereas, among the Dinka, a benign form of spirit-possession lies
at the centre of their religion and has none of these attributes.
   Dinka spear-master clans and warrior clans are linked in
descent and politics, the former specialized in ritual and the latter
in political leadership, producing a balanced duality of power
(Lienhardt, 1958:118–19).

  Leadership, in any Dinka political segment, necessarily involves
  the presence of two different classes or categories of clan, the
  warriors and the spear-masters, which are of equal and
  complementary status…. The Dinka masters of the fishing-
  spear are not merely ritual agents for composing feuds when the
  parties to them both wish it; they do not, as is usual for the
  Nuer leopard-skin chiefs, stand outside the structure of agnatic
  groups with which the political groups are identified in their
  relations with one another…
                                                    (ibid.: 130–1)

Needless to say there is no question of spear-masters being shaggy,
immoral, greedy, strange or grasping. They do not operate outside
the social structure, but as a normal part of it.
   As to their idea of spirit, Dinka in their rituals are much readier
to expect good to come from abandoning themselves to it
completely. Each clan has its own divinities, but the spear-master
clans collectively recognize the divinity Flesh, the word which
comes from the twitching of the flesh after a sacrificial beast is
skinned which makes it appear to have a life of its own (Lienhardt,
1961:136–7). The divinity Flesh is specially manifest in the
quivering of legs and thighs at the onset of possession. The divinity
Flesh ensures that the man who speaks by virtue of it speaks
absolutely truthfully. Flesh means righteousness and justice. For
my general comparison, it is worth noting that Dinka who are
98 Test cases

possessed by other, lesser divinities, become ‘hysterically’
possessed and are in a state of danger (ibid.: 57ff. and 137),
whereas the trembling of the spear-masters at sacrificial rites is
always more controlled and safe. Thus the Dinka have two degrees
of bodily uncontrol, associated appropriately with the centre and
periphery of their religion, the centre and periphery of their social
categories.
    The Nuer attitude to possession is that it is dangerous in the
first phase, and produces an abnormal, specialized role in the
second phase; a role whose specialized task is to counteract the
dangers of first phase possession. (The distinction between these
phases has been developed by loan Lewis in a paper on witchcraft
and spirit possession.) The Dinka attitude is that trance is the
primary manifestation of unspecialized benign power. It is not
restricted to a specialized role in the sense of calling for special
initiation, by affliction, asceticism or training, but is open to all the
adult males of a clan, and normally experienced by them all.
    I believe I have summarized correctly a different religious bias
in the two tribal cultures. By contrasting Nuer prophets with
Dinka spear-masters I am able to emphasize a different value
placed on bodily dissociation. The Nuer prophet has a special
function in war, to compose hymns and rouse the fighting men.
His role is not parallel to that of the Dinka spear-masters, whose
clans are specialized for religion in juxtaposition with the warrior
clans. The true parallel of the Dinka spear-master among the Nuer
is the leopardskin priest. In certain Nuer lineages a ‘priestly virtue’
is transmitted to their members (Evans-Pritchard, 1956:292–3),
which is an effective power to curse and bless and to perform
sacrifice for certain occasions. Exactly the same word is used in
each language to describe the source of this power, ring, which
means flesh. It would seem that, at some stage in their
development, the Nuer priestly lineages were also juxtaposed
symmetrically with secular lineages in a similar pattern to the
Dinka one (ibid.: 293). Among the Dinka, Flesh is the chief
divinity, whose cult we have described. It is a cult of physical
dissociation and the attributes of flesh are etherialized into
intellectual and moral qualities. Nuer priests invoke ‘the spirit of
our flesh…which refers to the spiritual source of sacerdotal power’
(ibid.: 109). Even if it were to transpire that the Nuer concept of
flesh closely parallels the Dinka one, and this in spite of the many
connotations of ring, flesh, with the physical as compared with
other aspects of life (ibid.: 55, 154, 159), the much greater
                                                      Test cases 99

prominence and centrality of priestly possession as the channel of
divine power for the Dinka would still distinguish theirs from
Nuer religion. However great the difficulties of assessment, the
question still remains that two neighbouring peoples, with two
related languages, related histories and distinct political
institutions, frequently at war with one another, have made
different emphases in their use of the bodily mode.
   The Nuer cosmos seems to be more rational and regulative. The
connection they make between sickness and sin is so close that,
though they believe in evil eye and in the work of fetishes and
ghosts, they ‘generally appear to feel that suffering is due to some
fault of theirs’ (ibid.: 21, 22 and 176). Moral faults, inherent in
man’s nature, tend to accumulate and predispose to disaster (ibid.:
193). Though they believe in luck, it does not intervene as an
explanation of misfortune (ibid.: 195). The caprice element ranks
low in their cosmological ideas. There are no inexplicable shocks
or surprises in their universe. At death they mourn quietly, but not
ostentatiously, since this might give the impression that God had
not a perfect right to do whatever he wishes with them. Their
general outlook on humankind and its fate is pessimistic. Though
he writes about sacrifices to avert natural disasters, Evans-
Pritchard says the Nuer are not very interested or hopeful about
the efficacy of rites to change their fortune in hunting, agriculture
or the seasons. ‘Nuer rather turn their eyes inwards, to the little
closed social world in which they live, they and their cattle. Their
sacrifices are concerned with moral and spiritual, not natural
crises’ (ibid.: 200). Nuer are much more concerned than Dinka
with automatic pollution. They recognize classes of offences which
entail automatic misfortune. Incest is one such class; adultery,
disrespect to in-laws and homicide are others. To each class of
offence is imputed a particular class of illness. Incest produces skin
disease; adultery afflicts the injured husband with pains in the
lumbar region; and so on. A wider range of misfortunes may befall
the man who uncovers his genitals in the presence of his in-laws or
who drinks water after shedding human blood before purification.
Most of the Nuer sacrifices are made to atone for one or other
such offence, assumed to be the cause of illness. Here is an area of
taboo-mindedness in Nuer religion which is at variance with their
general disinclination for fetishes, charms and spells. But in these
two areas of their life social constraints are strongly felt, marriage
rules and local loyalty in fighting. Adultery, marriage and
homicide are the main occasions for the transfer of cattle and the
100 Test cases

Nuer have less cattle than the Dinka. These transgressions held to
be automatically dangerous express social relations in which Nuer
most strongly feel the constraints of living in society.
   By contrast, Dinka seem much less pollution-prone or
taboominded. There is less emphasis in Lienhardt’s book on Dinka
religion on the piacular element in sacrifices. This could be a
difference of focus in the observer. But I think not. Certainly the
Dinka seem to have a more optimistic world view. They do not
expect their universe to be rational: ‘The Dinka are in a universe
which is largely beyond their control and where events may
contradict the most reasonable human expectation’ (Lienhardt,
1961:54). They seem much less sin-conscious. An element of
caprice is clearly linked with misfortune in their concept of the
intriguing divinity, Macardit. He represents

  the final explanation of sufferings and misfortunes which
  cannot be traced to other causes more consonant with Dinka
  notions of Divinity as just…. Macardit presides over the ending
  of good things, the inevitable and sometimes brutal curtailment
  of human life and fertility…a malign divinity specially
  associated with women
                                                     (ibid.: 81–3)

So misfortune is not regularly traced to human faults. Is their
notion of death less philosophical and passive than that of the
Nuer? What does it signify that they cannot bear to speak of it,
and bury their dead without looking at the grave as they shovel the
earth in backwards? (Lienhardt, 1962). And what different quality
of their beliefs leads them to bury their most famous spear-master
alive so as to enact a kind of social triumph of life over death
(Lienhardt 1961:318)? Sexual promiscuity is said to follow such a
ceremony. Do the stricter Nuer have no such moments of licensed
orgy in which marriage ties and incest rules are overriden? Or did
their ethnographer just not happen to record them?
   God, for the Nuer, is dangerous (Evans-Pritchard, 1956:177,
195–6, 198). They are torn by a wish to keep him at a distance and
have him near at hand to help them. The Dinka god, as we have
seen, comes right down to possess intimately the bodies of his
worshippers. He is not distant, evidently. Is he dangerous? I
maintain that we are dealing here not with the different bias of
two reporters who saw similar things differently. On the contrary,
their close association gave them the same bias, as near as can be
                                                     Test cases 101

achieved by conscientious observation. The differences are
precisely those we would predict from small differences in ecology
and social structure summed up by Lienhardt in Tribes without
Rulers (1958).
   First, the Dinka are about four times more numerous than
Nuer; they live more densely. Then, most Dinka settlements
straggle across savannah forest in continuous settlement; their
sense of local bounded unit should be weaker than that of Nuer
who live in discrete, wet season villages and concentrate in large
cattle camps in the dry season. The pattern of Dinka transhumance
has two phases of congregation, one in the dry season, their
permanent settlements, the other in the height of the wet season.
When

  flooding reduces the area available for grazing, such small
  groups (of cattle camps) are drawn together and converge on
  the few best sites in their neighbourhood. Toward the end of the
  rainy season, herdsmen of each tribe are concentrated in several
  sub-tribal camps.
                                            (Lienhardt, 1958:100)

Most significantly, Dinka speak of their political communities as
cattle camps, and these

  are more fluid in composition and less fixed in their spatial
  relations to each other, than are permanent settlements….
  Dinka country sets less rigid limits to movements in the wet
  season, and to the expansion of settlements, than are set by
  much of Nuer land for its people. These different ecological
  conditions are consistent with some differences between Nuer
  and Dinka political segmentation.
                                                     (ibid.: 101)

Lienhardt goes on to describe Dinka political theory which rests
upon the assumption that groups expand, segment and break away
from each other. ‘Fission and fusion do not take place within a single
genealogical framework’ (ibid.: 104). Their political theory is one of
expansion. In spite of the much higher density of population, it is a
mobile social system in a sense in which the Nuer is not. ‘They see
their history as a spreading out and separation of peoples on the
ground…a notion which includes the notion of a measure of
personal leadership’ (ibid.: 118). The political framework is more
102 Test cases

confused and more fluid, genealogies are more muddled (ibid.: 106)
than Nuer; lineages have fewer orders of formal segmentation. From
this I conclude that it would be surprising if their categories for
incest and bridewealth were as strict as those of the Nuer. Dinka
recognize that they are capable of less wide-scale co-operation
against common enemies than Nuer (ibid.: 108). These facts suggest
that it is reasonable to place the Dinka further than Nuer along the
diminishing lines of grid and group towards zero. If their idea of
formal sin were alleged to be more highly developed than among the
Nuer, it would be surprising, since these people are related in less
inclusive and more easily evaded categories. I would not expect
techniques of reconciliation and religious techniques of coercion to
be so well developed. I would expect Nuer to be more magical and
taboominded than the Dinka. The differences in their social
structures, in the light of my hypothesis about symbolic behaviour,
seem amply to justify the differences in the reporting of their
religions. If it had been the other way, and the Dinka were reported
to be more conscious of sin, more interested in purification, more
afraid of the dangers of spirit possession, then the regular patterns
apparent elsewhere would have suggested a subjective bias. But the
more positive and more central use of bodily dissociation in Dinka
religion turns out to be correlated with the predicted social
variables.
   To complete the demonstration, I would like to include another
Nilotic tribe, the Mandari. On my reading of the ethnography they
would appear on a diagram showing strength of grid and group as
in diagram 5.
   Group, of course, refers to several possible levels of allegiance.
The Mandari are acutely conscious of the widest one:

  It is most important to bear in mind…that the small Mandari
  population in its tiny country is surrounded by powerful and
  numerous neighbours in vast territories and also that the
  Mandari population is itself made up of levels of immigrants
  dispersed around separated cores of original landowners, again
  of various kinds.
                                            (Buxton, 1963b: 49)

‘Mandari country was composed of a very large number of small
chiefdoms between whom relations were friendly, competitive or
openly hostile’ (Buxton, 1958:71). So, at the level of small local
chiefdom, group allegiance was important for Mandari. Within
                                                      Test cases 103




For the Mandari, grid and group are strongest; for the Nuer, they are
weaker; for the Dinka, grid and group are weaker than for the Nuer.

Diagram 5 Three Nilotes

each chiefdom relations were stratified in a hierarchy which
attributed ritual ties with the land to early groups of immigrants
and validated their claims as landowners. The rights to political
priority became matters of very tense competition, as their attitude
to clients as potential witches shows (Buxton, 1963b). Restraints
of grid and group seem to be highly charged emotional
experiences. It is gratifying to find that their attitude to sin and to
purification is very formalist. To the Mandari, sins, or pollutions,
are specific acts; they are not made better or worse by the
intentions of the sinner. Jean Buxton died suddenly in 1971. I had
earlier spoken to her about this subject and she generally
confirmed my impression of the greater magicality in the bias of
Mandari culture. I recall a lively account she gave in a seminar in
University College London of the complex colour and thermal
categories into which Mandari class kinds of sins and kinds of
illnesses. They prescribe sacrificial beasts with appropriate sex and
markings for the purification of each kind of offence. But the
pernickertiness of their rules drives them to desperate ritual shifts
for transforming incorrectly ‘hot’ beasts, red ones or male ones,
into the prescribed ‘cool’, white, black or female forms. Their
highly magical, formal approach to sin is in conformity with their
attitude to spirit possession which seems closely to correspond to
104 Test cases

that which I have outlined for the Nuer. Possession is dangerous,
causes sickness in the first phase and produces specialists in the
second phase who are adept at countering the dangers they have
themselves survived (Buxton, 1968:40). She describes an
‘elaborate specialist treatment’ for a person whose sickness has
been caused by a nyok, the vengeful spirit of a dead dog.

  The nyok screams ‘Ahrrr! Ahrrrr!’ and the doctor wrestles with
  it over the hole. He sways to and fro hanging on to the spear,
  while the spectators hold on to him; he foams at the mouth or
  blood pours from his nostrils. The nyok is said eventually to
  weaken and then to cease its struggles…. Treatment is in line
  with other exorcisms, and with convulsion therapy, where
  possession is induced by rhythmic rattle shaking.
                                                      (ibid.: 60)

Thus I have compared three Nilotic peoples on the basis of grid
and group. The material is very suggestive. I am tempted to find
that their religious behaviour upholds the hypothesis. The weaker
the social constraints, the more bodily dissociation is approved
and treated as a central ritual adjunct for channelling benign
power to the community. The stronger the social pressures, the
more magicality in ritual and in the definition of sin.
   It is important to notice two aspects of the Nuer-Dinka
comparison which will be relevant to any wider discussion. First,
the control of grid and group is not a function of population
density. The Dinka in question live at a density of up to 60 to the
square mile, the Nuer at roughly seven. Grid and group are a
function of order and constraint in social relations and these can
be as easily absent in dense as in sparse populations. The Dinka
seem to think that they can break off social relations and start
afresh quite easily. Their sense of living in an expanding economy
may possibly be derived from their successful cattle husbandry. It
makes a great difference to the quality of social life if people are
sharing resources which seem to be expanding, dwindling or static.
Paul Spencer (1965) has drawn attention to this variable in his
comparison of Rendille and Samburu pastoralists in Kenya. He
relates the much stricter social controls operating in Rendille
society to the fact that Rendille ‘believe that their camel herds, if
they are growing at all, are growing at a slower pace than the
human population’ while ‘the Samburu believe that their own
cattle herds increase at a faster rate than their human population’
                                                       Test cases 105

and that the poorest of men may build up substantial herds (p.
293). If the Nuer believe themselves to be husbanding a static
livestock population and the Dinka an expanding one, this would
be another explanation for why the latter take social control more
lightly. Economic expansion and restriction turn out to be much
more significant variables affecting cosmology than absolute
population density as such.
   I would not wish to brush off as unimportant the difficulties of
interpretation which beset this argument. Any kind of illustrative
material is intensely difficult to find for exactly the same reasons: no
reports are exhaustive; none can avoid bias; there is an enormous
subjective element of selection in any ethnographic observation. My
particular kind of hypothesis depends on very close, objective
assessment for its validation. Nothing will do but research which
has been specially designed, not to prove it, but to test it.
   Reviewing the shift from formal rite to positive approval of
trance, I have referred here and there to co-varying ideas about sin.
These should now be made more explicit. Along the series from
maximum formality and control in symbolic behaviour to
maximum informality and uncontrol there is a corresponding
series in attitudes to wrong-doing. At the pole of maximum
formality, the idea of wrong-doing takes no account of internal
motive, or of the state of mind of the actor. Wrong-doing is bad in
itself, its dangers are automatically unleashed, blame falls
automatically, and the wrong is known ex opere operate. It exactly
parallels the attitude to ritual in the case of extreme magicality. At
the pole of maximum informality the idea of wrong-doing is
entirely concerned with internal states of mind. The actual
consequences of the act are of less concern than the wishes and
intentions of the actor. Responsibility ends with securing right
motives. To take homicide as an example, at one end of the range
we have automatic pollution of blood, at the other unintended
manslaughter distinguished from homicide. I would expect these
variations to coincide smoothly with variations in formality and
informality and both in accordance with the hold of grid and
group on individuals in relevant contexts. Thus I would expect to
find whole cultures where ideas of sin are more internal, less
tabooridden than the ideas of their close neighbours, who
experience more effective and all-embracing social constraints.
   To show how this can be examined, let me break my
methodological strictures and dare to compare widely separated
peoples. The comparison of the pygmies with Hadza hunters in
106 Test cases

Tanzania is so illuminating in this matter of sin that I must discuss
them together. I have earlier described the fluidity of the Mbuti
pygmy camps. Their groupings are so undefined, so unimportant
in their lives that no tribe in Africa seems to emphasize group
membership less than they, with the exception of the Hadza. The
latter move even more freely in and out of camp, forming new
ones and moving away. The description of camp groupings poses a
serious problem of method for their ethnographer (J.C.Woodburn,
1964). We would expect then that they would have internalized
the idea of sin even more completely than the pygmies. But this is
not so. The Mbuti pygmies have no conception of pollution,
neither pollution of death, nor of birth, nor of menstruation. But
the Hadza fear pollution of menstrual blood. To interpret this
taboo, I need to leave the question of group and return to grid. The
pygmies are as free of social categories as they are of bounded
groups. Neither sex, age, nor kinship order their behaviour in
strictly ordained categories. Turnbull writes:

  It would, of course, be ridiculous to deny that there is any
  system of kinship, but it is certain that the kinship system does
  not have the same importance as a focal point of social control
  as it may have in other African societies. To my mind this is
  undeniably linked to the ad hoc nature of the society, with its
  almost complete lack of concern for the past, as for the future.
  …The effective kinship terminology at once reflects the
  situation, which only becomes confused when any attempt is
  made to relate the terms to their usage in village society. It
  distinguishes generations rather than kin and cuts
  indiscriminately across actual kinship boundaries…
                                           (Turnbull, 1965:109–10)

So also with sex, they place little emphasis on separate male and
female spheres. Men and women share in tasks of erecting huts
and even in hunting. Social categories are markedly weak. It is the
young men who operate the system of social control on behalf of
the camp.
   This is perfectly compatible with their general lack of concern
for sin. In this kind of culture people would readily believe Mary
Kingsley’s missionaries, who taught that ‘a little talk with Jesus
makes it all alright’. Informality is the key-note of their religious
practice. I have not counted how often the words ‘intimacy’ and
‘joy’ occur in Turnbull’s account, but they are very frequent.
                                                    Test cases 107

   Even more leaderless and free in movement from camp to camp
and spouse to spouse, the Hadza are divided by a social category
so dominating and all-inclusive that Woodburn is tempted to
describe it as a quasi-group. Wherever Hadza are, and whatever
they do, they are always controlled by the division between the
sexes. This division is between two hostile classes, each of which is
capable of organizing itself for defence or virulent attack against
the other. This extraordinarily intense consciousness of sexual
difference is the only permanent level of organization the Hadza
ever achieve. It is the background of male competition for wives,
of female collusion between mothers and daughters to exact the
maximum of trade goods from husbands in return for grudgingly
given sexual satisfaction. The very low level of the division of
labour between the sexes is itself an added difficulty in the way of
building up a set of long-term conjugal relations. Keep in mind the
insecurity of a man’s hold on his wife, and their belief in menstrual
pollution appears to have a practical value. When a Hadza woman
menstruates, she must avoid certain activities which would be
polluted by her contact. But not only must she rest. Her husband
of the moment, whoever he may be, must himself abstain from
manly activities lest he endanger the rest of the camp’s chance of
success in hunting. So his menstrual couvade is a kind of claim he
affirms regularly by asserting the physiological connection
between himself and his wife and the wide-spread dangers of
disregarding it (Woodburn, 1964:204–78; Douglas, 1968b).
   Here we find, amid a general lack of concern for purity and
danger, a strong regard for certain specific, symbolic boundaries. A
symbolic expression of the tie between husband and wife
(sanctioned by the threat of danger to the whole camp) reflects the
one relationship which is highly valued. It expresses the one social
category which is an active regulator of behaviour, the distinction
of men and women, and it draws the boundary between the sexes
in such a way as to incorporate the husband, in the restricted
context of his conjugal claims, within the same line which
encompasses his wife. So the rule, which in its general form sets all
women apart from all men and treats them as dangerous, in its
particular incidence sets each woman apart from other women,
but not apart from her husband; he, in his turn, is, in virtue of his
married state, set apart from other men. Thus the pollution rule
draws very precise lines of incorporation and exclusion. No jump
of the imagination is required to see this formal taboo, in an
otherwise taboo-free system, as expressing the pressure of social
108 Test cases

relations. Thus I take it as a starting point for demonstrating the
hypothesis that when social relations are not finely ascribed, when
they are easily broken off and carry little in the way of obligation
or privilege, the formal aspect of wrong-doing is disregarded. The
more fluid and formless are social relations, the more internalized
the idea of wrong-doing. The full demonstration requires, as I
insisted earlier, the social and symbolic behaviour of the Hadza to
be compared from this angle with their close neighbours and
similarly for the pygmies. But until the interest of such an
examination has been suggested, the work of analysis will not be
carried out.
   These examples throw considerable light on present
theological attitudes to the subject of sin. What is taken to be a
more advanced, enlightened doctrine appears merely as the usual
expression of a less differentiated experience of social relations.
We have here a glimpse of the sociological matrix in which ideas
about sin and the self are generated. No simple evolutionary
pattern emerges. It is not a history of the victory of liberal
tolerance over bigoted intolerance. The relation of self to society
varies with the constraints of grid and group: the stronger these
are, the more developed the idea of formal transgression and its
dangerous consequences, and the less regard is felt for the right
of the inner self to be freely expressed. The more that social
relations are differentiated by grid and group, the more the
private individual is exhorted to pour his passions into prescribed
channels or to control them altogether. In the small-scale
primitive social system (whether we identify with high
classification or with small group) a continual feedback process
modifies the public pattern of roles so that no great discrepancy
can arise. How the private individual sees his interests and how
society at large expects him to respond will more or less coincide.
All the pressures upon him are personal pressures. He is as
capable of modifying them by his action as they are of
controlling him. The great difference between us, in modern
industrial society, and them, in small-scale primitive society, is
that the feedback is lost. The pressures exerted on the individual
are not modified by his reaction. There is no arguing with or
explaining to the industrial system any more than there is
arguing with the weather. The strongest social controls are not
exerted in the personal mode.
   We find ourselves generally with the other primitive societies I
have identified with strong grid. They share with us the paradox
                                                    Test cases 109

that the sense of sin is weakened as social control is strengthened.
Just as society demands more and more urgently that our passions
flow in the channels it prescribes, we are more and more deaf to its
inducements. Because of the disjunction between its classifications
and our aims we hear the more insistent demand of the inner self
to be given full expression.
Chapter 7
The problem of evil




Pain and injustice do not pose problems, social or religious, for
everyone. Indeed, in any part of society located to the left of the
vertical line, they attract scant reflection (see diagram 4, p. 60).
To the right, where social control is strong, I will argue from
three types of social experience that the problem of evil is posed
in characteristically different ways. We are now approaching the
crux of the comparison with Bernstein’s analysis of family
control systems. For each type of family there is its necessary
manner of validating coercive demands. For each distinct type of
social environment, likewise, there is its necessary manner of
justifying coercion. Through the classifications used, the
furniture of the universe is turned into an armoury of control. In
each social system human suffering is explained in a way that
reinforces the controls. To see how evil is understood, we must
see classification and personal pressure, grid and group, working
together.
   In the first place, we can quickly dispose of high classification,
strong grid and group. These people use the incidence of
misfortune to uphold the moral law. Disease and accident are
either attributed to moral failures or invested with nobility in a
general metaphysical scheme which embraces suffering as part of
the order of being. There is no lack of ethnography to illustrate
this classic form of the problem.
   Moving down towards zero we come to the small groups
exerting strong personal pressures, but with weak classification.
Here flourishes a theory of evil that generally corresponds to fear
of witchcraft. This is a cosmos dominated by ill-will and jealousy.
Jane Austen made Emma smugly remark: ‘A very narrow income
has a tendency to contract the mind, and sour the temper. Those
who can barely live and who live perforce in a very small and
                                             The problem of evil 111

generally very inferior society may well be illiberal and cross.’ It is
not poverty in itself, but the contraction and above all the
confusion of social ties which go with the witchcraft syndrome.
Small competitive communities tend to believe themselves in a
dangerous universe, threatened by sinister powers operated by
fellow human beings. Instead of prayer, fasting and sacrifice to the
deity, ritual activity is devoted to witch hunting, witch-cleansing,
witch-killing and curing from the effects of witchcraft.
   The anthropological model for this type comes from Central
Africa where the studies of Marwick (1952, 1965) and Mitchell
(1956) and others following them have defined a type of
witchcraft situation. It is one in which accusations of witchcraft
are used to denigrate rivals and pull them down in the
competition for leadership. The accusations would not have this
effect if roles were clearly defined and rules of succession
unambiguous. But it is the essence of this situation that men can
entertain contradictory views of their roles. The elder brother is
supposed to be benevolent and authoritative, but his ability to
sustain the role convincingly is undermined by the knowledge
that each and all of his younger brothers is his rival in the
succession to the headmanship of the village. Ambiguity allows
competition within a closed circle of kin and neighbours. In the
competition the dangerous powers of the universe are alleged to
be under the control of the rival, to whose door all succeeding
misfortunes are laid. Here failure is not ascribed to bad luck, nor
to moral failings of the victim, but to the hostile, occult powers
of his neighbour. Eventually the witch, whom rumour tries at the
bar of public opinion, must either allow the village to split or
clear his name in some ordeal. The work of Central Africanists
enables us to specify precisely the social structure conducive to
this particular type of witch-cosmology. But it is not by any
means a Central African phenomenon. In Central America,
among the Trio and Shevante, Peter Rivière (1970) can make a
similar analysis. Witchcraft accusations are either used to expel
an unwanted member of the community, or to split the village
into two parts, each part supposing itself to have thus sloughed
off its dangerous elements.
   If this is the social structure in which witch beliefs flourish, we
should expect to find something approximating to witchcraft
wherever these conditions prevail. In short, if we have social units
whose external boundaries are clearly marked, whose internal
relations are confused, and which persist on a small scale, then we
112 The problem of evil

should look for the active witchcraft type of cosmology. Somehow
we must bring the association with cats and broomsticks under
control by eliciting some general characteristics of these beliefs.
First, to accuse of witchcraft is to accuse of evil practice on a
cosmic scale. The witch is no ordinary thief or adulterer, or even a
common traitor. He is accused of a perverted nature, or of alliance
with the enemies of human kind, in Europe with the devil, in other
continents with carnivorous predators. He is associated
symbolically with the reverse of the way that a normal human
lives, with night instead of day. His powers are abnormal, he can
fly, be in two places at once, change his shape. Above all, he is a
deceiver, someone whose external appearance does not
automatically betray his interior nature. Very common all over the
world is some idea equivalent to the witches’ coven. Though each
coming from different social groups, the witch sinks his local
loyalties in favour of obligations to his confraternity. In the end, if
he fails to satisfy them, they will devour him.
    If we take these beliefs about the nature of the witch to signify
something about the nature of the society which takes them
seriously, we are struck by a close portrayal of the witch-believing
social system. For here, as we saw, the body politic tends to have a
clear external boundary, and a confused internal state in which
envy and favouritism flourish and continually confound the proper
expectations of members. So the body of the witch, normal-
seeming and apparently carrying the normal human limitations, is
equipped with hidden and extraordinarily malevolent powers. The
loyalty of the witch, instead of being committed firmly to his
group, flies out loose. He goes alone to contend with alien
personifications of lust and power. The witch himself has no firm
anchorage in the social structure. In appearance he is present, but
only bodily; his real inner self has escaped from social restraint.
    A closer look at the symbolism of witchcraft shows the
dominance of symbols of inside and outside. The witch himself is
someone whose inside is corrupt; he works harm on his victims by
attacking their pure, innocent insides. Sometimes he sucks out
their soul and leaves them with empty husks, sometimes he poisons
their food, sometimes he throws darts which pierce their bodies.
And then again, sometimes he needs access to their inner bodily
juices, faeces, semen, spittle, before he can hurt them. Often such
bodily excretions are the weapons of his craft. If we were to make
an analysis of the symbols of attack, I predict we would find a
close correspondence between the experience of the social system
                                              The problem of evil 113

and the kind of attack most feared. Soul sucking and poisoning we
would expect to be practised by the witch within the local
community, weapon throwing by the far-off witch.
   So much for the cosmic scale on which the witch
characteristically is conceived. To imagine a witch it is necessary to
reflect on human nature, to consider its limitations in space and time
and to believe in its natural proclivity to justice and goodness; the
witch is the converse of a normal human. Now for the social uses of
the belief. In these small and simple social structures, with very little
differentiation of roles, techniques for distancing, regulating, and
reconciling are little developed. The witch doctrine is used as the
idiom of control, since it pins blame for misfortune on trouble-
makers and deviants. The accusation is a righteous demand for
conformity. In a community in which overt conflict cannot be
contained, witchcraft fears are used to justify expulsion and fission.
These are communities in which authority has very weak resources.
Beyond a certain size, they cannot persist without introducing
sharper definition into the structure of roles. Only certain limited
targets can be achieved by their low level of organization. Expulsion
of dissidents is one method of control, fission of the group a more
drastic one. In either case the group remains small and disorganized.
The doctrine of a cosmos inhabited by normal humans and by
witches disguised as humans is well adapted to the dynamics of
renewal and continuity in such social systems.
   There are thus four general characteristics of the witchcraft
cosmology: the idea of the bad outside and the good inside, the
inside under attack and in need of protection, human wickedness
on a cosmic scale, and these ideas used in political manipulation.
The symbols of black cats and broomsticks are local expressions of
this complex of beliefs which, once identified in general terms, can
be found more widely—I would even dare to suggest it may be
found wherever the social preconditions exist.
   Let me take an English sectarian movement, from the history of
the Exclusive Brethren, as an example.
   No apology is needed for moving from African witchcraft to
English sects. Bryan Wilson (1967) himself has blazed the trail in
his valuable set of studies of sectarianism. He concludes his
discussion of the Exclusive Brethren with just such a comparison:

   It might be said of the Brethren, that there is an elaborated
   Durkheimian point to be made, that—in a sense not far removed
   from that in which the idea was developed for a tribal people—
114 The problem of evil

  their worship of God is worship of the community. The worship is
  more elaborate; the relationships are more consciously recognized;
  and yet the assembly appears as a form of the Deity…. The
  community, the assembly has a sense of special sanctity from
  which individual and household sanctity is derived; it employs
  severe measures of ‘social hygiene’ for its maintenance.
                                                         (ibid.: 336)

These measures are equivalent to witch hunting and witch
expulsion. The Exclusive Brethren, which Wilson classifies as an
‘Introversionist Sect’, remain true to their principles of rejecting
human organization. Thus they deviate from the common trend
for sects to evolve into denominations in the course of two
generations. They have not grown and diversified, they have
remained aloof from secular society for over 100 years. The price
they have paid for maintaining themselves as a pure group is the
erecting of a high wall between themselves and the rest of the
world, and continual schism. As in witch-dominated systems,
doctrine is used as a weapon of expulsion and separation. As in
witch beliefs, the doctrine celebrates the purity and goodness of
one part of mankind, and the vileness of the rest.

  The idea of the saints already inhabiting heavenly places; the
  dissociation of the saints from Israel; and their different
  prospects from those of the world—are conceptions reinforced
  in their separatist consequences by teachings concerning the will
  of Christ and the will of man. Christ’s expression ‘Not my will,
  but thine be done’ is regarded as a form of assertion that there
  never was any divergence between the Father’s will and the
  Son’s. Nor should there be any divergent will in man, since all
  free will is seen as ‘self will’. Man’s only will is the will to sin. In
  contrast, the saints must act under the direction of the Holy
  Spirit, and this reasserts the authority of the fellowship over the
  individual, and encourages quietism towards the outside world.
                                                            (ibid.: 285)

  The Brethren aver that they have love to all the saints but that
  this can only be actually shown to those in the Fellowship. Yet,
  although theoretically the Brethren acknowledge the possibility
  of saints existing outside the Fellowship, they have sometimes
  behaved as if this were an entirely theoretical circumstance. The
  growth of emphasis on ecclesiological rectitude, the frequency of
                                              The problem of evil 115

   excommunication and the development of a more exacting ethic,
   have all occurred on the latent assumption that the fellowship
   was the only manifestation of the Church. Thus, during the
   1860s a system was developed in which the Park Street assembly,
   which was Darby’s assembly, brought heresy that occurred
   elsewhere virtually to the test of London judgement. London
   expelled in this period a Mr Stewart. The Walworth assembly
   enquired about the grounds of the expulsion, and on enquiry
   were not entirely satisfied. Subsequently, they moved their
   meeting to Peckham. London responded by excluding Peckham
   from their communion, which meant virtual excommunication of
   all in the assembly. Soon afterwards, a Mr Goodall of Peckham
   visited Sheffield and was received by the saints there at table. On
   this becoming known, Sheffield was also excommunicated by
   London, in deference to the long-established principle of
   eliminating all taint. On being questioned, Darby referred to the
   Church of God on earth, and said, ‘being outside…of what it
   represents in London…is to be outside it altogether’.
                                                          (ibid.: 294)

It is very tempting to work through this admirable book and to
make an analysis of the relation of the various sects to the outside
society in the terms of this discussion, that is of the influence of grid
and group on their doctrines. Most of them started, in what Wilson
calls the pre-sectarian stage, by shunning all forms of social
organization. Those which succeeded in maintaining for any length
of time this total rejection of authority and formality, usually paid
for it the price of doctrinal nullity. They stood together and
welcomed all comers, but stood for nothing. Those who felt after
some such experience the need for some doctrinal content would
tend to draw in their ranks, close their boundaries and set
themselves in the direction of sectarianism and schism. Those who
steered a middle course, who tried to convert the world to their
doctrines and developed an organization for the purpose, gradually
lost the singularity of their message, for the latter would seem to be
vital only so long as it expresses a certain low level of
undifferentiated social relations. In this way, the Plymouth Brethren
started in 1829 seeking to unite all true believers in a biblical
fellowship, reacting against institutionalism and ecclesiology:

   Communion was the bond of common life which brought into
   unity those who might not always agree on doctrinal matters or
116 The problem of evil

  procedures of worship, but who accepted an informal non-
  hierarchic lay assembly of those who took their stand on the
  Scriptures. Their principle was fellowship in the Spirit,
  participation in a common life, although with freedom to visit
  other religious assemblies and even to worship with groups of
  rather different doctrinal persuasions.
                                                     (ibid.: 244)

Here we have described exactly the social structure specified for
the witchcraft cosmology. The sect is founded on a particular idea
of human nature, emphasizing fellowship and goodwill, and
shunning principles of organization. Expulsions are used as the
method of control which enables the group to go on believing in
the possibility of living united in the spirit, but without hierarchy
and formality. When we look more closely at the cosmology, we
find the predicted principles. The inside is so good that within the
Fellowship they are all saints; the outside is bad. Not only is there
the alleged corruption of those who happen not to be within the
Fellowship, but there is also the general badness of institution-
alized behaviour, of seeking to relate Churches to the civil power,
to take over the work of the spirit by establishing external forms.
The contrast of the spirit with flesh, of spontaneity and freedom
with instituted form, the contrast of thing signified with sign, is
equated in the doctrinal controversies with the contrast of God
with man. So the significance of inside-outside takes on cosmic
proportions and the heretic is the saint who wants to have some
truck with the outside.
   These aspects of sectarianism emerge clearly in the life of John
Nelson Darby, whose appearance has been described in Chapter 5.
His life was an endless struggle with dissidents on this very score.
They felt that to insure continuity his standard suggestions were
inadequate. In the pamphlet entitled Reflections on the Ruined
Condition of the Church and on the Efforts Making (sic) by
Churchmen and Dissenters to Restore It to its Primitive Order
(1841) he wrote:

  The project of making Churches is really the hindrance in the
  way of the accomplishment of what all desire, namely the union
  of the saints in one body—first, because those who have
  attempted it, having gone beyond the power given them by the
  Spirit, the flesh has been fostered in them.
                                       (quoted in Coad, 1968:125)
                                             The problem of evil 117

The biographer goes on to say

  Darby concluded his pamphlet with his standard suggestions,
  which were so inadequate for continuing congregations. The
  present dispensation was fallen, and any who tried to remedy
  this state had failed to grasp the Divine Will. The promise of the
  presence of Christ when two or three were present in his name
  was still valid. Christians should avail themselves of this
  promise, and so meet to wait upon God, but no more. There
  was promise and power for such meetings, but none at all for
  those who sought to set up churches. To choose presidents or
  pastors is to organize a church, and even the appointment of
  elders is now impossible. The only government of the church
  was the acknowledgement of the Spirit of God.
                                                         (ibid.: 127)

Not only was error wrong, but for Darby ‘error was something
evil, directly involving the honour of the Godhead’ (ibid.: 87). So
in his controversy with a former friend and disciple, associating
heresy with evil and with the devil, he wrote:

  My mind did pass through the same process of anxiety as that
  of which you speak, as far as anxiety went, a qualm crossed my
  mind that some work of the enemy more than I knew how to
  judge of, was at the bottom.
                                                      (ibid.: 143)

The cosmic implications of God and the devil; inside and outside;
purity within, corruption without; here is the complex of ideas that
is associated with small groups with clearly marked membership
and confusion of internal roles. The fact that I have drawn on
Darby’s own attitudes raises the question of his personality. It is a
distraction to this discussion to suggest that persecution feelings and
a capacity to identify one’s own views with those of the Almighty,
and so to magnify the personal conflicts to a cosmic scale, are
psychopathic manifestations. So they may be, and Darby may well
have had these tendencies to an abnormal degree. So also, possibly,
many of his followers. But we cannot regard the psychological
explanation as satisfactory by itself without ignoring the correlation
of social structure with cosmology. Anyone who has had the
experience of a free and open social context changing to a suddenly
restricted one in which ascribed relationships have not been worked
out must recognize the change in attitudes of all the persons affected
118 The problem of evil

by the contraction and confusion of social ties. Leaders may well
have psychological traits which enable them to express very sharply
these fears and resentments, but only a sociological analysis can
explain why they find their followings in predictable niches whose
social structure corresponds recognizably with the dominant pattern
of symbols.
   We have signalled a similarity in philosophical outlook common
to small bounded communities. It can be described as a form of
metaphysical dualism. For its doctrine of two kinds of humanity,
one good, the other bad, and the association of the badness of some
humans with cosmic powers of evil is basically similar to some of
the so-called dualist religions which are discussed by historians. If
indeed we can relate philosophical dualism to certain kinds of social
structures, then some re-examination of the history of ideas is called
for. No longer should it be permitted for historians to write as if
philosophies move autonomously in a social vacuum, one idea
hitting another, splitting it, growing, decaying and being taken over.
Why did Zoroaster rebel against polytheism? Why did he think that
a good God could not be responsible for evil? Or, to put it more
cogently, why was there a following for a man who could not
tolerate the idea of a punishing God, but split the universe between
two equally balanced warring deities, one good, one bad? It takes a
certain kind of social experience to start to worry about the problem
of evil. Not everyone can perceive it as a problem at all. The
question of God’s responsibility does not pose itself in the terms
which historians customarily employ:

  It is only when one has come to admit one omnipotent,
  omniscient creator, who created the world with all there is in it,
  that the question arises why everything in the world does not go
  according to the will of the creator and ruler…in other words,
  the question arises as to how evil came into the world. An
  attempt to answer this question; such is dualism in its different
  forms…. The whole history of Western Philosophy appears in
  this light as an alternation of dualism and monism since
  Aristotle was already combating Plato’s dualism and since his
  own monism, with that of the Stoics, was succeeded by a period
  of pagan and Christian neo-Platonism up to the Aristotelian
  revival in the twelfth century. Plato himself did not invent
  dualism ex stirpe, for it was foreshadowed by Empedocles,
  Anaxagoras, the Orphics and Pythagoreans.
                             (Duchesne-Guillemin, 1958:1, 71–2)
                                            The problem of evil 119

The mind of the anthropologist boggles at the erudition required
to apply sociological insights to the problem of evil in such a
perspective. For certainly dualism through these centuries took
varying forms, some emphasizing more the contrast between spirit
and matter, some emphasizing more the human agents of evil,
others emphasizing demons. With each, we would expect
appropriately varying social conditions.
   The Pentecostal Church of West Indians in London which I
have mentioned already would ‘disfellowship’ a member who
unsuccessfully challenged the leader. The man thus expelled would
often go off and form a new church around his own leadership.
The charges made against him, usually of sexual irregularity, may
have had implications of a more deep-dyed and sinister form of
villainy in the eyes of the Fellowship than in ours. But this does not
appear from Calley’s account. I would hardly expect to find the
witchcraft cosmology established in a community whose
boundaries are so fluctuating and memberships so fluid. A close
analysis of sectarian movements on the criteria of grid and group
should reveal such consistently varying patterns of cosmology and
social structure.
   The only way in which a witch-dominated cosmology can be
transformed is by a change at the level of social organization. John
Middleton has described a cyclic move between ascribed and
competitive social patterns with the predicted shift in cosmological
emphasis (Middleton, 1960). In the early stages of the growth of a
new Lugbara lineage, leadership is ascribed by seniority in the
male line. At this stage, though witch beliefs are latent, they seem
to lie inactive. All fortunes, good and bad, are sent by punishing
ancestors who regulate behaviour through the mediation of the
lineage elder. But as the lineage grows in size and as the elder ages
and weakens, problems of succession split the group into rival
factions. Competition replaces ascription. The ancestors recede
into the background while accusations of witchcraft are bandied
about by rivals for the leadership. Once the succession problem is
settled (by the death or disgrace of the declining elder) ascription
and the ancestors take over again.
   People who frequently accuse one another of witchcraft readily
adopt witch-cleansing movements. In central Africa these
movements spread like wildfire from tribe to tribe where small
self-contained villages are dominated by witch beliefs. These
movements offer fantastic promises of a new golden age to be
realized on earth by the ending of witchcraft. But it is important to
120 The problem of evil

note that witch-cleansing movements are not the same as
millennial movements properly so-called. Witch-cleansing
movements, though they spread from one community to the next,
spread as solutions offered to a given community and its members
for their particular troubles. They are not formulae for saving the
world in general, or the whole tribe. Their exponents go round
from village to village like a decontamination squad selling
techniques for de-fusing potentially explosive human material.
When they have made their rounds, the community sees itself
restored (albeit temporarily) to a state of tranquil harmony. For so
long as the spell lasts all suspected witches are rendered harmless
and the witchcraft is under control; livestock will fatten, crops will
flourish, children will grow strong and no one die till a ripe old
age. Symbolism of the bounded social group is very clear in the
witch-cleansing movement (Douglas, 1963; Richards, 1935;
Marwick, 1950). The perfection of the body and the completion of
life’s span are promised through the control of witchcraft, which is
the only perceived threat to the unity of the group. The witch-
cleansing movement staves off schism and shores up the weak
internal organization of the group. But eventually a child sickens,
crops fail and strife breaks out again. The cult is said to have lost
its force.
    Although the witch-cleansing movement carries a millennial
possibility in its promise to end evil and suffering, it differs
radically from the true millennial movement. It is focused on the
problems of small local groups, whereas millennialism has a
message for the world. But like the millennial movement, the
witch-cleansing movement comes and goes and leaves the
community as it was, still prone to witch beliefs, still awaiting a
new, more effective movement which will kill off or immobilize
witches for ever. Neither can succeed in separating the social
structure permanently from its appropriate cosmology.
    The witch-fearing cosmology goes with a closely bounded unit.
When association is free and escape from unwanted ties easy, the
question of evil does not take this particular form. Witch-
dominated cosmologies are rare among nomadic hunters and
herders.
    Pastoralists who neighbour the Nuer, the Dinka, believe in
witchcraft as a possibility. They are able to indicate the physical
abnormalities which betray a witch, but they very rarely accuse
of witchcraft (Lienhardt, 1951). Navaho sheepherders in
Arizona, of whom we wrote in the first chapter, believe in
                                          The problem of evil 121

witchcraft. ‘Out of a Navaho group of 500 members, nineteen
living individuals have been accused (in gossip—not publicly) of
witchcraft. Ten additional individuals who have been dead from
ten to thirty years have been so accused. In the last thirty years
there have been six public accusations—“trials”—and two
“witches” have been killed’ (Kluckhohn, 1944:58). It took
Kluckhohn years of work to obtain more than anecdotal
reference to witches ‘over the mountain’ or ‘across the
reservation’ but none the less it was an important concern of
these Navaho who spent most of the year in small family groups
pent up together but isolated from others. On the other hand,
those Navaho observed by Aberle later, who had suffered from
de-stocking and the cash economy and taken comfort in the
peyote cult, had lost interest in witchcraft (Aberle, 1966:203–4).
By and large witchcraft beliefs are likely to flourish in small
enclosed groups, where movement in and out is restricted, when
interaction is unavoidably close, and where roles are undefined
or so defined that they are impossible to perform. Strindberg
shrewdly describes a society of this kind in the home of his own
childhood. The society of urban Sweden in the 1850s was divided
into classes, or rather natural divisions according to trade and
occupation, which held each other in check:

  The child’s first impressions, as he remembered afterwards,
  were of fear and hunger. He was afraid of the dark, of
  spankings, of upsetting everybody. Afraid of falling, of hurting
  himself, of being in the way. He was afraid of being hit by his
  brothers, slapped by the maids, scolded by his grandmother,
  caned by his father, and birched by his mother…. Above the
  child loomed a hierarchy of authorities wielding various rights
  and powers, ranging from the seniority privileges of his brothers
  to the supreme tribunal of his father. And yet above his father
  was the ‘super’ who always threatened him with the landlord….
  But even above him was the general…. The child did not know
  what a king looked like, but he knew that the general went up
  to the King…. When his mother prayed to God in the evening,
  the child could form no distinct idea of Him, except that he
  must certainly be higher than the King.
                                         (Strindberg, 1967:18–19)

Here is a perfect description of a distant God to whom the child
automatically relates through the clearly felt layers of social
122 The problem of evil

hierarchy. He then describes the confusion and troubles which
beset the family—and the sense of crowding.

  Three rooms were occupied by the father and mother with their
  seven children and two servants. The furniture consisted mostly
  of tables and beds. Children on ironing boards and chairs,
  children in cradles and beds. The father had no room for
  himself, although he was at home most of the time…. The
  family was and still is a very imperfect institution. No one had
  time to bring up the children. The school took over where the
  maids left off. The family was really an institution for eating,
  washing and ironing, and a very uneconomical one at that.
  Nothing but cooking, shopping, running errands to the
  greengrocer and dairy. Washing, ironing, starching and
  scouring. Too many things for such a small number of persons
  to do at once…. The child heard only that he had duties, not
  that he had rights. Everyone else’s wishes were listened to; his
  were ignored. He could do nothing without doing something
  wrong, go nowhere without being in someone’s way, utter no
  word without disturbing someone. Finally he did not even dare
  move. The supreme duty and greatest virtue was to sit on a
  chair and be quiet.
                                                       (ibid.: 30–2)

This gives us an unbeatable account of roles being impossibly
defined so as to produce frustration and, in the long run,
ambiguity and confusion. Strindberg, as a sensitive child,

  was in perpetual anxiety lest he should do something wrong.
  But he was always on the alert for injustice, and by setting a
  high standard for himself, he carefully watched the failings of
  his brothers. When they went unpunished, he felt deeply
  wronged; when they were undeservedly rewarded, his sense of
  justice suffered. With the result that he was considered envious.
                                                       (ibid.: 32–3)

One older brother was his father’s favourite, the other his
mother’s. He was no one’s favourite. Then he goes on to describe
the frequent miscarriage of justice from which he suffered and
which, as it accumulated, type-cast him in the family as secretive,
jealous and cold. His whole description of the social setting and
the response of members of the group parallels situations which
                                           The problem of evil 123

give rise to witchcraft beliefs with uncanny exactness. And of
course it is August Strindberg, the child who was nobody’s
favourite, who is accused of an abnormal, defective personality.
   To live in this kind of society is to live crowded together with
one’s fellow humans in disorderly competition. Its members have
reason to lack confidence that justice will prevail. Not theirs the
motto about the mills of God grinding slowly but grinding
exceedingly small. In the life of pastoralists such as Dinka and
Nuer the great imponderables are hazards of climate and pasture;
fellow humans are fairly reliable. In this other kind of society the
hazards and frustrations are produced by fellow humans.
   This contrast is made very clearly by Godfrey Lienhardt (1962),
when he compares the Nuer and Dinka with another Nilotic
people, the Anuak. As he put it:

  The Anuak are basically agricultural and sedentary, living in
  many distinct, largely self-sufficient and often very crowded
  village communities, where they are in constant and intense
  individual contact. The Dinka-Nuer are first and foremost
  pastoral people necessarily transhumant, with regular dispersal
  and regrouping of members of local communities. In the nature
  of their occupation, the Dinka-Nuer individually live more
  solitary lives than the Anuak.
      The frequent dispersal of the Dinka-Nuer as compared with
  the concentration of the Anuak may be associated with a much
  greater interest shown by the Anuak in individuals and
  personalities. They have an extensive psychological vocabulary,
  and their village politics…are conducted through an interplay of
  character as well as of faction. Anuak are interested in people,
  Dinka-Nuer more interested in cattle. For the Anuak their lively
  interest is a practical necessity in the conduct of their village
  affairs with their frequent plots for the promotion of sectional
  and individual interests in the headmanship. The competitive
  system of rank and influence permits any ambitious individual a
  wider scope for political activity…an Anuak who feels himself
  slighted by a particular headman will eventually find those with
  whom to combine in an attempt to replace him or he can go and
  seek favour at a noble’s court. The Anuak have institutions based
  on favouritism and competitiveness for favour, which could not
  develop among the Nuer-Dinka, who have no individuals of rank
  whom it could be profitable to cultivate.
                                          (Lienhardt, 1962:74–85)
124 The problem of evil

We hardly need to fill in the cosmology of the Anuak. Whereas
Dinka-Nuer believe misfortune and death to be sent by spirit
powers which correspond to the social order, Anuak attribute
deaths to witches or to ghostly vengeance of dead people whom
their victims have somehow wronged in their life. Whereas the
Nuer-Dinka respond to sickness by sacrifice and prayer ‘the only
religious expert among the Anuak is the Ajuan, a person most
usually a woman whose main traditional tasks were to find
witches and deal with witchcraft and to try to remove ghostly
curses from its victim’ (ibid.: 85).
   The choices people make about how they deal with one another
are the real material which concerns the student of comparative
religion. This is the missing dimension which must be added to
psychoanalysis for its insights to illumine. Jung’s comments on the
Reformation, for instance, treat the impoverishment of symbols in
European culture as the result of a dialectic of the mind:

  The iconoclasm of the Reformation, however, quite literally
  made a breach in the bulwarks of the holy pictures and, ever
  since, one after another has crumbled away. They became
  dubious, for they collided with awakening reason…. The
  history of the development of Protestantism is one of chronic
  iconoclasm. One wall after another fell. And the work of
  destruction was not too difficult either, when once the authority
  of the church had been shattered. We all know how, in large
  things as in small, in general as well as in particular, piece after
  piece collapsed, and how the alarming impoverishment of
  symbolism that is now the condition of our life came about.
                                                  (Jung, 1940:60–1)

Do we know how it came about? In general we tend to accept
implicitly with Jung that the movement is as inevitable as the
growth of technology and even that it may have something to do
with increase of knowledge in general, ‘awakening reason’, a kind
of sad maturity and coming of age. As he says:

  That the gods die from time to time is due to man’s discovery
  that they do not mean anything, that they are good-for-nothings
  made by human hands, fashioned out of wood and stone. In
  reality, man has thus discovered only this: that up till then he
  had not achieved one thought concerning these images.
                                                             (ibid.)
                                           The problem of evil 125

He then goes on to defend the rejection of symbols as an
achievement in its own right, and to present it in terms of the good
inside, spirit, being preferable to worthless outside, of content
preferred above empty form.

  I am convinced that Protestant man has not in vain been
  despoiled of his own development, and made to go naked. This
  development has an interconsistency. Everything that presented
  him with no thought-content has been torn from him…. As the
  Christian vow of worldly poverty turned the senses from the
  good things of the world, so spiritual poverty seeks to renounce
  the false riches of the spirit.
                                                       (ibid.:63–4)

Jung would be the first to agree that the individual suffers no
absolute impoverishment of his private symbolic life. The theory
of archetypes and the analysis of dreams depends on this.
Therefore the beggary to which he refers is the loss of coherence in
publicly recognized symbolic structures. And this derives from the
coherence of the social structures and declines with decline in that
realm. Thus the glowing eulogy of spiritual poverty as a source of
strength and self-knowledge for the individual becomes very
dubious. First, because the scope of self-knowledge is reduced by
restricted experience of other selves. Second, the fullest self-
knowledge will take account of the social conditions which affect
the development of the self. Third, it cannot be assumed that the
point near zero, where pressures of grid and group are at a
minimum, presents the ideal conditions for the development of the
individual personality.
Chapter 8
Impersonal rules




Witch beliefs express a division within humanity: there are pure,
good men, and utterly vile men who do not belong with humanity at
all. We have argued that this dualism is fostered by the experience of
living in small, closed communities. We now turn to societies where
this experience is lacking. Where a man is expected to build his own
career by transacting with all and sundry as widely as possible to the
best of his ability, there is a very different view of human nature. In
these competitive conditions, men are not set on either side of a line
dividing humanity from inhumanity. They are seen to be unequally
endowed with talents, but the inequality is random, unpredictable
and unconnected with moral judgement.
    Two New Guinea tribes show slight variations on the theme.
First, the Garia of the Madang District on the north coast of New
Guinea. About 2,500 of them inhabited 35 square miles of the
Bagasin Area. They lived in small hamlets consisting of dwellings
grouped around a cult house. Notice how the ties of common
residence are not congruent with those of personal allegiance.
Lawrence says:

  The structure must be seen from the standpoint of the
  individual and the network of interpersonal relations
  surrounding him. A man divided the inhabitants of his locality
  into those who belonged to his security circle—those with
  whom he had safe relationships—and those who did not. His
  security circle included all bilateral kin up to fourth ascending
  generation together with other people with whom he had
  normally no blood ties but specific contractual relationships;
  trade partners; persons with whom he exchanged pigs; and
  affines to whom he gave or from whom he received periodic
  instalments of bride price…. The members of a man’s security
                                              Impersonal rules 127

  circle could be scattered anywhere in his locality because of the
  land tenure system…their garden plots were often in different
  quarters. To use them all they had regularly to move from one
  settlement to another. The members of a patrilineage were
  rarely localized and hamlets consisted of irregular clusters of
  people, some of whom were interrelated and others not…. A
  leader’s authority was always ill-defined: he could not represent
  a specific group, but only the often transient inhabitants of his
  own and possibly neighbouring hamlets. Dispersal of land
  holdings and consequent migration enabled his followers to
  divide their allegiance between him and his rivals, or withdraw
  it immediately if his prowess was eclipsed.
                                           (Lawrence, 1964:24–5)

The possibilities of shifting allegiances and the confusion of social
categories are beautifully described. The Garia traded with other
tribes having variant forms of the same general type of social
organization. As Lawrence says:

  Nobody in any of the societies outlined clearly understood its
  total structure. Rather, individuals conducted their affairs from
  a purely egocentric standpoint: in terms of constellations of
  person-to-person relationships, some denoting membership of a
  descent or local group, and others affinal, cognatic, exchange,
  or trade ties.
                                                         (ibid.: 28)

He goes on to describe the universe in which these people saw
themselves. It was an optimistic view. The world existed for man
and he had the right to enjoy it. It could be manipulated according
to straightforward rules, very comparable in their effectiveness to
the rules of reciprocity by which men compelled one another to
exchange goods and women. Religion was a technology for
overcoming risk. There was no moral feedback in the system, he
remarks with a tinge of surprise.

  Spiritual values such as purity and sin were non-existent. There
  was no idea of rewards in the next world in return for good
  works or of separate destinations for ‘good’ and ‘bad’. The
  affairs of the dead automatically regulated themselves. Even the
  initiatory taboos had no abstract ethical meaning.
                                                             (ibid.)
128 Impersonal rules

It was an extremely pragmatic religion.

  Spatially…the cosmos was conceived as a unified physical realm
  with virtually no supernatural attributes; in which human
  beings reacted not only with each other but also with deities,
  spirits and totems.
                                                      (ibid.: 31)

The characteristics of a successful man were personal preeminence
and secret ritual knowledge.

  The leaders were men who ‘really knew’ and who could direct
  the activities of others—those who did not ‘really know’—to
  the best advantage. It was popular conviction of this ability that
  enabled the particularly successful leader, who had an
  outstanding personality and had never been defeated by
  unforeseen circumstances, to lure followers away from his less
  fortunate rivals.
                                                              (ibid.)

Here we have a brief glimpse of the religion we would expect to
correspond to this kind of social structure. Power is located so as
to be theoretically available for all, but it needs a talented man to
go out and get it for himself according to known rules. The cosmos
is amoral. Attitudes to ritual are highly magical. It is an ego-
focused religion, as predictable in an ego-focused social structure.
   I now quote from another Melanesian study. The ‘Are’are,
about 5,000 of them, inhabit the south of the island of Malaita.
Daniel de Coppet points out that their residential rules and land
rights do not admit of description in terms usually adopted by
anthropologists. Over a vast mountainous area, funeral sites are
fixed points of reference around which individuals circulate. For
rights of cultivation are determined by genealogical links with
these sites. One can choose among all and any of one’s ancestors.
So each person has a wider range of choice. There is no word to
signify territorial boundary; there is no inside nor outside of a local
territory. Only genealogically defined positions relative to funeral
sites are significant. Men are not enclosed within any kinds of
bounded territories. Like many other Melanesians, the ’Are’are use
a form of shell or tooth money for expressing their relationships.
These are worked out in a complex pattern of trade and ritual
exchanges.
                                              Impersonal rules 129

  Each individual carries a certain number of elements which
  assure him power over the world and over his peers. First, his
  identity in the form of several names of which some come to
  him from his father’s side and some from his mother’s. From
  birth, he holds defined land rights, and will receive on the death
  of each of his parents a share in their property. He will also be
  able to use his technical knowledge and his knowledge of moral,
  ritual and social rules, and supernatural powers inherited or
  bought. Finally, he is responsible for all the credits and debts
  which he creates in the course of ceremonial exchanges.
                                                  (de Coppet, 1968)

From this common starting point the ‘Big Man’ imposes himself as
leader, without any special titles, without the framework of any
hierarchy or installation, no special rights to levy taxes or to
demand labour. It is a purely personal achievement. His power
rests only in the consent of his followers. But the more numerous
they are, the greater his prestige and power. Here is basically the
same social situation. A relation of reciprocity and
interdependence, a premise of initial equality and an actual pattern
of gross inequality. Everyone else depends on the Big Man for their
livelihood and security. He creates the political and ritual
framework in which ordinary men can work out their cycles,
patterns of reciprocal exchanges in grander and grander patterns.
His glory enhances the lustre of theirs. He creates large-scale local
alliances, controls violence, settles disputes. He does it all by
generosity, hard work, skilful manipulation of the rules of feast-
giving and compensation. The rules are immensely complex. For
him a ladder of achievement, for those whose only hope of
freedom is to give up the struggle for solvency and esteem, they are
an oppressive grid.
   Another good example of this kind of social system was given
by Oliver (1957) for the Siuai of Bougainville Island, in the
Solomons. Here again, a highly individualistic, competitive
society is lifted above a lowly level of achievement by the efforts
of individual Big Men. The leaders compete for followers, force
other men to extend themselves to their utmost capacity to
produce yams, pigs and all manner of standard luxuries for feasts
at which they challenge and discountenance their rivals. The
successful leader challenges the leader of the next club-house;
then, successful in his own district, he challenges the leader of
another district. Each success rebounds to the glory of his own
130 Impersonal rules

club-house. If he had not asserted himself, they would have
apathetically half-exploited their environment. There would have
been no excitement and no collaboration. During the period of
his prime, they reach a higher level of organization than they
would otherwise have been capable of. When he grows old there
is the natural fall-off of his following. Somewhere else some
other leader arises and the level of social organization rises there,
while it falls here. Everyone in this society knows that it is only
personal qualities which help a leader. Their cosmos expresses
this precisely by attributing to each man his own set of spiritual
lieutenants. The Big Man has the fiercest, biggest demons to
work for him (ibid.: 444–6). Gradually we build up the picture
from these cultures of a type of society very preoccupied with
success. The man who works well for himself benefits everyone
else. It is a system based on private enterprise, and highly
cultivated managerial skills. The cosmos is morally neutral and
basically optimistic. Anyone can reach out of the sky any
Excalibur magic sword he is big enough to wield. There is no
disapproval of men who use magic to further their own cause.
Where the ends are approved, the means are also approved. The
admired virtues are ambition, cunning and strength. Not all New
Guinea societies conform closely to this pattern. For example,
K.Burridge (1965) describes the Tangu of Northern Madang
District as also seeing their universe as amoral (p. 225), magical
(p. 246), unpredictable and capricious (pp. 239–40), but he
describes here much greater emphasis on sorcery fears. Meggitt
(1965) describes the Mae Enga of the Western Highlands as
dominated by their fears of ancestral ghosts. Both societies seem
to exhibit the features we would predict from the foregoing
argument: smaller and more closed groups for the sorcery-ridden
Tangu, and an ascribed patrilineal role-system with well-defined
local communities for the ancestor-fearing Mae Enga. But only a
close examination of the way grid and group are felt in tribes in a
single cultural area will throw light on these variations.
   I now take an example from Europe. In the typical cosmology
of the ego-focused social system power is an individual gift.
Supernatural power is attributed in such a way as to validate
individual success and explain individual failure. Thus among our
Teutonic forbears, luck was the dominant cosmological idea, as
destiny was among the ancient Greeks.
   Recall that the Teutons had a cognatic system of kinship in
which obligations of help were reckoned to radiate out from each
                                               Impersonal rules 131

individual in all lines of descent. Then read Grönbech’s account in
The Culture of the Teutons (1931):

  Whichever way we turn, we find the power of luck. It
  determines all progress. Where it fails, life sickens. It seems
  to be the strongest power, the vital principle indeed of the
  world.
                                                     (Vol. I: 127)

He goes on to describe the capricious and individual nature of this
power. Each family might claim a certain kind of luck, for sailing,
or fighting or fishing. King Eric Weatherhat had the wind in his
hat: he could change it by turning it about.

  Among chieftains, this gift of victory shows in its full splendour.
  We find men of military genius, who bring victory in their train
  wherever they go. All the Norwegian kings of Harald Fairhair’s
  race had this great gift of victory. And when Carl Hakon was
  able to fill for a time the place as a ruler over Norway, it was
  due not least to his luck in winning victories, in pursuing and
  killing. It kept the people on his side, for they held that no one
  could be like him in respect of this particular gift. A like tone is
  apparent in the opening of the story of Beowulf, about
  Hrothgar’s kingdom; unto him was given war-speed and battle
  honour, so that his kinsmen followed him until the younglings
  were waxen and gathered about him in their host…. ‘And when
  they saw their leader was fallen, they fled every man’—this
  sentence occurs again and again in the sagas, and its truth is
  confirmed again and again by history. If the great man’s war-
  luck failed, what could the lesser luck of lesser men avail?
                                                                (ibid.)

I am struck with how closely in many respects Professor Maurice
Freedman’s accounts of Chinese geomancy correspond to the
picture I have been building up of a cosmology appropriate to a
highly individualistic, competitive social system. In his presidential
address to the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1968 (published
1969), he describes the Feng-shui system, the geomancy of
buildings. A building modifies the landscape, and so disturbs a
complex balance of forces. The landscape is part of a system, any
change in the form of one element may be to the detriment of
others, so that the geomancer’s task is to divine the best relation
132 Impersonal rules

for his client, whether that be a village community as a whole or
any individual member of it. The landscape suggests certain
symbols, such as dragons, writing brushes.

  The sinking of a well or the cutting of a road is likely to sever a
  dragon’s artery or sinew (to take the commonest case) and
  release some terrible power of misfortune to issue in poverty,
  disease or childlessness. A road made to lead straight to my door
  is an arrow against which I shall be able to protect myself only
  with difficulty and perhaps at great expense…. The link between
  the general properties of a site and the fate of those who occupy it
  lies in the horoscope…the geomancer charged with the job of
  finding and using sites for particular clients is engaged, on his
  client’s behalf, in carving out their best possible future, in staking
  the best possible claim for them in a world of restricted
  opportunities. For happiness and prosperity are not limitless;
  they form a fixed fund from which each man must strive to draw
  the maximum for himself at the expense of others.
                                                     (Freedman, 1969)

Here is a fascinatingly complex variant of the cosmology of
competition. Whereas the New Guinea and Teutonic models deal
in unlimited opportunity, the Chinese one is restricted and
competition all the more keenly pursued. It is, moreover, adapted
to a literate and numerate society of scholars. But, these big
differences apart, it is also morally neutral, a manipulable system,
ego-focused as the others. I would expect its use to vary according
to the importance of ascribed status in different sectors of society.
Maurice Freedman gives an old myth of a geomancer who tried to
overthrow the Ming dynasty by ensuring that his own burial site
would place his son in the position of becoming Emperor. But the
son had to follow certain precise instructions and to wait a
prescribed number of days of mourning. His impatience led him to
cut the mourning time short by one day, and so all the well-laid
plans, which depended on exact timing, went awry. Thus a moral
and social limit on the powers of geomancy can be imported into
an otherwise amoral technology. I would also expect the whole
feeling of the art to change between periods of restriction to
periods of expansion, or between sectors of society which sense
themselves to be expanding or shut in. In the expanding social
system Feng-shui should be surely an optimistic art, but the
geomancer should find his clientele falling off. In the restricted
                                               Impersonal rules 133

system his business would thrive on the fears, well-grounded, of
his clients. There would be more tendency to consult, more
readiness to alter graves and buildings, less happy-go-lucky, do-it-
yourself assurance about the generally propitious elements in the
landscape. Our own industrial consultants find within limits that
economic stringency is good for their class of business.
   We have no difficulty in finding models for the competitive
cosmology in the industrial world. If we look for men who see the
world as a morally neutral, technical system which is lying there for
themselves to exploit with their own special gifts, in which they
place great confidence, we find them in any of our great industrial
magnates. I select Lord Thomson of Fleet, whose biography is so
engagingly frank and detailed on all the relevant points (Braddon,
1965). The wide range of his geographical movements between his
childhood home in Toronto and his present London head office
suggests a parallel with the possibilities of free movement within the
New Guinea societies I have described. The increasing geographical
scale of his responsibilities ranks him, on the same standards, as a
very Big Man indeed. His obsession with making money, then his
obsession with gaining a peerage—it is all very recognizably like the
New Guinea ambition to enjoy power, dependants and prestige.
From a clerical post in the Colonial Cordage Company, to
proprietor of 140 newspapers, here is someone who has never
submitted to the pressure of group boundaries, local or other. His
responsibility is to himself and his own immediate family. When
challenged by victims of his enterprise as to the morality of his
action, closing down or amalgamating failing businesses, he would
be always ready with ‘Someone has to foot the wages bill’. What
was good for him was also best for the majority, and for the
growing number of his dependants.
   First, I would like to show by quotations why he should be
classed as someone free from group constraints. His career is
marked by close partnerships, but, of those he started out with,
very few survived to share his final triumph. Family apart, his
personal relationships are largely mechanized; the majority of his
contacts are fleeting and impersonal.

  From 1953 to 1957 his diaries reveal a profusion of entries that
  read ‘Dinner jacket, speak 20 minutes’—a profusion which is
  matched only by the scarcity of his private or informal
  engagements.
                                            (Braddon:1965:265)
134 Impersonal rules

At receptions, night after night,

  He would shed the hat and the black loose-swinging overcoat,
  and talk and grin amongst the throng. Yet seem always solitary:
  with—rather than of—a group.
                                                     (ibid.: 265)
This is a man who sends Christmas cards every year to everyone he
ever knew (p. 276) and whose secretary brings him a weekly set of
birthday greetings to sign for dispatch to a long list of names. He
has thrust his way up through a series of statuses, his eye
unashamedly on the top grades which stood as challenges.

  I want to find out if I’m as good as I think I am…. What I want
  more than anything in the world is a Knighthood.
                                                       (ibid.: 169)

    On the subject of his peerage he confessed: ‘This title has
  always been an even greater ambition than owning a hundred
  newspapers because it seemed such an unreasonable one—a
  hundred million-to-one-chance.’
                                                   (ibid.: 311)

Clearly the more unreasonable the ambition, the more attractive it
seems. With a longer life-span he might have tried for Shah of
Persia. Very interested in rank, enjoying being called Roy by all his
employees, but anxious to be correct in observing the social rules:

    ‘Say, Roy,…is there anyone here who’s just plain mister?’
    ‘Only you’n me,’ Thomson told him happily. He was going
  through a period when the mere presence of aristocracy made
  him feel happy—and tonight, at this private dinner party, he
  had landed one duke, five earls and a veritable mob of knights.
                                                     (ibid.: 207)

      Within these circles he protected himself by ensuring that he
   was well-briefed. (‘Say, how do I address this guy? Is it My Lord
   or My Lord Bishop?’)
                                                          (ibid.: 273)
   The existence of a set of formal relationships and ranks
provides for him a framework on which to develop his ego-centred
field of activity. His social universe is to be manipulated by energy
and scrupulous observance of rules.
                                              Impersonal rules 135

  Asked what might happen to the man who did not make a 10%
  profit on money he had borrowed at 5%, Thomson’s reply was
  simple. The bank had no right to lend to anyone so half-witted.
                                                     (ibid.: 185)

And, right from the start, we see him always poring over his
balance-sheets. Like the game of snakes and ladders, the
balancesheets represent rules which send him to the winning post
and his rivals to the starting point. His dynamism and attitudes to
time and work are characteristic:

  At his first board meeting he opened proceedings punctually at
  10 a.m. and at 2.30 p.m. was still hard at it. ‘Doesn’t this fellow
  have any sense of time?’ a hungry director asked Chapman
  irritably. ‘Not when there’s work to be done,’ Chapman told
  him. Between them, Chapman and Thomson made clear that
  budgeting and rationalizing were to be imposed on the well-
  established chaos of the Scotsman’s finances.
                                                         (ibid.: 171)

We also see the pragmatic approach to morality: it pays to be
honest is a solemn principle (pp. 236, 273). He is, by admission,
not a religious man. Interviewed on television:

    ‘Are you a religious man?’
     ‘No, I’m afraid I am not.’
     ‘Do you have a nominal religion that you support?’
     ‘Yes, I’m a Protestant, loosely speaking. I would go to any
  Protestant church.’
     ‘You have a conventional belief in God?’
     ‘Quite so.’
     ‘Do you think it is possible for a man who has done as well
  out of the wicked world as you have to say that he lives the life
  of a Christian?’
     ‘I think in all respects,’ Thomson retorted uncompromisingly.
  ‘Yes! I believe implicitly in the Golden Rule. “Do unto others as
  you would have them do unto you.”’
                                                     (ibid.: 275–6)

It is pleasing to think of Lord Thomson in the guise of a New
Guinea hero: the feasts, the balance-sheets, the dynamism, it all
makes the same sense, whether newspapers are bought with
136 Impersonal rules

money, or pigs with shells. Oliver gives these glimpses of a genial
Siuai leader:

  A clever man like So?i makes plans for pig-collecting years in
  advance. Orim said of him: ‘Other men sit in the clubhouse and
  chew betel nut, talking of nothing. Not so with So?i. His heart
  is full of pigs and shell money; giving this and receiving that;
  enlarging his following, emphasizing his potu (renown) and
  dividing his anurara’ (shell-cash). And after a great feast, to
  make a success of which his followers have slaved for weeks
  and are now lying round exhausted, he gives them no rest. Yet
  early next morning the wooden gongs boomed out again and
  they seemed louder than ever, probably because the noise was so
  unexpected. A few sleepy natives strolled in the direction of the
  club house and heard So?i storm out: ‘Hiding in your homes
  again, copulating night and day while there’s work to be done!
  Why, if it were left up to you, you would spend the rest of your
  lives smelling yesterday’s pigs. But I tell you, yesterday’s feast
  was nothing. The next one will be really big. Sihan, I want you
  to arrange with Konu for his largest pig; and you, Maimoi, go
  to Mokakaru and find a pig for Uremu; and…etc.’
                                                  (Oliver, 1949:25)

So the work of organizing credit and partnerships for the next
takeover feast never stops. Whenever a newspaper is bought there
is a feast in Thomson’s diary and plenty of smaller, preparatory
feasts. One could justly account all the rest of his activities as
preparations for more and more splendid feasts. The strict
relevance of the New Guinea parallel is plain enough.
   Among the cosmologies of success we should recognize
different kinds of control exerted over the individual’s behaviour.
Chinese geomancy for example, itself a technique free of moral
consideration, is part of a complex system in which moral controls
are fully represented in the idea of Heaven. The Teuton’s idea of
personal success was moderated by the close relation between luck
and honour. But it is possible for personal success to be celebrated
without recognizing any other constraints than those written into
the rules of the game. In industrial society a limited moral basis for
transactions is supplied by the recognition that financial probity
and creditworthiness are necessary for success. In New Guinea a
leader’s dependence on his followers creates a sensitive feedback
system. Everyone who transacts with others subscribes to the
                                              Impersonal rules 137

respect for reciprocity, and feels as sensitive to shame as to glory.
These moral restraints are generated in the competition itself.
Though they inform the concept of the upright man, the honest
broker, they do nothing further to relate the individual to any final
purposes of the community as such.
   Here we seem to have a type of social system without a
collective conscience. Lowie (1925) did well to point to its
existence, adducing the rank individualism of Crow religion as a
type which Durkheim’s approach could not accommodate. This
is the very type of society which Durkheim thought could not
exist in primitive economic conditions: low level of economic
interdependence combined with highly competitive
individualism, and a religion of private guardian spirits for each
man. In this system, whether among the American Indians or in
New Guinea or here amongst ourselves, each person is
committed to it by the lure of outstanding success (or even just
moderate success) for himself.
   If we turn to consider how a social group can weld the symbols
of self and society into a coherent whole, it appears that the ego-
focused grid system does nothing comparable for the concept of
self. Questions about the identity and value of the self are hardly
soluble except by manifestations of success. And the system of
strong grid is such that only the few can achieve success. For these
few it is possible to find that the rules are so many ropes and
ladders for a giddy emancipation. For the majority of others it may
never be clear that the path is blocked for themselves: one day
their luck or demons may become more effective. But there must
always be some who discover that they are born to lose all their
lives, to serve for a pittance, to admire glittering prizes which can
never come within their grasp. Who are the bad sorcerers so much
disapproved by respectable New Guinea society, the stranglers
with red eyes and long nails whose hearts are said to be consumed
with jealousy? The good men use sorcery all the time as part of the
approved technology of success. So the disapproved sorcerers must
be the failures, the drop-outs, casualties of the system. What their
world view is, what they think of the way the rules are worked,
how they view the system would be the most valuable information
of all for our comparison. How do they succeed in protecting their
image of their inner selves from degradation and disgust? It is
possible that they come to believe in their own moral inadequacy
and take their own bitterness and jealousy as proof of the
soundness of accusations levelled against them. Or are these the
138 Impersonal rules

men waiting to be delivered by a new cargo cult? The ethnography
of the world seen from the eyes of the accused sorcerer has not
been recorded as yet.
   Curiously enough, the successful leaders, having spiralled free
of personal constraints, emerge into a rarified atmosphere which
has something in common with the world view of the people most
heavily subject to controlling pressure in the same society. Their
ephemeral social contacts and imperviousness to personal
pressures enable them to see the cosmos as a rational order not
dominated by people but by manipulable objects. These objects are
the impersonal rules which govern their transactions. Their world
is not controlled by independent ghosts and witches, or evil men.
There is no sin: only stupidity. Human nature is divided between
the foolish and the wise, between ‘those who know’, and the
others. They feel no need for symbolic action other than triumphal
feasts for symbolizing the control of society by the self. Hence, a
certain blindness to any symbolic representations of the self being
controlled by society which mysteriously transcends it and vests it
with greater significance. For them it is a rational world whose
laws are perfectly intelligible and unmysterious. And it is, on the
whole, a satisfactory world, for those successful leaders.
   In New Guinea, this social structure, an ego-focused grid, and
this cosmology, are the permanent, on-going back-drop to
recurring cargo cults. The term ‘cargo’ represents European
wealth, clothes, food and trade goods. The essence of these cults is
that some mythical hero will reveal to the people secret rituals for
obtaining cargo. Periodically, at the say-so of a prophet, they drop
their hoes, destroy their property, perform rituals and go out to the
wharf or airfield to await the delivery of the cargo. Cargo cults
have caused great turmoil and administrative concern in
Melanesia; mobs are controlled with violence, leaders jailed. Yet
they are only driven underground and recur again and again.
There is now a considerable literature on these cults. Inevitably,
since cargo is a word and an idea derived from European
occupation, the cults have been analysed as colonial
manifestations, the result of contact with a foreign culture
(Lawrence, 1964; Worsley, 1957; Thrupp, 1962:17). But it seems
very possible that similar movements have occurred earlier, though
at less regular intervals.
   The modern cargo cult is very like other millennial
movements. It discards existing rituals and looks for a radical
new rite which will usher in a golden era. But it has one
                                             Impersonal rules 139

distinctive and crucial mark. Most millennial movements reject
the material values of society and seek to transform it into
something quite other. But the cargo cult explicitly accepts the
current material values, these especially, and seeks to provide for
its followers a means of achieving them. The difference
corresponds to two distinctive attitudes to poverty in
contemporary Christian religion. On the one hand is the Sermon
on the Mount, blessing poverty and warning against riches, on
the other is the vow to abolish poverty and achieve affluence for
all. Its drastic contemporary form may well be an adaptation to a
particularly prolonged and acute contemporary crisis of an
ancient ritual of moral regeneration. The present crisis is caused
by the coastal Melanesians finding themselves in relation with
rich foreigners with whom they cannot transact because they
have nothing to offer in exchange. They are therefore unable to
enter into reciprocal relations with the Europeans. They find
themselves denied the basic human rights of social intercourse,
and denied it by people with whom they would particularly like
to transact. This sense of being excluded, disregarded, of being
made to feel of no value is a regular experience in the system of
strong grid. For continually as one man rises to eminence he
reduces his former partners to insignificance, refuses to trade
with them or to feast with them as equals, and sets his sights on
other more lucrative relationships. Lawrence very convincingly
describes the cargo cult as an attempt to adopt traditional ritual
techniques to the European situation. In this everyday magic a
Garia man sought to make other people ‘think on’ him. To get
someone to ‘think on’ oneself is to get them to co-operate. Social
oblivion is the great risk. This idiom of forcing other people by
ritual to ‘think on’ one is a telling way of expressing the anxiety
not to be neglected and disparaged in a system where only some
can succeed and where the rest are bound to experience
disparagement and, with it, material and social loss.

  The content of these social relationships can be described as the
  exchange of equivalent goods and services. A purely nominal
  relation had little value. What counted was that each party to a
  relationship should be forced to ‘think on’…the other by the
  fulfilment of specific obligations—as in kinship and exchange
  commitments—which demanded an automatic and equal return
  at the risk of losing personal reputation and mutual
  advantage…where there was no exchange of goods and
140 Impersonal rules

  services, there could be no sense of relationship, mutual
  obligation and value, but only suspicion, hostility and risk of
  warfare.
                                        (Lawrence, 1964:29–30)

Cargo, then, is not wanted for its own sake, but for the new
relationships it will permit, when Papuan can exchange with
European on fair and equal terms. The cargo cult is to be seen as
a specially potent rite which dissolves all existing commitments
and relationships for the sake of establishing a new, more
profitable set of links. Not surprisingly, in view of what we have
seen about the tendency to reproduce a social situation in bodily
symbolism, shaking, frenzy and sexual promiscuity accompany
many cargo cult rituals. The people want to wipe out the old
system, with its inferior forms of wealth, and to make a new
beginning. I find it hard to believe that very similar movements
of moral regeneration have not been endemic in Melanesia long
before the invention of the idea of cargo. The means by which the
cults spread from one locality to the next by way of regularly
instituted payments suggest a well-known system. Kenelm
Burridge suggests that the Tangu had resorted to cults of renewal
before the advent of Europeans (1960:25). My own hypothesis is
that a society so strongly centred on a structure of ego-focused
grid is liable to recurrent breakdown from its inherent moral
weakness. It cannot continually sustain the commitment of all its
members to an egalitarian principle that favours a minority. It
has no way of symbolizing or activating the collective conscience.
One would anticipate an ego-focused grid system to swing
between the glorification of successful leaders and the
celebration of the right of the masses to enjoy success. Thus the
cargo cult and its prototypes would be cults of revolt against the
way the social structure seems to be working, but not of
revolution against the traditional structure itself.
   Many are struck with the parallel between student revolt and
violent millennialism. Compensation theory gives as the cause
insecurity or deprivation. But my own hypothesis points to a lack
of adequate structuring in the university population. It could well
be that academics, in a given department, could feel hemmed in
together in competitive disorder and show themselves prone to
diagnose in terms of the witch hunt. And it could well be that the
students themselves experience grid without group. Each, with an
individual time-table controlling every hour of his day, moves from
                                                Impersonal rules 141

impersonal lecture halls to isolated lodging; the groups he joins are
fragmentary and short-term. The organization to which he is
subject seems to prevent him from realizing his aspirations instead
of securing them for him. He experiences society as an alien,
sinister body, a machine which represses life. His categories of
pollution and purity, of matter and mind, flesh and spirit are
drawn up on the age-old pattern. Hence the brutal confrontation:
his teachers live in one universe, they cherish boundaries and smell
conspiracy against sacred forms; he lives in another universe in
which no particular form is sacred; form as such is distinct from
content and inferior to it; he opposes classification as the
expression of empty form, the very emblem of evil. While I am
writing this the University of Illinois is investigating the
destruction of its library catalogues and deploring an apparently
mindless attack on learning. But the destruction of categories of
any kind is a symbolic act which replicates social life over-
structured by grid, the experience which has always driven people
to value unstructured personal experiences and to place their faith
in a catastrophic event which will sweep away all existing forms of
structure.
   To sum up: the four social types we have identified by grid and
group have four distinctive cosmological types. First, for high
classification, where grid and group are strong, the universe is just.
Pain and suffering are either the proper punishments of individual
misdeeds or accounted by transcendental book-keeping so that the
effects of one man’s virtue are chalked up for the common good
and his faults are likewise charged to the community. It is a
complex regulative cosmos.
   Second, for the social type I have called small group, the
universe is divided between warring forces of good and evil.
Leadership is precarious in such groups, roles ambiguous and
undefined. The group boundary is the main definer of rights:
people are classed either as members or strangers. Magical danger
is associated with the idea of boundary. Evil is a foreign danger
introduced by foreign agents in disguise. Group members accuse
deviants in their midst of allowing the outside evil to infiltrate. The
accusations lead to fission of the group. The cosmos is endangered
by the vile, irrational behaviour of human agents of evil. It is
preoccupied with rituals of cleansing, expulsion of spies or witches
and the redrawing of boundaries. Many people believe in
witchcraft without being preoccupied by fear of their neighbour’s
aggression. I would not include their witch-beliefs, which tend to
142 Impersonal rules

be marginal elements of their cosmology, in this category. Witch-
dominated cosmologies vary in a range which corresponds to the
structuring of internal roles and the openness and permeability of
the external boundary.
   There are clear interpretations in what I have said on witchcraft
for the history of religious movements. There could be practical
implications too. If a new witch-hunting terror were to appear,
such as that led by Joe McCarthy in America in the 1950s, it
would not be enough to denounce him and his followers. Richard
Rovere (1959) says: ‘McCarthy drew into his following most of
the zanies and zombies and compulsive haters who had followed
earlier and lesser demagogues.’ But when witch fantasies occur on
a national scale, they are not merely the product of the crazed and
weak-minded and of cynical manipulators, as Arthur Miller’s The
Crucible implied. Witch hunting develops in a specifiable social
niche: important factions, externally distinct, internally
competitive. It could be important to adjust the conditions in
which political power is sought and wielded if witch-hunting
movements are to be controlled.
   It is unlikely that a diplomat who nears the top of his profession
is spiralling freely in the buccaneering environment of the Big
Men. Nor can one assume that the conditions of the Foreign
Service reproduce necessarily the ordered and predictable system
of strong grid and group where precedence is bolstered by piety. It
could be that the confusion and uncertainty of the small Central
African village or of a sect such as the Plymouth Brethren in their
early days afford a closer model. If this were so, the conspiracy
theory of politics would fog the atmosphere of summit meetings
with suspicion and experts would urge their leaders to outcast evil-
doers and draw tight on the boundaries of the good society.
   Now for the third social type, the competitive leaders who
dominate the system of strong grid. I have just described their
success cosmology, with its syncretism and scope for private
magic. For lack of recognizing this as a distinctive type, the early
anthropologists may have completely misinterpreted their
findings. The Dobu Islanders have long provided the stereotype of
a witch-dominated cosmology. Among these far-ranging traders
much respected and even feared by distant partners, each man has
his own collection of formulae for success and competes
passionately against his neighbours and kinsmen. It would be
worth re-analysing Fortune’s (1932) great pioneering study with a
view to deciding whether the Dobuans are to stay classed as
                                              Impersonal rules 143

nervous inward-turning paranoiacs obsessed by fear of persecution
or as bold tycoons who protect their magical recipes as so many
industrial secrets for use against their rivals.
   Fourth, the other end of the strong grid where the mass of the
people are subject to impersonal rules—this type would be likely
to go through successive phases according to the ups and downs
of the Big Men’s fortunes and according to whether their
allegiance is strongly sought or disregarded. At one phase in his
career, a rising leader will be attracting dependants, promising
them rewards, flattering followers with his concern. This phase
for the society constituted around him is like a rising trend in the
level of employment. Unfilled vacancies create optimism and the
followers will not find the rules of the system meaningless for
their own lives since its rewards come within their reach. When
riding at the top of his career the leader may have taken up most
of the potential market of followers. The system is suspended
thus as long as his drive and ability holds it together. There could
be a phase something like over-employment in which the
followers gain such a sense of worth that they dare to play the
market, look round for a better leader, switch allegiance. Even
so, there will always be some who find themselves in all phases
holding the wrong end of the stick. No one says that this is a
comfortable or dignified system in which to grow old. At some
stage inevitably the leader himself ages and loses his grip. The
machinery clogs. The best of the followers are seduced away by
stronger leaders. In the middle of the rival empires, a mass of
people are uncertain of their future. Others are too deeply
embedded in one man’s fortunes and have done too well by him
to be acceptable in another camp. The confusion and crisis would
be like the experience of Europe as the Renaissance princedoms
collapsed (Trevor-Roper, 1967). And in this condition, as in
Europe, the idea of the millennium, ever present in the
consciousness from infancy, begins to come forward. The very
structure of strong grid predisposes the rank and file to
millennial movements. This society, spanning the whole diagram
from right to left, creates at the left side the extremely pragmatic,
unspeculative and materialist belief system and on the right a
tendency, alternately repressed and breaking out, to
millennialism.
   Having set out these four social systems and their distinctive
beliefs, I have to pay attention to a factor which has already
confused the simplicity of the design, the factor I have called
144 Impersonal rules

sparsity. Ultimately the trends on the right side of the diagram are
aspects of human control, either by classification, or by direct
personal pressures, or both, and they are accentuated by tightening
of the control. It follows then that if there are very few people on
the ground and they meet each other infrequently and irregularly
and their possibilities of evading one another’s company are good,
there is a lessening of control. So sparsity all round is likely to have
the same effect as a shift towards zero. To the right the cosmos is
more punishing, to the left more benign. Decreasing human
contact tends to give the same result. Hence any form of dropping
out which is a dropping away from other people’s categories and
pressures gives a rosier tinge to the world. The deeper the retreat,
the greater the faith in the inner purity and goodness of the human
heart; the need for ritual forms is weakened, also the sense of sin.
Chapter 9
Control of symbols




According to the Book of Genesis our ancestor fell from a state of
natural innocence when he ate the ambiguous fruit. To attain
knowledge of good and evil is still the god-defying and distinctive
goal of human beings. And always we find ourselves unable to
bear the knowledge, and always erecting filters to protect the
idea of our own interior innocence. One such filter is the strong
resistance made by many scholars to the very notion of social
determinants of belief. They would rather think of beliefs
floating free in an autonomous vacuum, developing according to
their own internal logic, bumping into other ideas by the chance
of historical contact and being modified by new insights. This is
an inverted materialism. In the name of the primacy of mind over
matter, its adherents evade their own responsibility for choosing
the circumstances for their intellectual freedom. To ensure
autonomy of mind we should first recognize the restrictions
imposed by material existence. This leads back to our original
programme.
   We have identified distinctive social patterns and the theory of
justification that goes with each and sustains it. Two tasks remain.
One is to distinguish what is said from what is not said in each
world view. Each theory has its hidden implications. These are its
unspoken assumptions about the nature of ultimate reality. They
are unspoken because they are taken for granted. There is no need
to make them explicit because this is the common basis of
experience. Such shared assumptions underlie any discourse, even
the elaborated speech code which is developed to inspect them.
They are the foundations on which social reality is constituted, as
the phenomenologists point out. Yet so far, though it is agreed that
reality is a social construct (Berger and Luckmann, 1971), no
convincing order has been discerned in all the multiple kinds of
146 Control of symbols

reality construable. To find what is implicit in each cosmology we
shall follow the same thread that has unravelled the rest of the
argument, the relation of self to society. By this thread we shall
find how the grand building blocks of the cosmos are balanced
together and so fathom the gaps between them. The unspoken
assumptions betray how the social bond is constituted in the secret
consciousness of individuals. With that exposed, the scene is set for
the last task, the relation between the media and the society whose
visible substance they are.
   Each social form and its accompanying style of thought restricts
the self-knowledge of the individual in one way or another. With
strong grid and group, there is the tendency to take the intellectual
categories which the fixed social categories require as if they were
God-given eternal truths. The mind is tied hand and foot, so to
speak, bound by the socially generated categories of culture. No
other alternative view of reality seems possible. A small shift in the
definitions is anathema and worth protecting with bloodshed.
Anomaly is abhorrent. In such a system, the purity code has set up
a strong distinction between the private and the public, and its
wider implications are irresistible. Here the eruption of the organic
into the social domain is most dangerous, to be purified with
ritual. The individual in transition from one social status to
another is like matter out of place, impure and to be ritually re-
integrated. Rituals have the function of celebrating the
transcendance of the whole over the part.
   By contrast, still in the right-hand quadrant, any position
near zero is less impressed by the purity rule and its meanings.
But charming though its world view is, and rosy its concept of
human nature, it is a temporary resting place which turns
barren for the long-term resident. All opportunities of
individual development are limited by the lack of organization.
The range and quality of personal interaction are restricted.
The possibilities of knowing the self are reduced by the limited
contact with other selves. Intellectually it is as null as it is
ineffective in organization.
   Second, the closed community with its intolerance of
imperfections: its focus on an impossible good is limiting in
another way. The failure to confront the menacing idea of evil is as
complete here as in the first case. At zero point evil is implicitly
ignored, here it is explicitly shunned and rejected. Thus both
systems allow the individual to cherish an inadequate view of the
self and its capacities and dangers.
                                             Control of symbols 147

   Third, the strong grid: this society allows all the possibilities of
large-scale organization to be taken, but at the expense of personal
relationships. Again, in the extreme form, there is a sterile
exaltation of the self in isolation from other selves. Other persons
are treated as things, instruments, pawns in a game. So the
individual caught up in this system is incapable of reflecting on the
nature of the self, or of symbolizing it as a complex agent. Here we
have an equal impoverishment of the symbolic life and deadening
of metaphysical curiosity.
   If we turn to the quadrant of social structures (diagram 4, p. 60)
we can now draw out some general characters, some elementary
types of cosmology. Take first the effects of group boundedness. To
the left of zero, on the horizontal axis of control, the cosmos is
seen as if dominated by impersonal powers and principles.
Anthropomorphism in these religions is weak. In so far as demons
or gods are considered to be at all influential, they are only faintly
drawn in the human image. They tend to be bizarre, dislocated or
diffuse in their presence. Recall the idea of the forest as a cosmic
force in the religion of Ituri pygmies, the various confused
refractions through which the Nuer God is manifested, the animal
spirits of the Plains Indians, to realize the extent to which
anthropomorphism can be diminished. At the same time these
religions are not moral regulators. They hold out no system of
rewards and punishment, neither in this world nor in the next. At
top left, the principles which govern the universe act as multipliers
of human success or failure. It is a system of positive feedback
which offers total escalation to those who are strong enough to
play by the rules. And total degradation to those who fail. No




Diagram 6 From impersonal to personal
148 Control of symbols

techniques of re-integration and reconciliation are provided, since
there is no conception of offence against the community, only of
failure. There are no over-arching doctrines of sin and atonement.
In these societies, the idea of the self is free from social constraint.
The self is valued uniquely for its own sake, not for any
contribution it can make to the whole.
   On the other side of the vertical line, where group is strong, we
find the opposite holds good. The powers that control the universe
are modelled on human figures. Either they are the spirits of dead
fathers and grandfathers, or culture heroes like big brothers, or a
creator god, the most ancestral figure of them all. Or they are
actual, real human beings, free men with powers to bless and
curse, or witches and sorcerers with their own armoury of ill-
doing. On this side, where group is strong, social control is built
into the cosmos. These humans and human-like powers are
activated by moral situations. Ancestors punish and reward; curses
avenge moral wrong; even witches only strike when provoked by
neglect or rudeness. The idea of the self is surrounded with prickly
moral contexts in which it has to operate.
   Now to consider the vertical axis. Here we have a very
different set of discriminations. Diminishing grid gives a pattern
for increasingly ascetic behaviour. Where grid is strong the
external manifestations of life are positively valued. Wealth and
pomp are justified as symbolic expressions or as good in
themselves. There is no feeling of guilt about spending; the
outward expressions of society and self are not despised or




Diagram 7 From asceticism to affirmation
                                            Control of symbols 149

feared—the world, society, the Church, organization as such and
all its signs are affirmed. As we approach zero, there are two
kinds of asceticism. With strong group, ascetic attitudes express
the rejection of what is external, the husk, the empty shell, the
contamination of the senses. Strict controls are set on bodily
enjoyment and on the gateways of sensual experience. Moving
towards the zero of the horizontal line, another form of
asceticism results from valuing human fellowship above material
things. Those who belong in this sector are usually aware of
other ways of living, both more arduous and more richly
rewarded in material wealth. Their culture is often seen as a
choice, a preference for the simple life. Thus the Mbuti pygmies,
after a period of lush living in the Bantu village, scamper back
gleefully to the forest in the spirit of children repairing to their
holiday camping to enjoy candlelight and sausages. Thus the
reaction against the American middle class consciously prides
itself on embracing poverty.

     In their personal life-style, their aesthetic sense, many in the
  Movement reject affluence and its associated symbols. The
  ambition to escape from poverty is no spur to action in their
  lives,…their parents’ desire to own, to accumulate, to achieve
  the status and prestige which go with material wealth, are
  meaningless goals to them….
                                  (Jacobs and Landau, 1967:15–16)

Then again, escaping more completely from social life and
coming even nearer to zero, we hear Thoreau preaching the
beauty of nature from his hermitage at Walden. If the active
society listens to the hermit, our diagram’s rules will shift him
out from zero to the bottom left with the other voices in the
wilderness which cry out and are heeded. Then the range
between society and renunciation becomes more than a passive
scale of measurement. A dialogue involves two sectors of society,
the renouncers reproaching the celebrators with the vanity of
their ways. The whole diagram becomes too complicated when
the precepts of the renouncers are accepted by society at large
and come to control the idiom of public classification. Just such a
competitive dialogue is analysed between the Brahmans and the
renouncing sects of India by Louis Dumont (1966) who traces to
it the root ideas of Hinduism. A parallel dialogue between Rome
and the succession of desert dwellers, anchorites and poor friars
150 Control of symbols

has complicated our own culture. We cannot but be aware of the
ascetic tradition.
    Already the comparison of world views has led to life-styles. I
have started the second task which is to relate the media of
expression to cosmology and social structure. Without more ado,
we are ready to answer our questions about the social conditions
in which ritual comes into contempt. We took ritual to signify
fixed forms of communication which acquire magical efficacy. The
top half of diagram 4 represents the main body of society. The
further away from zero in all directions upwards, the stronger the
belief in efficacious signs; the closer to zero the less the demand for
communication, and the less the tendency to vest symbols with
something more than an expressive function. Magicality is a
product of social control. To insist that the symbols are efficacious
is to threaten blasphemy and sacrilege with automatic danger and
to promise the reverent automatic blessing. Magicality is an
instrument of mutual coercion which only works when common
consent upholds the system. It is useless for a witch doctor to
invest a fetish with magic power by the sole authority of his
charisma. Magic derives its potency from the legitimacy of the
system in which this kind of communication is being made. Like
the notices which warn against contact with high-voltage electric
wires, it protects the media of communication. As consent
withdraws from the system of control, leaders lose their credibility,
and so does their magic. This is as true of the society organized by
strong grid and group as the one spread on both sides of the
diagram, where Big Men exert pressure on a long chain of
followers. For the magic which in the first case invests the
established institutions in the second case invests the individual
leader. If his success departs from him, so does his own belief in the
potency of his charms and spiritual helpers waver. Magicality is a
barometer of political legitimacy. From this the rest follows. Small
groups, with a minimum of classification and only one strong
outer boundary that they wish to preserve, protect that boundary
with magic. Rituals are for social interaction. Nearer to zero,
people are uninterested in magic. Here it is inner experience,
contemplation and the internal evolution of the self that counts.
This is the picture in static terms. Lack of interest in ritual is not
anti-ritualism. But inevitably social change must be expressed in a
revolt against ritual. Ritual and anti-ritual are the idiom which
natural systems of symbols afford for acting out theories of
society.
                                            Control of symbols 151

   Anyone who finds himself living in a new social condition
must, by the logic of all we have seen, find that the cosmology he
used in his old habitat no longer works. We should try to think of
cosmology as a set of categories that are in use. It is like lenses
which bring into focus and make bearable the manifold challenge
of experience. It is not a hard carapace which the tortoise has to
carry for ever, but something very flexible and easily disjointed.
Spare parts can be fitted and adjustments made without much
trouble. Occasionally a major overhaul is necessary to bring the
obsolete set of views into focus with new times and new
company. This is conversion. But most of the time adjustments
are made so smoothly that one is hardly aware of the shifts of
angle until they have developed an obvious disharmony between
past and present. Then a gradual conversion that has been slowly
taking place has to be recognized. Inevitably this recognition of a
new viewpoint produces a revulsion against dead ritual.
Whichever way a person has moved (unless it is out of and away
from the zero position), there is a burden of old, irrelevant rituals
to be laid aside. They no longer have meaning because the social
action in which they inhered no longer attracts. By a paradox
which becomes very understandable, every conversion generates
some anti-ritual feeling, even if (as is often the case) it is a
conversion to a ritualist belief. So the more social change, the
more radical revision of cosmologies, the more conversion
phenomena, and the more denigration of ritual. Could St
Augustine have chosen any creed more materially hidebound and
magical than Manicheeism in his youthful revolt against the
African Christianity of the sixth century? But he chose it as an
act of emancipation. It offered him intellectual freedom relative
to the dried-up teachings of local Christianity. What he selected
in Manicheean teaching was the promise of immediate
knowledge, direct access to divine mysteries without mediating
authority or respect for external institutions:

  It is hardly surprising, therefore, that Augustine should have
  adopted a religion which claimed to slough off any beliefs that
  threatened the independence of his very active mind. For as a
  Manichee, Augustine had been able to rid himself, immediately,
  of ideas that cluttered up the religion of the conventional
  Christian. He was possessed of a vivid certainty:
     ‘I have known my soul and the body that lies upon it
152 Control of symbols

     That they have been enemies since the creation of the
  worlds.’
     There was no need to ‘water down’ so intimate an
  awareness, to obscure it with the clumsy scaffolding of Hebrew
  prophecies that the Catholic Church had erected around the
  simple truth. The Manichee did not need to be ordered to
  believe. He could grasp, for himself, the essence of religion.
  Immediacy was what counted most. The crucifixion of Christ
  spoke directly to such a man of the sufferings of his own soul.
  His hero was Doubting Thomas, a man whose yearning for a
  direct immediate contact with the divine secrets had not been
  spurned by Christ.
                                                (Brown, 1967:49)

It is curious that it could mean such different things to the fringe
followers and to the central figures of the cult. For the initiated
Manicheean teachers themselves seem to have developed from
the same doctrine a typical sectarian cosmology. Their small,
tightly organized group maintained its identity by elaborate
rituals, ruthless rejection of the bad outside and affirmation by
symbolic means of the purity of the group and of their inner
selves. To most of their educated followers they offered an
intellectual freedom which they themselves did not enjoy, since
they were bound by the authority of Mani. But their system of
moral control and bodily asceticism offered a technique for
achieving mastery over the self.
    Finally, there is another source of anti-ritualism. The subject
followers of distant leaders in the strong grid system find
themselves weakly related to other people. Their social categories
are barely defined, their contracts with other people fragile and
unreliable. They are in a universe dominated by principles. It is
as if things, not people, determine their lot. And, as with
principles and things, there is no arguing with these people in
charge, no appeal to compassion. This is the subjection which is
hardest to bear. The impersonal controls of weather and tides,
however cruel, do not produce the sense of injustice which is
aroused when people behave as if they and those they control are
objects, not persons. A violent source of anti-ritualism is opened
up when persons are perceived to be behind the principles, or
benefiting from them.
    The unsuccessful may find themselves forced to move from
leader to leader in the attempt to get a better deal and as they
                                             Control of symbols 153

move they break their social ties. Or they find themselves unable
to move, located with other people who also would like to move
but cannot, and with whom they form an undifferentiated mass.
The delicate differentiations by which they structure their
relations with each other are of no significance to the people who
operate the rules against them. Although they themselves
discriminate the claims of age, sex, relationship, these
distinctions make no difference to the impersonal principles
which ruthlessly separate them or force them to huddle together.
What they experience is a failure of other people to recognize
their claims as persons. Persons in control behave to them
mechanically and treat them as if they were objects. This, I
suggest, is the experience which has always predisposed to the
millennial cult, which wipes out existing rituals.
   Anti-ritualism is therefore the idiom of revolt. It must be so, and
it must inevitably press the case by decrying not only meaningless
rituals, but all rituals as such. Even when the case demands more
articulate communication, even when more meaningful rituals are
needed, anti-ritualism is undiscriminating in its sweeping
condemnation of formality. Here we come to Durkheim’s insight
that the shared experience of society structures the internal
consciousness of the private person to match that of the
collectivity. The public symbolic system which has been set up by
social intercourse puts its controlling stamp on individual
perception and restricts understanding to the possibilities admitted
in its own construction of the universe. In the small group a man is
caught searching under his bed for witches when he might learn
more by searching his own heart. With strong grid and group, the
sources of innovation are squeezed out and despised for their
incompatibility with the given categories. And yet such a society
may desperately be seeking new solutions to its problems. If
compensation theory were valid, the masses who experience
control by objects would in reaction seek to differentiate more
effectively. But instead they rush to adopt symbols of non-
differentiation and so accentuate the condition from which they
suffer. This is the dangerous backlash in symbolic experience of
which we should beware. The man who has been raised up seeks
symbols of his high estate; the one who has been degraded seeks
symbols of debasement. After T.E.Lawrence had suffered
humiliation he could only bear a social life to match his sense of
degradation. He sought to make true in the sight of other people
what he felt in himself.
154 Control of symbols

  From henceforward my way will lie with these fellows [in the
  RAF] here degrading myself (for in their eyes and your eyes and
  Winterton’s eyes I see that it is a degradation) in the hope that
  some day I will really feel degraded, be degraded, to their level.
  I long for people to look down on me and despise me, and I’m
  too shy to take the filthy steps which would publicly shame me,
  and put me into their contempt.
                                (Knightley and Simpson, 1969:255)

Thus we should expect that those who have the sense of living
without meaningful categories, and who suffer from being treated
as an undifferentiated, insignificant mass, will seek to express
themselves by inarticulate, undifferentiated symbols.
   They should react strongly against non-differentiation and seek
to establish clear categories and distinctions which the oppressors
would be forced to recognize. They should get organized. This
would involve them in hierarchical discriminations. But expressive
action is easier, more satisfying and may possibly have some
instrumental value. So they use marches and mass protests as
expressions of revolt. These may indeed be the most effective
instrument for calling attention to affliction. But insidiously the
symbolic mode seduces the intellect to its own estate. The drive to
achieve consonance between social and physical and emotional
experience envelops the mind also in its sweep. Hence the failure of
revolutionary millennialists to write a programme that in any way
matches the strength of their case. Hence the apparent flippancy or
unserious abandon with which they pronounce their diagnosis and
their remedies. It is as if the symbolic mode has overwhelmed the
freedom of the mind to grapple with reality.
   The cosmology which goes with the experience of mass, of
undifferentiated human solidarity has a fatal attraction for those
who most vehemently wish to remedy its failures. They find
themselves behaving like revivalists in the effervescent stage of a
new religion. They reject social differentiation and propose
programmes to enhance the sense of individual worth, human
warmth and spontaneity. They pay tribute to these values,
announce their ultimate triumph. But so far from doing something
to realize them, in past history they have led their followers into
symbolic marches and crusades, usually with dire results.
   In this short space I cannot elaborately document the argument. I
can sum it up and illustrate it. Where grid is oppressively exerted
from afar a further weakening of the delicate relationships can turn
                                           Control of symbols 155

the passive cosmology into revolutionary millennialism. Norman
Conn (1957) has listed the precipitating causes of millennialism in
medieval Europe. Disparate though they seem (Cohn, 1962),
ranging from sexual frustration to cosmic anxiety, they all stem
from an aggravation of the weakness of the social structure.

  But in the most populous and economically advanced areas of
  Europe there existed numbers of poor folk who had no such
  organization behind them: in the countryside landless peasants
  and farm hands, in the towns journeymen (who were forbidden
  to organize), unskilled workers (who had no guilds) and a
  floating population of beggars and unemployed. It was such
  people as these that provided the revolutionary prophets with
  their following.
                                                (Cohn, 1962:39)

  Catastrophe or the fear of catastrophe: e.g. the famines and
  plagues which preceded several popular crusades and similar
  movements; the massacres which preceded the mass movements
  of dispersed Jews towards Jerusalem.
                                                     (ibid.: 40)

  The areas which saw the rise of popular crusades were always
  those areas north of the Alps that had a relatively dense
  population including landless peasants; Flanders, northern
  France, and the Rhine valley…. It is significant that at the time
  of the First Crusade of 1095 the areas which were swept by
  mass enthusiasm had for ten years been afflicted by famine and
  drought and for five years by plague, while the crusades of
  1146, 1309 and 1320 were all preluded by famines.
                                                         (ibid.: 34)

That millennial fervour emerges with weakness of classification is
amply demonstrated in the same volume from Brazilian and
Indonesian movements (Thrupp, 1962:55–69; 80–121 and
especially 80, 88, 92–3).
   For our own contemporary experiences of this kind, it is not
difficult to find comparable expressions of millennial fervour. The
focus is on poverty, class and race discrimination, colonialism, and
student unrest. The spokesmen in each case pin-point the same
symptoms: control by humans as if by things, non-differentiation,
rootlessness.
156 Control of symbols

   The writer of one of the most thoughtful books on the Paris riots of
May and June 1968, under the pseudonym of Epistemon, asks why
university students in the mid-twentieth century should have taken
over the role of revolutionary spearhead from the working class. For
answer he gives a cogent account of the revolutionary ideas on which
the universities have been fed, giving particular praise and
prominence to the philosophical work of Sartre. He traces very
skilfully the break-up of form in drama, in literature and philosophy
down to the final undermining of confidence in knowledge, as such.
Although he gives a typically Gallic priority to the evolution of ideas,
and only second place to the evolution of the social structures in
which they are developed, he ably discusses the rootless, marginal
character of the university students’ social world. This would
perfectly fit my analysis if only the priority were reversed. I have
already hinted how Sartre’s own biography fits the diagnosis. The
whole history of ideas should be reviewed in the light of the power of
social structures to generate symbols of their own. These symbols
deceivingly commend themselves as spiritual truths unconnected with
fleshly processes of conception, thus obeying the purity rule.
   The poor of America in the 1960s are ‘victims of a
bureaucratically enforced rootlessness’ due to evictions from
slums; the social workers are bureaucratized, hostile, dehumanized
(Harrington, 1962:157, 120). Subject colonial peoples are
discerned ‘only as an indistinct mass’ (Fanon, 1967:34) and they
know that this is what they are:

  Henceforward, the interests of one will be the interests of all,
  for in concrete fact everyone will be discovered by the troops,
  everyone will be massacred—or everyone will be saved.
                                                       (ibid.: 37)

  The men whom the growing population of the country districts
  and colonial expropriation have brought to desert their family
  holdings circle tirelessly round the different towns hoping that
  one day or another they will be allowed inside. It is within this
  mass of humanity, this people of the shanty towns, at the core
  of the lumpen-proletariat that the rebellion will find its urban
  spearhead.
                                                       (ibid.: 103)

The leaders of the movement for Negro emancipation find their
enemies inhuman:
                                              Control of symbols 157

  …the driver of the pick-up truck pulled up alongside. He had a
  face from central casting, like all the faces I had watched in
  newsreels spitting on little girls in Little Rock and unleashing
  snarling police dogs in Birmingham.
                                                (Newfield, 1966:92)

The New Radicals

  are saying that the whole society—from the academy to the
  anti-poverty programme—has become too bureaucratized and
  must be decentralized and humanized.
                                                 (ibid.: 204)

Students, too, protest against bureaucracy, against exaggerated
compartmentalism of study, discontinuous and truncated
understanding and loss of personal attachment to the worth of
study as a humanistic enterprise (ibid.: 163).
    This is the evidence I take that the wide-spread revolt of the left
is indeed a revolt, as it says it is, against control by humans as if by
objects. So much for the underlying social experience. It receives
expression in the common ritual style. It relies on the symbolic
expression of the state they deplore, as a means of remedy. Their
intellectual stance is a rejection of categories of all kinds, including
both symbolic and functional discriminations. Harrington writes
scathingly of ‘the definition-makers’ (ibid.: 137). The students,
feeling themselves subject to an undiscriminating, mindless
bureaucratic machine, reject differentiation as such.
    The tragedy of millennial movements, as Norman Cohn has
pointed out, is that they do not usually lead to a better society. No
one would wish reform to produce an explosion which creates
more misery and oppression than that which provoked the
movement. Such unfruitful outcomes result from the backlash of
the symbolic system. Anyone who tries to correct the unfeelingness
of the bureaucratic machine with a revolution of feeling gives up
control of the situation to natural symbols. After attacking
definition as such, differentiation as such, ritual as such, it is very
difficult to turn about and seek the new definitions,
differentiations and rituals which will remedy the case. In the
period of the Crusades, beggars and orphaned children set out to
take the Holy Land from the Turks by the very power of their
meekness and poverty. Contemporary observers thought that they
might succeed and that a golden age would begin. But the
158 Control of symbols

crusaders fell into the sea and were drowned or were captured by
Barbary pirates. Today, our clergy, our poor and our youth unite to
take the great places by demonstrating their helplessness in non-
violent parades.
    This is the last source of contemporary anti-ritualism. It is clear
that its protest against symbols is only against rituals of
differentiation. Its social experience is as much restricted by its
own symbolic forms as those other three I have already indicated.
It follows that the solution to grave problems of social
organization can rarely come from those who experience them.
For they inevitably can only think according to the cosmological
type in which their social life is cast. Therefore it behoves others to
identify and resist the allurements of zero.
    The millennialist is optimistic about human nature (once freed
from the external machine) and about the outcome of his policies.
He fuses disparate problems together and resists attempts to define
and distinguish. For his single problem, overthrow of the evil
system, he advocates a simple solution, usually symbolic and
expected to have magical effect. He has low respect for technical
processes or special knowledge. Like the fundamentalist sects, he
has contempt for learning and for academic (or clerical)
specialization. His organization can only work in spasmodic bursts
because he rejects specialized roles as such. The time span of his
thinking is erratic; the millennium will come soon and suddenly;
differentiation in time is as difficult for him to envisage as other
kinds of differentiation.
    Millennialism is to be taken very seriously, in all its forms. The
solution to the problems which provoke it is not to join the
stampede. To throw overboard differentiating doctrines and
differentiating rituals is to reach for the poison that symbolizes the
ill. Anti-ritualists around us who feel this excitement in the air,
rather than yield, should feel more practical compassion for the
rootlessness and helplessness that inspire it. Then, instead of
sweeping away little rituals, such as Friday abstinence, which
shore up a sense of belonging and of roots, and instead of belittling
the magic of priesthood and sacraments, they would turn their
attention to repairing the defences of grid and group.
    How to humanize the machine is the problem, not how to
symbolize its dehumanizing effects. When bureaucrats hear the
catchword ‘equality’ (a symbol of non-differentiation) they should
beware, for equality, like symmetry, is a mechanical principle in its
operation. It chops the human diversity of need into its own pre-
                                             Control of symbols 159

ordained regularities. The way to humanize the system is to
cherish particular categories. The institution which runs by strict
adherence to general rules gives up its own autonomy. If it tries to
adopt equality or seniority or alphabetical order or any other hard
and fast principle for promotion and admission, it is bound to
override the hard case. Furthermore, it is bound to abandon its
traditions and so its identity and its original, special purposes. For
these humanizing influences depend upon a continuity with the
past, benevolent forms of nepotism, irregular charity,
extraordinary promotions, freedom to pioneer in the tradition of
the founders, whoever they were. Instead of anti-ritualism it would
be more practical to experiment with more flexible institutional
forms and to seek to develop their ritual expression.
   But this would mean going into the world, mixing with
corruption and sin, dirtying oneself with externals, having some
truck with the despised forms, instead of worshipping the sacred
mysteries of pure zero. The theologians who should be providing
for us more precise and original categories of thought are busy
demolishing meaningless rituals and employing the theological
tool chest to meet the demands of anti-ritualists. Yet the diagram
of grid and group suggests that to go where the tide sweeps them
can hardly be their proper calling.
Chapter 10
Out of the cave




Plato’s image of the cave on whose wall are cast the shadows we
mistake for real is a popular one today. There is a heady promise in
various intellectual fields of escape from the conditions of
knowledge. With this promise an impossible kind of freedom is
being proposed, freedom from necessity of any kind. It is preached
particularly in artistic and literary circles. These are the people who
have shouldered the clergy’s old responsibility to care for the
symbols of society. They should know that the cave is the body
social mediated by the image of the other body. To emerge free from
its constraints would be as feasible for the artist as for a linguistic
philosopher to give up the constraints of language. Indeed the
illusion of escape may well be a new kind of confinement.
Bernstein’s work shows us something of how our different
cosmologies imprison us. The free exercise of our faculties is limited
by the media of expression. There are areas of experience which can
be investigated in one speech code but not another. There are social
relations possible for one but not another. The range of speech codes
available is part of the social environment for an individual at any
given time. Since the speech code is a quality inhering in the social
structure, a strong one-way causal relation seems to be implied. If
pressed on the matter, presumably Bernstein would be gloomy about
the prospects of ever mastering the codes and being free of their
restraints. On his view we can only hope for fortunate shifts in the
social structure to introduce change:

  The thesis to be developed here places the emphasis on changes
  in the social structure as major factors in shaping or changing a
  given culture through their effect on the consequences of
  speaking…which speech codes are generated is a function of the
  system of social relations. The particular form of a social
                                                Out of the cave 161

  relation acts selectively on what is said, when it is said, and how
  it is said…. The experience of the speakers may then be
  transformed by what is made significant or relevant by the
  different speech systems. This is a sociological argument,
  because the speech system is taken as a consequence of the
  social relation, or to put it more generally, is a quality of the
  social structure.
                                              (Bernstein, 1965:151)

If we apply this beyond the case of speech to culture in general, we
do not necessarily subscribe to a theory of society as
infrastructure, the basic phenomenon, with culture as
superstructure, mere epiphenomenon. Bernstein regards both
speech and relationships as qualities of the social structure. In the
latter there are at least small options for dealing with other
persons in one way or another, and from selections among these
small-scale social choices there can be changes in the speech codes.
Bernstein would not, as I understand his thesis, deny personal
creativity and cultural innovation, but would have to locate them
primarily in the sphere of direct human interaction. If the same
analysis were applied to all the media of communication and
allowance made for their effects on the experience of the society
using them, the anxiety about sociological determinism would
surely be allayed. For on this view, society or culture are both
abstractions, categories applied to the process which, in the last
resort, consists of individuals dealing with other individuals.
Furthermore the elaborated code provides a means of assessing the
value of one kind of social process, the codes derived from it, and
the values and principles that go with both. In the long run, the
argument of this book is that the elaborated code challenges its
users to turn round on themselves and inspect their values, to
reject some of them, and to resolve to cherish positional forms of
control and communication wherever these are available. This
would seem to be the only way to use our knowledge to free
ourselves from the power of our own cosmology. No one would
deliberately choose the elaborated code and the personal control
system who is aware of the seeds of alienation it contains. After
listing some of the advantages of the restricted code, which unites
speakers to kin and community, Bernstein notes:

  A change of code involves changes in the means whereby social
  identity and reality are created. This argument means that
162 Out of the cave

  educational institutions in a fluid society carry within
  themselves alienating tendencies.
                                                (ibid.: 168)

By contrast the restricted code allows a person to perceive his
identity as part of his immediate social world; personal and social
integration are achieved together. Here we should expect to find
symbols of the human body actively expressing the solidarity of
the social body. The first thing that is striking about the English
working-class home is the attempt to provide privacy in spite of
the difficulties of layout. The respect for the privacy of bodily
functions corresponds to the respect for the distinction between
social and private occasions; the back of the house is appropriately
allocated to cooking, washing and excretory functions; the front
parlour, distinguished from the living room-kitchen, is functionless
except for public, social representation. Space by no means
wasted, it is the face of the house, which speaks composedly and
smiles for the rest of the body; from this room a person must rush
if he bursts into tears. Certain families of the middle class tend to
break down the barrier between public and private. They seek to
live in public together in an unstructured, open room, expressing
aptly (perhaps disastrously) their unstructured, personal system of
control. In such a family it must be difficult to assimilate the image
of society and the house to the image of body, and correspondingly
more difficult, one suspects, for the individual to incorporate into
his personal identity any symbolic structures integrating him with
his own society. Hence it is predictable that the body may come to
represent an alien husk, something from which the inmost self
needs to escape, something whose exigencies should not be taken
too seriously. It can and even must be transcended if the individual
encased within the body is to fulfil his unique potential for
experience. How brilliantly Bernstein’s insight illuminates much of
our contemporary culture. Alienation and integration imply
different uses of the body as a symbolic mode. Is it legitimate to
call them different codes derived from different social systems?
   What has gone before has been stimulated by his work, yet I
cannot pretend that I have so far succeeded in applying Bernstein’s
analysis of speech codes to other symbolic systems. It is not easy to
distinguish the range from relatively restricted to elaborated ritual
forms, which he suggests should be present in any medium as it is
in speech. One might start by considering the possibility of the
symbolic life being detached more and more from the task of
                                               Out of the cave 163

relating an individual to his society and more and more freed for
expressing his unique private concerns. This recalls again Lowie’s
use of Crow Indian beliefs to discredit Durkheim’s theory of
religion as always and essentially a collective experience. What
type of primitive social structure would allow the symbolic orders
to be relieved of their Durkheimian office of sustaining it? The
question put in this form suggests that we should compare systems
making progressively less and less claim on their individual
members to honour a common morality. The weaker the social
pressures, the freer the individual person. But this range of
comparisons would merely show the diminishing moral and
control aspects of the restricted code in some social systems. We
still have to look for something corresponding to the division of
labour among ourselves, some power to call forth an increasingly
greater elaboration of the medium of expression towards greater
universality in scope and greater syntactic flexibility. This power
would create the need to communicate without the intimate
knowledge of assumptions held in common. An interesting
example would be the so-called ‘mother-in-law language’ of the
Tully River aborigines. Robert Dixon says that the language of
respect which a man uses for conversing with his mother-in-law
expresses social distance by avoiding terms with particular
reference and choosing generic terms.

  Thus in the everyday language there are about a dozen terms for
  referring to types of grubs…there is no generic term for ‘grub’
  in the everyday language. However, in mother-in-law there is
  only a generic term…
                                              (Dixon, 1968:653)

This is a linguistic example. It would be a daunting task to analyse
non-verbal rituals to see if any distinction between more particular
and more universalistic symbols is ever organized to express two
distinct ritual codes or even a gradation from one to another.
However something suggestive of the elaborated code appears in
the aesthetic activity of some New Guinea societies where art, like
everything else, is harnessed to individual competition. Here is a
challenge for students of primitive art to work out. Admittedly
well beyond my own powers of scholarship, this suggestion does
not exhaust the interest of pursuing the analogy of the restricted
and elaborated code in ritual. However, my own interest is more
concerned with varieties of restricted code.
164 Out of the cave

    Bernstein has allowed that there will be many different kinds
of restricted codes. My classification of cosmologies is based on
four social types: first, strong grid and group, the bounded
system high on the classification line; second, a bounded,
otherwise unstructured system (small group); and third, strong
grid, in which the leaders are distinguished; and fourth, their
mass of followers. If we ignore for the moment the latter two we
can take together the two systems in which boundary is strong. Is
it possible to see in the symbolism of the body appropriate to
them two different restricted codes? In the one case, the religious
emphasis would be expected to treat the body as the focus and
symbol of life. We would expect to find positive themes of
symbolic nourishment developed to the extent that the social
body and the physical body are assimilated and both focus the
identity of individuals in a structured, bounded system. In the
second case, boundary without structure, that is, group without
grid, we would expect to find the body an object of anxiety; fear
of poisoning and debilitation would be dominant and ritual
officiants much concerned with therapy, physical and social.
Here, I suggest, we have two versions of a restricted code which
serve the function of mediating the individual and his society by
manipulating the image of the human body. Each type exerts its
own constraints on the perceptions and thus on the choices of
individuals; each symbolic system has its own pre-coded stimuli
and responses which intimately affect the person’s knowledge of
his body and acts selectively on his capacity to respond to bodily
images. They are restricted codes which integrate the individual
with the social system.
    In either of these two social types it is possible for sub-systems
of a lower order of inclusiveness to be alienated from the whole.
Then we can see another restricted code taking over. The body is
still the image of society but somewhere inside it someone is not
accepting its rule. I am suggesting that the symbolic medium of the
body has its restricted code to express and sustain alienation of a
sub-category from the wider society. In this code the claims of the
body and of the wider society are not highly credited: bodily
grooming, diet, pathology, these subjects attract less interest than
other non-bodily claims. The body is despised and disregarded,
consciousness is conceptually separated from its vehicle and
accorded independent honour. Experimenting with consciousness
becomes the most personal form of experience, contributing least
to the widest social system, and therefore most approved. This is
                                                Out of the cave 165

where the dichotomy of spirit and matter becomes an insistent
theme.
   If we allow that there is a restricted code for alienation, the way
is open for a bold synthesis between the Durkheimian analysis of
religious belief and theological controversies, whether from
Christian, Islamic, Buddhist or Hindu history. Edmund Leach
(1966) has attempted to relate dogmas of virgin birth, a centrally
Christian theme, to theories about the kind of dealings held in
different cultures to be possible between gods and men. He
suggests that the problem is too complex for he himself to be
satisfied with the correlations he draws. Indeed his attempt to
make a plain sociological approach is less interesting than his
attempts to find the local cultural patterns into which ideas about
natural and divine procreation would seem to fit. The greatest
value of this essay was his insistence that philosophical ideas about
physical and metaphysical forces in the universe lie behind dogmas
about whether humans and gods can mingle their natures or not.
But where, we should ask, is any given balance between physical
and other forces generated? Durkheim’s famous saying ‘Society is
God’, spelt out, means that in every culture where there is an
image of society it is endowed with sacredness, or conversely that
the idea of God can only be constituted from the idea of society. It
follows from the first that alienation from society will be expressed
by desacralizing its image. And from the second that the idea of
God, dethroned from the centres of power, will be set up again in
the small, interpersonal group which is alienated. Thus the image
of God loses its majesty and becomes intimate, a personal friend
who speaks directly, heart to heart without any truck with
instituted forms. This is obvious and the change in the use of the
body as a medium for expressing the sacred, from honouring the
outside, shifts to honouring the interior exclusively. I shall now
suggest that philosophical controversies about the relation of spirit
to matter or mind to body be interpreted as exchanges of
condensed statements about the relation of society to the
individual.
   Such controversies flare up and down. There may be no
particular reason why they become active at one point in time and
not in another. But I suggest that they only become relevant as
metaphors when the relation of an alienated sub-group to the
social whole becomes an acute political issue. The body or the
flesh in these theological controversies represents the wider
society; mind and spirit represent the individual identified with the
166 Out of the cave

sub-group concerned. To require a discussion to be conducted in
those terms is like adopting a restricted speech code which is well
understood by all parties. It governs the selections of symbolic
relations and skews the judgements towards its own inherent
values. To insist on the superiority of spiritual over material
elements is to insist on the liberties of the individual and to imply a
political programme to free him from unwelcome constraints.
   In the contrary view, to declare that spirit works through
matter, that spiritual values are made effective through material
acts, that body and mind are intimately united, any emphasis on
the necessity to mingle spirit and matter implies that the individual
is by nature subordinate to society and finds his freedom within its
forms. This view is prepared to sacralize flesh, while their
opponents count it as blasphemy to teach the physical union of
godhead and manhood.
   The anthropologist can never assume that the chosen symbols
of religious controversy are arbitrary. If they are used to
discriminate contended positions, they also express something
about the social situation. So it is that anthropologists cannot but
admire the aptness of doctrines which deny that God could take
human flesh for expressing a revolt against the established
ecclesiastical order. In the early centuries of Christianity, when its
doctrines were being refined and articulated, most of the
theological disputes concerned the nature of the Second Person of
the Trinity. As it finally emerged, the orthodox doctrine of the
Incarnation insisted on a perfect mediation between spirit and
matter. According to this creed, as defined at Nicea, Christ was
fully God, fully man, both natures combined mysteriously in one
person. The heresies of the third and fourth centuries which taught
that Christ was mere man, not really God, or not fully man, an
historical emanation from God, all agreed on admitting a gulf
between spirit and matter. To move either way from the central
doctrine of the Incarnation was to dilute the unique Christian
message. Not so obviously, to move either way is to exalt spirit
and debase matter and so to adopt the philosophical attitude
which, following Durkheim’s thought, is appropriate to
detachment from or revolt against the established social forms. In
his study of Arianism, John Henry Newman (1901) tended very
much to treat the heresy itself as no more than a technique of
revolt. For him it did not matter what bone of contention they
chose, the contumacious behaviour of the heresiarchs was enough
to show that their doctrine was of secondary interest. It is certainly
                                                  Out of the cave 167

very difficult to demonstrate my thesis convincingly to historians
because in the long time span of the institutions they study, a
movement can start, like Arianism, as a discourse set in the
restricted code of alienation, and quickly become one in the
restricted code of integration, as when Constantius became
Emperor and proclaimed Arianism as the official doctrine of Rome
with himself as God’s representative on earth. With Arian bishops
installed in the great sees, the doctrines they espoused came to
sound only hair-splittingly different from those they had so hotly
rejected when the fight had been on, and general interest in the
issues originally at stake dwindled to the basic symbols of
allegiance to one side or another.
   It is also difficult to demonstrate this theme in the field of Indian
religion, because of its great complexity. What is claimed to be its
special feature, the use of bodily purity to symbolize hierarchy and
group boundaries, is in itself indeed only the natural system of
symbols. India may well have developed the bodily mode to an
unparalleled extent. If so, our approach would look, to explain its
unique development, to the distinction between hierarchy and
power, which Professor Dumont insists is a fundamental principle of
the caste system (1966:91–3). Where hierarchy is truly divorced
from power, India would communicate within a restricted code of
alienation. We would expect it to separate spirit from matter and to
clothe the top ranks of the hierarchy in the most ethereal, non-
physical symbols compatible with material comfort. Hence the
austerities of the sects, which renounce the world by monastic
withdrawal, would naturally provide the symbols of status for
worldly and unworldly Brahmans, whose rank is defined by their
opposition to the ruling caste. Setting a fashion in vegetarianism,
both for gods and men, would appropriately be part of the move
away from external, physically mediated religious forms towards
the religion of the interior heart which is always preferred by
preachers who themselves have withdrawn from temporal
responsibility. Each sub-caste which tries to use this code for
communicating with others about its relative status fails to realize
the internal, spiritual changes which it implies. Each sub-caste is
perforce involved in its local and political concerns. Consequently
the speech of renunciation from the material world takes on a
spectacularly material meaning: formal spirituality becomes
hidebound in material gestures and serves very earthy, political ends.
The Indian sub-continent, in so far as its use of the bodily medium is
peculiar, surely owes this development to the strong
168 Out of the cave

disestablishmentarianism of its official church, implicit in the
doctrine of hierarchy divorced from power. Conversely, the Church
of Rome would owe its own parallel and distinctive development of
doctrine to its early association of religious hierarchy with power. In
saying this I do not wish to allot the primacy in determining ritual
forms to ideological bias. As I see it, essentially it is initially in small
decisions, about who deals with whom and how, that these codes
develop. As the doctrines and social forms interact, they develop
momentum and finally come to create a symbolic environment in
which later generations of individuals find themselves. But, however
strong the power of this symbolic medium to coerce subsequent
choices, just because it is a system, it can be cracked whenever any
part of it is breached: thus the original Protestantism; thus the
changes in the caste system.
   Jung reproached Protestant Europe for giving up its austerity
and seeking to parade in the finery of Eastern religions. In a
passage which reveals his own abdication of judgement to a
restricted code of alienation, he applauds the loss of meaning of
the old religious symbols of Christianity, as a noble stripping of
outer meaningless husks down to the bare individual self. Having
achieved so much, what a falling off he sees in the embracing of
alien religious forms:

   If he should now go and cover his nakedness with the
   gorgeous dress of the Orient, like the theosophists, he would
   be untrue to his own history. A man does not work his way
   down to beggarhood and then pose as an Indian king on the
   stage.
                                                 (Jung, 1940:63)

But there was no switch in logic and no betrayal of the principles
of Protestantism in the theosophist turning to exotic cultures,
only a natural evolution. For a European turning to Eastern
doctrines is a European rejecting the Christian gospel of God
taking flesh. First the Eucharist, then inevitably sooner or later
the Incarnation; for the same social process which made the first
repugnant was bound to lead to the rejection of the other. To the
extent that society contains individuals united to it by no strong,
solidary bonds, their culture is likely to believe romantically in
the separation of pure spirit from gross matter, to seek to
embrace the one and somehow at the same time to reject the
other.
                                                  Out of the cave 169

   It may be that in this century we have become more aware of
the subjective conditions of experience. Certainly it seems that the
possibilities of self-awareness are here. But the practical problem
of retaining consciousness is as great as ever. Lévi-Strauss has
sought to display the action of the unconscious mind expressing
itself through social forms. He argues that a moiety system, in
which society divides itself into two wife-exchanging halves,
makes a visible representation of the mind’s natural proclivity to
divide and subdivide (1968:132ff.). The worldwide distribution of
moiety systems, their appearance in the most simple and small-
scale societies, their persistence, all suggest that by studying
moieties we can do a kind of social archaeology. Understanding
how a moiety system has power over its members is like digging
into the prehistory of mankind in an area which picks and shovels
never reach. By binary distinctions our cave-ancestors may have
created the contrast of culture/nature, started all the contrasts on
which language is built, and even created their society in the image
of mind. This is Lévi-Strauss’s implied argument.
   Mercifully, we are not in thrall at present to that particular
surge of creativity which produces dualist organization. Our
society is not restricted to the moiety system. But unless reflection
on the self-sustaining power of moieties warns us of the power of
our own unconscious mental activity, these lessons of prehistory
are surely wasted. The resilience of primitive moiety systems
shows how difficult it is to break out of the circle, once it is set up,
between the impulse of unconscious mind and its external
expression. How many people have smiled knowingly at the
scribblings on the walls of the Latin Quarter during the 1968
revolts in Paris. ‘La honte est contre-Révolutionnaire’ and ‘Le
discours est contre-Révolutionnaire’. But intellectuals are slow to
see their own behaviour in the same light as that of the rioters
tearing up paving stones. ‘Plus je fais la Revolution, plus j’ai envie
de faire l’amour.’ Reforming bishops and radical theologians, to
say nothing of Utopian marxists, must eventually recognize that
the generous warmth of their doctrinal latitude, their critical
dissolving of categories and attack on intellectual and
administrative distinctions are generated by analogous social
experience. ‘Ears have walls.’ Another of the graffiti of Paris 1968
refers summarily to vain supplications and hardened rejection. No
judgement is intended here on the political accuracy of that slogan
at that place and time. As a general statement for the sociology of
perception it could be amended to ‘Ears must have walls’.
170 Out of the cave

Legitimacy must be clothed in magic, words must be made into
things, blocks, hedges, compartments are the condition of
knowledge. Thinkers must recognize the destructive lure of the
natural system of symbols, equally when it devastates category
boundaries as when it wrongfully closes them.
   Returning to our opening theme, we find that the apparent anti-
ritualism of today is the adoption of one set of natural symbols in
place of another. It is like a switch between restricted speech codes.
Two morals can be drawn from this analogy; first the duty of
everyone to preserve their vision from the constraints of the
natural symbols when judging any social situation; second the
opportunity of religious bodies to set their message in the natural
system of symbols. For the first duty, we must recognize that the
value of particular social forms can only be judged objectively by
the analytic power of the elaborated code. Beware, therefore, of
arguments couched in the bodily medium. Strongly subjective
attitudes to society get coded through bodily symbols.
   For the second, Christian preachers fail to respond to the
current meaning in the body. The elaborated code has here
intervened too much. Or perhaps the difference of age separating
those in authority from those in immediate contact with the
faithful may explain the neglect in religion of symbols which are
being spontaneously exploited elsewhere. The very religious
themes which repelled radicals of half a century ago are now being
seized upon in drama, fiction and visual art and woven into a
secular symbolic system. We may well ask why the now elderly
radicals rejected religious themes of renunciation, why they
disdained the unabashed, sexual imagery of the mystics and the
completely counter-rational doctrine of the resurrection of the
body, and why the young radicals of today express contempt for
the physical body, read the mystics and cultivate non-rationality.
The difference surely lies in the respective attitudes to political
power, the former seeking and the latter rejecting it. The Churches
could worry that their clothes are being stolen while they bathe in
a stream of ethical sensitivity. For the current dichotomy of spirit
and matter is an assertion of spiritual values. While preaching
good works they would do well to relate the simple social duty to
the wealth of doctrines which in Christian history have done
service for the same restricted code: the mystical body, the
communion of saints, death, resurrection, immortality and
speaking with tongues.
Bibliography




ABERLE, DAVID: The Peyote Religion among the Navaho, London,
   Aldine, 1966.
AUERBACH, ERICH: Literary Language and Its Public, London,
   Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965.
BARTH, FREDRIK: Nomads of South Persia. The Basseri Tribe of the
   Khamseh Confederacy, London, Allen & Unwin, 1964.
BARTHES, ROLAND: Writing Degree Zero, London, Jonathan Cape,
   1967.
BARTON, R.F.: Ifugao Law: University of California Publications in
   American Archaeology and Ethnology, 15. 1:186ff., 1919.
Ifugao Economics: University of California Publications in
   AmericanArchaeology and Ethnology, 15. 5:385–446, 1922
The Religion of the Ifugaos, Memoirs of American Anthropological
   Association, No. 65, 1946.
The Kalingas: Their Institutions and Custom Law, University of Chicago
   Publications in Anthropology, Social Anthropology Series, Chicago,
   University of Chicago Press, 1949.
BERGER, P. and T.LUCKMANN: The Social Construction of Reality, a
   Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge, London, Penguin, 1971.
BERNSTEIN, BASIL: ‘Some Sociological Determinants of Perception’,
   British Journal of Sociology, 9:159; 174, 1958.
‘A Public Language—Some Sociological Implications of a Linguistic
   Form’, British Journal of Sociology, 10:311–26, 1959.
‘Linguistic Codes, Hesitation Phenomena and Intelligence’, Language and
   Speech, 5.1. October-December: 31–46, 1962.
‘Social Class and Psycho-therapy’, British Journal of Sociology, 15: 54–
   64, 1964.
‘A Socio-Linguistic Approach to Social Learning’, Penguin Survey of the
   Social Sciences, Gould, J. (ed.), London, Penguin, 1965.
‘A Socio-Linguistic Approach to Socialisation’ in Gumperz, J. and D.
   Hymes (eds), Directions in Socio-Linguistics, New York, Holt,
   Rinehart & Winston, 1970.
Class, Codes and Control, Vol. I, Theoretical Studies towards a Sociology
   of Language, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1971.
BERNSTEIN, B., H.L.ELVIN, and R.S.PETERS: Ritual in Education,
172 Bibliography
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Series B, Biological
   Sciences, No. 772, Vol. 251:429–36, 1966.
BRADDON, R.: Roy Thomson of Fleet Street, London, Collins, 1965.
BROWN, PETER: Augustine of Hippo, London, Faber & Faber, 1967.
BULMER, RALPH: ‘Why is the Cassowary not a Bird?’ Man, N.S. 2, 1:
   5–25, 1967.
BURRIDGE, KENELM: Mambu, a Melanesian Millennium, London,
   Methuen, 1960.
‘Tangu, Northern Madang District’ in Lawrence, P. and M.J.Meggitt
   (eds), Gods, Ghosts and Men in Melanesia, London, Oxford
   University Press, 1965.
BUXTON, JEAN: ‘The Mandari of the Southern Sudan’ in Middleton, J.
   and D.Tait (eds), Tribes without Rulers, London, Routledge & Kegan
   Paul, 1958.
Chiefs and Strangers, Oxford, Clarendon, 1963a.
‘Mandari Witchcraft’ in Middleton, J. and E.Winter (eds), Witchcraft and
   Sorcery in East Africa, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963b.
‘Animals, Identity and Human Peril. Some Mandari Images’, Man, N.S. 3.
   1:35–49, 1968.
CALLEY, MALCOLM J.C.: God’s People: West Indian Pentecostal Sects
   in England, London, Oxford University Press for Institute of Race
   Relations, 1965.
CLARK, FRANCIS: The Eucharistic Sacrifice and the Reformation,
   London, The Newman Press, 1960.
COAD, F.ROY: A History of the Brethren Movement, London,
   Paternoster Press, 1968.
CORN, NORMAN: The Pursuit of the Millennium, London, Seeker &
   Warburg, 1957.
‘Mediaeval Millenarism: Its Bearings on the Comparative Study of
   Millenarian Movements’ in Thrupp, Sylvia (ed.), Millennial Dreams in
   Action, The Hague, Mouton, 1962.
COX, HARVEY: The Secular City, London, Penguin, 1968.
DE COPPET, DANIEL: ‘Pour une étude des échanges cérémoniels en
   Mélanésie’, L’Homme, 8. 4:45–57, 1968.
DIXON, R.: ‘Correspondence: Virgin Birth’, Man, N.S. 3. 4:653–4, 1968.
DOUGLAS, MARY: The Lele of the Kasai, London, Oxford University
   Press, 1963.
Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and Taboo,
   London, Penguin, 1966.
Pollution in International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. 12:
   336–42, New York, Macmillan and the Free Press, 1968a.
‘The Relevance of Tribal Studies’, Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 12.
   1, 1968b.
‘Social Control of Cognition, Factors in Joke Perception’, Man, N.S. 3.
   3:361–67, 1968c.
DUCHESNE-GUILLEMIN, L.: The Western Response to Zoroaster:
   Ratanbei Katrak Lectures, 1956, Oxford, Clarendon, 1958.
DUMONT, LOUIS: Homo Hierarchicus—essai sur le système des castes,
   Paris, Gallimard, 1966.
                                                    Bibliography 173
DURKHEIM, ÉMILE: Elementary Forms of the Religious Life (translated
   by J.W.Swain), London, Allen & Unwin, 1915.
DURKHEIM, E. and M.MAUSS: Primitive Classification, 1903,
   translated with an introduction by Rodney Needham, London, Cohen
   & West, 1963.
EPISTEMON: Ces idées qui ont ébranlé la France, Nanterre, Fayard,
   1968.
EVANS-PRITCHARD, E.E.: The Nuer, a Description of the Modes of
   Livelihood and Political Institutions of a Nilotic People, Oxford,
   Clarendon, 1940a.
‘The Nuer of the Southern Sudan’ in Fortes, M. and E.E.Evans-Pritchard
   (eds), African Political Systems, London, Oxford University Press,
   1940b.
Nuer Religion, Clarendon, Oxford, 1956.
FANON, F.: The Wretched of the Earth, London, Penguin, 1967.
FIRTH, R.: Tikopia Ritual and Belief, London, Allen & Unwin, 1967.
FORTES, MEYER: The Dynamics of Clanship among the Tallensi,
   London, Oxford University Press for the International African
   Institute, 1945.
The Web of Kinship among the Tallensi, London, Oxford University Press
   for the International African Institute, 1949.
Oedipus and Job in West African Religion, Cambridge University Press,
   1959.
Totem and Taboo, Presidential address 1966, Proceedings of the Royal
   Anthropological Institute, 1967.
FORTUNE, R.F.: The Sorcerers of Dobu, London, 1932.
FREEDMAN, M.: Presidential Address to the Royal Anthropological
   Institute, Proceedings, 1969.
GOFFMAN, E.: The Presentation of the Self in Everyday Life, London,
   Penguin, 1971.
GOODENOUGH, E.R.: Jewish Symbols in the Graeco-Roman Period,
   Vol. 5, New York, Bollingen Foundation, 1956; London, Oxford
   University Press, 1968.
GRÖNBECH, W.: The Culture of the Teutons, Vol. 1, London, Oxford
   University Press, 1931.
GULLIVER, P.H.: Neighbours and Networks: The Idiom of Kinship in
   Social Action among the Ndendeuli of Tanzania, Berkeley, California,
   University of California Press, 1971.
HALL, EDWARD T.: The Silent Language, New York, Doubleday, 1959.
HARRINGTON, MICHAEL: The Other America, New York,
   Macmillan, 1962; London, Penguin, 1968.
HERBERG, WILL: Protestant, Catholic, Jew, London, Mayflower, 1960.
HIGHER CATECHETICAL INSTITUTE: Nijmegen: A New Catechism,
   Catholic Faith for Adults, London, Burns & Oates, 1967.
HORTON, ROBIN: Book review: ‘Divinity and Experience’, Africa, 32.
   1: 78, 1962.
‘Types of Spirit Possession in Kalahari Religion’, in Spirit Mediumship
   and Society in Africa, Beattie, John and John Middleton (eds),
   London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969.
HUMPHRY, C.E.: Manners for Women, London, James Bowden, 1897.
174 Bibliography
JACOBS, PAUL and SAUL LANDAU: The New Radicals, a Report with
   Documents, London, Penguin, 1967.
JUNG, CARL G.: The Integration of the Personality, London, Routledge
   & Kegan Paul, 1940.
KEYNES, J.M.: Essays in Biography (Mr Lloyd George), London,
   Macmillan, 1933.
KLEIN, MELANIE: Envy and Gratitude, a Study of Unconscious
   Sources, London, Tavistock, 1957. Our Adult World and Other
   Essays, London, Heinemann, 1963.
KLUCKHOHN, CLYDE: Navaho Witchcraft, Cambridge, Mass.,
   Peabody Museum, 1944.
KNIGHTLY, PHILLIP and COLIN SIMPSON, The Secret Lives of
   Lawrence of Arabia, London, Nelson, 1969.
LAWRENCE, P.: Road Belong Cargo: a Study of the Cargo Movement the
   Southern Madang District, New Guinea, Manchester, Manchester
   University Press, 1964.
LAWRENCE, P. and M.J.MEGGITT (eds): Gods, Ghosts and Men in
   Melanesia: Some Religions of Australia, New Guinea and the New
   Hebrides, London, Oxford University Press, 1965.
LEACH, E.R.: Virgin Birth, Henry Myers Lecture, Proceedings of the
   Royal Anthropological Institute: 33–39, 1966.
LÉVI-STRAUSS, C.: Introduction to Marcel Mauss, Sociologie et
   anthropologie, Paris, Presses Universitaires de France, 1950.
Mythologiques I: Le cru et le cuit, Paris, Plon, 1964.
Mythologiques II: Du miel aux cendres, Paris, Plon, 1966.
Mythologiques III: L’Origine des manières de table, Paris, Plon, 1968.
Structural Anthropology, London, Penguin, 1972.
LEWIS, I.M.: ‘Spirit Possession and Deprivation Cults’, Man, N.S. 1,
   3:307–29, 1966.
LIENHARDT, GODFREY: ‘Some Notions of Witchcraft among the
   Dinka’, Africa, 21. 1:303–18, 1951.
The Western Dinka’ in Middleton, J. and D.Tait (eds), Tribes without
   Rulers, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1958.
Divinity and Experience: The Religion of the Dinka, Oxford, Clarendon,
   1961.
‘The Situation of Death: An Aspect of Anuak Philosophy’,
   Anthropological Quarterly, 35. 2. April: 74–85, 1962.
LOWIE, R.H.: Primitive Religion, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul,
   1925:
MAIMONIDES, MOSES: The Guide for the Perplexed, translated from
   the Arabic by M.Friedlander, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1956.
MARSHALL, LORNA: ‘!Kung Bushman Religious Beliefs’, Africa, 32.
   3:221–52, 1962.
MARTIN, DAVID: ‘Towards Eliminating the Concept of Secularisation’,
   Penguin Survey of the Social Sciences, Gould, J. (ed.), London,
   Penguin, 1965.
MARWICK, M.G.: ‘Another Modern Anti-Witchcraft Movement in East
   Central Africa’, Africa, 20. 2:100–12, 1950.
‘The Social Context of Cewa Witch Beliefs’, Africa, 22. 2:120–35; 215–
   33, 1952.
                                                    Bibliography 175
Sorcery in its Social Setting, a Study of the Northern Rhodesia Cewa,
   Manchester, Manchester University Press, 1965.
MAUSS, MARCEL: ‘Les Techniques du corps’, Journal de la Psychologie,
   32. March-April, 1936.
MEGGITT, M.J. ‘The Mae Enga of the Western Highlands’ in Lawrence,
   P. and M.J.Meggitt (eds), Gods, Ghosts and Men in Melanesia,
   London, Oxford University Press, 1965.
MERTON, R.K.: Social Theory and Social Structure (revised edn),
   Glencoe, The Free Press, 1957.
MIDDLETON, J. and DAVID TAIT (eds): Tribes without Rulers. Studies
   in African Segmentary Systems, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul,
   1958.
MIDDLETON, JOHN: The Religion of the Lugbara, International
   African Institute, London, Oxford University Press, 1960.
MITCHELL, CLYDE: The Yao Village, Manchester, Manchester
   University Press, 1956.
NEAL, SISTER MARIE AUGUSTA: Values and Interests in Social
   Change, London, Prentice-Hall, 1965.
NEEDHAM, RODNEY: ‘Percussion and Transition’, Man, N.S. 2. 4:
   606–14, 1967.
NEWFIELD, JACK: A Prophetic Minority: The American New Left,
   London, Anthony Blond, 1966.
NEWMAN, J.H.: The Arians of the Fourth Century, London, Longman,
   1901.
OLIVER, D.L.: Human Relations and Language in a Papuan-Speaking
   Tribe of Southern Bougainville, Solomon Islands. Papers of the
   Peabody Museum, Vol. 29. 2:3–38, 1949.
A Solomon Island Society: Kinship and Leadership among the Siuai of
   Bougainville, London, Oxford University Press, 1957.
OTTO, RUDOLPH: The Idea of the Holy, London, Oxford University
   Press, 1957.
PARSONS, T. and NEIL SMELSER: Society and Economy, London,
   Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1956.
PAUL VI: Encyclical letter: Mysterium Fidei, 1965. Decree: Paenitemine,
   1966.
RICHARDS, A.I.: ‘A Modern Movement of Witch-Finders’, Africa, 8. 4:
   448–61, 1935.
RIVIÈRE, PETER: ‘Factions and Exclusions in Two South American
   Village Systems’, Witchcraft Confessions and Accusations, ed. Mary
   Douglas, A.S.A.Monograph No. 9, London, Tavistock, 1970.
ROVERE, RICHARD: Senator Joe McCarthy, New York, Harcourt,
   Brace & World, 1959.
SACRED CONGREGATION OF RITES: Instruction on the Worship of
   the Eucharistic Mystery, London, Catholic Truth Society, 1967.
SAPIR, E.: Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. 9:155–69, 1933.
SARTRE, JEAN-PAUL: Words, London, Penguin, 1967.
SCHBESTA, P.: Die Bambuti-Pygmaen vom Ituri, Vol. 2, Part 3, Die
   Religion, Mem. Inst. Royal Colonial Belge, Brussels, 1950.
SMELSER, NEIL J.: Theory of Collective Behaviour, London, Routledge
   & Kegan Paul, 1962.
176 Bibliography
SMITH, W.ROBERTSON: Lectures on the Religion of the Semites,
  London, Black, 1894.
SPENCER, PAUL: The Samburu: A Study of Gerontocracy in a Nomadic
  Tribe, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965.
STRINDBERG, AUGUST: The Son of a Servant: The Story of the
  Evolution of a Human Being. 1849–67, London, Jonathan Cape,
  1967.
STRIZOWER, S.: ‘Clean and Unclean’, Jewish Chronicle (London), 26
  August 1966.
TAYLOR, A.J.P.: English History 1914–1945, London, Penguin, 1970.
THRUPP, SYLVIA L. (ed.): Millennial Dreams in Action. Essays in
  Comparative Study, The Hague, Mouton, 1962.
TREVOR-ROPER, H.R.: Religion, the Reformation and Social Change
  and Other Essays, London, Macmillan, 1967.
TURNBULL, COLIN, M.: The Forest People, London; Chatto &
  Windus, 1961.
Wayward Servants: The Two Worlds of the African Pygmies, London,
  Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1965.
TURNER, V.W.: Chihamba, the White Spirit. A Ritual Drama of the
  Ndembu, Manchester, Manchester University Press, 1962.
The Drums of Affliction: A Study of Religious Processes among the
  Ndembu of Zambia, International Africa Institute, Oxford,
  Clarendon, 1968.
VAN GENNEP, A.: The Rites of Passage (translated by M.B.Vizedom and
  G.L.Caffee), London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1960.
WEIL, SIMONE: Waiting on God, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul,
  1951.
WHORF, B.L.: ‘The Relation of Habitual Thought and Behaviour to
  Language’, Language, Culture and Personality: Essays in Memory of
  Edward Sapir, Menasha, Winsconsin, Sapir Memorial Publication
  Fund, 1941.
WILSON, BRYAN R. (ed.): Patterns of Sectarianism, London,
  Heinemann Educational Books, 1967.
WOODBURN, JAMES: The Social Organization of the Hadza of North
  Tanganyika, Doctoral thesis, University of Cambridge, 1964.
WORSLEY, PETER: The Trumpet Shall Sound: a Study of ‘Cargo’ Cults
  in Melanesia, London, MacGibbon & Kee, 1957.
Index




Aberle, D. 11–14, 121                  Bertrams, W. 43
Africa, Central 63–4, 111, 119–20      Bloor, D. xxv
alienation 20, 162, 164–5              bodily excretions 76, 112
allegiance 39–41, 126–7                body: control xxxv–xxxvi, 72,
ancestor-fear 130                         74–6, 83–5, 95–6; natural
anthropomorphism 147                      symbols xxxi–ii, xxxvi–xxxvii;
anti-ritualism: external expression       sexual imagery 170; smooth/
    51; formality/informality 75;         shaggy 77–8; social 69, 164–6;
    and history 21; injustice 152–3;      symbols 52–3, 69–70, 140,
    maladjustment theory 5; and           164; techniques 69–70
    revolt xii, 1, 153; Roman          Bog Irishism 3–4, 5, 33, 37
    Catholic Church 3–4; symbols       Book of Manners for Women
    157–9, 170                            (Humphry) xxxiii–xxxiv
Antiochus, King 39                     boundaries 50, 64
Anuak people 35, 123–4                 bounded group xix, 119–20
’Are’are people 128–9                  Braddon, R. 133–6
Arianism 166–7                         Brahmans 149, 167
asceticism 149                         Brethren movement 73–4, 113–16,
Auerbach, E. 71–2                         142
Augustine, Saint 71–2, 151–2           Brown, P. xxv, 152
Austen, J. 110–11                      Bulmer, R. 38
                                       bureaucracy 63
Barth, F. 18–19                        Burridge, K. 130, 140
Barthes, R. 72–3                       bushmen 82–4
Basseri nomads 18–19, 35               Buxton, J. 102–3
Beattie 89
behaviour xxv, xxxiii-xxxv, 69–70      Cage, J. 61–2
beliefs, social determinants 145       Calley, M.J. C. 84
Beowulf 131                            cargo cults 138–40
Berger, P. 145–6                       categories 58–9, 127, 141
Bernstein, B.: curriculum ix-x;        Catholic Institute for International
   elaborated/restricted codes of         Relations 44
   speech 23–7, 29–32, 35, 54–7,       Catholicism: see Roman Catholic
   160–2; family systems 27–33,           Church
   34–6, 56–7, 59; speech systems      China, geomancy 131–3, 136
   21–3, 33–5
178 Index
Christianity 4, 9–11, 168–70; see       cults 88–9, 91–3, 138–40
   also Protestantism; Roman            curing dance 82–3
   Catholic Church                      curriculum ix–x
Clark, F. 47–8
class, and speech code 162              dance, curing 82–3
classification 58–9, 61; cosmology      Darby, J.N. 73–4, 116–17
   151, 164; individual 67; low/        de Coppet, D. 128–9
   high 62–3, 67, 141; public/          deprivation hypothesis 6
   private 60–1, 149                    desacralization 165
Coad, F.R. 74, 116                      devil 117–18
Coakley, S. xxvii–xxviii                dietary restrictions 38, 46
codes: see speech codes                 Dinka people 15–17; cosmos
Cohn, N. 88–9, 154–5, 157                  100; and other Nilotes 123–4;
colonialism 64–5, 138                      religion 16–17; social structure
communication ix; animals 2;               101–2, 104–5; spirit
   barriers xii; order 58; ritual 2,       possession 95, 97–9; trance
   21–2; symbols 10                        79–81, 94–5
communities, closed 126, 146            disorder 86
comparative religion xvii, 124          dissidence xx-xxi, 113
compensation theory 88, 140, 153        Dixon, R. 163
competition 126–8; ’Are’are             Dobu Islanders 142–3
   people 128–9; Chinese 131–3;         doctrine, and social organization
   Garia people 128–9; individual          xix
   137; leadership 129–30;              Douglas, M. ix, xiii, xvii, xix-xx,
   Solomon Islanders 129–30;               xxiv, xxv, xxvi, xxxi, 74, 86–7,
   Teutons 130–1; industrial               107, 120
   world 133–6                          dualism 118–19, 126
conformity 4, 61                        Duchesne-Guillemin, L. 118
consciousness 58, 67, 79, 146,          Dumont, L. 149, 167
   164–5, 169                           Durkheim, É.: classification 58–9;
consonance 74, 154                         effervescence 78; religion 163,
control:cosmos 57; social/bodily           165; sacred xv-xvi; social
   expressions xxxv-xxxvi, 72,             system xxxii, 67, 137, 153;
   74–6, 83–6, 95–6; structured/           solidarity 54
   unstructured 78–80
cosmology: classified 151, 164;         ecstasy xxxvii
   competition 126–36; control          effervescence xiv, 78, 79, 89
   systems 57; Dinka 100; God           elaborated code: see speech
   and devil 117–18; implicit 146;          codes
   Nuer 99–100; rational 138;           Ellis, R. xxvii
   and ritual form ix-x; success        enclave xix-xxii
   136; types defined 60–1, 66,         Ensor, J. 61–2
   141–3; witch-fearing 120             equality 158–9
Cox, H. 17                              Essays in the Sociology of
Coyle, D. xxvii                             Perception (Douglas) xxv
Crow Indians 137, 163                   ethics, symbols 46
culture: and behaviour xxxiii-          Eucharist 8, 42, 46–9
   xxxv; bias xviii-iv, xxvii-xxviii;   Evans-Pritchard, E.E. 16, 94,
   language 21; nature xxxi, 71,            95–6, 98–9
   72–3; speech 161                     evil, social control 110
                                                              Index 179
exchange, goods and services          Hadza hunters 105–8
   139–40                             Hall, E. 70
Exclusive Brethren 113–16             Hampton, J. xxv
existentialists 52                    Harrington, M. 156, 157
experience, symbolic action 16        Herberg, W. 21, 46
                                      heresy 166–7
family systems: and evil 110;         hierarchy xxii, xxiii, xxiv, 121–2
   personal 27–8, 29, 30–2, 33,       Higher Catechetical Institute 49
   34–6, 53, 62, 162;positional       Hinduism 149
   24–7, 29, 30, 32–3, 56–7, 59,      homicide 105
   162; ritual 53                     Horton, R. 16, 89–91
Fanon, F. 156                         Hull, D. xvii
Feng-shui system, geomancy            Humphry, C.E. xxxiii-xxxiv
   131–3, 136
Firth, R. 80                          immigrants 5–6
food, sociology of xxvi               impersonal 148
Fortes, M. 62–3                       incarnation xxxiii, 166
Fortune, R.F. 142–3                   Indian religion 149, 167–8
Freedman, M. 131, 132                 individual: classification system
freedom 160                               67; competitive 137; moral
Freud, S. 4, 70                           context 148; religion 6–7;
Friday abstinence 3–4, 7, 40, 42–6        ritual 146; social structure
frustration, sexual 88–9                  35–6, 146; symbolism 125
fundamentalists 20                    infancy 52–3, 62
                                      informality 105
Garia people 126–8, 139               injustice 152–3
geomancy, Chinese 131–3, 136          innovation 61
Ghana, Tallensi people 62–3           integration 162
God xxxiii, 117–18, 121–2, 165,       intimacy 76–7, 106
   166                                Irish people 3–4, 5, 33, 37
Goffman, E. 75                        Ituri pygmies 147
Goodenough, E.R. 42
grace 9                               Jacobs, P. 149
Grendstad, G. xxvii                   Judaism 10–11, 38–40
grid 59; ego-focused 137–40;          John the Baptist, Saint 93
   oppressive 66, 129; strong         joke, as natural symbol 86
   64, 93, 110, 137, 139, 142–3,      Jung, C.G. 124–5, 168
   147, 152; without group            justice 122–3, 141
   140–1
grid and group ix, xxvi, xxvii, 60;   Kalahari religion 89–91
   evil 110; Nilotes 82; restraints   Kenya, pastoralists 104
   102–3; sectarianism 119;           Keynes, J.M. 94
   slackening 89; strong 141, 146     Kingsley, M. 106
Griffiths, R. xxiii                   kinship 12–13, 106, 130–1
Grönbech, W. 131                      Klein, M. 52–3
Gross, J. xxv, xxvi                   Kluckhohn, C. 121
groups: bounded xxiv, 119–20;         Knightley, P. 154
   membership xix, 13, 147–8;         knowledge, undermined 156
   small 64, 141–2, 150               !Kung Bushmen 82–3
Gulliver, P. 65
180 Index
labour division 24, 92–3, 106–7,      Mbuti pygmies 11, 14–15, 106,
   163                                   148
Landau, S. 149                        Meggitt, M.J. 130
language: culture 21; mother-in-      Melanesian people 128–9, 138–40
   law 161; for religion xiv-xv; as   menstrual couvade 107
   social process 22, 28–9;           Merton, R.K. 1–2
   structural analysis 75; tonal      Middleton, J. 89–91, 119
   xxxv; see also speech; speech      migration cycle 18–19
   codes                              millennial movements: materialism
laughter xxxiii-xxxiv                    rejected 139; optimism 158;
law, and morality 2–3                    revolt 154–5, spirit xxxvi-
Lawrence, P. 126–7, 138, 139–40          xxxvii; violence 140–1; witch-
Lawrence, T.E. 153–4                     cleansing 120; women 88–9
Leach, E. xxxvi, 165                  Mitchell, C. 111
leadership: competition 129–30;       morality 2–3, 135, 148
   enclave xx-xxii; failing 143;      Mormons xxii-xxiii
   feedback 136–7; psychology of      myth, and ritual 11
   118; strong grid 152; success
   138                                nature, culture xxxi, 71, 72–3
legitimacy 150, 170                   Navaho people 11–14, 120–1
Lévi-Strauss, C. xxxiv-xxxv, 70–1,    Ndembu people 10
   169                                Ndendeule people 65
Lewis, I. 91–2, 97, 98                Neal, Sister M.A. 7, 21
Lienhardt, G. 16, 80, 95, 97, 100,    Needham, R. 75
   120, 123                           New Guinea tribes: Big Man
Lim, R. xxviii                           65; cargo cults 138–40;
Lloyd George, D. 93                      competition 126–8; leadership
Lortz, J. 48                             136–7; social networks 64–5;
Lowie, R.H. 137, 163                     tribal beliefs 17
Luckmann, T. 144–5                    Newfield, J. 1, 156
Lugbara people 119                    Newman, F.W. 74
Luther, M. 48                         Newman, J.H. 166–7
                                      Ney, S. xiii
Maccabees 38–9
                                      Nilotic people, compared 82,
McCarthy, Joe 142
                                         103–4, 123–4
magic: natural 70; ritual 128;
                                      nomads, Persian 18–19
  rules 37; sin 10; social
                                      Nuer people: cosmos 99–100;
  structure 16–17, 102–3,
                                         god 147; and other Nilotes
  150; in theology 8, 9–10
                                         123–4; prophets 93, 96;
Maimonides xxxii-xxxiii
                                         religion 15–17; social structure
Maine, H.J.S. 54
                                         101–2, 104; spirit possession
maladjustment theory 5
                                         95–6, 98, 103–4; trance 79,
Mandari people 102–4
                                         94–5
Manicheeism 151–2
marginality 91–2
Marshall, L. 82–3                     Oliver, D.L. 129, 136
Martin, D. 52                         organization: corporate 64–5;
Marwick, M.G. 111, 120                   enclaves xx-xxii; and ideas
mass movements 6                         xxiv; and individual 146;
Mauss, M. xvii, xxxii, 58, 59, 69,       religious sociology xviii-xxi;
  74
                                                               Index 181
   and social control 56; and         reality, social construct 145–6
   symbolic expression 50–1           reciprocity 129, 137
L’Osservatore Romano 43               relationships, networks 64–5,
Ostrander, D. xxv                         126–7, 128–9
Otto, R. 70                           religion: collective 163;
outcastes, voluntary 61                   comparative xvi, 124;
outrage xv                                cosmology xiii-xv, xviii, xix;
                                          existentialists 52; Kalibari
Parsons, T. 78                            89–91; language xiv-xv;
pastoralists 15–17, 104, 120              magical 11–12; power xxv;
Patterns of Sectarianism (Wilson)         revivalist movements 88–9,
   4–5                                    154; and risk 127–8; ritualist/
Paul, VI, Pope 42, 46–7, 48–9             unritualist 13, 16–17; social
Pegg, Mark xviii                          control 28; sociology of xii-xiii,
penitence 42–3                            xviii-xxi, 6–7; symbolism 20–1,
Pentecostal churches 84–5, 119            166–70; trance 78, 79–80;
personal family: see family systems       witchcraft 141–2; see also
peyote 12–14                              Christianity; Hinduism;
Plains Indians 147                        Judaism
Plato 118, 160                        Rendille pastoralists 104
Plymouth Brethren 115, 142            restricted code: see speech codes
politics 64, 88, 111, 142             revivalist movements 88–9, 154
pollution 106                         revolt xi, 1, 153–6
pork 38–40                            Richards, A.L. 120
positional family: see family         risk xxvi, 127–8
   systems                            Risk and Culture (Douglas) xxvii
poverty 139, 149, 156                 ritual xvi-xvii; cargo cult 138–9;
power: attitudes 170;                     coded 33–4, 54–5; as
   classification 61, 62; religion        communication 2, 21–2;
   xxv; and social systems 61,            conformity 4; contamination
   130–6                                  12; cosmology ix-x; family
Primitive Classification (Durkheim        systems 53; and individual 146;
   and Mauss) 58, 59                      magical 128; and myth 11;
primitive society, symbols 2–3            neutrality 2–3; poverty of form
privacy 162                               1, 55; and rationality 4;
prophets 93                               Roman Catholic Church xv,
Protestantism 4, 20, 47–8, 88–9,          38; Zambia 10
   125, 154, 168                      ritualism 1–2, 35; conditions for
proto-hierarchy xxiv                      23, 78–9, 150; declining 35,
psychoanalysis 5, 70, 86–7, 124–5         50–1; sacrament/magic 9–10,
psychology, social facts xv-xvii          128; social groups 14–15, 20;
Purity and Danger (Douglas) ix,           as symbolic action 7–8
   xxxii, 38                          Rivière, P. 111
purity rule 34, 76, 86, 146, 156      Roman Catholic Church:
pygmies 11, 14–15, 35, 105–6,             American 6, 44–6; anti-
   147, 148                               ritualism 3–4; conflict xxiii;
                                          Eucharist 8, 42, 46–9; Friday
racism 156                                abstinence 3–4, 7, 10–11, 38,
rationality 4, 138                        40, 42–6; hierarchy 168; ritual
Rayner, S. xxii, xxv, xxvi, xxvii         xv, 38
182 Index
Rovere, R. 142                           Solomon Islanders 129–30
Rudwick, M. xxvi                         sorcery 130, 137–8
                                         sparsity 143–4
sacrament 8–10                           speech 21–4, 25–6, 161
sacred contagion xv-xvi, xvii-xviii      speech codes 160–1; class 162;
saints 114–15, 116                          elaborated 23–4, 29–32,
Samburu people 79, 104                      161–2; family systems 56–7;
Sapir, E. 21                                restricted 23–7, 29–32, 35,
Sartre, J.-P. 32, 156                       54–7, 72, 162, 163–5; social
Schmutzer, M. xxviii                        context 24–32
sect xix-xx, 4–5, 20–1                   Spencer, P. 79, 104
sectarianism xix-xx, xxi;                spirit possession 80–2, 89–92;
    development 78;exclusivity              Dinka 95, 97–9; Nuer 95–6,
    113–16; group and grid                  98, 103–5
    analysis 119; hierarchy xxii;        spirituality xxxvi-xxxvii, 6–7, 166
    see also enclave                     strain 6
secularism xvii, 17                      Strindberg, A. 121–3
self: see individual                     Strizower, S. 38
Selle, P. xxvii                          students, protesting 140–1, 155–6,
shagginess, and smoothness 77–8             157
Shevante people 111                      style 71, 72, 73
Simpson, C. 154                          success 128, 130, 136, 138
sin xvii, 10, 105, 108–9                 Sudan, pastoralists 15–17
Siuai people 129–30, 136                 superstition xviii
Sivan, E. xxiii                          Sweden, hierarchy 121–2
small group category 64, 141–2,          symbolic action 7–8, 16
    150                                  symbolism; anti-ritualism 157–9;
Smelser, N.J. 6                             of categories 141; for
Smith, W.R. 9, 11                           individuals 125; and intellect
social control xxxv-xxxvi, 28,              154; magic 37; and
    55–6, 110                               organization 50–1; primitive
social distance 76–7, 163                   societies 2–3; public 7;
social relations xxx, 20, 60–1              religious 20–1, 166–70;
social structure 66, 147–8; bodily          structure 70–1
    control xxxv-xxxvi, 72, 74,          symbols: of allegiance 39–41; body
    83–6, 95–6; dualism 118;fluid           52–3, 69–70, 140, 164; co-
    105–7; and individual 35–6,             ordinate 39; as communication
    146; language 22, 28–9; magic           10; condensed 10–11, 21, 35,
    16–17, 102–3, 150; networks             47; diffuse 11–12; and ethics
    64–5; Nilotic 101–2, 104;               46; impoverished 49, 124–5,
    order 58; power 61, 130–6;              147; natural xxxi, xxxii, xxxvi-
    self 35–6; solidarity xv, 54;           xxxvii, 86–7, 170; smooth/
    speech 161; witchcraft 111–12,          shaggy 77–8; socially
    116, 119, 141–2                         determined xxxii, 9, 140;
social types 66, 141–3                      wealth 148; witchcraft 112–13;
socialization 34, 76                        value 38
society xxxii, 23, 74
sociology of religion xii-xiii, xviii-   taboos 11–12
    xxi, 6–7                             Tallensi people 62–3
solidarity xv, 54                        Tangu people 130, 140
                                                           Index 183
Tanzania: Hadza hunters 105–8;     Van Gennep, A. 86
   Ndendeule people 65             violence 140–1
Taylor, A.J.P. 93–4
Teutons 130–31, 136                waste products 76, 112
theology, sacramental/magical 8,   wealth, as symbol 148
   9–10                            Weber, M. xiv, 4
Thompson, M. xxv, xxvi, xxvii      Weil, S. 88
Thomson, R., Lord of Fleet 133–6   West Indians, Pentecostal Church
Thoreau, H.D. 149                     84–5, 119
Thrupp, S.L. 138, 155              Wildavsky, A. xxvi-xxvii
Thurber, J. 75–6                   Wilson, B. 4–5, 113–15
trance: approved 105; bodily       witch-cleansing 119–20
   control 83; Nilotes 79, 94–5;   witchcraft: beliefs 126, 141–2;
   semi-conscious 82–3; in            Central Africa 119–20; fear
   worship 78, 79–80                  110–11, 130; pastoralists 120;
transubstantiation 46–7               political struggles 64, 111; and
Trevor-Roper, H.R. 143                religion 141–2; social
Trio people 111                       conditions 111–12, 116, 119,
Tully River aborigines 163            141–2; symbols 111–12
Turnbull, C. 11, 14–15, 46, 106    Woodburn, J. 105–6, 107
Turner, V.W. 10                    Worsley, P. 138
uncertainty 143
                                   Zambia, rituals 10
universe, good and evil 141–2
