Chapter 9
Control of symbols




According to the Book of Genesis our ancestor fell from a state of
natural innocence when he ate the ambiguous fruit. To attain
knowledge of good and evil is still the god-defying and distinctive
goal of human beings. And always we find ourselves unable to
bear the knowledge, and always erecting filters to protect the
idea of our own interior innocence. One such filter is the strong
resistance made by many scholars to the very notion of social
determinants of belief. They would rather think of beliefs
floating free in an autonomous vacuum, developing according to
their own internal logic, bumping into other ideas by the chance
of historical contact and being modified by new insights. This is
an inverted materialism. In the name of the primacy of mind over
matter, its adherents evade their own responsibility for choosing
the circumstances for their intellectual freedom. To ensure
autonomy of mind we should first recognize the restrictions
imposed by material existence. This leads back to our original
programme.
   We have identified distinctive social patterns and the theory of
justification that goes with each and sustains it. Two tasks remain.
One is to distinguish what is said from what is not said in each
world view. Each theory has its hidden implications. These are its
unspoken assumptions about the nature of ultimate reality. They
are unspoken because they are taken for granted. There is no need
to make them explicit because this is the common basis of
experience. Such shared assumptions underlie any discourse, even
the elaborated speech code which is developed to inspect them.
They are the foundations on which social reality is constituted, as
the phenomenologists point out. Yet so far, though it is agreed that
reality is a social construct (Berger and Luckmann, 1971), no
convincing order has been discerned in all the multiple kinds of

146 Control of symbols

reality construable. To find what is implicit in each cosmology we
shall follow the same thread that has unravelled the rest of the
argument, the relation of self to society. By this thread we shall
find how the grand building blocks of the cosmos are balanced
together and so fathom the gaps between them. The unspoken
assumptions betray how the social bond is constituted in the secret
consciousness of individuals. With that exposed, the scene is set for
the last task, the relation between the media and the society whose
visible substance they are.
   Each social form and its accompanying style of thought restricts
the self-knowledge of the individual in one way or another. With
strong grid and group, there is the tendency to take the intellectual
categories which the fixed social categories require as if they were
God-given eternal truths. The mind is tied hand and foot, so to
speak, bound by the socially generated categories of culture. No
other alternative view of reality seems possible. A small shift in the
definitions is anathema and worth protecting with bloodshed.
Anomaly is abhorrent. In such a system, the purity code has set up
a strong distinction between the private and the public, and its
wider implications are irresistible. Here the eruption of the organic
into the social domain is most dangerous, to be purified with
ritual. The individual in transition from one social status to
another is like matter out of place, impure and to be ritually re-
integrated. Rituals have the function of celebrating the
transcendance of the whole over the part.
   By contrast, still in the right-hand quadrant, any position
near zero is less impressed by the purity rule and its meanings.
But charming though its world view is, and rosy its concept of
human nature, it is a temporary resting place which turns
barren for the long-term resident. All opportunities of
individual development are limited by the lack of organization.
The range and quality of personal interaction are restricted.
The possibilities of knowing the self are reduced by the limited
contact with other selves. Intellectually it is as null as it is
ineffective in organization.
   Second, the closed community with its intolerance of
imperfections: its focus on an impossible good is limiting in
another way. The failure to confront the menacing idea of evil is as
complete here as in the first case. At zero point evil is implicitly
ignored, here it is explicitly shunned and rejected. Thus both
systems allow the individual to cherish an inadequate view of the
self and its capacities and dangers.

                                             Control of symbols 147

   Third, the strong grid: this society allows all the possibilities of
large-scale organization to be taken, but at the expense of personal
relationships. Again, in the extreme form, there is a sterile
exaltation of the self in isolation from other selves. Other persons
are treated as things, instruments, pawns in a game. So the
individual caught up in this system is incapable of reflecting on the
nature of the self, or of symbolizing it as a complex agent. Here we
have an equal impoverishment of the symbolic life and deadening
of metaphysical curiosity.
   If we turn to the quadrant of social structures (diagram 4, p. 60)
we can now draw out some general characters, some elementary
types of cosmology. Take first the effects of group boundedness. To
the left of zero, on the horizontal axis of control, the cosmos is
seen as if dominated by impersonal powers and principles.
Anthropomorphism in these religions is weak. In so far as demons
or gods are considered to be at all influential, they are only faintly
drawn in the human image. They tend to be bizarre, dislocated or
diffuse in their presence. Recall the idea of the forest as a cosmic
force in the religion of Ituri pygmies, the various confused
refractions through which the Nuer God is manifested, the animal
spirits of the Plains Indians, to realize the extent to which
anthropomorphism can be diminished. At the same time these
religions are not moral regulators. They hold out no system of
rewards and punishment, neither in this world nor in the next. At
top left, the principles which govern the universe act as multipliers
of human success or failure. It is a system of positive feedback
which offers total escalation to those who are strong enough to
play by the rules. And total degradation to those who fail. No




Diagram 6 From impersonal to personal

148 Control of symbols

techniques of re-integration and reconciliation are provided, since
there is no conception of offence against the community, only of
failure. There are no over-arching doctrines of sin and atonement.
In these societies, the idea of the self is free from social constraint.
The self is valued uniquely for its own sake, not for any
contribution it can make to the whole.
   On the other side of the vertical line, where group is strong, we
find the opposite holds good. The powers that control the universe
are modelled on human figures. Either they are the spirits of dead
fathers and grandfathers, or culture heroes like big brothers, or a
creator god, the most ancestral figure of them all. Or they are
actual, real human beings, free men with powers to bless and
curse, or witches and sorcerers with their own armoury of ill-
doing. On this side, where group is strong, social control is built
into the cosmos. These humans and human-like powers are
activated by moral situations. Ancestors punish and reward; curses
avenge moral wrong; even witches only strike when provoked by
neglect or rudeness. The idea of the self is surrounded with prickly
moral contexts in which it has to operate.
   Now to consider the vertical axis. Here we have a very
different set of discriminations. Diminishing grid gives a pattern
for increasingly ascetic behaviour. Where grid is strong the
external manifestations of life are positively valued. Wealth and
pomp are justified as symbolic expressions or as good in
themselves. There is no feeling of guilt about spending; the
outward expressions of society and self are not despised or




Diagram 7 From asceticism to affirmation

                                            Control of symbols 149

feared—the world, society, the Church, organization as such and
all its signs are affirmed. As we approach zero, there are two
kinds of asceticism. With strong group, ascetic attitudes express
the rejection of what is external, the husk, the empty shell, the
contamination of the senses. Strict controls are set on bodily
enjoyment and on the gateways of sensual experience. Moving
towards the zero of the horizontal line, another form of
asceticism results from valuing human fellowship above material
things. Those who belong in this sector are usually aware of
other ways of living, both more arduous and more richly
rewarded in material wealth. Their culture is often seen as a
choice, a preference for the simple life. Thus the Mbuti pygmies,
after a period of lush living in the Bantu village, scamper back
gleefully to the forest in the spirit of children repairing to their
holiday camping to enjoy candlelight and sausages. Thus the
reaction against the American middle class consciously prides
itself on embracing poverty.

     In their personal life-style, their aesthetic sense, many in the
  Movement reject affluence and its associated symbols. The
  ambition to escape from poverty is no spur to action in their
  lives,…their parents’ desire to own, to accumulate, to achieve
  the status and prestige which go with material wealth, are
  meaningless goals to them….
                                  (Jacobs and Landau, 1967:15–16)

Then again, escaping more completely from social life and
coming even nearer to zero, we hear Thoreau preaching the
beauty of nature from his hermitage at Walden. If the active
society listens to the hermit, our diagram’s rules will shift him
out from zero to the bottom left with the other voices in the
wilderness which cry out and are heeded. Then the range
between society and renunciation becomes more than a passive
scale of measurement. A dialogue involves two sectors of society,
the renouncers reproaching the celebrators with the vanity of
their ways. The whole diagram becomes too complicated when
the precepts of the renouncers are accepted by society at large
and come to control the idiom of public classification. Just such a
competitive dialogue is analysed between the Brahmans and the
renouncing sects of India by Louis Dumont (1966) who traces to
it the root ideas of Hinduism. A parallel dialogue between Rome
and the succession of desert dwellers, anchorites and poor friars

150 Control of symbols

has complicated our own culture. We cannot but be aware of the
ascetic tradition.
    Already the comparison of world views has led to life-styles. I
have started the second task which is to relate the media of
expression to cosmology and social structure. Without more ado,
we are ready to answer our questions about the social conditions
in which ritual comes into contempt. We took ritual to signify
fixed forms of communication which acquire magical efficacy. The
top half of diagram 4 represents the main body of society. The
further away from zero in all directions upwards, the stronger the
belief in efficacious signs; the closer to zero the less the demand for
communication, and the less the tendency to vest symbols with
something more than an expressive function. Magicality is a
product of social control. To insist that the symbols are efficacious
is to threaten blasphemy and sacrilege with automatic danger and
to promise the reverent automatic blessing. Magicality is an
instrument of mutual coercion which only works when common
consent upholds the system. It is useless for a witch doctor to
invest a fetish with magic power by the sole authority of his
charisma. Magic derives its potency from the legitimacy of the
system in which this kind of communication is being made. Like
the notices which warn against contact with high-voltage electric
wires, it protects the media of communication. As consent
withdraws from the system of control, leaders lose their credibility,
and so does their magic. This is as true of the society organized by
strong grid and group as the one spread on both sides of the
diagram, where Big Men exert pressure on a long chain of
followers. For the magic which in the first case invests the
established institutions in the second case invests the individual
leader. If his success departs from him, so does his own belief in the
potency of his charms and spiritual helpers waver. Magicality is a
barometer of political legitimacy. From this the rest follows. Small
groups, with a minimum of classification and only one strong
outer boundary that they wish to preserve, protect that boundary
with magic. Rituals are for social interaction. Nearer to zero,
people are uninterested in magic. Here it is inner experience,
contemplation and the internal evolution of the self that counts.
This is the picture in static terms. Lack of interest in ritual is not
anti-ritualism. But inevitably social change must be expressed in a
revolt against ritual. Ritual and anti-ritual are the idiom which
natural systems of symbols afford for acting out theories of
society.

                                            Control of symbols 151

   Anyone who finds himself living in a new social condition
must, by the logic of all we have seen, find that the cosmology he
used in his old habitat no longer works. We should try to think of
cosmology as a set of categories that are in use. It is like lenses
which bring into focus and make bearable the manifold challenge
of experience. It is not a hard carapace which the tortoise has to
carry for ever, but something very flexible and easily disjointed.
Spare parts can be fitted and adjustments made without much
trouble. Occasionally a major overhaul is necessary to bring the
obsolete set of views into focus with new times and new
company. This is conversion. But most of the time adjustments
are made so smoothly that one is hardly aware of the shifts of
angle until they have developed an obvious disharmony between
past and present. Then a gradual conversion that has been slowly
taking place has to be recognized. Inevitably this recognition of a
new viewpoint produces a revulsion against dead ritual.
Whichever way a person has moved (unless it is out of and away
from the zero position), there is a burden of old, irrelevant rituals
to be laid aside. They no longer have meaning because the social
action in which they inhered no longer attracts. By a paradox
which becomes very understandable, every conversion generates
some anti-ritual feeling, even if (as is often the case) it is a
conversion to a ritualist belief. So the more social change, the
more radical revision of cosmologies, the more conversion
phenomena, and the more denigration of ritual. Could St
Augustine have chosen any creed more materially hidebound and
magical than Manicheeism in his youthful revolt against the
African Christianity of the sixth century? But he chose it as an
act of emancipation. It offered him intellectual freedom relative
to the dried-up teachings of local Christianity. What he selected
in Manicheean teaching was the promise of immediate
knowledge, direct access to divine mysteries without mediating
authority or respect for external institutions:

  It is hardly surprising, therefore, that Augustine should have
  adopted a religion which claimed to slough off any beliefs that
  threatened the independence of his very active mind. For as a
  Manichee, Augustine had been able to rid himself, immediately,
  of ideas that cluttered up the religion of the conventional
  Christian. He was possessed of a vivid certainty:
     ‘I have known my soul and the body that lies upon it

152 Control of symbols

     That they have been enemies since the creation of the
  worlds.’
     There was no need to ‘water down’ so intimate an
  awareness, to obscure it with the clumsy scaffolding of Hebrew
  prophecies that the Catholic Church had erected around the
  simple truth. The Manichee did not need to be ordered to
  believe. He could grasp, for himself, the essence of religion.
  Immediacy was what counted most. The crucifixion of Christ
  spoke directly to such a man of the sufferings of his own soul.
  His hero was Doubting Thomas, a man whose yearning for a
  direct immediate contact with the divine secrets had not been
  spurned by Christ.
                                                (Brown, 1967:49)

It is curious that it could mean such different things to the fringe
followers and to the central figures of the cult. For the initiated
Manicheean teachers themselves seem to have developed from
the same doctrine a typical sectarian cosmology. Their small,
tightly organized group maintained its identity by elaborate
rituals, ruthless rejection of the bad outside and affirmation by
symbolic means of the purity of the group and of their inner
selves. To most of their educated followers they offered an
intellectual freedom which they themselves did not enjoy, since
they were bound by the authority of Mani. But their system of
moral control and bodily asceticism offered a technique for
achieving mastery over the self.
    Finally, there is another source of anti-ritualism. The subject
followers of distant leaders in the strong grid system find
themselves weakly related to other people. Their social categories
are barely defined, their contracts with other people fragile and
unreliable. They are in a universe dominated by principles. It is
as if things, not people, determine their lot. And, as with
principles and things, there is no arguing with these people in
charge, no appeal to compassion. This is the subjection which is
hardest to bear. The impersonal controls of weather and tides,
however cruel, do not produce the sense of injustice which is
aroused when people behave as if they and those they control are
objects, not persons. A violent source of anti-ritualism is opened
up when persons are perceived to be behind the principles, or
benefiting from them.
    The unsuccessful may find themselves forced to move from
leader to leader in the attempt to get a better deal and as they

                                             Control of symbols 153

move they break their social ties. Or they find themselves unable
to move, located with other people who also would like to move
but cannot, and with whom they form an undifferentiated mass.
The delicate differentiations by which they structure their
relations with each other are of no significance to the people who
operate the rules against them. Although they themselves
discriminate the claims of age, sex, relationship, these
distinctions make no difference to the impersonal principles
which ruthlessly separate them or force them to huddle together.
What they experience is a failure of other people to recognize
their claims as persons. Persons in control behave to them
mechanically and treat them as if they were objects. This, I
suggest, is the experience which has always predisposed to the
millennial cult, which wipes out existing rituals.
   Anti-ritualism is therefore the idiom of revolt. It must be so, and
it must inevitably press the case by decrying not only meaningless
rituals, but all rituals as such. Even when the case demands more
articulate communication, even when more meaningful rituals are
needed, anti-ritualism is undiscriminating in its sweeping
condemnation of formality. Here we come to Durkheim’s insight
that the shared experience of society structures the internal
consciousness of the private person to match that of the
collectivity. The public symbolic system which has been set up by
social intercourse puts its controlling stamp on individual
perception and restricts understanding to the possibilities admitted
in its own construction of the universe. In the small group a man is
caught searching under his bed for witches when he might learn
more by searching his own heart. With strong grid and group, the
sources of innovation are squeezed out and despised for their
incompatibility with the given categories. And yet such a society
may desperately be seeking new solutions to its problems. If
compensation theory were valid, the masses who experience
control by objects would in reaction seek to differentiate more
effectively. But instead they rush to adopt symbols of non-
differentiation and so accentuate the condition from which they
suffer. This is the dangerous backlash in symbolic experience of
which we should beware. The man who has been raised up seeks
symbols of his high estate; the one who has been degraded seeks
symbols of debasement. After T.E.Lawrence had suffered
humiliation he could only bear a social life to match his sense of
degradation. He sought to make true in the sight of other people
what he felt in himself.

154 Control of symbols

  From henceforward my way will lie with these fellows [in the
  RAF] here degrading myself (for in their eyes and your eyes and
  Winterton’s eyes I see that it is a degradation) in the hope that
  some day I will really feel degraded, be degraded, to their level.
  I long for people to look down on me and despise me, and I’m
  too shy to take the filthy steps which would publicly shame me,
  and put me into their contempt.
                                (Knightley and Simpson, 1969:255)

Thus we should expect that those who have the sense of living
without meaningful categories, and who suffer from being treated
as an undifferentiated, insignificant mass, will seek to express
themselves by inarticulate, undifferentiated symbols.
   They should react strongly against non-differentiation and seek
to establish clear categories and distinctions which the oppressors
would be forced to recognize. They should get organized. This
would involve them in hierarchical discriminations. But expressive
action is easier, more satisfying and may possibly have some
instrumental value. So they use marches and mass protests as
expressions of revolt. These may indeed be the most effective
instrument for calling attention to affliction. But insidiously the
symbolic mode seduces the intellect to its own estate. The drive to
achieve consonance between social and physical and emotional
experience envelops the mind also in its sweep. Hence the failure of
revolutionary millennialists to write a programme that in any way
matches the strength of their case. Hence the apparent flippancy or
unserious abandon with which they pronounce their diagnosis and
their remedies. It is as if the symbolic mode has overwhelmed the
freedom of the mind to grapple with reality.
   The cosmology which goes with the experience of mass, of
undifferentiated human solidarity has a fatal attraction for those
who most vehemently wish to remedy its failures. They find
themselves behaving like revivalists in the effervescent stage of a
new religion. They reject social differentiation and propose
programmes to enhance the sense of individual worth, human
warmth and spontaneity. They pay tribute to these values,
announce their ultimate triumph. But so far from doing something
to realize them, in past history they have led their followers into
symbolic marches and crusades, usually with dire results.
   In this short space I cannot elaborately document the argument. I
can sum it up and illustrate it. Where grid is oppressively exerted
from afar a further weakening of the delicate relationships can turn

                                           Control of symbols 155

the passive cosmology into revolutionary millennialism. Norman
Conn (1957) has listed the precipitating causes of millennialism in
medieval Europe. Disparate though they seem (Cohn, 1962),
ranging from sexual frustration to cosmic anxiety, they all stem
from an aggravation of the weakness of the social structure.

  But in the most populous and economically advanced areas of
  Europe there existed numbers of poor folk who had no such
  organization behind them: in the countryside landless peasants
  and farm hands, in the towns journeymen (who were forbidden
  to organize), unskilled workers (who had no guilds) and a
  floating population of beggars and unemployed. It was such
  people as these that provided the revolutionary prophets with
  their following.
                                                (Cohn, 1962:39)

  Catastrophe or the fear of catastrophe: e.g. the famines and
  plagues which preceded several popular crusades and similar
  movements; the massacres which preceded the mass movements
  of dispersed Jews towards Jerusalem.
                                                     (ibid.: 40)

  The areas which saw the rise of popular crusades were always
  those areas north of the Alps that had a relatively dense
  population including landless peasants; Flanders, northern
  France, and the Rhine valley…. It is significant that at the time
  of the First Crusade of 1095 the areas which were swept by
  mass enthusiasm had for ten years been afflicted by famine and
  drought and for five years by plague, while the crusades of
  1146, 1309 and 1320 were all preluded by famines.
                                                         (ibid.: 34)

That millennial fervour emerges with weakness of classification is
amply demonstrated in the same volume from Brazilian and
Indonesian movements (Thrupp, 1962:55–69; 80–121 and
especially 80, 88, 92–3).
   For our own contemporary experiences of this kind, it is not
difficult to find comparable expressions of millennial fervour. The
focus is on poverty, class and race discrimination, colonialism, and
student unrest. The spokesmen in each case pin-point the same
symptoms: control by humans as if by things, non-differentiation,
rootlessness.

156 Control of symbols

   The writer of one of the most thoughtful books on the Paris riots of
May and June 1968, under the pseudonym of Epistemon, asks why
university students in the mid-twentieth century should have taken
over the role of revolutionary spearhead from the working class. For
answer he gives a cogent account of the revolutionary ideas on which
the universities have been fed, giving particular praise and
prominence to the philosophical work of Sartre. He traces very
skilfully the break-up of form in drama, in literature and philosophy
down to the final undermining of confidence in knowledge, as such.
Although he gives a typically Gallic priority to the evolution of ideas,
and only second place to the evolution of the social structures in
which they are developed, he ably discusses the rootless, marginal
character of the university students’ social world. This would
perfectly fit my analysis if only the priority were reversed. I have
already hinted how Sartre’s own biography fits the diagnosis. The
whole history of ideas should be reviewed in the light of the power of
social structures to generate symbols of their own. These symbols
deceivingly commend themselves as spiritual truths unconnected with
fleshly processes of conception, thus obeying the purity rule.
   The poor of America in the 1960s are ‘victims of a
bureaucratically enforced rootlessness’ due to evictions from
slums; the social workers are bureaucratized, hostile, dehumanized
(Harrington, 1962:157, 120). Subject colonial peoples are
discerned ‘only as an indistinct mass’ (Fanon, 1967:34) and they
know that this is what they are:

  Henceforward, the interests of one will be the interests of all,
  for in concrete fact everyone will be discovered by the troops,
  everyone will be massacred—or everyone will be saved.
                                                       (ibid.: 37)

  The men whom the growing population of the country districts
  and colonial expropriation have brought to desert their family
  holdings circle tirelessly round the different towns hoping that
  one day or another they will be allowed inside. It is within this
  mass of humanity, this people of the shanty towns, at the core
  of the lumpen-proletariat that the rebellion will find its urban
  spearhead.
                                                       (ibid.: 103)

The leaders of the movement for Negro emancipation find their
enemies inhuman:

                                              Control of symbols 157

  …the driver of the pick-up truck pulled up alongside. He had a
  face from central casting, like all the faces I had watched in
  newsreels spitting on little girls in Little Rock and unleashing
  snarling police dogs in Birmingham.
                                                (Newfield, 1966:92)

The New Radicals

  are saying that the whole society—from the academy to the
  anti-poverty programme—has become too bureaucratized and
  must be decentralized and humanized.
                                                 (ibid.: 204)

Students, too, protest against bureaucracy, against exaggerated
compartmentalism of study, discontinuous and truncated
understanding and loss of personal attachment to the worth of
study as a humanistic enterprise (ibid.: 163).
    This is the evidence I take that the wide-spread revolt of the left
is indeed a revolt, as it says it is, against control by humans as if by
objects. So much for the underlying social experience. It receives
expression in the common ritual style. It relies on the symbolic
expression of the state they deplore, as a means of remedy. Their
intellectual stance is a rejection of categories of all kinds, including
both symbolic and functional discriminations. Harrington writes
scathingly of ‘the definition-makers’ (ibid.: 137). The students,
feeling themselves subject to an undiscriminating, mindless
bureaucratic machine, reject differentiation as such.
    The tragedy of millennial movements, as Norman Cohn has
pointed out, is that they do not usually lead to a better society. No
one would wish reform to produce an explosion which creates
more misery and oppression than that which provoked the
movement. Such unfruitful outcomes result from the backlash of
the symbolic system. Anyone who tries to correct the unfeelingness
of the bureaucratic machine with a revolution of feeling gives up
control of the situation to natural symbols. After attacking
definition as such, differentiation as such, ritual as such, it is very
difficult to turn about and seek the new definitions,
differentiations and rituals which will remedy the case. In the
period of the Crusades, beggars and orphaned children set out to
take the Holy Land from the Turks by the very power of their
meekness and poverty. Contemporary observers thought that they
might succeed and that a golden age would begin. But the

158 Control of symbols

crusaders fell into the sea and were drowned or were captured by
Barbary pirates. Today, our clergy, our poor and our youth unite to
take the great places by demonstrating their helplessness in non-
violent parades.
    This is the last source of contemporary anti-ritualism. It is clear
that its protest against symbols is only against rituals of
differentiation. Its social experience is as much restricted by its
own symbolic forms as those other three I have already indicated.
It follows that the solution to grave problems of social
organization can rarely come from those who experience them.
For they inevitably can only think according to the cosmological
type in which their social life is cast. Therefore it behoves others to
identify and resist the allurements of zero.
    The millennialist is optimistic about human nature (once freed
from the external machine) and about the outcome of his policies.
He fuses disparate problems together and resists attempts to define
and distinguish. For his single problem, overthrow of the evil
system, he advocates a simple solution, usually symbolic and
expected to have magical effect. He has low respect for technical
processes or special knowledge. Like the fundamentalist sects, he
has contempt for learning and for academic (or clerical)
specialization. His organization can only work in spasmodic bursts
because he rejects specialized roles as such. The time span of his
thinking is erratic; the millennium will come soon and suddenly;
differentiation in time is as difficult for him to envisage as other
kinds of differentiation.
    Millennialism is to be taken very seriously, in all its forms. The
solution to the problems which provoke it is not to join the
stampede. To throw overboard differentiating doctrines and
differentiating rituals is to reach for the poison that symbolizes the
ill. Anti-ritualists around us who feel this excitement in the air,
rather than yield, should feel more practical compassion for the
rootlessness and helplessness that inspire it. Then, instead of
sweeping away little rituals, such as Friday abstinence, which
shore up a sense of belonging and of roots, and instead of belittling
the magic of priesthood and sacraments, they would turn their
attention to repairing the defences of grid and group.
    How to humanize the machine is the problem, not how to
symbolize its dehumanizing effects. When bureaucrats hear the
catchword ‘equality’ (a symbol of non-differentiation) they should
beware, for equality, like symmetry, is a mechanical principle in its
operation. It chops the human diversity of need into its own pre-

                                             Control of symbols 159

ordained regularities. The way to humanize the system is to
cherish particular categories. The institution which runs by strict
adherence to general rules gives up its own autonomy. If it tries to
adopt equality or seniority or alphabetical order or any other hard
and fast principle for promotion and admission, it is bound to
override the hard case. Furthermore, it is bound to abandon its
traditions and so its identity and its original, special purposes. For
these humanizing influences depend upon a continuity with the
past, benevolent forms of nepotism, irregular charity,
extraordinary promotions, freedom to pioneer in the tradition of
the founders, whoever they were. Instead of anti-ritualism it would
be more practical to experiment with more flexible institutional
forms and to seek to develop their ritual expression.
   But this would mean going into the world, mixing with
corruption and sin, dirtying oneself with externals, having some
truck with the despised forms, instead of worshipping the sacred
mysteries of pure zero. The theologians who should be providing
for us more precise and original categories of thought are busy
demolishing meaningless rituals and employing the theological
tool chest to meet the demands of anti-ritualists. Yet the diagram
of grid and group suggests that to go where the tide sweeps them
can hardly be their proper calling.

Chapter 10
Out of the cave




Plato’s image of the cave on whose wall are cast the shadows we
mistake for real is a popular one today. There is a heady promise in
various intellectual fields of escape from the conditions of
knowledge. With this promise an impossible kind of freedom is
being proposed, freedom from necessity of any kind. It is preached
particularly in artistic and literary circles. These are the people who
have shouldered the clergy’s old responsibility to care for the
symbols of society. They should know that the cave is the body
social mediated by the image of the other body. To emerge free from
its constraints would be as feasible for the artist as for a linguistic
philosopher to give up the constraints of language. Indeed the
illusion of escape may well be a new kind of confinement.
Bernstein’s work shows us something of how our different
cosmologies imprison us. The free exercise of our faculties is limited
by the media of expression. There are areas of experience which can
be investigated in one speech code but not another. There are social
relations possible for one but not another. The range of speech codes
available is part of the social environment for an individual at any
given time. Since the speech code is a quality inhering in the social
structure, a strong one-way causal relation seems to be implied. If
pressed on the matter, presumably Bernstein would be gloomy about
the prospects of ever mastering the codes and being free of their
restraints. On his view we can only hope for fortunate shifts in the
social structure to introduce change:

  The thesis to be developed here places the emphasis on changes
  in the social structure as major factors in shaping or changing a
  given culture through their effect on the consequences of
  speaking…which speech codes are generated is a function of the
  system of social relations. The particular form of a social

                                                Out of the cave 161

  relation acts selectively on what is said, when it is said, and how
  it is said…. The experience of the speakers may then be
  transformed by what is made significant or relevant by the
  different speech systems. This is a sociological argument,
  because the speech system is taken as a consequence of the
  social relation, or to put it more generally, is a quality of the
  social structure.
                                              (Bernstein, 1965:151)

If we apply this beyond the case of speech to culture in general, we
do not necessarily subscribe to a theory of society as
infrastructure, the basic phenomenon, with culture as
superstructure, mere epiphenomenon. Bernstein regards both
speech and relationships as qualities of the social structure. In the
latter there are at least small options for dealing with other
persons in one way or another, and from selections among these
small-scale social choices there can be changes in the speech codes.
Bernstein would not, as I understand his thesis, deny personal
creativity and cultural innovation, but would have to locate them
primarily in the sphere of direct human interaction. If the same
analysis were applied to all the media of communication and
allowance made for their effects on the experience of the society
using them, the anxiety about sociological determinism would
surely be allayed. For on this view, society or culture are both
abstractions, categories applied to the process which, in the last
resort, consists of individuals dealing with other individuals.
Furthermore the elaborated code provides a means of assessing the
value of one kind of social process, the codes derived from it, and
the values and principles that go with both. In the long run, the
argument of this book is that the elaborated code challenges its
users to turn round on themselves and inspect their values, to
reject some of them, and to resolve to cherish positional forms of
control and communication wherever these are available. This
would seem to be the only way to use our knowledge to free
ourselves from the power of our own cosmology. No one would
deliberately choose the elaborated code and the personal control
system who is aware of the seeds of alienation it contains. After
listing some of the advantages of the restricted code, which unites
speakers to kin and community, Bernstein notes:

  A change of code involves changes in the means whereby social
  identity and reality are created. This argument means that

162 Out of the cave

  educational institutions in a fluid society carry within
  themselves alienating tendencies.
                                                (ibid.: 168)

By contrast the restricted code allows a person to perceive his
identity as part of his immediate social world; personal and social
integration are achieved together. Here we should expect to find
symbols of the human body actively expressing the solidarity of
the social body. The first thing that is striking about the English
working-class home is the attempt to provide privacy in spite of
the difficulties of layout. The respect for the privacy of bodily
functions corresponds to the respect for the distinction between
social and private occasions; the back of the house is appropriately
allocated to cooking, washing and excretory functions; the front
parlour, distinguished from the living room-kitchen, is functionless
except for public, social representation. Space by no means
wasted, it is the face of the house, which speaks composedly and
smiles for the rest of the body; from this room a person must rush
if he bursts into tears. Certain families of the middle class tend to
break down the barrier between public and private. They seek to
live in public together in an unstructured, open room, expressing
aptly (perhaps disastrously) their unstructured, personal system of
control. In such a family it must be difficult to assimilate the image
of society and the house to the image of body, and correspondingly
more difficult, one suspects, for the individual to incorporate into
his personal identity any symbolic structures integrating him with
his own society. Hence it is predictable that the body may come to
represent an alien husk, something from which the inmost self
needs to escape, something whose exigencies should not be taken
too seriously. It can and even must be transcended if the individual
encased within the body is to fulfil his unique potential for
experience. How brilliantly Bernstein’s insight illuminates much of
our contemporary culture. Alienation and integration imply
different uses of the body as a symbolic mode. Is it legitimate to
call them different codes derived from different social systems?
   What has gone before has been stimulated by his work, yet I
cannot pretend that I have so far succeeded in applying Bernstein’s
analysis of speech codes to other symbolic systems. It is not easy to
distinguish the range from relatively restricted to elaborated ritual
forms, which he suggests should be present in any medium as it is
in speech. One might start by considering the possibility of the
symbolic life being detached more and more from the task of

                                               Out of the cave 163

relating an individual to his society and more and more freed for
expressing his unique private concerns. This recalls again Lowie’s
use of Crow Indian beliefs to discredit Durkheim’s theory of
religion as always and essentially a collective experience. What
type of primitive social structure would allow the symbolic orders
to be relieved of their Durkheimian office of sustaining it? The
question put in this form suggests that we should compare systems
making progressively less and less claim on their individual
members to honour a common morality. The weaker the social
pressures, the freer the individual person. But this range of
comparisons would merely show the diminishing moral and
control aspects of the restricted code in some social systems. We
still have to look for something corresponding to the division of
labour among ourselves, some power to call forth an increasingly
greater elaboration of the medium of expression towards greater
universality in scope and greater syntactic flexibility. This power
would create the need to communicate without the intimate
knowledge of assumptions held in common. An interesting
example would be the so-called ‘mother-in-law language’ of the
Tully River aborigines. Robert Dixon says that the language of
respect which a man uses for conversing with his mother-in-law
expresses social distance by avoiding terms with particular
reference and choosing generic terms.

  Thus in the everyday language there are about a dozen terms for
  referring to types of grubs…there is no generic term for ‘grub’
  in the everyday language. However, in mother-in-law there is
  only a generic term…
                                              (Dixon, 1968:653)

This is a linguistic example. It would be a daunting task to analyse
non-verbal rituals to see if any distinction between more particular
and more universalistic symbols is ever organized to express two
distinct ritual codes or even a gradation from one to another.
However something suggestive of the elaborated code appears in
the aesthetic activity of some New Guinea societies where art, like
everything else, is harnessed to individual competition. Here is a
challenge for students of primitive art to work out. Admittedly
well beyond my own powers of scholarship, this suggestion does
not exhaust the interest of pursuing the analogy of the restricted
and elaborated code in ritual. However, my own interest is more
concerned with varieties of restricted code.

164 Out of the cave

    Bernstein has allowed that there will be many different kinds
of restricted codes. My classification of cosmologies is based on
four social types: first, strong grid and group, the bounded
system high on the classification line; second, a bounded,
otherwise unstructured system (small group); and third, strong
grid, in which the leaders are distinguished; and fourth, their
mass of followers. If we ignore for the moment the latter two we
can take together the two systems in which boundary is strong. Is
it possible to see in the symbolism of the body appropriate to
them two different restricted codes? In the one case, the religious
emphasis would be expected to treat the body as the focus and
symbol of life. We would expect to find positive themes of
symbolic nourishment developed to the extent that the social
body and the physical body are assimilated and both focus the
identity of individuals in a structured, bounded system. In the
second case, boundary without structure, that is, group without
grid, we would expect to find the body an object of anxiety; fear
of poisoning and debilitation would be dominant and ritual
officiants much concerned with therapy, physical and social.
Here, I suggest, we have two versions of a restricted code which
serve the function of mediating the individual and his society by
manipulating the image of the human body. Each type exerts its
own constraints on the perceptions and thus on the choices of
individuals; each symbolic system has its own pre-coded stimuli
and responses which intimately affect the person’s knowledge of
his body and acts selectively on his capacity to respond to bodily
images. They are restricted codes which integrate the individual
with the social system.
    In either of these two social types it is possible for sub-systems
of a lower order of inclusiveness to be alienated from the whole.
Then we can see another restricted code taking over. The body is
still the image of society but somewhere inside it someone is not
accepting its rule. I am suggesting that the symbolic medium of the
body has its restricted code to express and sustain alienation of a
sub-category from the wider society. In this code the claims of the
body and of the wider society are not highly credited: bodily
grooming, diet, pathology, these subjects attract less interest than
other non-bodily claims. The body is despised and disregarded,
consciousness is conceptually separated from its vehicle and
accorded independent honour. Experimenting with consciousness
becomes the most personal form of experience, contributing least
to the widest social system, and therefore most approved. This is

                                                Out of the cave 165

where the dichotomy of spirit and matter becomes an insistent
theme.
   If we allow that there is a restricted code for alienation, the way
is open for a bold synthesis between the Durkheimian analysis of
religious belief and theological controversies, whether from
Christian, Islamic, Buddhist or Hindu history. Edmund Leach
(1966) has attempted to relate dogmas of virgin birth, a centrally
Christian theme, to theories about the kind of dealings held in
different cultures to be possible between gods and men. He
suggests that the problem is too complex for he himself to be
satisfied with the correlations he draws. Indeed his attempt to
make a plain sociological approach is less interesting than his
attempts to find the local cultural patterns into which ideas about
natural and divine procreation would seem to fit. The greatest
value of this essay was his insistence that philosophical ideas about
physical and metaphysical forces in the universe lie behind dogmas
about whether humans and gods can mingle their natures or not.
But where, we should ask, is any given balance between physical
and other forces generated? Durkheim’s famous saying ‘Society is
God’, spelt out, means that in every culture where there is an
image of society it is endowed with sacredness, or conversely that
the idea of God can only be constituted from the idea of society. It
follows from the first that alienation from society will be expressed
by desacralizing its image. And from the second that the idea of
God, dethroned from the centres of power, will be set up again in
the small, interpersonal group which is alienated. Thus the image
of God loses its majesty and becomes intimate, a personal friend
who speaks directly, heart to heart without any truck with
instituted forms. This is obvious and the change in the use of the
body as a medium for expressing the sacred, from honouring the
outside, shifts to honouring the interior exclusively. I shall now
suggest that philosophical controversies about the relation of spirit
to matter or mind to body be interpreted as exchanges of
condensed statements about the relation of society to the
individual.
   Such controversies flare up and down. There may be no
particular reason why they become active at one point in time and
not in another. But I suggest that they only become relevant as
metaphors when the relation of an alienated sub-group to the
social whole becomes an acute political issue. The body or the
flesh in these theological controversies represents the wider
society; mind and spirit represent the individual identified with the

166 Out of the cave

sub-group concerned. To require a discussion to be conducted in
those terms is like adopting a restricted speech code which is well
understood by all parties. It governs the selections of symbolic
relations and skews the judgements towards its own inherent
values. To insist on the superiority of spiritual over material
elements is to insist on the liberties of the individual and to imply a
political programme to free him from unwelcome constraints.
   In the contrary view, to declare that spirit works through
matter, that spiritual values are made effective through material
acts, that body and mind are intimately united, any emphasis on
the necessity to mingle spirit and matter implies that the individual
is by nature subordinate to society and finds his freedom within its
forms. This view is prepared to sacralize flesh, while their
opponents count it as blasphemy to teach the physical union of
godhead and manhood.
   The anthropologist can never assume that the chosen symbols
of religious controversy are arbitrary. If they are used to
discriminate contended positions, they also express something
about the social situation. So it is that anthropologists cannot but
admire the aptness of doctrines which deny that God could take
human flesh for expressing a revolt against the established
ecclesiastical order. In the early centuries of Christianity, when its
doctrines were being refined and articulated, most of the
theological disputes concerned the nature of the Second Person of
the Trinity. As it finally emerged, the orthodox doctrine of the
Incarnation insisted on a perfect mediation between spirit and
matter. According to this creed, as defined at Nicea, Christ was
fully God, fully man, both natures combined mysteriously in one
person. The heresies of the third and fourth centuries which taught
that Christ was mere man, not really God, or not fully man, an
historical emanation from God, all agreed on admitting a gulf
between spirit and matter. To move either way from the central
doctrine of the Incarnation was to dilute the unique Christian
message. Not so obviously, to move either way is to exalt spirit
and debase matter and so to adopt the philosophical attitude
which, following Durkheim’s thought, is appropriate to
detachment from or revolt against the established social forms. In
his study of Arianism, John Henry Newman (1901) tended very
much to treat the heresy itself as no more than a technique of
revolt. For him it did not matter what bone of contention they
chose, the contumacious behaviour of the heresiarchs was enough
to show that their doctrine was of secondary interest. It is certainly

                                                  Out of the cave 167

very difficult to demonstrate my thesis convincingly to historians
because in the long time span of the institutions they study, a
movement can start, like Arianism, as a discourse set in the
restricted code of alienation, and quickly become one in the
restricted code of integration, as when Constantius became
Emperor and proclaimed Arianism as the official doctrine of Rome
with himself as God’s representative on earth. With Arian bishops
installed in the great sees, the doctrines they espoused came to
sound only hair-splittingly different from those they had so hotly
rejected when the fight had been on, and general interest in the
issues originally at stake dwindled to the basic symbols of
allegiance to one side or another.
   It is also difficult to demonstrate this theme in the field of Indian
religion, because of its great complexity. What is claimed to be its
special feature, the use of bodily purity to symbolize hierarchy and
group boundaries, is in itself indeed only the natural system of
symbols. India may well have developed the bodily mode to an
unparalleled extent. If so, our approach would look, to explain its
unique development, to the distinction between hierarchy and
power, which Professor Dumont insists is a fundamental principle of
the caste system (1966:91–3). Where hierarchy is truly divorced
from power, India would communicate within a restricted code of
alienation. We would expect it to separate spirit from matter and to
clothe the top ranks of the hierarchy in the most ethereal, non-
physical symbols compatible with material comfort. Hence the
austerities of the sects, which renounce the world by monastic
withdrawal, would naturally provide the symbols of status for
worldly and unworldly Brahmans, whose rank is defined by their
opposition to the ruling caste. Setting a fashion in vegetarianism,
both for gods and men, would appropriately be part of the move
away from external, physically mediated religious forms towards
the religion of the interior heart which is always preferred by
preachers who themselves have withdrawn from temporal
responsibility. Each sub-caste which tries to use this code for
communicating with others about its relative status fails to realize
the internal, spiritual changes which it implies. Each sub-caste is
perforce involved in its local and political concerns. Consequently
the speech of renunciation from the material world takes on a
spectacularly material meaning: formal spirituality becomes
hidebound in material gestures and serves very earthy, political ends.
The Indian sub-continent, in so far as its use of the bodily medium is
peculiar, surely owes this development to the strong

168 Out of the cave

disestablishmentarianism of its official church, implicit in the
doctrine of hierarchy divorced from power. Conversely, the Church
of Rome would owe its own parallel and distinctive development of
doctrine to its early association of religious hierarchy with power. In
saying this I do not wish to allot the primacy in determining ritual
forms to ideological bias. As I see it, essentially it is initially in small
decisions, about who deals with whom and how, that these codes
develop. As the doctrines and social forms interact, they develop
momentum and finally come to create a symbolic environment in
which later generations of individuals find themselves. But, however
strong the power of this symbolic medium to coerce subsequent
choices, just because it is a system, it can be cracked whenever any
part of it is breached: thus the original Protestantism; thus the
changes in the caste system.
   Jung reproached Protestant Europe for giving up its austerity
and seeking to parade in the finery of Eastern religions. In a
passage which reveals his own abdication of judgement to a
restricted code of alienation, he applauds the loss of meaning of
the old religious symbols of Christianity, as a noble stripping of
outer meaningless husks down to the bare individual self. Having
achieved so much, what a falling off he sees in the embracing of
alien religious forms:

   If he should now go and cover his nakedness with the
   gorgeous dress of the Orient, like the theosophists, he would
   be untrue to his own history. A man does not work his way
   down to beggarhood and then pose as an Indian king on the
   stage.
                                                 (Jung, 1940:63)

But there was no switch in logic and no betrayal of the principles
of Protestantism in the theosophist turning to exotic cultures,
only a natural evolution. For a European turning to Eastern
doctrines is a European rejecting the Christian gospel of God
taking flesh. First the Eucharist, then inevitably sooner or later
the Incarnation; for the same social process which made the first
repugnant was bound to lead to the rejection of the other. To the
extent that society contains individuals united to it by no strong,
solidary bonds, their culture is likely to believe romantically in
the separation of pure spirit from gross matter, to seek to
embrace the one and somehow at the same time to reject the
other.

                                                  Out of the cave 169

   It may be that in this century we have become more aware of
the subjective conditions of experience. Certainly it seems that the
possibilities of self-awareness are here. But the practical problem
of retaining consciousness is as great as ever. Lévi-Strauss has
sought to display the action of the unconscious mind expressing
itself through social forms. He argues that a moiety system, in
which society divides itself into two wife-exchanging halves,
makes a visible representation of the mind’s natural proclivity to
divide and subdivide (1968:132ff.). The worldwide distribution of
moiety systems, their appearance in the most simple and small-
scale societies, their persistence, all suggest that by studying
moieties we can do a kind of social archaeology. Understanding
how a moiety system has power over its members is like digging
into the prehistory of mankind in an area which picks and shovels
never reach. By binary distinctions our cave-ancestors may have
created the contrast of culture/nature, started all the contrasts on
which language is built, and even created their society in the image
of mind. This is Lévi-Strauss’s implied argument.
   Mercifully, we are not in thrall at present to that particular
surge of creativity which produces dualist organization. Our
society is not restricted to the moiety system. But unless reflection
on the self-sustaining power of moieties warns us of the power of
our own unconscious mental activity, these lessons of prehistory
are surely wasted. The resilience of primitive moiety systems
shows how difficult it is to break out of the circle, once it is set up,
between the impulse of unconscious mind and its external
expression. How many people have smiled knowingly at the
scribblings on the walls of the Latin Quarter during the 1968
revolts in Paris. ‘La honte est contre-Révolutionnaire’ and ‘Le
discours est contre-Révolutionnaire’. But intellectuals are slow to
see their own behaviour in the same light as that of the rioters
tearing up paving stones. ‘Plus je fais la Revolution, plus j’ai envie
de faire l’amour.’ Reforming bishops and radical theologians, to
say nothing of Utopian marxists, must eventually recognize that
the generous warmth of their doctrinal latitude, their critical
dissolving of categories and attack on intellectual and
administrative distinctions are generated by analogous social
experience. ‘Ears have walls.’ Another of the graffiti of Paris 1968
refers summarily to vain supplications and hardened rejection. No
judgement is intended here on the political accuracy of that slogan
at that place and time. As a general statement for the sociology of
perception it could be amended to ‘Ears must have walls’.

170 Out of the cave

Legitimacy must be clothed in magic, words must be made into
things, blocks, hedges, compartments are the condition of
knowledge. Thinkers must recognize the destructive lure of the
natural system of symbols, equally when it devastates category
boundaries as when it wrongfully closes them.
   Returning to our opening theme, we find that the apparent anti-
ritualism of today is the adoption of one set of natural symbols in
place of another. It is like a switch between restricted speech codes.
Two morals can be drawn from this analogy; first the duty of
everyone to preserve their vision from the constraints of the
natural symbols when judging any social situation; second the
opportunity of religious bodies to set their message in the natural
system of symbols. For the first duty, we must recognize that the
value of particular social forms can only be judged objectively by
the analytic power of the elaborated code. Beware, therefore, of
arguments couched in the bodily medium. Strongly subjective
attitudes to society get coded through bodily symbols.
   For the second, Christian preachers fail to respond to the
current meaning in the body. The elaborated code has here
intervened too much. Or perhaps the difference of age separating
those in authority from those in immediate contact with the
faithful may explain the neglect in religion of symbols which are
being spontaneously exploited elsewhere. The very religious
themes which repelled radicals of half a century ago are now being
seized upon in drama, fiction and visual art and woven into a
secular symbolic system. We may well ask why the now elderly
radicals rejected religious themes of renunciation, why they
disdained the unabashed, sexual imagery of the mystics and the
completely counter-rational doctrine of the resurrection of the
body, and why the young radicals of today express contempt for
the physical body, read the mystics and cultivate non-rationality.
The difference surely lies in the respective attitudes to political
power, the former seeking and the latter rejecting it. The Churches
could worry that their clothes are being stolen while they bathe in
a stream of ethical sensitivity. For the current dichotomy of spirit
and matter is an assertion of spiritual values. While preaching