Chapter 6
Test cases




At a stage in her life when she had cut herself free from social ties,
Simone Well (1951) reproved the ancient Israelites for their
adherence to rule, for the legalism of the priests and their rejection
of the Dionysian mystery cults. But it was all very well for her to
make the judgement. It would be impossible for the leaders of an
occupied but still resisting nation to adopt an effervescent form of
religion. To expect them to stop preaching a stern sexual morality,
vigilant control of bodily boundaries, and a corresponding
religious cult would be asking them to give up the political
struggle. So long as they were set upon that, the choice was no
more open to them to worship God with wine, song and dance
than it was open to Simone Weil herself to make a strict religious
commitment when she had relaxed her own commitment to
society.
   The principle of symbolic replication of a social state leads us to
a different view of revivalist movements among the poor and
oppressed. Compensation theory too glibly explains by reference
to physical suffering and deprivation of civil and economic rights.
Then it finds this explanation does not cover the throng of well-to-
do women who so often predominate in these movements. So it
turns to sexual frustration. In the following passage Norman Cohn
adopts a simple Freudian approach to explain the female element
in millenarian movements:

  …emotional frustration in women of means and leisure but
  without social function or prestige. Throughout the history of
  Christianity this circumstance has contributed to the rise of
  revivalist movements and it still does so today. What ideal such
  a movement sets itself seems to depend chiefly on personal
  factors—in the first place on the particular personality of the

                                                        Test cases 89

  prophet, which will appeal only to certain types of women. The
  antinomian and erotic millenarism of the Brethren of the Free
  Spirit does however indicate one recurrent possibility…. Do
  comparable movements occur in societies where sexual life is
  less guilt-ridden than it has usually been in Christendom?
                                                  (Cohn, 1962:41)

The answer is yes: the tendency to celebrate sexual promiscuity is
not a response to repression; it is more likely to be found where
repression is least in evidence. Cohn also mentions as alternative
causes, political oppression and sudden catastrophe (see Chapter 9
below).
   My explanation of effervescent religious revivalism is tidier
since it uses only one hypothesis to predict its occurrence both
among the poor and deprived and among the females of the rich
and privileged classes, and also its likely development following
catastrophe. In all cases, it is the lack of strong social articulation,
the slackening of group and grid which leads people to seek, in the
slackening of bodily control, appropriate forms of expression. This
is how the fringes of society express their marginality. It is enough
to say that the experience of a certain kind of structuring of society
gets expressed in a certain way, without invoking the emotionally
distracting principle of deprivation. In relation to established
authority, his area of the social structure is the wilderness from
which prophets and new cults are observed to arise. The collection
of essays on Spirit Mediumship and Society in Africa (ed. Beattie
and Middleton, 1969) is a rich mine of examples. Robin Horton
makes this very point in his contribution on the main varieties of
spirit possession in Kalabari religion. He contrasts possession by
big spirits and minor spirits.

  Possession by the big spirits is subject to a public scrutiny and
  control which discourages any departure from a traditionally-
  prescribed content. Its principal significance is that it reminds
  people, sometimes at recurrent intervals and sometimes at times
  of communal crisis, of the presence and attributes of the spirits,
  and of the values they support. Its general setting leaves little
  room for individual innovation on the part of the medium.
  Possession by the minor water-spirits, on the other hand, is
  virtually free from public scrutiny and control. Although it too
  serves to remind people of the presence and attributes of the
  spirits, it has a much wider range of significance. Thus it

90 Test cases

  provides a means of personal adjustment for those whose
  ascribed position in society is excessively irksome to them. It
  also provides the occasion for both narrative and dramatic art.
  Finally, it provides a means for the propagation of new ideas
  about the world. In all these contexts, the impress of individual
  innovation is very evident.
      These differences are, I think, fairly readily explained. First
  of all, doctrines relating to the founding heroes and the big local
  water-spirits occupy a crucial place in the community’s world
  view. They both interpret, validate and indicate means for the
  perpetuation of the established order of society and ecology.
  Any change in such doctrines is potentially a grave threat to the
  established order of things. Hence there is continual public
  scrutiny to insure that no such change takes place. Since
  possession by the big spirits gives dramatic reminders and
  illustrations of these doctrines, it must be included in the
  scrutiny.
      Doctrines relating to the minor water-spirits are, by contrast,
  rather marginal to the community’s world-view. Collectively, it
  is true, these minor spirits have an important part to play in the
  explanation of the peculiarities of individual life-courses. But no
  one spirit is involved with more than a few individuals. Again,
  these minor spirits are by definition the owners of distant creeks
  with which the community is not practically concerned.
  Particular spirits of this class, then, are important neither to the
  community as a whole nor to any considerable section of it.
  Hence doctrines concerning them are free from the scrutiny and
  control applied to doctrines concerning the big spirits. And this
  freedom extends to possession by them.
      One consequence is that possession by the minor water-
  spirits comes readily under the influence of a variety of desires
  and needs other than those concerned with the explanation,
  prediction and control of the world. Thus it becomes caught up
  in the struggle to find a way round uncongenial ascriptions of
  status, and again in the struggle to elaborate forms of both
  narrative and dramatic art. Another consequence is that the
  individual ‘carrier’ is free to make his personal contribution to
  the content of possession: a freedom which has been amply
  exploited in both of these contexts.
      This freedom also makes possession by the minor water-
  spirits a promising channel for innovations in belief and
  doctrine which may eventually come to assume importance in

                                                     Test cases 91

  the community at large. Since the utterances of these spirits on
  the heads of their carriers are virtually free from public scrutiny
  and control, they can serve as vehicles of new ideas which
  would be scotched at birth if they came from one of the big
  spirits. Remember how, during the time of the first Christian
  conversions, it was a minor water-spirit that went about telling
  people to join the churches since the day of the oru was over.
     Through the same freedom, it is even possible that these
  marginal spirits may provide the material for renewing and
  readapting the very core of the community’s world view. We
  don’t have much evidence on this; but one case is suggestive.
  This is the case of the spirit carried by one of the two men in our
  sample of people possessed by ‘women’s oru’. This spirit was
  first announced as the owner of a distant creek, far away from
  the community’s own sphere of interest and operations. Later, it
  came to announce itself as a controller of local waters who
  acted together with the established water-spirit Duminea.
  During a visit by a Shell prospecting party, it assumed
  responsibility for the oil resources of the neighbouring creeks;
  and when oil was found, the community gave it the credit for
  the discovery. For some time now, the community has been on
  the brink of treating it as an object of public cult.
     With this case in mind, we may look again at some of the
  myths which tell how village heroes originally came out of the
  world of the water-people to live with men. I have already
  offered an intellectualist interpretation of such myths. But it
  would seem possible to supplement this with a more historical
  (though highly speculative) interpretation. It is that the heroes,
  and other big spirits, were originally introduced to the
  community as minor water-spirits on the heads of oru kuro
  people; and that they stayed incubating on the sidelines until, at
  some time of social upheaval and change requiring new
  interpretative concepts, they came out to make grander claims
  for themselves. Elsewhere, I have described how in former times
  Kalahari got rid of spirits who seemed to have no further
  usefulness to the community. We may have a clue here as to
  how they got themselves new spirits to meet new challenges to
  their way of life.
                                                (Horton, 1969:45–7)

In his Malinowski lecture on Spirit Possession (1966) loan Lewis
applies the useful distinction between the main morality cult and

92 Test cases

peripheral cults: he finds that people who are peripheral to the
central focus of power and authority tend to be possessed by
spirits who are peripheral to the main pantheon and whose
morality is dubious. So the allocation of spiritual powers reflects
the location of people along a dimension from the centre to the
margins. So women subject to their husbands, serfs subject to their
masters, indeed any in a state of subjection, constitute his category
of the peripheral. For lack of a hypothesis about why these people
should incline towards cults of bodily dissociation, the argument
insidiously slides towards deprivation as the explanation and
means of recognizing peripheral possession cults. But what about
the Bog Irish of London? The argument is unable to deal with the
many cases of people who are obviously and consciously deprived,
and yet do not react in the predicted way.
    It is no accident that women so often form the main
membership of possession cults. The social division of labour
involves women less deeply than their menfolk in the central
institutions—political, legal, administrative, etc.—of their
society. They are indeed subject to control. But the range of
controls they experience is simpler, less varied. Mediated through
fewer human contacts, their social responsibilities are more
confined to the domestic range. The decisions they take do not
have repercussions on a very wide range of institutions. The web
of their social life, though it may tie them down effectively
enough, is of a looser texture. Their social relations certainly
carry less weighty pressure than those which are also
institutional in range. This is the social condition they share with
slaves and serfs. Their place in the public structure of roles is
clearly defined in relation to one or two points of reference, say
in relation to husbands and fathers. As for the rest of their social
life, it takes place at the relatively unstructured, interpersonal
level, with other women in the case of women, with other slaves
and serfs in the case of slaves and serfs. Of course I would be
wrong to say that the network of relations a woman has with
others of her sex is unstructured. A delicate patterning certainly
prevails. But its significance for society at large is less than the
significance of men’s relations with one another in the public role
system. A quarrel between women has not anything like the same
repercussions as a quarrel between their husbands. If they want
to give their social relations with one another a more central
structuring, they can only do so by embroiling their menfolk.
Their links with one another are only as strong as the links

                                                      Test cases 93

between the menfolk to whom they are attached. Women, serfs
and slaves (especially released slaves), are inevitably pinned only
weakly into the central structure of their society. A small setback
can harm them more irrevocably than those whose more complex
links give a better chance of recovery. Their options are few.
They experience strong grid. Therefore they are susceptible to
religious movements which celebrate this experience. Unlike
those who have internalized the classifications of society and
who accept its pressures as aids to realizing the meanings they
afford, these classes are peripheral. They express their spiritual
independence in the predicted way, by shaggier, more bizarre
appearance, and more ready abandonment of control.
   I do not wish to embark on the difference between male and
female dress in expressing this difference. For it is complicated
by sexual functions. Instead, consider the distinctive
appearance of prophets. They tend to arise in peripheral areas
of society, and prophets tend to be shaggy, unkempt individuals.
They express in their bodies the independence of social norms
which their peripheral origins inspire in them. It is no accident
that St John the Baptist lived in the desert and wore skins, or
that Nuer prophets wear beards and long hair in a fashion that
ordinary Nuer find displeasing. Everywhere, social
peripherality has the same physical forms of expression, bizarre
and untrimmed.
   It is necessary all the time to remind ourselves that we are only
dealing with distant ages and remote places in order to understand
ourselves. The ceteris paribus rule allows me to use a more local
example. In noticing that Lloyd George wore his hair long and
loose it is relevant only in that it was longer and looser than other
members of his cabinet, not that it was longer than Roundheads or
shorter than Royalists wore it two centuries earlier. It becomes
extremely interesting that the verdict of two contemporaries on
this long-haired premier ranges him clearly with other peripheral
prophets. It is argued that he would never have come to power but
for the national chaos of mid-war in 1916 and that only recurring
crises of great magnitude kept him in power until 1922. Even
within the political scene, he owed his promotion to a ‘revolt of the
cabin-boys’ (Taylor, 1970:189), a phrase which suggests a
desperate abdication of reason and control to someone from the
margins. He was the only politician who retired far richer than he
began. The irregularity of his personal life is no secret. Not for him
the main morality cult. When he made a speech he trembled and

94 Test cases

poured with sweat as if the divine afflatus was on him. Keynes,
who saw him at the Peace Conference of 1919, wrote:

  How can I convey to the reader, who does not know him, any
  just impression of this extraordinary figure of our time, this
  syren, this goat-footed bard, this half-human visitor to our age
  from the hag-ridden magic and enchanted woods of Celtic
  antiquity? One catches in his company that flavour of final
  purposelessness, inner responsibility, existence outside or away
  from our Saxon good and evil, mixed with cunning,
  remorselessness, love of power, that lend fascination,
  enthralment and terror to the fair-seeming magicians of North
  European folklore.
                                              (Keynes, 1933:36–7)

Here is a stirring description of a peripheral prophet-leader which
corresponds closely to the ethnographic examples in respect of
appearance, morality and social provenance. Having illustrated it I
shall now attempt to test my hypothesis more rigorously. It requires
that peoples sharing a common culture who differ radically in social
organization along the specified dimensions shall show the predicted
variations in religious behaviour. If I concentrate on variations in
terms of the original diagram, I will try to contrast different possible
patterns across the top right-hand quadrant. I will seek to contrast
weaker and stronger control by grid and group. As an illustration I
will compare the Nuer and Dinka, two neighbouring Nilotic tribes
who are radically different in the crucial aspects of their religious
behaviour. For the Western Dinka, the state of trance is treated
positively as a central cult, the source of blessing and strength. For
Nuer, trance is dangerous. I shall look for objectively definable
social variables to account for the difference.
   Those neighbouring tribes of pastoralists who raid one another,
capture and enslave one another and speak related Nilotic
languages are both organized on the basis of agnatic lineages. The
Nuer have been observed in a number of short visits by Evans-
Pritchard and their published record is now very full. Before he
wrote a large volume on Nuer religion, he produced monographs
describing their ecology, political institutions and kinship and
marriage, and while this work was in production, he also
published numerous short articles on diverse aspects of their life.
One supposes that the problem his pupil faced as ethnographer of
the Dinka was delicate and complex. First, it could be tedious to

                                                       Test cases 95

recite at length the parallel chronicle of the Dinka, noting both
where their practice conformed to and diverged from Nuer
practice. Second, such a programme would not allow for the
different perspective of a younger man, seeing the culture from the
shoulders, as it were, of his teacher. This perspective might light
upon different aspects, it might be more profound, and still be
perfectly compatible with the earlier work on the Nuer. On the
other hand, discoveries about how Dinka institutions worked
might produce an embarrassing situation in which one or other or
both of the two friends might find that his work discredited the
findings of the other. To such a complex of delicacies we can
attribute the various emphases and omissions in Godfrey
Lienhardt’s Dinka studies.
   As far as ecological pressures and political institutions are
concerned, he has adopted the alternative of summarizing very
comprehensively the differences between the two peoples (1958).
As far as family structure, incest, exogamy, marriage are
concerned, he adopted the solution of omission. As far as religion
is concerned, he adopted his own original perspective, taking the
interpretation of symbolic behaviour to profound, new levels. My
puzzle about whether Nuer and Dinka social experience is
different in ways which would account for the difference in their
symbolic order is therefore complicated by lack of detailed
information about marriage regulations. From the pattern of the
rest of their social and symbolic behaviour I will hazard a guess
that Dinka observe less stringent, less far-reaching rules of incest
and exogamy and are less consistent in using the pattern of their
cattle transfers to define their categories of permitted and
prohibited sexual relations.
   But first let me fill in the contrast at the symbolic level, in what
concerns their attitudes to spirit possession. The Nuer regard it as
dangerous. Evans-Pritchard says, ‘Seizure of a man by a spirit may
be temporary or permanent. When it is permanent the possessed
person becomes a prophet…’ (1940a). Sickness is often attributed
to temporary spirit possession: sacrifice is made to the spirit to
appease it, and the victim, once cured, must continue to make
sacrifices ‘to let it know that he has not forgotten it. Otherwise it
may cause trouble again.’ The process of cure, apart from
sacrifice, includes a séance of singing, drumming, rattling and
clapping until someone close to the victim becomes possessed. In
the case he describes it is the sick man’s father who becomes a
medium to make known the demands of the spirit. I quote:

96 Test cases

  As the singing, rattling and clapping continued, Rainen began
  to twitch and shake from head to foot and then suddenly leaped
  into the air and fell back on the floor of the hut where he lay
  stiff as though in a paroxysm. After lying tense and prostrate
  for a while he sat up, but shortly afterwards collapsed again.
  Then for about a quarter of an hour he threw himself wildly
  about the hut, writhing and twitching as though in agony. He
  reminded me of a hen which has had its throat cut in the
  Muslim way, and is thrown on the ground to die. If the people
  around had not broken most of his falls he might have injured
  himself. As it was, he complained to me on the following day of
  the soreness of his arms and legs. Every now and again he
  barked like a dog. In describing these spasms Nuer say that the
  spirit wrestles with the man it possesses.
                                       (Evans-Pritchard, 1956:36)

Note that the occasion of a spirit possessing a man is first known
by the illness of the latter: in the next stage it possesses someone
else with whom it wrestles violently, before it discloses its name
and demands gifts. Then after some hard bargaining, the spirit is
persuaded to go. The séance is in the charge of a prophet, one
whose state of possession is permanent. And note the strange
picture of a Nuer prophet (ibid., facing p. 306) which shows the
unkempt hair and beard ‘both of which are objectionable to
ordinary Nuer’. Their prophets stand outside the structuring of
normal Nuer society. A prophet who is inspired by a spirit must
give it a name

  which distinguishes it as his particular spirit from the spirits of
  other prophets of his neighbourhood who are his rivals for
  renown and influence; for the attachment here is to individuals
  who built it up through a personal following and not, at least
  primarily, to social groups.
                                                         (ibid.: 117)

To this extent they sustain my thesis that bodily control tends to
be relaxed where social control is weak. The Nuer prophets look
strange and unkempt; they operate outside the normal social
structure, competing with one another for influence in a social
dimension peculiar to themselves and distinct from the balanced
opposition of lineage segments. By normal Nuer values, prophets
have different moral standards. They are greedy, grasping and

                                                      Test cases 97

eccentric. They cure sickness caused by spirits and state their
price in terms of cattle to be dedicated to spirits. Spirit-dedicated
cattle represent transfers which restrict the flow of wealth
through the secular channels of marriage payments and
compensations. In fact, though individual prophets do well
enough by their vocation, spirits are distinctly a nuisance to the
general run of Nuer who would like their help but would also
like them to stay away.
   To sum up, using loan Lewis’s terms, spirit possession is not
part of the main morality cult of the Nuer but a peripheral cult.
Whereas, among the Dinka, a benign form of spirit-possession lies
at the centre of their religion and has none of these attributes.
   Dinka spear-master clans and warrior clans are linked in
descent and politics, the former specialized in ritual and the latter
in political leadership, producing a balanced duality of power
(Lienhardt, 1958:118–19).

  Leadership, in any Dinka political segment, necessarily involves
  the presence of two different classes or categories of clan, the
  warriors and the spear-masters, which are of equal and
  complementary status…. The Dinka masters of the fishing-
  spear are not merely ritual agents for composing feuds when the
  parties to them both wish it; they do not, as is usual for the
  Nuer leopard-skin chiefs, stand outside the structure of agnatic
  groups with which the political groups are identified in their
  relations with one another…
                                                    (ibid.: 130–1)

Needless to say there is no question of spear-masters being shaggy,
immoral, greedy, strange or grasping. They do not operate outside
the social structure, but as a normal part of it.
   As to their idea of spirit, Dinka in their rituals are much readier
to expect good to come from abandoning themselves to it
completely. Each clan has its own divinities, but the spear-master
clans collectively recognize the divinity Flesh, the word which
comes from the twitching of the flesh after a sacrificial beast is
skinned which makes it appear to have a life of its own (Lienhardt,
1961:136–7). The divinity Flesh is specially manifest in the
quivering of legs and thighs at the onset of possession. The divinity
Flesh ensures that the man who speaks by virtue of it speaks
absolutely truthfully. Flesh means righteousness and justice. For
my general comparison, it is worth noting that Dinka who are

98 Test cases

possessed by other, lesser divinities, become ‘hysterically’
possessed and are in a state of danger (ibid.: 57ff. and 137),
whereas the trembling of the spear-masters at sacrificial rites is
always more controlled and safe. Thus the Dinka have two degrees
of bodily uncontrol, associated appropriately with the centre and
periphery of their religion, the centre and periphery of their social
categories.
    The Nuer attitude to possession is that it is dangerous in the
first phase, and produces an abnormal, specialized role in the
second phase; a role whose specialized task is to counteract the
dangers of first phase possession. (The distinction between these
phases has been developed by loan Lewis in a paper on witchcraft
and spirit possession.) The Dinka attitude is that trance is the
primary manifestation of unspecialized benign power. It is not
restricted to a specialized role in the sense of calling for special
initiation, by affliction, asceticism or training, but is open to all the
adult males of a clan, and normally experienced by them all.
    I believe I have summarized correctly a different religious bias
in the two tribal cultures. By contrasting Nuer prophets with
Dinka spear-masters I am able to emphasize a different value
placed on bodily dissociation. The Nuer prophet has a special
function in war, to compose hymns and rouse the fighting men.
His role is not parallel to that of the Dinka spear-masters, whose
clans are specialized for religion in juxtaposition with the warrior
clans. The true parallel of the Dinka spear-master among the Nuer
is the leopardskin priest. In certain Nuer lineages a ‘priestly virtue’
is transmitted to their members (Evans-Pritchard, 1956:292–3),
which is an effective power to curse and bless and to perform
sacrifice for certain occasions. Exactly the same word is used in
each language to describe the source of this power, ring, which
means flesh. It would seem that, at some stage in their
development, the Nuer priestly lineages were also juxtaposed
symmetrically with secular lineages in a similar pattern to the
Dinka one (ibid.: 293). Among the Dinka, Flesh is the chief
divinity, whose cult we have described. It is a cult of physical
dissociation and the attributes of flesh are etherialized into
intellectual and moral qualities. Nuer priests invoke ‘the spirit of
our flesh…which refers to the spiritual source of sacerdotal power’
(ibid.: 109). Even if it were to transpire that the Nuer concept of
flesh closely parallels the Dinka one, and this in spite of the many
connotations of ring, flesh, with the physical as compared with
other aspects of life (ibid.: 55, 154, 159), the much greater

                                                      Test cases 99

prominence and centrality of priestly possession as the channel of
divine power for the Dinka would still distinguish theirs from
Nuer religion. However great the difficulties of assessment, the
question still remains that two neighbouring peoples, with two
related languages, related histories and distinct political
institutions, frequently at war with one another, have made
different emphases in their use of the bodily mode.
   The Nuer cosmos seems to be more rational and regulative. The
connection they make between sickness and sin is so close that,
though they believe in evil eye and in the work of fetishes and
ghosts, they ‘generally appear to feel that suffering is due to some
fault of theirs’ (ibid.: 21, 22 and 176). Moral faults, inherent in
man’s nature, tend to accumulate and predispose to disaster (ibid.:
193). Though they believe in luck, it does not intervene as an
explanation of misfortune (ibid.: 195). The caprice element ranks
low in their cosmological ideas. There are no inexplicable shocks
or surprises in their universe. At death they mourn quietly, but not
ostentatiously, since this might give the impression that God had
not a perfect right to do whatever he wishes with them. Their
general outlook on humankind and its fate is pessimistic. Though
he writes about sacrifices to avert natural disasters, Evans-
Pritchard says the Nuer are not very interested or hopeful about
the efficacy of rites to change their fortune in hunting, agriculture
or the seasons. ‘Nuer rather turn their eyes inwards, to the little
closed social world in which they live, they and their cattle. Their
sacrifices are concerned with moral and spiritual, not natural
crises’ (ibid.: 200). Nuer are much more concerned than Dinka
with automatic pollution. They recognize classes of offences which
entail automatic misfortune. Incest is one such class; adultery,
disrespect to in-laws and homicide are others. To each class of
offence is imputed a particular class of illness. Incest produces skin
disease; adultery afflicts the injured husband with pains in the
lumbar region; and so on. A wider range of misfortunes may befall
the man who uncovers his genitals in the presence of his in-laws or
who drinks water after shedding human blood before purification.
Most of the Nuer sacrifices are made to atone for one or other
such offence, assumed to be the cause of illness. Here is an area of
taboo-mindedness in Nuer religion which is at variance with their
general disinclination for fetishes, charms and spells. But in these
two areas of their life social constraints are strongly felt, marriage
rules and local loyalty in fighting. Adultery, marriage and
homicide are the main occasions for the transfer of cattle and the

100 Test cases

Nuer have less cattle than the Dinka. These transgressions held to
be automatically dangerous express social relations in which Nuer
most strongly feel the constraints of living in society.
   By contrast, Dinka seem much less pollution-prone or
taboominded. There is less emphasis in Lienhardt’s book on Dinka
religion on the piacular element in sacrifices. This could be a
difference of focus in the observer. But I think not. Certainly the
Dinka seem to have a more optimistic world view. They do not
expect their universe to be rational: ‘The Dinka are in a universe
which is largely beyond their control and where events may
contradict the most reasonable human expectation’ (Lienhardt,
1961:54). They seem much less sin-conscious. An element of
caprice is clearly linked with misfortune in their concept of the
intriguing divinity, Macardit. He represents

  the final explanation of sufferings and misfortunes which
  cannot be traced to other causes more consonant with Dinka
  notions of Divinity as just…. Macardit presides over the ending
  of good things, the inevitable and sometimes brutal curtailment
  of human life and fertility…a malign divinity specially
  associated with women
                                                     (ibid.: 81–3)

So misfortune is not regularly traced to human faults. Is their
notion of death less philosophical and passive than that of the
Nuer? What does it signify that they cannot bear to speak of it,
and bury their dead without looking at the grave as they shovel the
earth in backwards? (Lienhardt, 1962). And what different quality
of their beliefs leads them to bury their most famous spear-master
alive so as to enact a kind of social triumph of life over death
(Lienhardt 1961:318)? Sexual promiscuity is said to follow such a
ceremony. Do the stricter Nuer have no such moments of licensed
orgy in which marriage ties and incest rules are overriden? Or did
their ethnographer just not happen to record them?
   God, for the Nuer, is dangerous (Evans-Pritchard, 1956:177,
195–6, 198). They are torn by a wish to keep him at a distance and
have him near at hand to help them. The Dinka god, as we have
seen, comes right down to possess intimately the bodies of his
worshippers. He is not distant, evidently. Is he dangerous? I
maintain that we are dealing here not with the different bias of
two reporters who saw similar things differently. On the contrary,
their close association gave them the same bias, as near as can be

                                                     Test cases 101

achieved by conscientious observation. The differences are
precisely those we would predict from small differences in ecology
and social structure summed up by Lienhardt in Tribes without
Rulers (1958).
   First, the Dinka are about four times more numerous than
Nuer; they live more densely. Then, most Dinka settlements
straggle across savannah forest in continuous settlement; their
sense of local bounded unit should be weaker than that of Nuer
who live in discrete, wet season villages and concentrate in large
cattle camps in the dry season. The pattern of Dinka transhumance
has two phases of congregation, one in the dry season, their
permanent settlements, the other in the height of the wet season.
When

  flooding reduces the area available for grazing, such small
  groups (of cattle camps) are drawn together and converge on
  the few best sites in their neighbourhood. Toward the end of the
  rainy season, herdsmen of each tribe are concentrated in several
  sub-tribal camps.
                                            (Lienhardt, 1958:100)

Most significantly, Dinka speak of their political communities as
cattle camps, and these

  are more fluid in composition and less fixed in their spatial
  relations to each other, than are permanent settlements….
  Dinka country sets less rigid limits to movements in the wet
  season, and to the expansion of settlements, than are set by
  much of Nuer land for its people. These different ecological
  conditions are consistent with some differences between Nuer
  and Dinka political segmentation.
                                                     (ibid.: 101)

Lienhardt goes on to describe Dinka political theory which rests
upon the assumption that groups expand, segment and break away
from each other. ‘Fission and fusion do not take place within a single
genealogical framework’ (ibid.: 104). Their political theory is one of
expansion. In spite of the much higher density of population, it is a
mobile social system in a sense in which the Nuer is not. ‘They see
their history as a spreading out and separation of peoples on the
ground…a notion which includes the notion of a measure of
personal leadership’ (ibid.: 118). The political framework is more

102 Test cases

confused and more fluid, genealogies are more muddled (ibid.: 106)
than Nuer; lineages have fewer orders of formal segmentation. From
this I conclude that it would be surprising if their categories for
incest and bridewealth were as strict as those of the Nuer. Dinka
recognize that they are capable of less wide-scale co-operation
against common enemies than Nuer (ibid.: 108). These facts suggest
that it is reasonable to place the Dinka further than Nuer along the
diminishing lines of grid and group towards zero. If their idea of
formal sin were alleged to be more highly developed than among the
Nuer, it would be surprising, since these people are related in less
inclusive and more easily evaded categories. I would not expect
techniques of reconciliation and religious techniques of coercion to
be so well developed. I would expect Nuer to be more magical and
taboominded than the Dinka. The differences in their social
structures, in the light of my hypothesis about symbolic behaviour,
seem amply to justify the differences in the reporting of their
religions. If it had been the other way, and the Dinka were reported
to be more conscious of sin, more interested in purification, more
afraid of the dangers of spirit possession, then the regular patterns
apparent elsewhere would have suggested a subjective bias. But the
more positive and more central use of bodily dissociation in Dinka
religion turns out to be correlated with the predicted social
variables.
   To complete the demonstration, I would like to include another
Nilotic tribe, the Mandari. On my reading of the ethnography they
would appear on a diagram showing strength of grid and group as
in diagram 5.
   Group, of course, refers to several possible levels of allegiance.
The Mandari are acutely conscious of the widest one:

  It is most important to bear in mind…that the small Mandari
  population in its tiny country is surrounded by powerful and
  numerous neighbours in vast territories and also that the
  Mandari population is itself made up of levels of immigrants
  dispersed around separated cores of original landowners, again
  of various kinds.
                                            (Buxton, 1963b: 49)

‘Mandari country was composed of a very large number of small
chiefdoms between whom relations were friendly, competitive or
openly hostile’ (Buxton, 1958:71). So, at the level of small local
chiefdom, group allegiance was important for Mandari. Within

                                                      Test cases 103




For the Mandari, grid and group are strongest; for the Nuer, they are
weaker; for the Dinka, grid and group are weaker than for the Nuer.

Diagram 5 Three Nilotes

each chiefdom relations were stratified in a hierarchy which
attributed ritual ties with the land to early groups of immigrants
and validated their claims as landowners. The rights to political
priority became matters of very tense competition, as their attitude
to clients as potential witches shows (Buxton, 1963b). Restraints
of grid and group seem to be highly charged emotional
experiences. It is gratifying to find that their attitude to sin and to
purification is very formalist. To the Mandari, sins, or pollutions,
are specific acts; they are not made better or worse by the
intentions of the sinner. Jean Buxton died suddenly in 1971. I had
earlier spoken to her about this subject and she generally
confirmed my impression of the greater magicality in the bias of
Mandari culture. I recall a lively account she gave in a seminar in
University College London of the complex colour and thermal
categories into which Mandari class kinds of sins and kinds of
illnesses. They prescribe sacrificial beasts with appropriate sex and
markings for the purification of each kind of offence. But the
pernickertiness of their rules drives them to desperate ritual shifts
for transforming incorrectly ‘hot’ beasts, red ones or male ones,
into the prescribed ‘cool’, white, black or female forms. Their
highly magical, formal approach to sin is in conformity with their
attitude to spirit possession which seems closely to correspond to

104 Test cases

that which I have outlined for the Nuer. Possession is dangerous,
causes sickness in the first phase and produces specialists in the
second phase who are adept at countering the dangers they have
themselves survived (Buxton, 1968:40). She describes an
‘elaborate specialist treatment’ for a person whose sickness has
been caused by a nyok, the vengeful spirit of a dead dog.

  The nyok screams ‘Ahrrr! Ahrrrr!’ and the doctor wrestles with
  it over the hole. He sways to and fro hanging on to the spear,
  while the spectators hold on to him; he foams at the mouth or
  blood pours from his nostrils. The nyok is said eventually to
  weaken and then to cease its struggles…. Treatment is in line
  with other exorcisms, and with convulsion therapy, where
  possession is induced by rhythmic rattle shaking.
                                                      (ibid.: 60)

Thus I have compared three Nilotic peoples on the basis of grid
and group. The material is very suggestive. I am tempted to find
that their religious behaviour upholds the hypothesis. The weaker
the social constraints, the more bodily dissociation is approved
and treated as a central ritual adjunct for channelling benign
power to the community. The stronger the social pressures, the
more magicality in ritual and in the definition of sin.
   It is important to notice two aspects of the Nuer-Dinka
comparison which will be relevant to any wider discussion. First,
the control of grid and group is not a function of population
density. The Dinka in question live at a density of up to 60 to the
square mile, the Nuer at roughly seven. Grid and group are a
function of order and constraint in social relations and these can
be as easily absent in dense as in sparse populations. The Dinka
seem to think that they can break off social relations and start
afresh quite easily. Their sense of living in an expanding economy
may possibly be derived from their successful cattle husbandry. It
makes a great difference to the quality of social life if people are
sharing resources which seem to be expanding, dwindling or static.
Paul Spencer (1965) has drawn attention to this variable in his
comparison of Rendille and Samburu pastoralists in Kenya. He
relates the much stricter social controls operating in Rendille
society to the fact that Rendille ‘believe that their camel herds, if
they are growing at all, are growing at a slower pace than the
human population’ while ‘the Samburu believe that their own
cattle herds increase at a faster rate than their human population’

                                                       Test cases 105

and that the poorest of men may build up substantial herds (p.
293). If the Nuer believe themselves to be husbanding a static
livestock population and the Dinka an expanding one, this would
be another explanation for why the latter take social control more
lightly. Economic expansion and restriction turn out to be much
more significant variables affecting cosmology than absolute
population density as such.
   I would not wish to brush off as unimportant the difficulties of
interpretation which beset this argument. Any kind of illustrative
material is intensely difficult to find for exactly the same reasons: no
reports are exhaustive; none can avoid bias; there is an enormous
subjective element of selection in any ethnographic observation. My
particular kind of hypothesis depends on very close, objective
assessment for its validation. Nothing will do but research which
has been specially designed, not to prove it, but to test it.
   Reviewing the shift from formal rite to positive approval of
trance, I have referred here and there to co-varying ideas about sin.
These should now be made more explicit. Along the series from
maximum formality and control in symbolic behaviour to
maximum informality and uncontrol there is a corresponding
series in attitudes to wrong-doing. At the pole of maximum
formality, the idea of wrong-doing takes no account of internal
motive, or of the state of mind of the actor. Wrong-doing is bad in
itself, its dangers are automatically unleashed, blame falls
automatically, and the wrong is known ex opere operate. It exactly
parallels the attitude to ritual in the case of extreme magicality. At
the pole of maximum informality the idea of wrong-doing is
entirely concerned with internal states of mind. The actual
consequences of the act are of less concern than the wishes and
intentions of the actor. Responsibility ends with securing right
motives. To take homicide as an example, at one end of the range
we have automatic pollution of blood, at the other unintended
manslaughter distinguished from homicide. I would expect these
variations to coincide smoothly with variations in formality and
informality and both in accordance with the hold of grid and
group on individuals in relevant contexts. Thus I would expect to
find whole cultures where ideas of sin are more internal, less
tabooridden than the ideas of their close neighbours, who
experience more effective and all-embracing social constraints.
   To show how this can be examined, let me break my
methodological strictures and dare to compare widely separated
peoples. The comparison of the pygmies with Hadza hunters in

106 Test cases

Tanzania is so illuminating in this matter of sin that I must discuss
them together. I have earlier described the fluidity of the Mbuti
pygmy camps. Their groupings are so undefined, so unimportant
in their lives that no tribe in Africa seems to emphasize group
membership less than they, with the exception of the Hadza. The
latter move even more freely in and out of camp, forming new
ones and moving away. The description of camp groupings poses a
serious problem of method for their ethnographer (J.C.Woodburn,
1964). We would expect then that they would have internalized
the idea of sin even more completely than the pygmies. But this is
not so. The Mbuti pygmies have no conception of pollution,
neither pollution of death, nor of birth, nor of menstruation. But
the Hadza fear pollution of menstrual blood. To interpret this
taboo, I need to leave the question of group and return to grid. The
pygmies are as free of social categories as they are of bounded
groups. Neither sex, age, nor kinship order their behaviour in
strictly ordained categories. Turnbull writes:

  It would, of course, be ridiculous to deny that there is any
  system of kinship, but it is certain that the kinship system does
  not have the same importance as a focal point of social control
  as it may have in other African societies. To my mind this is
  undeniably linked to the ad hoc nature of the society, with its
  almost complete lack of concern for the past, as for the future.
  …The effective kinship terminology at once reflects the
  situation, which only becomes confused when any attempt is
  made to relate the terms to their usage in village society. It
  distinguishes generations rather than kin and cuts
  indiscriminately across actual kinship boundaries…
                                           (Turnbull, 1965:109–10)

So also with sex, they place little emphasis on separate male and
female spheres. Men and women share in tasks of erecting huts
and even in hunting. Social categories are markedly weak. It is the
young men who operate the system of social control on behalf of
the camp.
   This is perfectly compatible with their general lack of concern
for sin. In this kind of culture people would readily believe Mary
Kingsley’s missionaries, who taught that ‘a little talk with Jesus
makes it all alright’. Informality is the key-note of their religious
practice. I have not counted how often the words ‘intimacy’ and
‘joy’ occur in Turnbull’s account, but they are very frequent.

                                                    Test cases 107

   Even more leaderless and free in movement from camp to camp
and spouse to spouse, the Hadza are divided by a social category
so dominating and all-inclusive that Woodburn is tempted to
describe it as a quasi-group. Wherever Hadza are, and whatever
they do, they are always controlled by the division between the
sexes. This division is between two hostile classes, each of which is
capable of organizing itself for defence or virulent attack against
the other. This extraordinarily intense consciousness of sexual
difference is the only permanent level of organization the Hadza
ever achieve. It is the background of male competition for wives,
of female collusion between mothers and daughters to exact the
maximum of trade goods from husbands in return for grudgingly
given sexual satisfaction. The very low level of the division of
labour between the sexes is itself an added difficulty in the way of
building up a set of long-term conjugal relations. Keep in mind the
insecurity of a man’s hold on his wife, and their belief in menstrual
pollution appears to have a practical value. When a Hadza woman
menstruates, she must avoid certain activities which would be
polluted by her contact. But not only must she rest. Her husband
of the moment, whoever he may be, must himself abstain from
manly activities lest he endanger the rest of the camp’s chance of
success in hunting. So his menstrual couvade is a kind of claim he
affirms regularly by asserting the physiological connection
between himself and his wife and the wide-spread dangers of
disregarding it (Woodburn, 1964:204–78; Douglas, 1968b).
   Here we find, amid a general lack of concern for purity and
danger, a strong regard for certain specific, symbolic boundaries. A
symbolic expression of the tie between husband and wife
(sanctioned by the threat of danger to the whole camp) reflects the
one relationship which is highly valued. It expresses the one social
category which is an active regulator of behaviour, the distinction
of men and women, and it draws the boundary between the sexes
in such a way as to incorporate the husband, in the restricted
context of his conjugal claims, within the same line which
encompasses his wife. So the rule, which in its general form sets all
women apart from all men and treats them as dangerous, in its
particular incidence sets each woman apart from other women,
but not apart from her husband; he, in his turn, is, in virtue of his
married state, set apart from other men. Thus the pollution rule
draws very precise lines of incorporation and exclusion. No jump
of the imagination is required to see this formal taboo, in an
otherwise taboo-free system, as expressing the pressure of social

108 Test cases

relations. Thus I take it as a starting point for demonstrating the
hypothesis that when social relations are not finely ascribed, when
they are easily broken off and carry little in the way of obligation
or privilege, the formal aspect of wrong-doing is disregarded. The
more fluid and formless are social relations, the more internalized
the idea of wrong-doing. The full demonstration requires, as I
insisted earlier, the social and symbolic behaviour of the Hadza to
be compared from this angle with their close neighbours and
similarly for the pygmies. But until the interest of such an
examination has been suggested, the work of analysis will not be
carried out.
   These examples throw considerable light on present
theological attitudes to the subject of sin. What is taken to be a
more advanced, enlightened doctrine appears merely as the usual
expression of a less differentiated experience of social relations.
We have here a glimpse of the sociological matrix in which ideas
about sin and the self are generated. No simple evolutionary
pattern emerges. It is not a history of the victory of liberal
tolerance over bigoted intolerance. The relation of self to society
varies with the constraints of grid and group: the stronger these
are, the more developed the idea of formal transgression and its
dangerous consequences, and the less regard is felt for the right
of the inner self to be freely expressed. The more that social
relations are differentiated by grid and group, the more the
private individual is exhorted to pour his passions into prescribed
channels or to control them altogether. In the small-scale
primitive social system (whether we identify with high
classification or with small group) a continual feedback process
modifies the public pattern of roles so that no great discrepancy
can arise. How the private individual sees his interests and how
society at large expects him to respond will more or less coincide.
All the pressures upon him are personal pressures. He is as
capable of modifying them by his action as they are of
controlling him. The great difference between us, in modern
industrial society, and them, in small-scale primitive society, is
that the feedback is lost. The pressures exerted on the individual
are not modified by his reaction. There is no arguing with or
explaining to the industrial system any more than there is
arguing with the weather. The strongest social controls are not
exerted in the personal mode.
   We find ourselves generally with the other primitive societies I
have identified with strong grid. They share with us the paradox

                                                    Test cases 109

that the sense of sin is weakened as social control is strengthened.
Just as society demands more and more urgently that our passions
flow in the channels it prescribes, we are more and more deaf to its
inducements. Because of the disjunction between its classifications
and our aims we hear the more insistent demand of the inner self
to be given full expression.

Chapter 7
The problem of evil




Pain and injustice do not pose problems, social or religious, for
everyone. Indeed, in any part of society located to the left of the
vertical line, they attract scant reflection (see diagram 4, p. 60).
To the right, where social control is strong, I will argue from
three types of social experience that the problem of evil is posed
in characteristically different ways. We are now approaching the
crux of the comparison with Bernstein’s analysis of family
control systems. For each type of family there is its necessary
manner of validating coercive demands. For each distinct type of
social environment, likewise, there is its necessary manner of
justifying coercion. Through the classifications used, the
furniture of the universe is turned into an armoury of control. In
each social system human suffering is explained in a way that
reinforces the controls. To see how evil is understood, we must
see classification and personal pressure, grid and group, working
together.
   In the first place, we can quickly dispose of high classification,
strong grid and group. These people use the incidence of
misfortune to uphold the moral law. Disease and accident are
either attributed to moral failures or invested with nobility in a
general metaphysical scheme which embraces suffering as part of
the order of being. There is no lack of ethnography to illustrate
this classic form of the problem.
   Moving down towards zero we come to the small groups
exerting strong personal pressures, but with weak classification.
Here flourishes a theory of evil that generally corresponds to fear
of witchcraft. This is a cosmos dominated by ill-will and jealousy.
Jane Austen made Emma smugly remark: ‘A very narrow income
has a tendency to contract the mind, and sour the temper. Those
who can barely live and who live perforce in a very small and

                                             The problem of evil 111

generally very inferior society may well be illiberal and cross.’ It is
not poverty in itself, but the contraction and above all the
confusion of social ties which go with the witchcraft syndrome.
Small competitive communities tend to believe themselves in a
dangerous universe, threatened by sinister powers operated by
fellow human beings. Instead of prayer, fasting and sacrifice to the
deity, ritual activity is devoted to witch hunting, witch-cleansing,
witch-killing and curing from the effects of witchcraft.
   The anthropological model for this type comes from Central
Africa where the studies of Marwick (1952, 1965) and Mitchell
(1956) and others following them have defined a type of
witchcraft situation. It is one in which accusations of witchcraft
are used to denigrate rivals and pull them down in the
competition for leadership. The accusations would not have this
effect if roles were clearly defined and rules of succession
unambiguous. But it is the essence of this situation that men can
entertain contradictory views of their roles. The elder brother is
supposed to be benevolent and authoritative, but his ability to
sustain the role convincingly is undermined by the knowledge
that each and all of his younger brothers is his rival in the
succession to the headmanship of the village. Ambiguity allows
competition within a closed circle of kin and neighbours. In the
competition the dangerous powers of the universe are alleged to
be under the control of the rival, to whose door all succeeding
misfortunes are laid. Here failure is not ascribed to bad luck, nor
to moral failings of the victim, but to the hostile, occult powers
of his neighbour. Eventually the witch, whom rumour tries at the
bar of public opinion, must either allow the village to split or
clear his name in some ordeal. The work of Central Africanists
enables us to specify precisely the social structure conducive to
this particular type of witch-cosmology. But it is not by any
means a Central African phenomenon. In Central America,
among the Trio and Shevante, Peter Rivière (1970) can make a
similar analysis. Witchcraft accusations are either used to expel
an unwanted member of the community, or to split the village
into two parts, each part supposing itself to have thus sloughed
off its dangerous elements.
   If this is the social structure in which witch beliefs flourish, we
should expect to find something approximating to witchcraft
wherever these conditions prevail. In short, if we have social units
whose external boundaries are clearly marked, whose internal
relations are confused, and which persist on a small scale, then we

112 The problem of evil

should look for the active witchcraft type of cosmology. Somehow
we must bring the association with cats and broomsticks under
control by eliciting some general characteristics of these beliefs.
First, to accuse of witchcraft is to accuse of evil practice on a
cosmic scale. The witch is no ordinary thief or adulterer, or even a
common traitor. He is accused of a perverted nature, or of alliance
with the enemies of human kind, in Europe with the devil, in other
continents with carnivorous predators. He is associated
symbolically with the reverse of the way that a normal human
lives, with night instead of day. His powers are abnormal, he can
fly, be in two places at once, change his shape. Above all, he is a
deceiver, someone whose external appearance does not
automatically betray his interior nature. Very common all over the
world is some idea equivalent to the witches’ coven. Though each
coming from different social groups, the witch sinks his local
loyalties in favour of obligations to his confraternity. In the end, if
he fails to satisfy them, they will devour him.
    If we take these beliefs about the nature of the witch to signify
something about the nature of the society which takes them
seriously, we are struck by a close portrayal of the witch-believing
social system. For here, as we saw, the body politic tends to have a
clear external boundary, and a confused internal state in which
envy and favouritism flourish and continually confound the proper
expectations of members. So the body of the witch, normal-
seeming and apparently carrying the normal human limitations, is
equipped with hidden and extraordinarily malevolent powers. The
loyalty of the witch, instead of being committed firmly to his
group, flies out loose. He goes alone to contend with alien
personifications of lust and power. The witch himself has no firm
anchorage in the social structure. In appearance he is present, but
only bodily; his real inner self has escaped from social restraint.
    A closer look at the symbolism of witchcraft shows the
dominance of symbols of inside and outside. The witch himself is
someone whose inside is corrupt; he works harm on his victims by
attacking their pure, innocent insides. Sometimes he sucks out
their soul and leaves them with empty husks, sometimes he poisons
their food, sometimes he throws darts which pierce their bodies.
And then again, sometimes he needs access to their inner bodily
juices, faeces, semen, spittle, before he can hurt them. Often such
bodily excretions are the weapons of his craft. If we were to make
an analysis of the symbols of attack, I predict we would find a
close correspondence between the experience of the social system

                                              The problem of evil 113

and the kind of attack most feared. Soul sucking and poisoning we
would expect to be practised by the witch within the local
community, weapon throwing by the far-off witch.
   So much for the cosmic scale on which the witch
characteristically is conceived. To imagine a witch it is necessary to
reflect on human nature, to consider its limitations in space and time
and to believe in its natural proclivity to justice and goodness; the
witch is the converse of a normal human. Now for the social uses of
the belief. In these small and simple social structures, with very little
differentiation of roles, techniques for distancing, regulating, and
reconciling are little developed. The witch doctrine is used as the
idiom of control, since it pins blame for misfortune on trouble-
makers and deviants. The accusation is a righteous demand for
conformity. In a community in which overt conflict cannot be
contained, witchcraft fears are used to justify expulsion and fission.
These are communities in which authority has very weak resources.
Beyond a certain size, they cannot persist without introducing
sharper definition into the structure of roles. Only certain limited
targets can be achieved by their low level of organization. Expulsion
of dissidents is one method of control, fission of the group a more
drastic one. In either case the group remains small and disorganized.
The doctrine of a cosmos inhabited by normal humans and by
witches disguised as humans is well adapted to the dynamics of
renewal and continuity in such social systems.
   There are thus four general characteristics of the witchcraft
cosmology: the idea of the bad outside and the good inside, the
inside under attack and in need of protection, human wickedness
on a cosmic scale, and these ideas used in political manipulation.
The symbols of black cats and broomsticks are local expressions of
this complex of beliefs which, once identified in general terms, can
be found more widely—I would even dare to suggest it may be
found wherever the social preconditions exist.
   Let me take an English sectarian movement, from the history of
the Exclusive Brethren, as an example.
   No apology is needed for moving from African witchcraft to
English sects. Bryan Wilson (1967) himself has blazed the trail in
his valuable set of studies of sectarianism. He concludes his
discussion of the Exclusive Brethren with just such a comparison:

   It might be said of the Brethren, that there is an elaborated
   Durkheimian point to be made, that—in a sense not far removed
   from that in which the idea was developed for a tribal people—

114 The problem of evil

  their worship of God is worship of the community. The worship is
  more elaborate; the relationships are more consciously recognized;
  and yet the assembly appears as a form of the Deity…. The
  community, the assembly has a sense of special sanctity from
  which individual and household sanctity is derived; it employs
  severe measures of ‘social hygiene’ for its maintenance.
                                                         (ibid.: 336)

These measures are equivalent to witch hunting and witch
expulsion. The Exclusive Brethren, which Wilson classifies as an
‘Introversionist Sect’, remain true to their principles of rejecting
human organization. Thus they deviate from the common trend
for sects to evolve into denominations in the course of two
generations. They have not grown and diversified, they have
remained aloof from secular society for over 100 years. The price
they have paid for maintaining themselves as a pure group is the
erecting of a high wall between themselves and the rest of the
world, and continual schism. As in witch-dominated systems,
doctrine is used as a weapon of expulsion and separation. As in
witch beliefs, the doctrine celebrates the purity and goodness of
one part of mankind, and the vileness of the rest.

  The idea of the saints already inhabiting heavenly places; the
  dissociation of the saints from Israel; and their different
  prospects from those of the world—are conceptions reinforced
  in their separatist consequences by teachings concerning the will
  of Christ and the will of man. Christ’s expression ‘Not my will,
  but thine be done’ is regarded as a form of assertion that there
  never was any divergence between the Father’s will and the
  Son’s. Nor should there be any divergent will in man, since all
  free will is seen as ‘self will’. Man’s only will is the will to sin. In
  contrast, the saints must act under the direction of the Holy
  Spirit, and this reasserts the authority of the fellowship over the
  individual, and encourages quietism towards the outside world.
                                                            (ibid.: 285)

  The Brethren aver that they have love to all the saints but that
  this can only be actually shown to those in the Fellowship. Yet,
  although theoretically the Brethren acknowledge the possibility
  of saints existing outside the Fellowship, they have sometimes
  behaved as if this were an entirely theoretical circumstance. The
  growth of emphasis on ecclesiological rectitude, the frequency of

                                              The problem of evil 115

   excommunication and the development of a more exacting ethic,
   have all occurred on the latent assumption that the fellowship
   was the only manifestation of the Church. Thus, during the
   1860s a system was developed in which the Park Street assembly,
   which was Darby’s assembly, brought heresy that occurred
   elsewhere virtually to the test of London judgement. London
   expelled in this period a Mr Stewart. The Walworth assembly
   enquired about the grounds of the expulsion, and on enquiry
   were not entirely satisfied. Subsequently, they moved their
   meeting to Peckham. London responded by excluding Peckham
   from their communion, which meant virtual excommunication of
   all in the assembly. Soon afterwards, a Mr Goodall of Peckham
   visited Sheffield and was received by the saints there at table. On
   this becoming known, Sheffield was also excommunicated by
   London, in deference to the long-established principle of
   eliminating all taint. On being questioned, Darby referred to the
   Church of God on earth, and said, ‘being outside…of what it
   represents in London…is to be outside it altogether’.
                                                          (ibid.: 294)

It is very tempting to work through this admirable book and to
make an analysis of the relation of the various sects to the outside
society in the terms of this discussion, that is of the influence of grid
and group on their doctrines. Most of them started, in what Wilson
calls the pre-sectarian stage, by shunning all forms of social
organization. Those which succeeded in maintaining for any length
of time this total rejection of authority and formality, usually paid
for it the price of doctrinal nullity. They stood together and
welcomed all comers, but stood for nothing. Those who felt after
some such experience the need for some doctrinal content would
tend to draw in their ranks, close their boundaries and set
themselves in the direction of sectarianism and schism. Those who
steered a middle course, who tried to convert the world to their
doctrines and developed an organization for the purpose, gradually
lost the singularity of their message, for the latter would seem to be
vital only so long as it expresses a certain low level of
undifferentiated social relations. In this way, the Plymouth Brethren
started in 1829 seeking to unite all true believers in a biblical
fellowship, reacting against institutionalism and ecclesiology:

   Communion was the bond of common life which brought into
   unity those who might not always agree on doctrinal matters or

116 The problem of evil

  procedures of worship, but who accepted an informal non-
  hierarchic lay assembly of those who took their stand on the
  Scriptures. Their principle was fellowship in the Spirit,
  participation in a common life, although with freedom to visit
  other religious assemblies and even to worship with groups of
  rather different doctrinal persuasions.
                                                     (ibid.: 244)

Here we have described exactly the social structure specified for
the witchcraft cosmology. The sect is founded on a particular idea
of human nature, emphasizing fellowship and goodwill, and
shunning principles of organization. Expulsions are used as the
method of control which enables the group to go on believing in
the possibility of living united in the spirit, but without hierarchy
and formality. When we look more closely at the cosmology, we
find the predicted principles. The inside is so good that within the
Fellowship they are all saints; the outside is bad. Not only is there
the alleged corruption of those who happen not to be within the
Fellowship, but there is also the general badness of institution-
alized behaviour, of seeking to relate Churches to the civil power,
to take over the work of the spirit by establishing external forms.
The contrast of the spirit with flesh, of spontaneity and freedom
with instituted form, the contrast of thing signified with sign, is
equated in the doctrinal controversies with the contrast of God
with man. So the significance of inside-outside takes on cosmic
proportions and the heretic is the saint who wants to have some
truck with the outside.
   These aspects of sectarianism emerge clearly in the life of John
Nelson Darby, whose appearance has been described in Chapter 5.
His life was an endless struggle with dissidents on this very score.
They felt that to insure continuity his standard suggestions were
inadequate. In the pamphlet entitled Reflections on the Ruined
Condition of the Church and on the Efforts Making (sic) by
Churchmen and Dissenters to Restore It to its Primitive Order
(1841) he wrote:

  The project of making Churches is really the hindrance in the
  way of the accomplishment of what all desire, namely the union
  of the saints in one body—first, because those who have
  attempted it, having gone beyond the power given them by the
  Spirit, the flesh has been fostered in them.
                                       (quoted in Coad, 1968:125)

                                             The problem of evil 117

The biographer goes on to say

  Darby concluded his pamphlet with his standard suggestions,
  which were so inadequate for continuing congregations. The
  present dispensation was fallen, and any who tried to remedy
  this state had failed to grasp the Divine Will. The promise of the
  presence of Christ when two or three were present in his name
  was still valid. Christians should avail themselves of this
  promise, and so meet to wait upon God, but no more. There
  was promise and power for such meetings, but none at all for
  those who sought to set up churches. To choose presidents or
  pastors is to organize a church, and even the appointment of
  elders is now impossible. The only government of the church
  was the acknowledgement of the Spirit of God.
                                                         (ibid.: 127)

Not only was error wrong, but for Darby ‘error was something
evil, directly involving the honour of the Godhead’ (ibid.: 87). So
in his controversy with a former friend and disciple, associating
heresy with evil and with the devil, he wrote:

  My mind did pass through the same process of anxiety as that
  of which you speak, as far as anxiety went, a qualm crossed my
  mind that some work of the enemy more than I knew how to
  judge of, was at the bottom.
                                                      (ibid.: 143)

The cosmic implications of God and the devil; inside and outside;
purity within, corruption without; here is the complex of ideas that
is associated with small groups with clearly marked membership
and confusion of internal roles. The fact that I have drawn on
Darby’s own attitudes raises the question of his personality. It is a
distraction to this discussion to suggest that persecution feelings and
a capacity to identify one’s own views with those of the Almighty,
and so to magnify the personal conflicts to a cosmic scale, are
psychopathic manifestations. So they may be, and Darby may well
have had these tendencies to an abnormal degree. So also, possibly,
many of his followers. But we cannot regard the psychological
explanation as satisfactory by itself without ignoring the correlation
of social structure with cosmology. Anyone who has had the
experience of a free and open social context changing to a suddenly
restricted one in which ascribed relationships have not been worked
out must recognize the change in attitudes of all the persons affected

118 The problem of evil

by the contraction and confusion of social ties. Leaders may well
have psychological traits which enable them to express very sharply
these fears and resentments, but only a sociological analysis can
explain why they find their followings in predictable niches whose
social structure corresponds recognizably with the dominant pattern
of symbols.
   We have signalled a similarity in philosophical outlook common
to small bounded communities. It can be described as a form of
metaphysical dualism. For its doctrine of two kinds of humanity,
one good, the other bad, and the association of the badness of some
humans with cosmic powers of evil is basically similar to some of
the so-called dualist religions which are discussed by historians. If
indeed we can relate philosophical dualism to certain kinds of social
structures, then some re-examination of the history of ideas is called
for. No longer should it be permitted for historians to write as if
philosophies move autonomously in a social vacuum, one idea
hitting another, splitting it, growing, decaying and being taken over.
Why did Zoroaster rebel against polytheism? Why did he think that
a good God could not be responsible for evil? Or, to put it more
cogently, why was there a following for a man who could not
tolerate the idea of a punishing God, but split the universe between
two equally balanced warring deities, one good, one bad? It takes a
certain kind of social experience to start to worry about the problem
of evil. Not everyone can perceive it as a problem at all. The
question of God’s responsibility does not pose itself in the terms
which historians customarily employ:

  It is only when one has come to admit one omnipotent,
  omniscient creator, who created the world with all there is in it,
  that the question arises why everything in the world does not go
  according to the will of the creator and ruler…in other words,
  the question arises as to how evil came into the world. An
  attempt to answer this question; such is dualism in its different
  forms…. The whole history of Western Philosophy appears in
  this light as an alternation of dualism and monism since
  Aristotle was already combating Plato’s dualism and since his
  own monism, with that of the Stoics, was succeeded by a period
  of pagan and Christian neo-Platonism up to the Aristotelian
  revival in the twelfth century. Plato himself did not invent
  dualism ex stirpe, for it was foreshadowed by Empedocles,
  Anaxagoras, the Orphics and Pythagoreans.
                             (Duchesne-Guillemin, 1958:1, 71–2)

                                            The problem of evil 119

The mind of the anthropologist boggles at the erudition required
to apply sociological insights to the problem of evil in such a
perspective. For certainly dualism through these centuries took
varying forms, some emphasizing more the contrast between spirit
and matter, some emphasizing more the human agents of evil,
others emphasizing demons. With each, we would expect
appropriately varying social conditions.
   The Pentecostal Church of West Indians in London which I
have mentioned already would ‘disfellowship’ a member who
unsuccessfully challenged the leader. The man thus expelled would
often go off and form a new church around his own leadership.
The charges made against him, usually of sexual irregularity, may
have had implications of a more deep-dyed and sinister form of
villainy in the eyes of the Fellowship than in ours. But this does not
appear from Calley’s account. I would hardly expect to find the
witchcraft cosmology established in a community whose
boundaries are so fluctuating and memberships so fluid. A close
analysis of sectarian movements on the criteria of grid and group
should reveal such consistently varying patterns of cosmology and
social structure.
   The only way in which a witch-dominated cosmology can be
transformed is by a change at the level of social organization. John
Middleton has described a cyclic move between ascribed and
competitive social patterns with the predicted shift in cosmological
emphasis (Middleton, 1960). In the early stages of the growth of a
new Lugbara lineage, leadership is ascribed by seniority in the
male line. At this stage, though witch beliefs are latent, they seem
to lie inactive. All fortunes, good and bad, are sent by punishing
ancestors who regulate behaviour through the mediation of the
lineage elder. But as the lineage grows in size and as the elder ages
and weakens, problems of succession split the group into rival
factions. Competition replaces ascription. The ancestors recede
into the background while accusations of witchcraft are bandied
about by rivals for the leadership. Once the succession problem is
settled (by the death or disgrace of the declining elder) ascription
and the ancestors take over again.
   People who frequently accuse one another of witchcraft readily
adopt witch-cleansing movements. In central Africa these
movements spread like wildfire from tribe to tribe where small
self-contained villages are dominated by witch beliefs. These
movements offer fantastic promises of a new golden age to be
realized on earth by the ending of witchcraft. But it is important to

120 The problem of evil

note that witch-cleansing movements are not the same as
millennial movements properly so-called. Witch-cleansing
movements, though they spread from one community to the next,
spread as solutions offered to a given community and its members
for their particular troubles. They are not formulae for saving the
world in general, or the whole tribe. Their exponents go round
from village to village like a decontamination squad selling
techniques for de-fusing potentially explosive human material.
When they have made their rounds, the community sees itself
restored (albeit temporarily) to a state of tranquil harmony. For so
long as the spell lasts all suspected witches are rendered harmless
and the witchcraft is under control; livestock will fatten, crops will
flourish, children will grow strong and no one die till a ripe old
age. Symbolism of the bounded social group is very clear in the
witch-cleansing movement (Douglas, 1963; Richards, 1935;
Marwick, 1950). The perfection of the body and the completion of
life’s span are promised through the control of witchcraft, which is
the only perceived threat to the unity of the group. The witch-
cleansing movement staves off schism and shores up the weak
internal organization of the group. But eventually a child sickens,
crops fail and strife breaks out again. The cult is said to have lost
its force.
    Although the witch-cleansing movement carries a millennial
possibility in its promise to end evil and suffering, it differs
radically from the true millennial movement. It is focused on the
problems of small local groups, whereas millennialism has a
message for the world. But like the millennial movement, the
witch-cleansing movement comes and goes and leaves the
community as it was, still prone to witch beliefs, still awaiting a
new, more effective movement which will kill off or immobilize
witches for ever. Neither can succeed in separating the social
structure permanently from its appropriate cosmology.
    The witch-fearing cosmology goes with a closely bounded unit.
When association is free and escape from unwanted ties easy, the
question of evil does not take this particular form. Witch-
dominated cosmologies are rare among nomadic hunters and
herders.
    Pastoralists who neighbour the Nuer, the Dinka, believe in
witchcraft as a possibility. They are able to indicate the physical
abnormalities which betray a witch, but they very rarely accuse
of witchcraft (Lienhardt, 1951). Navaho sheepherders in
Arizona, of whom we wrote in the first chapter, believe in

                                          The problem of evil 121

witchcraft. ‘Out of a Navaho group of 500 members, nineteen
living individuals have been accused (in gossip—not publicly) of
witchcraft. Ten additional individuals who have been dead from
ten to thirty years have been so accused. In the last thirty years
there have been six public accusations—“trials”—and two
“witches” have been killed’ (Kluckhohn, 1944:58). It took
Kluckhohn years of work to obtain more than anecdotal
reference to witches ‘over the mountain’ or ‘across the
reservation’ but none the less it was an important concern of
these Navaho who spent most of the year in small family groups
pent up together but isolated from others. On the other hand,
those Navaho observed by Aberle later, who had suffered from
de-stocking and the cash economy and taken comfort in the
peyote cult, had lost interest in witchcraft (Aberle, 1966:203–4).
By and large witchcraft beliefs are likely to flourish in small
enclosed groups, where movement in and out is restricted, when
interaction is unavoidably close, and where roles are undefined
or so defined that they are impossible to perform. Strindberg
shrewdly describes a society of this kind in the home of his own
childhood. The society of urban Sweden in the 1850s was divided
into classes, or rather natural divisions according to trade and
occupation, which held each other in check:

  The child’s first impressions, as he remembered afterwards,
  were of fear and hunger. He was afraid of the dark, of
  spankings, of upsetting everybody. Afraid of falling, of hurting
  himself, of being in the way. He was afraid of being hit by his
  brothers, slapped by the maids, scolded by his grandmother,
  caned by his father, and birched by his mother…. Above the
  child loomed a hierarchy of authorities wielding various rights
  and powers, ranging from the seniority privileges of his brothers
  to the supreme tribunal of his father. And yet above his father
  was the ‘super’ who always threatened him with the landlord….
  But even above him was the general…. The child did not know
  what a king looked like, but he knew that the general went up
  to the King…. When his mother prayed to God in the evening,
  the child could form no distinct idea of Him, except that he
  must certainly be higher than the King.
                                         (Strindberg, 1967:18–19)

Here is a perfect description of a distant God to whom the child
automatically relates through the clearly felt layers of social

122 The problem of evil

hierarchy. He then describes the confusion and troubles which
beset the family—and the sense of crowding.

  Three rooms were occupied by the father and mother with their
  seven children and two servants. The furniture consisted mostly
  of tables and beds. Children on ironing boards and chairs,
  children in cradles and beds. The father had no room for
  himself, although he was at home most of the time…. The
  family was and still is a very imperfect institution. No one had
  time to bring up the children. The school took over where the
  maids left off. The family was really an institution for eating,
  washing and ironing, and a very uneconomical one at that.
  Nothing but cooking, shopping, running errands to the
  greengrocer and dairy. Washing, ironing, starching and
  scouring. Too many things for such a small number of persons
  to do at once…. The child heard only that he had duties, not
  that he had rights. Everyone else’s wishes were listened to; his
  were ignored. He could do nothing without doing something
  wrong, go nowhere without being in someone’s way, utter no
  word without disturbing someone. Finally he did not even dare
  move. The supreme duty and greatest virtue was to sit on a
  chair and be quiet.
                                                       (ibid.: 30–2)

This gives us an unbeatable account of roles being impossibly
defined so as to produce frustration and, in the long run,
ambiguity and confusion. Strindberg, as a sensitive child,

  was in perpetual anxiety lest he should do something wrong.
  But he was always on the alert for injustice, and by setting a
  high standard for himself, he carefully watched the failings of
  his brothers. When they went unpunished, he felt deeply
  wronged; when they were undeservedly rewarded, his sense of
  justice suffered. With the result that he was considered envious.
                                                       (ibid.: 32–3)

One older brother was his father’s favourite, the other his
mother’s. He was no one’s favourite. Then he goes on to describe
the frequent miscarriage of justice from which he suffered and
which, as it accumulated, type-cast him in the family as secretive,
jealous and cold. His whole description of the social setting and
the response of members of the group parallels situations which

                                           The problem of evil 123

give rise to witchcraft beliefs with uncanny exactness. And of
course it is August Strindberg, the child who was nobody’s
favourite, who is accused of an abnormal, defective personality.
   To live in this kind of society is to live crowded together with
one’s fellow humans in disorderly competition. Its members have
reason to lack confidence that justice will prevail. Not theirs the
motto about the mills of God grinding slowly but grinding
exceedingly small. In the life of pastoralists such as Dinka and
Nuer the great imponderables are hazards of climate and pasture;
fellow humans are fairly reliable. In this other kind of society the
hazards and frustrations are produced by fellow humans.
   This contrast is made very clearly by Godfrey Lienhardt (1962),
when he compares the Nuer and Dinka with another Nilotic
people, the Anuak. As he put it:

  The Anuak are basically agricultural and sedentary, living in
  many distinct, largely self-sufficient and often very crowded
  village communities, where they are in constant and intense
  individual contact. The Dinka-Nuer are first and foremost
  pastoral people necessarily transhumant, with regular dispersal
  and regrouping of members of local communities. In the nature
  of their occupation, the Dinka-Nuer individually live more
  solitary lives than the Anuak.
      The frequent dispersal of the Dinka-Nuer as compared with
  the concentration of the Anuak may be associated with a much
  greater interest shown by the Anuak in individuals and
  personalities. They have an extensive psychological vocabulary,
  and their village politics…are conducted through an interplay of
  character as well as of faction. Anuak are interested in people,
  Dinka-Nuer more interested in cattle. For the Anuak their lively
  interest is a practical necessity in the conduct of their village
  affairs with their frequent plots for the promotion of sectional
  and individual interests in the headmanship. The competitive
  system of rank and influence permits any ambitious individual a
  wider scope for political activity…an Anuak who feels himself
  slighted by a particular headman will eventually find those with
  whom to combine in an attempt to replace him or he can go and
  seek favour at a noble’s court. The Anuak have institutions based
  on favouritism and competitiveness for favour, which could not
  develop among the Nuer-Dinka, who have no individuals of rank
  whom it could be profitable to cultivate.
                                          (Lienhardt, 1962:74–85)

124 The problem of evil

We hardly need to fill in the cosmology of the Anuak. Whereas
Dinka-Nuer believe misfortune and death to be sent by spirit
powers which correspond to the social order, Anuak attribute
deaths to witches or to ghostly vengeance of dead people whom
their victims have somehow wronged in their life. Whereas the
Nuer-Dinka respond to sickness by sacrifice and prayer ‘the only
religious expert among the Anuak is the Ajuan, a person most
usually a woman whose main traditional tasks were to find
witches and deal with witchcraft and to try to remove ghostly
curses from its victim’ (ibid.: 85).
   The choices people make about how they deal with one another
are the real material which concerns the student of comparative
religion. This is the missing dimension which must be added to
psychoanalysis for its insights to illumine. Jung’s comments on the
Reformation, for instance, treat the impoverishment of symbols in
European culture as the result of a dialectic of the mind:

  The iconoclasm of the Reformation, however, quite literally
  made a breach in the bulwarks of the holy pictures and, ever
  since, one after another has crumbled away. They became
  dubious, for they collided with awakening reason…. The
  history of the development of Protestantism is one of chronic
  iconoclasm. One wall after another fell. And the work of
  destruction was not too difficult either, when once the authority
  of the church had been shattered. We all know how, in large
  things as in small, in general as well as in particular, piece after
  piece collapsed, and how the alarming impoverishment of
  symbolism that is now the condition of our life came about.
                                                  (Jung, 1940:60–1)

Do we know how it came about? In general we tend to accept
implicitly with Jung that the movement is as inevitable as the
growth of technology and even that it may have something to do
with increase of knowledge in general, ‘awakening reason’, a kind
of sad maturity and coming of age. As he says:

  That the gods die from time to time is due to man’s discovery
  that they do not mean anything, that they are good-for-nothings
  made by human hands, fashioned out of wood and stone. In
  reality, man has thus discovered only this: that up till then he
  had not achieved one thought concerning these images.
                                                             (ibid.)

                                           The problem of evil 125

He then goes on to defend the rejection of symbols as an
achievement in its own right, and to present it in terms of the good
inside, spirit, being preferable to worthless outside, of content
preferred above empty form.

  I am convinced that Protestant man has not in vain been
  despoiled of his own development, and made to go naked. This
  development has an interconsistency. Everything that presented
  him with no thought-content has been torn from him…. As the
  Christian vow of worldly poverty turned the senses from the
  good things of the world, so spiritual poverty seeks to renounce
  the false riches of the spirit.
                                                       (ibid.:63–4)

Jung would be the first to agree that the individual suffers no
absolute impoverishment of his private symbolic life. The theory
of archetypes and the analysis of dreams depends on this.
Therefore the beggary to which he refers is the loss of coherence in
publicly recognized symbolic structures. And this derives from the
coherence of the social structures and declines with decline in that
realm. Thus the glowing eulogy of spiritual poverty as a source of
strength and self-knowledge for the individual becomes very
dubious. First, because the scope of self-knowledge is reduced by
restricted experience of other selves. Second, the fullest self-
knowledge will take account of the social conditions which affect
the development of the self. Third, it cannot be assumed that the
point near zero, where pressures of grid and group are at a
minimum, presents the ideal conditions for the development of the
individual personality.

Chapter 8
Impersonal rules




Witch beliefs express a division within humanity: there are pure,
good men, and utterly vile men who do not belong with humanity at
all. We have argued that this dualism is fostered by the experience of
living in small, closed communities. We now turn to societies where
this experience is lacking. Where a man is expected to build his own
career by transacting with all and sundry as widely as possible to the
best of his ability, there is a very different view of human nature. In
these competitive conditions, men are not set on either side of a line
dividing humanity from inhumanity. They are seen to be unequally
endowed with talents, but the inequality is random, unpredictable
and unconnected with moral judgement.
    Two New Guinea tribes show slight variations on the theme.
First, the Garia of the Madang District on the north coast of New
Guinea. About 2,500 of them inhabited 35 square miles of the
Bagasin Area. They lived in small hamlets consisting of dwellings
grouped around a cult house. Notice how the ties of common
residence are not congruent with those of personal allegiance.
Lawrence says:

  The structure must be seen from the standpoint of the
  individual and the network of interpersonal relations
  surrounding him. A man divided the inhabitants of his locality
  into those who belonged to his security circle—those with
  whom he had safe relationships—and those who did not. His
  security circle included all bilateral kin up to fourth ascending
  generation together with other people with whom he had
  normally no blood ties but specific contractual relationships;
  trade partners; persons with whom he exchanged pigs; and
  affines to whom he gave or from whom he received periodic
  instalments of bride price…. The members of a man’s security

                                              Impersonal rules 127

  circle could be scattered anywhere in his locality because of the
  land tenure system…their garden plots were often in different
  quarters. To use them all they had regularly to move from one
  settlement to another. The members of a patrilineage were
  rarely localized and hamlets consisted of irregular clusters of
  people, some of whom were interrelated and others not…. A
  leader’s authority was always ill-defined: he could not represent
  a specific group, but only the often transient inhabitants of his
  own and possibly neighbouring hamlets. Dispersal of land
  holdings and consequent migration enabled his followers to
  divide their allegiance between him and his rivals, or withdraw
  it immediately if his prowess was eclipsed.
                                           (Lawrence, 1964:24–5)

The possibilities of shifting allegiances and the confusion of social
categories are beautifully described. The Garia traded with other
tribes having variant forms of the same general type of social
organization. As Lawrence says:

  Nobody in any of the societies outlined clearly understood its
  total structure. Rather, individuals conducted their affairs from
  a purely egocentric standpoint: in terms of constellations of
  person-to-person relationships, some denoting membership of a
  descent or local group, and others affinal, cognatic, exchange,
  or trade ties.
                                                         (ibid.: 28)

He goes on to describe the universe in which these people saw
themselves. It was an optimistic view. The world existed for man
and he had the right to enjoy it. It could be manipulated according
to straightforward rules, very comparable in their effectiveness to
the rules of reciprocity by which men compelled one another to
exchange goods and women. Religion was a technology for
overcoming risk. There was no moral feedback in the system, he
remarks with a tinge of surprise.

  Spiritual values such as purity and sin were non-existent. There
  was no idea of rewards in the next world in return for good
  works or of separate destinations for ‘good’ and ‘bad’. The
  affairs of the dead automatically regulated themselves. Even the
  initiatory taboos had no abstract ethical meaning.
                                                             (ibid.)

128 Impersonal rules

It was an extremely pragmatic religion.

  Spatially…the cosmos was conceived as a unified physical realm
  with virtually no supernatural attributes; in which human
  beings reacted not only with each other but also with deities,
  spirits and totems.
                                                      (ibid.: 31)

The characteristics of a successful man were personal preeminence
and secret ritual knowledge.

  The leaders were men who ‘really knew’ and who could direct
  the activities of others—those who did not ‘really know’—to
  the best advantage. It was popular conviction of this ability that
  enabled the particularly successful leader, who had an
  outstanding personality and had never been defeated by
  unforeseen circumstances, to lure followers away from his less
  fortunate rivals.
                                                              (ibid.)

Here we have a brief glimpse of the religion we would expect to
correspond to this kind of social structure. Power is located so as
to be theoretically available for all, but it needs a talented man to
go out and get it for himself according to known rules. The cosmos
is amoral. Attitudes to ritual are highly magical. It is an ego-
focused religion, as predictable in an ego-focused social structure.
   I now quote from another Melanesian study. The ‘Are’are,
about 5,000 of them, inhabit the south of the island of Malaita.
Daniel de Coppet points out that their residential rules and land
rights do not admit of description in terms usually adopted by
anthropologists. Over a vast mountainous area, funeral sites are
fixed points of reference around which individuals circulate. For
rights of cultivation are determined by genealogical links with
these sites. One can choose among all and any of one’s ancestors.
So each person has a wider range of choice. There is no word to
signify territorial boundary; there is no inside nor outside of a local
territory. Only genealogically defined positions relative to funeral
sites are significant. Men are not enclosed within any kinds of
bounded territories. Like many other Melanesians, the ’Are’are use
a form of shell or tooth money for expressing their relationships.
These are worked out in a complex pattern of trade and ritual
exchanges.

                                              Impersonal rules 129

  Each individual carries a certain number of elements which
  assure him power over the world and over his peers. First, his
  identity in the form of several names of which some come to
  him from his father’s side and some from his mother’s. From
  birth, he holds defined land rights, and will receive on the death
  of each of his parents a share in their property. He will also be
  able to use his technical knowledge and his knowledge of moral,
  ritual and social rules, and supernatural powers inherited or
  bought. Finally, he is responsible for all the credits and debts
  which he creates in the course of ceremonial exchanges.
                                                  (de Coppet, 1968)

From this common starting point the ‘Big Man’ imposes himself as
leader, without any special titles, without the framework of any
hierarchy or installation, no special rights to levy taxes or to
demand labour. It is a purely personal achievement. His power
rests only in the consent of his followers. But the more numerous
they are, the greater his prestige and power. Here is basically the
same social situation. A relation of reciprocity and
interdependence, a premise of initial equality and an actual pattern
of gross inequality. Everyone else depends on the Big Man for their
livelihood and security. He creates the political and ritual
framework in which ordinary men can work out their cycles,
patterns of reciprocal exchanges in grander and grander patterns.
His glory enhances the lustre of theirs. He creates large-scale local
alliances, controls violence, settles disputes. He does it all by
generosity, hard work, skilful manipulation of the rules of feast-
giving and compensation. The rules are immensely complex. For
him a ladder of achievement, for those whose only hope of
freedom is to give up the struggle for solvency and esteem, they are
an oppressive grid.
   Another good example of this kind of social system was given
by Oliver (1957) for the Siuai of Bougainville Island, in the
Solomons. Here again, a highly individualistic, competitive
society is lifted above a lowly level of achievement by the efforts
of individual Big Men. The leaders compete for followers, force
other men to extend themselves to their utmost capacity to
produce yams, pigs and all manner of standard luxuries for feasts
at which they challenge and discountenance their rivals. The
successful leader challenges the leader of the next club-house;
then, successful in his own district, he challenges the leader of
another district. Each success rebounds to the glory of his own

130 Impersonal rules

club-house. If he had not asserted himself, they would have
apathetically half-exploited their environment. There would have
been no excitement and no collaboration. During the period of
his prime, they reach a higher level of organization than they
would otherwise have been capable of. When he grows old there
is the natural fall-off of his following. Somewhere else some
other leader arises and the level of social organization rises there,
while it falls here. Everyone in this society knows that it is only
personal qualities which help a leader. Their cosmos expresses
this precisely by attributing to each man his own set of spiritual
lieutenants. The Big Man has the fiercest, biggest demons to
work for him (ibid.: 444–6). Gradually we build up the picture
from these cultures of a type of society very preoccupied with
success. The man who works well for himself benefits everyone
else. It is a system based on private enterprise, and highly
cultivated managerial skills. The cosmos is morally neutral and
basically optimistic. Anyone can reach out of the sky any
Excalibur magic sword he is big enough to wield. There is no
disapproval of men who use magic to further their own cause.
Where the ends are approved, the means are also approved. The
admired virtues are ambition, cunning and strength. Not all New
Guinea societies conform closely to this pattern. For example,
K.Burridge (1965) describes the Tangu of Northern Madang
District as also seeing their universe as amoral (p. 225), magical
(p. 246), unpredictable and capricious (pp. 239–40), but he
describes here much greater emphasis on sorcery fears. Meggitt
(1965) describes the Mae Enga of the Western Highlands as
dominated by their fears of ancestral ghosts. Both societies seem
to exhibit the features we would predict from the foregoing
argument: smaller and more closed groups for the sorcery-ridden
Tangu, and an ascribed patrilineal role-system with well-defined
local communities for the ancestor-fearing Mae Enga. But only a
close examination of the way grid and group are felt in tribes in a
single cultural area will throw light on these variations.
   I now take an example from Europe. In the typical cosmology
of the ego-focused social system power is an individual gift.
Supernatural power is attributed in such a way as to validate
individual success and explain individual failure. Thus among our
Teutonic forbears, luck was the dominant cosmological idea, as
destiny was among the ancient Greeks.
   Recall that the Teutons had a cognatic system of kinship in
which obligations of help were reckoned to radiate out from each

                                               Impersonal rules 131

individual in all lines of descent. Then read Grönbech’s account in
The Culture of the Teutons (1931):

  Whichever way we turn, we find the power of luck. It
  determines all progress. Where it fails, life sickens. It seems
  to be the strongest power, the vital principle indeed of the
  world.
                                                     (Vol. I: 127)

He goes on to describe the capricious and individual nature of this
power. Each family might claim a certain kind of luck, for sailing,
or fighting or fishing. King Eric Weatherhat had the wind in his
hat: he could change it by turning it about.

  Among chieftains, this gift of victory shows in its full splendour.
  We find men of military genius, who bring victory in their train
  wherever they go. All the Norwegian kings of Harald Fairhair’s
  race had this great gift of victory. And when Carl Hakon was
  able to fill for a time the place as a ruler over Norway, it was
  due not least to his luck in winning victories, in pursuing and
  killing. It kept the people on his side, for they held that no one
  could be like him in respect of this particular gift. A like tone is
  apparent in the opening of the story of Beowulf, about
  Hrothgar’s kingdom; unto him was given war-speed and battle
  honour, so that his kinsmen followed him until the younglings
  were waxen and gathered about him in their host…. ‘And when
  they saw their leader was fallen, they fled every man’—this
  sentence occurs again and again in the sagas, and its truth is
  confirmed again and again by history. If the great man’s war-
  luck failed, what could the lesser luck of lesser men avail?
                                                                (ibid.)

I am struck with how closely in many respects Professor Maurice
Freedman’s accounts of Chinese geomancy correspond to the
picture I have been building up of a cosmology appropriate to a
highly individualistic, competitive social system. In his presidential
address to the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1968 (published
1969), he describes the Feng-shui system, the geomancy of
buildings. A building modifies the landscape, and so disturbs a
complex balance of forces. The landscape is part of a system, any
change in the form of one element may be to the detriment of
others, so that the geomancer’s task is to divine the best relation

132 Impersonal rules

for his client, whether that be a village community as a whole or
any individual member of it. The landscape suggests certain
symbols, such as dragons, writing brushes.

  The sinking of a well or the cutting of a road is likely to sever a
  dragon’s artery or sinew (to take the commonest case) and
  release some terrible power of misfortune to issue in poverty,
  disease or childlessness. A road made to lead straight to my door
  is an arrow against which I shall be able to protect myself only
  with difficulty and perhaps at great expense…. The link between
  the general properties of a site and the fate of those who occupy it
  lies in the horoscope…the geomancer charged with the job of
  finding and using sites for particular clients is engaged, on his
  client’s behalf, in carving out their best possible future, in staking
  the best possible claim for them in a world of restricted
  opportunities. For happiness and prosperity are not limitless;
  they form a fixed fund from which each man must strive to draw
  the maximum for himself at the expense of others.
                                                     (Freedman, 1969)

Here is a fascinatingly complex variant of the cosmology of
competition. Whereas the New Guinea and Teutonic models deal
in unlimited opportunity, the Chinese one is restricted and
competition all the more keenly pursued. It is, moreover, adapted
to a literate and numerate society of scholars. But, these big
differences apart, it is also morally neutral, a manipulable system,
ego-focused as the others. I would expect its use to vary according
to the importance of ascribed status in different sectors of society.
Maurice Freedman gives an old myth of a geomancer who tried to
overthrow the Ming dynasty by ensuring that his own burial site
would place his son in the position of becoming Emperor. But the
son had to follow certain precise instructions and to wait a
prescribed number of days of mourning. His impatience led him to
cut the mourning time short by one day, and so all the well-laid
plans, which depended on exact timing, went awry. Thus a moral
and social limit on the powers of geomancy can be imported into
an otherwise amoral technology. I would also expect the whole
feeling of the art to change between periods of restriction to
periods of expansion, or between sectors of society which sense
themselves to be expanding or shut in. In the expanding social
system Feng-shui should be surely an optimistic art, but the
geomancer should find his clientele falling off. In the restricted

                                               Impersonal rules 133

system his business would thrive on the fears, well-grounded, of
his clients. There would be more tendency to consult, more
readiness to alter graves and buildings, less happy-go-lucky, do-it-
yourself assurance about the generally propitious elements in the
landscape. Our own industrial consultants find within limits that
economic stringency is good for their class of business.
   We have no difficulty in finding models for the competitive
cosmology in the industrial world. If we look for men who see the
world as a morally neutral, technical system which is lying there for
themselves to exploit with their own special gifts, in which they
place great confidence, we find them in any of our great industrial
magnates. I select Lord Thomson of Fleet, whose biography is so
engagingly frank and detailed on all the relevant points (Braddon,
1965). The wide range of his geographical movements between his
childhood home in Toronto and his present London head office
suggests a parallel with the possibilities of free movement within the
New Guinea societies I have described. The increasing geographical
scale of his responsibilities ranks him, on the same standards, as a
very Big Man indeed. His obsession with making money, then his
obsession with gaining a peerage—it is all very recognizably like the
New Guinea ambition to enjoy power, dependants and prestige.
From a clerical post in the Colonial Cordage Company, to
proprietor of 140 newspapers, here is someone who has never
submitted to the pressure of group boundaries, local or other. His
responsibility is to himself and his own immediate family. When
challenged by victims of his enterprise as to the morality of his
action, closing down or amalgamating failing businesses, he would
be always ready with ‘Someone has to foot the wages bill’. What
was good for him was also best for the majority, and for the
growing number of his dependants.
   First, I would like to show by quotations why he should be
classed as someone free from group constraints. His career is
marked by close partnerships, but, of those he started out with,
very few survived to share his final triumph. Family apart, his
personal relationships are largely mechanized; the majority of his
contacts are fleeting and impersonal.

  From 1953 to 1957 his diaries reveal a profusion of entries that
  read ‘Dinner jacket, speak 20 minutes’—a profusion which is
  matched only by the scarcity of his private or informal
  engagements.
                                            (Braddon:1965:265)

134 Impersonal rules

At receptions, night after night,

  He would shed the hat and the black loose-swinging overcoat,
  and talk and grin amongst the throng. Yet seem always solitary:
  with—rather than of—a group.
                                                     (ibid.: 265)
This is a man who sends Christmas cards every year to everyone he
ever knew (p. 276) and whose secretary brings him a weekly set of
birthday greetings to sign for dispatch to a long list of names. He
has thrust his way up through a series of statuses, his eye
unashamedly on the top grades which stood as challenges.

  I want to find out if I’m as good as I think I am…. What I want
  more than anything in the world is a Knighthood.
                                                       (ibid.: 169)

    On the subject of his peerage he confessed: ‘This title has
  always been an even greater ambition than owning a hundred
  newspapers because it seemed such an unreasonable one—a
  hundred million-to-one-chance.’
                                                   (ibid.: 311)

Clearly the more unreasonable the ambition, the more attractive it
seems. With a longer life-span he might have tried for Shah of
Persia. Very interested in rank, enjoying being called Roy by all his
employees, but anxious to be correct in observing the social rules:

    ‘Say, Roy,…is there anyone here who’s just plain mister?’
    ‘Only you’n me,’ Thomson told him happily. He was going
  through a period when the mere presence of aristocracy made
  him feel happy—and tonight, at this private dinner party, he
  had landed one duke, five earls and a veritable mob of knights.
                                                     (ibid.: 207)

      Within these circles he protected himself by ensuring that he
   was well-briefed. (‘Say, how do I address this guy? Is it My Lord
   or My Lord Bishop?’)
                                                          (ibid.: 273)
   The existence of a set of formal relationships and ranks
provides for him a framework on which to develop his ego-centred
field of activity. His social universe is to be manipulated by energy
and scrupulous observance of rules.

                                              Impersonal rules 135

  Asked what might happen to the man who did not make a 10%
  profit on money he had borrowed at 5%, Thomson’s reply was
  simple. The bank had no right to lend to anyone so half-witted.
                                                     (ibid.: 185)

And, right from the start, we see him always poring over his
balance-sheets. Like the game of snakes and ladders, the
balancesheets represent rules which send him to the winning post
and his rivals to the starting point. His dynamism and attitudes to
time and work are characteristic:

  At his first board meeting he opened proceedings punctually at
  10 a.m. and at 2.30 p.m. was still hard at it. ‘Doesn’t this fellow
  have any sense of time?’ a hungry director asked Chapman
  irritably. ‘Not when there’s work to be done,’ Chapman told
  him. Between them, Chapman and Thomson made clear that
  budgeting and rationalizing were to be imposed on the well-
  established chaos of the Scotsman’s finances.
                                                         (ibid.: 171)

We also see the pragmatic approach to morality: it pays to be
honest is a solemn principle (pp. 236, 273). He is, by admission,
not a religious man. Interviewed on television:

    ‘Are you a religious man?’
     ‘No, I’m afraid I am not.’
     ‘Do you have a nominal religion that you support?’
     ‘Yes, I’m a Protestant, loosely speaking. I would go to any
  Protestant church.’
     ‘You have a conventional belief in God?’
     ‘Quite so.’
     ‘Do you think it is possible for a man who has done as well
  out of the wicked world as you have to say that he lives the life
  of a Christian?’
     ‘I think in all respects,’ Thomson retorted uncompromisingly.
  ‘Yes! I believe implicitly in the Golden Rule. “Do unto others as
  you would have them do unto you.”’
                                                     (ibid.: 275–6)

It is pleasing to think of Lord Thomson in the guise of a New
Guinea hero: the feasts, the balance-sheets, the dynamism, it all
makes the same sense, whether newspapers are bought with

136 Impersonal rules

money, or pigs with shells. Oliver gives these glimpses of a genial
Siuai leader:

  A clever man like So?i makes plans for pig-collecting years in
  advance. Orim said of him: ‘Other men sit in the clubhouse and
  chew betel nut, talking of nothing. Not so with So?i. His heart
  is full of pigs and shell money; giving this and receiving that;
  enlarging his following, emphasizing his potu (renown) and
  dividing his anurara’ (shell-cash). And after a great feast, to
  make a success of which his followers have slaved for weeks
  and are now lying round exhausted, he gives them no rest. Yet
  early next morning the wooden gongs boomed out again and
  they seemed louder than ever, probably because the noise was so
  unexpected. A few sleepy natives strolled in the direction of the
  club house and heard So?i storm out: ‘Hiding in your homes
  again, copulating night and day while there’s work to be done!
  Why, if it were left up to you, you would spend the rest of your
  lives smelling yesterday’s pigs. But I tell you, yesterday’s feast
  was nothing. The next one will be really big. Sihan, I want you
  to arrange with Konu for his largest pig; and you, Maimoi, go
  to Mokakaru and find a pig for Uremu; and…etc.’
                                                  (Oliver, 1949:25)

So the work of organizing credit and partnerships for the next
takeover feast never stops. Whenever a newspaper is bought there
is a feast in Thomson’s diary and plenty of smaller, preparatory
feasts. One could justly account all the rest of his activities as
preparations for more and more splendid feasts. The strict
relevance of the New Guinea parallel is plain enough.
   Among the cosmologies of success we should recognize
different kinds of control exerted over the individual’s behaviour.
Chinese geomancy for example, itself a technique free of moral
consideration, is part of a complex system in which moral controls
are fully represented in the idea of Heaven. The Teuton’s idea of
personal success was moderated by the close relation between luck
and honour. But it is possible for personal success to be celebrated
without recognizing any other constraints than those written into
the rules of the game. In industrial society a limited moral basis for
transactions is supplied by the recognition that financial probity
and creditworthiness are necessary for success. In New Guinea a
leader’s dependence on his followers creates a sensitive feedback
system. Everyone who transacts with others subscribes to the

                                              Impersonal rules 137

respect for reciprocity, and feels as sensitive to shame as to glory.
These moral restraints are generated in the competition itself.
Though they inform the concept of the upright man, the honest
broker, they do nothing further to relate the individual to any final
purposes of the community as such.
   Here we seem to have a type of social system without a
collective conscience. Lowie (1925) did well to point to its
existence, adducing the rank individualism of Crow religion as a
type which Durkheim’s approach could not accommodate. This
is the very type of society which Durkheim thought could not
exist in primitive economic conditions: low level of economic
interdependence combined with highly competitive
individualism, and a religion of private guardian spirits for each
man. In this system, whether among the American Indians or in
New Guinea or here amongst ourselves, each person is
committed to it by the lure of outstanding success (or even just
moderate success) for himself.
   If we turn to consider how a social group can weld the symbols
of self and society into a coherent whole, it appears that the ego-
focused grid system does nothing comparable for the concept of
self. Questions about the identity and value of the self are hardly
soluble except by manifestations of success. And the system of
strong grid is such that only the few can achieve success. For these
few it is possible to find that the rules are so many ropes and
ladders for a giddy emancipation. For the majority of others it may
never be clear that the path is blocked for themselves: one day
their luck or demons may become more effective. But there must
always be some who discover that they are born to lose all their
lives, to serve for a pittance, to admire glittering prizes which can
never come within their grasp. Who are the bad sorcerers so much
disapproved by respectable New Guinea society, the stranglers
with red eyes and long nails whose hearts are said to be consumed
with jealousy? The good men use sorcery all the time as part of the
approved technology of success. So the disapproved sorcerers must
be the failures, the drop-outs, casualties of the system. What their
world view is, what they think of the way the rules are worked,
how they view the system would be the most valuable information
of all for our comparison. How do they succeed in protecting their
image of their inner selves from degradation and disgust? It is
possible that they come to believe in their own moral inadequacy
and take their own bitterness and jealousy as proof of the
soundness of accusations levelled against them. Or are these the

138 Impersonal rules

men waiting to be delivered by a new cargo cult? The ethnography
of the world seen from the eyes of the accused sorcerer has not
been recorded as yet.
   Curiously enough, the successful leaders, having spiralled free
of personal constraints, emerge into a rarified atmosphere which
has something in common with the world view of the people most
heavily subject to controlling pressure in the same society. Their
ephemeral social contacts and imperviousness to personal
pressures enable them to see the cosmos as a rational order not
dominated by people but by manipulable objects. These objects are
the impersonal rules which govern their transactions. Their world
is not controlled by independent ghosts and witches, or evil men.
There is no sin: only stupidity. Human nature is divided between
the foolish and the wise, between ‘those who know’, and the
others. They feel no need for symbolic action other than triumphal
feasts for symbolizing the control of society by the self. Hence, a
certain blindness to any symbolic representations of the self being
controlled by society which mysteriously transcends it and vests it
with greater significance. For them it is a rational world whose
laws are perfectly intelligible and unmysterious. And it is, on the
whole, a satisfactory world, for those successful leaders.
   In New Guinea, this social structure, an ego-focused grid, and
this cosmology, are the permanent, on-going back-drop to
recurring cargo cults. The term ‘cargo’ represents European
wealth, clothes, food and trade goods. The essence of these cults is
that some mythical hero will reveal to the people secret rituals for
obtaining cargo. Periodically, at the say-so of a prophet, they drop
their hoes, destroy their property, perform rituals and go out to the
wharf or airfield to await the delivery of the cargo. Cargo cults
have caused great turmoil and administrative concern in
Melanesia; mobs are controlled with violence, leaders jailed. Yet
they are only driven underground and recur again and again.
There is now a considerable literature on these cults. Inevitably,
since cargo is a word and an idea derived from European
occupation, the cults have been analysed as colonial
manifestations, the result of contact with a foreign culture
(Lawrence, 1964; Worsley, 1957; Thrupp, 1962:17). But it seems
very possible that similar movements have occurred earlier, though
at less regular intervals.
   The modern cargo cult is very like other millennial
movements. It discards existing rituals and looks for a radical
new rite which will usher in a golden era. But it has one

                                             Impersonal rules 139

distinctive and crucial mark. Most millennial movements reject
the material values of society and seek to transform it into
something quite other. But the cargo cult explicitly accepts the
current material values, these especially, and seeks to provide for
its followers a means of achieving them. The difference
corresponds to two distinctive attitudes to poverty in
contemporary Christian religion. On the one hand is the Sermon
on the Mount, blessing poverty and warning against riches, on
the other is the vow to abolish poverty and achieve affluence for
all. Its drastic contemporary form may well be an adaptation to a
particularly prolonged and acute contemporary crisis of an
ancient ritual of moral regeneration. The present crisis is caused
by the coastal Melanesians finding themselves in relation with
rich foreigners with whom they cannot transact because they
have nothing to offer in exchange. They are therefore unable to
enter into reciprocal relations with the Europeans. They find
themselves denied the basic human rights of social intercourse,
and denied it by people with whom they would particularly like
to transact. This sense of being excluded, disregarded, of being
made to feel of no value is a regular experience in the system of
strong grid. For continually as one man rises to eminence he
reduces his former partners to insignificance, refuses to trade
with them or to feast with them as equals, and sets his sights on
other more lucrative relationships. Lawrence very convincingly
describes the cargo cult as an attempt to adopt traditional ritual
techniques to the European situation. In this everyday magic a
Garia man sought to make other people ‘think on’ him. To get
someone to ‘think on’ oneself is to get them to co-operate. Social
oblivion is the great risk. This idiom of forcing other people by
ritual to ‘think on’ one is a telling way of expressing the anxiety
not to be neglected and disparaged in a system where only some
can succeed and where the rest are bound to experience
disparagement and, with it, material and social loss.

  The content of these social relationships can be described as the
  exchange of equivalent goods and services. A purely nominal
  relation had little value. What counted was that each party to a
  relationship should be forced to ‘think on’…the other by the
  fulfilment of specific obligations—as in kinship and exchange
  commitments—which demanded an automatic and equal return
  at the risk of losing personal reputation and mutual
  advantage…where there was no exchange of goods and

140 Impersonal rules

  services, there could be no sense of relationship, mutual
  obligation and value, but only suspicion, hostility and risk of
  warfare.
                                        (Lawrence, 1964:29–30)

Cargo, then, is not wanted for its own sake, but for the new
relationships it will permit, when Papuan can exchange with
European on fair and equal terms. The cargo cult is to be seen as
a specially potent rite which dissolves all existing commitments
and relationships for the sake of establishing a new, more
profitable set of links. Not surprisingly, in view of what we have
seen about the tendency to reproduce a social situation in bodily
symbolism, shaking, frenzy and sexual promiscuity accompany
many cargo cult rituals. The people want to wipe out the old
system, with its inferior forms of wealth, and to make a new
beginning. I find it hard to believe that very similar movements
of moral regeneration have not been endemic in Melanesia long
before the invention of the idea of cargo. The means by which the
cults spread from one locality to the next by way of regularly
instituted payments suggest a well-known system. Kenelm
Burridge suggests that the Tangu had resorted to cults of renewal
before the advent of Europeans (1960:25). My own hypothesis is
that a society so strongly centred on a structure of ego-focused
grid is liable to recurrent breakdown from its inherent moral
weakness. It cannot continually sustain the commitment of all its
members to an egalitarian principle that favours a minority. It
has no way of symbolizing or activating the collective conscience.
One would anticipate an ego-focused grid system to swing
between the glorification of successful leaders and the
celebration of the right of the masses to enjoy success. Thus the
cargo cult and its prototypes would be cults of revolt against the
way the social structure seems to be working, but not of
revolution against the traditional structure itself.
   Many are struck with the parallel between student revolt and
violent millennialism. Compensation theory gives as the cause
insecurity or deprivation. But my own hypothesis points to a lack
of adequate structuring in the university population. It could well
be that academics, in a given department, could feel hemmed in
together in competitive disorder and show themselves prone to
diagnose in terms of the witch hunt. And it could well be that the
students themselves experience grid without group. Each, with an
individual time-table controlling every hour of his day, moves from

                                                Impersonal rules 141

impersonal lecture halls to isolated lodging; the groups he joins are
fragmentary and short-term. The organization to which he is
subject seems to prevent him from realizing his aspirations instead
of securing them for him. He experiences society as an alien,
sinister body, a machine which represses life. His categories of
pollution and purity, of matter and mind, flesh and spirit are
drawn up on the age-old pattern. Hence the brutal confrontation:
his teachers live in one universe, they cherish boundaries and smell
conspiracy against sacred forms; he lives in another universe in
which no particular form is sacred; form as such is distinct from
content and inferior to it; he opposes classification as the
expression of empty form, the very emblem of evil. While I am
writing this the University of Illinois is investigating the
destruction of its library catalogues and deploring an apparently
mindless attack on learning. But the destruction of categories of
any kind is a symbolic act which replicates social life over-
structured by grid, the experience which has always driven people
to value unstructured personal experiences and to place their faith
in a catastrophic event which will sweep away all existing forms of
structure.
   To sum up: the four social types we have identified by grid and
group have four distinctive cosmological types. First, for high
classification, where grid and group are strong, the universe is just.
Pain and suffering are either the proper punishments of individual
misdeeds or accounted by transcendental book-keeping so that the
effects of one man’s virtue are chalked up for the common good
and his faults are likewise charged to the community. It is a
complex regulative cosmos.
   Second, for the social type I have called small group, the
universe is divided between warring forces of good and evil.
Leadership is precarious in such groups, roles ambiguous and
undefined. The group boundary is the main definer of rights:
people are classed either as members or strangers. Magical danger
is associated with the idea of boundary. Evil is a foreign danger
introduced by foreign agents in disguise. Group members accuse
deviants in their midst of allowing the outside evil to infiltrate. The
accusations lead to fission of the group. The cosmos is endangered
by the vile, irrational behaviour of human agents of evil. It is
preoccupied with rituals of cleansing, expulsion of spies or witches
and the redrawing of boundaries. Many people believe in
witchcraft without being preoccupied by fear of their neighbour’s
aggression. I would not include their witch-beliefs, which tend to

142 Impersonal rules

be marginal elements of their cosmology, in this category. Witch-
dominated cosmologies vary in a range which corresponds to the
structuring of internal roles and the openness and permeability of
the external boundary.
   There are clear interpretations in what I have said on witchcraft
for the history of religious movements. There could be practical
implications too. If a new witch-hunting terror were to appear,
such as that led by Joe McCarthy in America in the 1950s, it
would not be enough to denounce him and his followers. Richard
Rovere (1959) says: ‘McCarthy drew into his following most of
the zanies and zombies and compulsive haters who had followed
earlier and lesser demagogues.’ But when witch fantasies occur on
a national scale, they are not merely the product of the crazed and
weak-minded and of cynical manipulators, as Arthur Miller’s The
Crucible implied. Witch hunting develops in a specifiable social
niche: important factions, externally distinct, internally
competitive. It could be important to adjust the conditions in
which political power is sought and wielded if witch-hunting
movements are to be controlled.
   It is unlikely that a diplomat who nears the top of his profession
is spiralling freely in the buccaneering environment of the Big
Men. Nor can one assume that the conditions of the Foreign
Service reproduce necessarily the ordered and predictable system
of strong grid and group where precedence is bolstered by piety. It
could be that the confusion and uncertainty of the small Central
African village or of a sect such as the Plymouth Brethren in their
early days afford a closer model. If this were so, the conspiracy
theory of politics would fog the atmosphere of summit meetings
with suspicion and experts would urge their leaders to outcast evil-
doers and draw tight on the boundaries of the good society.
   Now for the third social type, the competitive leaders who
dominate the system of strong grid. I have just described their
success cosmology, with its syncretism and scope for private
magic. For lack of recognizing this as a distinctive type, the early
anthropologists may have completely misinterpreted their
findings. The Dobu Islanders have long provided the stereotype of
a witch-dominated cosmology. Among these far-ranging traders
much respected and even feared by distant partners, each man has
his own collection of formulae for success and competes
passionately against his neighbours and kinsmen. It would be
worth re-analysing Fortune’s (1932) great pioneering study with a
view to deciding whether the Dobuans are to stay classed as

                                              Impersonal rules 143

nervous inward-turning paranoiacs obsessed by fear of persecution
or as bold tycoons who protect their magical recipes as so many
industrial secrets for use against their rivals.
   Fourth, the other end of the strong grid where the mass of the
people are subject to impersonal rules—this type would be likely
to go through successive phases according to the ups and downs
of the Big Men’s fortunes and according to whether their
allegiance is strongly sought or disregarded. At one phase in his
career, a rising leader will be attracting dependants, promising
them rewards, flattering followers with his concern. This phase
for the society constituted around him is like a rising trend in the
level of employment. Unfilled vacancies create optimism and the
followers will not find the rules of the system meaningless for
their own lives since its rewards come within their reach. When
riding at the top of his career the leader may have taken up most
of the potential market of followers. The system is suspended
thus as long as his drive and ability holds it together. There could
be a phase something like over-employment in which the
followers gain such a sense of worth that they dare to play the
market, look round for a better leader, switch allegiance. Even
so, there will always be some who find themselves in all phases
holding the wrong end of the stick. No one says that this is a
comfortable or dignified system in which to grow old. At some
stage inevitably the leader himself ages and loses his grip. The
machinery clogs. The best of the followers are seduced away by
stronger leaders. In the middle of the rival empires, a mass of
people are uncertain of their future. Others are too deeply
embedded in one man’s fortunes and have done too well by him
to be acceptable in another camp. The confusion and crisis would
be like the experience of Europe as the Renaissance princedoms
collapsed (Trevor-Roper, 1967). And in this condition, as in
Europe, the idea of the millennium, ever present in the
consciousness from infancy, begins to come forward. The very
structure of strong grid predisposes the rank and file to
millennial movements. This society, spanning the whole diagram
from right to left, creates at the left side the extremely pragmatic,
unspeculative and materialist belief system and on the right a
tendency, alternately repressed and breaking out, to
millennialism.
   Having set out these four social systems and their distinctive
beliefs, I have to pay attention to a factor which has already
confused the simplicity of the design, the factor I have called

144 Impersonal rules

sparsity. Ultimately the trends on the right side of the diagram are
aspects of human control, either by classification, or by direct
personal pressures, or both, and they are accentuated by tightening
of the control. It follows then that if there are very few people on
the ground and they meet each other infrequently and irregularly
and their possibilities of evading one another’s company are good,
there is a lessening of control. So sparsity all round is likely to have
the same effect as a shift towards zero. To the right the cosmos is
more punishing, to the left more benign. Decreasing human
contact tends to give the same result. Hence any form of dropping
out which is a dropping away from other people’s categories and
pressures gives a rosier tinge to the world. The deeper the retreat,
the greater the faith in the inner purity and goodness of the human
heart; the need for ritual forms is weakened, also the sense of sin.
