Chapter 3
The Bog Irish




The Bog Irishman in his faithfulness to the rule of Friday
abstinence is undeniably like the primitive ritualist. Magical
rules have always an expressive function. Whatever other
functions they perform, disciplinary, anxiety-reducing, or
sanctioning of moral codes, they have first and foremost a
symbolic function. The official symbolism of Friday abstinence
was originally personal mortification, a small weekly
celebration of the annual celebration of Good Friday. Thus it
pointed directly to Calvary and Redemption. It could hardly
have a more central load of meaning for Christian worship. In
reporting that it has become empty and meaningless, what is
meant is that its symbols are no longer seen to point in that
direction or anywhere in particular.
   Yet symbols which are tenaciously adhered to can hardly be
dismissed as altogether meaningless. They must mean something.
We can start by asking what are the most poignant experiences of
the Irish girl who has left her home to do service in London hotels
or hospitals, or of the Irish man who arrives looking for big, quick
money in construction work. If they have friends and kin to find
them lodgings, their sense of exile is softened by a sense of
continuity, the Irish newspapers sold outside Church after Mass,
the weekly dances in the parish hall. There is a sense of belonging.
If no such welcome is arranged, they are likely to see on the doors
of lodging houses: ‘No Irish, no coloured’. Then the sense of exile
and of boundary is sharper. This is what the rule of Friday
abstinence can signify. No empty symbol, it means allegiance to a
humble home in Ireland and to a glorious tradition in Rome. These
allegiances are something to be proud of in the humiliations of the
unskilled labourer’s lot. At its lowest it means what haggis and the
pipes mean to Scots abroad on Burns’ night. At its most it means

38 The Bog Irish

what abstaining from pork meant to the venerable Eleazar as
narrated in 2 Maccabees.
   The Catholic hierarchy in England today is under pressure to
underestimate the expressive function of ritual. Catholics are
exhorted to invent individual acts of almsgiving as a more
meaningful celebration of Friday. But why Friday? Why
celebrate at all? Why not be good and generous all the time? As
soon as symbolic action is denied value in its own right, the
flood-gates of confusion are opened. Symbols are the only
means of communication. They are the only means of
expressing value; the main instruments of thought, the only
regulators of experience. For any communication to take place,
the symbols must be structured. For communication about
religion to take place, the structure of the symbols must be able
to express something relevant to the social order. If a people
takes a symbol that originally meant one thing, and twists it to
mean something else, and energetically holds on to that
subverted symbol, its meanings for their personal life must be
very profound. Who would dare to despise the cult of Friday
abstinence who has not himself endured the life of the Irish
labourer in London?
   Friday abstinence must be interpreted under the same rubric as
Jewish abstinence from pork. In Purity and Danger I argued that
the dietary rules in Leviticus xi afford a shorthand summary of the
categories of Israelite culture. The pig is not singled out for special
abhorrence more than the camel and the rock badger. The dietary
rules, I suggested, should be taken as a whole and related to the
totality of symbolic structures organizing the universe. In this way
the abominations are seen as anomalies within a particular logical
scheme (Douglas, 1966: ch. 3). Since writing this, useful criticisms
have been made. Dr S.Strizower (1966) has pointed out that I
overlooked the importance of restrictive dietary rules in setting the
Israelites apart from other people and in expressing their sense of
apartness. Ralph Bulmer has argued that if my interpretation of
the whole set of rules as carrying a condensed classification of the
universe be conceded, it still does not explain the particular
abhorrence of the flesh of the pig (1967:21). Why should this one
animal be singled out to be the chief representative and vanguard
of all other abominations? The answer to both would seem to be in
the two books of Maccabees. This is the narrative of how Judas
Maccabeus led the people of Israel against their conquerors, the
Greeks.

                                                 The Bog Irish 39

     1 Maccabees i, 21. And after Antiochus had ravaged Egypt in
  the 143rd year, he returned and sent up against Israel…23. And
  he proudly entered into the sanctuary and took away the golden
  altar…26…. and there was great mourning in Israel …29. And
  all the house of Jacob was covered with confusion. 32–8. He
  attacked and destroyed the city, threw down the walls, took the
  women captive…and built the city of David with a great and
  strong wall and with strong towers and made it a fortress for
  them…39…and defiled the holy place…40. And the inhabitants
  of Jerusalem fled away by reason of them, and the city was
  made a habitation of strangers; and she became a stranger to
  her own seed and her children forsook her.

Not content with political and military victory, King Antiochus
ordered all the nations under him to leave their own laws.

    45…And many of Israel consented to his service: and they
  sacrificed to idols and profaned the Sabbath.

Throughout the subsequent narrative of the overthrow of the
invading armies and the purification of the temple three themes are
treated as co-ordinate symbols:

  defilement of the temple
  defilement of the body
  breach of the law.

The temple is finally rebuilt and rededicated, with high walls
and strong towers round about (1 Maccabees iv, 60); a
necessary military precaution. But the leaders of Israel also
took as drastic precautions against the defilement of their
bodies (2 Maccabees v, 27):

     But Judas Maccabeus…had withdrawn himself into a desert
  place, and there lived among the wild beasts in the mountains
  with his company: and they continued feeding on herbs, that
  they might not be partakers of the pollution.

Those who circumcised or observed the Sabbath in secret were
brutally killed by the conquerors. It is clear here that any of the
rules, dietary and other, and any among the dietary rules, were
equally held sacred and their breach equally held polluting. But

40 The Bog Irish

Antiochus ordered swine to be immolated on their altars (1
Maccabees i, 50) and took eating of swine’s flesh as a symbol of
submission (2 Maccabees vi). So it was he, by this action, who
forced into prominence the rule concerning pork as the critical
symbol of group allegiance. Circumcision, after all, is a private
matter concerning the private parts of a person. Observing the
Sabbath, also, does not necessarily impinge on other people’s lives
or at least only periodically. Refusal of commensality is a more
total rejection of social intercourse. If the heathen eat pork, the
pork-avoiding Israelite cannot join their meals. In a greatly
lessened degree, if a Catholic is invited out to dine on Friday, his
ritual allegiance may be an affront to his hosts, only because it is
not one they share. Thus pork avoidance and Friday abstinence
gain significance as symbols of allegiance simply by their lack of
meaning for other cultures. The splendid passage describing
Eleazar’s trial explains how eating pork came to be abhorred as an
act of betrayal as well as of defilement.

     2 Maccabees vi, 18. Eleazar, one of the chief of the scribes, a
  man advanced in years and of a comely countenance, was
  pressed to open his mouth to eat swine’s flesh. 19. But he,
  choosing rather a most glorious death than a hateful life, went
  forward voluntarily to the torment…21. But they that stood by,
  being moved with wicked pity, for the old friendship they had
  with the man, taking him aside, desired that flesh might be
  brought which it was lawful for him to eat, that he might make
  as if he had eaten, as the king had commanded, of the flesh of
  the sacrifice. 22. That by so doing he might be delivered from
  death. And for the sake of their old friendship with the man
  they did him this courtesy. 23. But he began to consider the
  dignity of his age and his ancient years and the inbred honour of
  his grey head and his good life and conversation from a child:
  and he answered without delay, according to the ordinances of
  the holy law made by God, saying that he would rather be sent
  into the other world. 24. For it doth not become our age, said
  he, to dissemble: whereby many young persons might think that
  Eleazar, at the age of fourscore and ten years, was gone over to
  the life of the heathens: 25. And so, they, through my
  dissimulation and for a little time of a corruptible life should be
  deceived, and hereby I should bring a stain and a curse upon my
  old age…27. Wherefore, by departing manfully out of this life, I
  shall shew myself worthy of my old age. 28. And I shall leave an

                                                    The Bog Irish 41

  example of fortitude to young men, if with a ready mind and
  constancy I suffer an honourable death, for the most venerable
  and most holy laws. And having spoken thus, he was forthwith
  carried to execution.

Notice that it is not one law, but all the laws for which he dies, and
that the execrable character of pig itself as an animal or form of
food does not enter into the discussion. Nor does it enter into the
next chapter in which seven brothers and their mother were
apprehended and compelled by the King to eat swine’s flesh. In all
the gruesome description of how their tongues were cut out, their
heads scalped and their bodies fried alive in huge frying pans to the
merriment of pagan onlookers, nothing is said whatever about the
abominable character of pig. But after such historic acts of
heroism, no wonder the avoidance of pork became a specially
powerful symbol of allegiance for the Jewish people and so
attracted the later hellenizing exegesis that looked to the moral
attributes of the pig. Whereas this symbol in origin owed its
meaning only to its place in a total pattern of symbols, for which it
came to stand, as a result of its prominence in persecution. We
belong to a generation whose perception of symbols is blurred
except in familiar social contexts. So it may be easier to
sympathize with the irritation of the cook in King Solomon’s
Mines at the unswerving obedience of the Zulu, Umslopogas, to
his dietary laws. If two symbolic systems are confronted, they
begin to form, even by their opposition, a single whole. In this
totality each half may be represented to the other by a single
element which is made to jump out of context to perform this role.
Other people select among our external symbols of allegiance
those which offend or amuse them most. So Shifra Strizower is
right. Further account of the apartness of the people of Israel and
of their beleaguered history would have given more meaning to
their dietary laws. The story of Maccabees teaches that the
Israelites took the purity of the temple and the purity of the human
body to represent adherence to all the details of the law and so a
total turning of each person in his own body and of the whole
nation in the temple and in the law towards God. For when they
cleansed and rebuilt the temple (1 Maccabees iv, 42) ‘he chose
priests without blemish whose will was set upon the law of God’.
The high walls they built around Mount Sion and the strong guard
they set upon their mouths were the symbolic ramparts of their
commitment to their religion.

42 The Bog Irish

   Perhaps it is true that Friday abstinence became a wall behind
which the Catholics in England retired too smugly. But it was the
only ritual which brought Christian symbols down into the kitchen
and larder and on to the dinner table in the manner of Jewish rules
of impurity. To take away one symbol that meant something is no
guarantee that the spirit of charity will flow in its place. It might
have been safer to build upon that small symbolic wall in the hope
that eventually it could come to surround Mount Sion. But we
have seen that those who are responsible for ecclesiastical
decisions are only too likely to have been made, by the manner of
their education, insensitive to non-verbal signals and dull to their
meaning. This is central to the difficulties of Christianity today. It
is as if the liturgical signal boxes were manned by colour-blind
signalmen.
   I will now give some space to the question of Friday abstinence
to demonstrate that there is indeed a clear movement in educated
Catholic circles in England, a move from symbolic to ethical
action. But it is a less important example than my second one, the
change in the attitude to the Eucharist. Friday abstinence was
never anything more than a disciplinary rule. No special
sacramental efficacy was officially imputed to the act, negatively
or positively, whereas the doctrine of the Eucharist is as magically
sacramental as any tribal religion.
   Some anthropologists reading this may be as confused as to the
nature of Friday abstinence from meat as the most benighted of
the faithful. They may even share Goodenough’s belief that the
focus of the ritual is not on penitence, but on a positive celebration
of fish as against meat. He has argued ingeniously (1956:50ff.)
that fish, which Catholic housewives queue for on Fridays, is a
powerful condensed symbol of Christ and that herein lies the true
explanation of the observance. However there is no rule about
eating fish; only a rule about abstaining from flesh meat. In
February 1966 Pope Paul VI issued a decree on fasting and
abstinence. He expounded the tradition of penitence, ‘a religious
and personal act which has as its aim love and surrender to God’.
Citing numerous Old Testament instances of the fast as pleasing to
God, and citing Christ’s example in the New Testament, he
describes acts of penance as ‘participating in a special way in the
infinite expiation of Christ…. Thus the task of bearing in his body
and soul the death of our Lord affects the whole life of the
baptized person at every instant and in every aspect.’ He goes on
to condemn any form of penitence which is ‘purely external’.

                                                   The Bog Irish 43

Recognizing that very different conditions prevail in rich and poor
countries, he proceeds to revise the Church laws on fasting and
abstinence, concentrating them in the season of Lent and
otherwise requiring abstinence only on Fridays. These minimal
penitential days and seasons are intended to ‘unite the faithful in a
common celebration of penitence’. At the same time he invites the
Bishops to substitute wholly or in part other penitential exercises
(Paenitemine, 17 February 1966).
   An article in L’Osservatore Romano (20 February 1966) by W.
Bertrams (a canon lawyer at the Gregorian University) comments
on the decree and gives it a little extra twist away from ritual and
towards ethics and social justice:

  Indeed, the faithful must be taught that the Christian spirit of
  penitence demands also the voluntary privation of things which
  are not absolutely necessary, so that the money which would
  have been spent in obtaining them may be used instead for
  works of charity.

A year later the English hierarchy takes up the invitation to
adapt the penitential legislation to local conditions. A letter is
issued from the Archbishop’s house, Westminster (21 July
1967) seeking the views of all clergy and laity. The letter shows
no sense of history or of the value of symbolic action; moreover
it shows a strange ambivalence to the subject in hand. It starts
firmly by announcing that there is no question of simply
abolishing Friday abstinence, but of asking whether an
obligatory rule of Friday abstinence achieves its purpose today.
What the purpose is, the letter treats very summarily, and goes
on with:

  Some consider that the obligation should be abolished and
  instead Fridays should be marked by prayer, voluntary
  abstinence or other penitential exercises. It is argued that
  obligatory Friday abstinence is not necessarily a penance and
  that modern conditions make it difficult to observe it. For the
  most part, professional and working people have their midday
  meal away from home, often in a canteen. Again, social events
  are often fixed for a Friday. And whilst an alternative dish is
  often available, it is questioned whether it is advisable in our
  mixed society for a Catholic to appear singular in this matter.
  Non-Catholics know and accept that we do not eat meat on

44 The Bog Irish

  Fridays but often they do not understand why we do not, and in
  consequence regard us as odd.

Echoes of the Reformed Synagogue! Arguing that it is not a
hardship to avoid meat, and then adding that there is too much
hardship for those eating away from home and social
embarrassment for those dining out, this seems an inadequate
statement to use for consulting the mind of the faithful. When the
consultation was concluded, the following was issued from
Westminster:

  As respect for the moral law decreases, the need for self-denial
  grows greater. Many Catholics have begun to ask themselves if
  going without meat on Friday is penance enough. Some find it
  no penance at all. Meanwhile, in Asia, Africa and South
  America many Catholics have to go without meat not only on
  Friday but every day. Millions are starving or at least underfed.
     The Bishops have therefore decided that the best way of
  carrying out our Lord’s command to do penance is for each of
  us to choose our own way of self-denial each Friday…
                                             (31 December 1967)

Thus was the old ritual abolished. In the old days the child
admonished to eat his tapioca for the sake of starving millions
would be puzzled to know how this obedience would benefit the
hungry. The problem of how to benefit the hungry by not
abstaining from meat does not arise. The Catholic Institute for
International Relations quickly produced a collecting box marked
‘Friday fund. One meal a day’, and sent it around with an appeal:
‘Friday Apathy or Friday Action: Will you put a little away for
others each Friday? Boxes from CIIR’. Now there is no cause for
others to ‘regard us as odd’. Friday no longer rings the great
cosmic symbols of expiation and atonement: it is not symbolic at
all, but a practical day for the organization of charity. Now the
English Catholics are like everyone else.
   Interestingly, the American bishops did much better (from the
ritualist, anthropological point of view) than the English in their
handling of the same opportunity. There is no down-grading of the
symbolic function, more sense of history, more recognition of the
need for symbolic solidarity with the past and present body of the
Church. Their pastoral statement begins with admirable
directness:

                                                    The Bog Irish 45

  Christ died for us on Friday. Gratefully remembering this,
  Catholic peoples from time immemorial have set apart Friday
  for special penitential observance by which they gladly suffer
  with Christ, that they may one day be glorified with him. This is
  the heart of the tradition of abstinence from meat on Fridays.
  …Changing circumstances, including economic, dietary and
  social elements, have made some of our people feel that the
  renunciation of the eating of meat is not always and for
  everyone the most effective means of practising penance.

Their sense of liturgical continuity comes out in a list of
recommendations which start by saying ‘Friday should be in each
week something of what Lent is in the entire year. For this reason
we urge all to prepare for that weekly Easter by freely making of
every Friday a day of mortification in prayerful remembrance of
the passion of Jesus Christ.’ Thus the liturgical year is
encapsulated in the liturgical week. They go on specially to
commend voluntary abstinence from flesh meat as a means of
observing Friday:

  (a) We shall thus freely and out of love of Christ crucified show
  our solidarity with the generation of believers to whom this
  practice frequently became, especially in time of persecution
  and of great poverty, no mean evidence of fidelity to Christ and
  His Church.
  (b) We shall thus also remind ourselves that as Christians,
  although immersed in the world and sharing its life, we must
  preserve a saving and necessary difference from the spirit of the
  world. Our deliberate personal abstinence from meat, more
  especially because no longer required by law, will be an
  outward sign of inward spiritual values that we cherish.
      (Pastoral statement of Conference of Catholic Bishops on
  Penitential Observance, Washington, D.C., 18 November 1966)

It is easy to recognize in the banality of the English hierarchy’s
attitude the working of the Bernstein effect, surely not among all
the Bishops, but certainly among their advisors. It is puzzling to
know how the American hierarchy came to take a different view of
symbolic action. It is unlikely that their secretariats are not equally
staffed by new men, reared in personal homes and masters of the
elaborated code. It may be that the greater sociological awareness
of the Americans makes the difference. For the sociologist of

46 The Bog Irish

religion would be superficial indeed if he were not aware of the
power of symbols to order experience. No one would deny value in
its own right to the symbolic function who takes time and
perspective to reflect objectively on the issue. Those who belittle it
are responding shortsightedly to their own subjective situation in
home and in society.
   I seem to have taken a very heavy hammer to crack a small
liturgical nut. Friday abstinence is a disciplinary rule, a mere
detail. Although this book is not intended primarily for
anthropologists, I have written about this theme at length for
their interest. For anthropologists often exhort one another to
turn to contemporary religions for their material and particularly
to Christianity. Dietary restrictions are deep in their traditional
subject matter and I wish to show that modern examples are as
susceptible to the modes of analysis we employ as are primitive
ones. Why not? The only difficulty hitherto has been the lack of a
frame of analysis for comparing ourselves and tribal societies
along the series from high magicality to low. In the 1960s
Bernstein’s work on ourselves and Turnbull’s work on the
pygmies enable this framework to be set up. The discussion can
begin.
   Now I turn to the other example of how messages about
symbols issue from the Vatican only to be decoded here as
messages about ethics. The celebration of the Eucharist is central
to Catholic dogma. If this gets bowdlerized, then the tendency
which Herberg describes for denominations to become social
compartments empty of distinguishing doctrines will have worked
its way right through the modern world. Historic, sacramental
Catholicism will have faded out.
   To introduce the problem, I take Pope Paul’s Encyclical letter
Mysterium Fidei (1965). Here he refers, as his reasons for pastoral
concern and anxiety, to current disquieting views on the Eucharist.
Among these, he notes that it is not

  right to be so preoccupied with considering the nature of the
  sacramental sign that the impression is created that the
  symbolism—and no one denies its existence in the most holy
  Eucharist—expresses and exhausts the whole meaning of
  Christ’s presence in this sacrament. Nor is it right to treat of the
  mystery of transubstantiation without mentioning the
  marvellous change of the whole of the bread’s substance into
  Christ’s body and the whole of the wine’s substance into his

                                                   The Bog Irish 47

  blood, of which the Council of Trent speaks, and thereby to
  make these changes consist of nothing but a ‘trans-signification’
  or a ‘trans-finalization’, to use these terms. Nor, finally, is it
  right to put forward and to give expression in practice to the
  view which maintains that Christ the Lord is no longer present
  in the consecrated hosts which are left over when the sacrifice of
  the Mass is over.
                                               (Paul VI, 1965:7–8)

Here is a doctrine as uncompromising as any West African
fetishist’s that the deity is located in a specific object, place and
time and under control of a specific formula. To make the deity
inhabit a material object, whether shrine, mask, juju or piece of
bread, is ritualism at its starkest. The condensation of symbols in
the Eucharist is staggering in its range and depth. The white circle
of bread encompasses symbolically the cosmos, the whole history
of the Church and more, since it goes from the bread offering of
Melchisidech, to Calvary and the Mass. It unites the body of each
worshipper to the body of the faithful. In this compass it expresses
themes of atonement, nourishment and renewal. Such intensive
condensation is hard for anyone to stomach who has had a highly
verbal, personal upbringing. But this is not all. Symbolizing does
not exhaust the meaning of the Eucharist. Its full meaning involves
magical or sacramental efficacy. If it were just a matter of
expressing all these themes, symbolizing and commemorating,
much less blood and ink would have been spilt at the Reformation.
The crux of the doctrine is that a real, invisible transformation has
taken place at the priest’s saying of the sacred words and that the
eating of the consecrated host has saving efficacy for those who
take it and for others. It is based on a fundamental assumption
about the human role in religion. It assumes that humans can take
an active part in the work of redemption, both to save themselves
and others, through using the sacraments as channels of grace—
sacraments are not only signs, but essentially different from other
signs, being instruments. This touches on the belief in opus
operation, the efficacious rite, whose very possibility was denied
by Protestant reformers. In Catholic thought there is an economy
of mediation through the Church, through the sacraments and
especially through the Mass as the Eucharistic counterpart of
Calvary. Dr Francis Clark goes to the root of this question in his
admirable survey, The Eucharistic Sacrifice and the Reformation,
from which I quote now. Protestantism rejected mediation equally

48 The Bog Irish

through the instrument of things as through the instrument of
persons. For Luther, and above all later teachers,

  there was no place for any created reality to mediate to men
  God’s salutary action, nor for the active sharing by men in the
  dispensation of grace. His cardinal objection against the
  traditional doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass was that it was
  a ‘work’, something which belonged to that whole order of
  instrumental mediation and of man’s active participation in the
  economy of grace that was anathema to the Reformer…. The
  celebration of the Lord’s supper was a promise and a testament
  of that pardon to the individual communicant; it could not ‘do’
  anything for others nor could it ‘offer’ anything to God…. In
  the Babylonian Captivity he insisted:

     God does not deal, nor has he ever dealt with man in any
  other way than by the word of his promise. So too we can never
  have dealings with God in any other way than by faith in that
  word of promise.
                                 (Werke, Weimar, VI: 516, 521)

  This radical opposition of inner ‘word’ to sacramental ‘work’ is
  the theological key to the understanding of the storm of
  hostility to the Mass which swept across Europe.
                                              (Clark 1960:106–7)

He goes on to quote Dr J.Lortz, saying:

  It was a direct attack on the traditional sacramental concept, that
  is, against the objectivity of the divine life operative in the
  Church’s liturgy. Here the resolution of Christianity into a
  religion of inner feeling was achieved at the very point at which
  its victory would have the greatest impact. Here was assailed the
  secret centre of the Church’s unity…. For the Catholic Church, it
  was not the attack on the Papacy that was the most fateful event
  which has happened in the Reformation, but the emptying out
  from her Mysteries of the objective source of power.
            (Die Reformation im Deutschland, 2nd edn, I, p. 229,
                                                  quoted ibid.: 107)

No wonder that Pope Paul is worried by contemporary theologians
who whittle down the Eucharist’s meaning and who by ambiguous

                                                     The Bog Irish 49

terms such as ‘trans-signification’ and ‘trans-finalization’ threaten to
reduce it from an efficacious source of power to a mere symbol. Two
years after his Encyclical, the Sacred Congregation of rites issued an
Instruction on the Eucharistic Mystery (1967). Here it propounds
four different modes of Christ’s presence, recognizes them all, but
exalts above all the presence in the Eucharist. Christ is present in the
body of the faithful gathered in his name. He is present in his Word.
He is present in the person of the minister, ‘and above all under the
species of the Eucharist. For in this sacrament Christ is present in a
unique way, whole and entire, God and man, substantially and
permanently.’ This is the message that is sent out. By the time it
reaches the faithful it is emasculated more than somewhat. For the
writers of popular catechisms and prayer books have evidently been
through Bernstein’s personal upbringing. They prefer to expatiate
verbally on their inner feelings, at a cosier, more intimate level. My
comparison with primitive religions would probably disgust them.
Great magical acts of worship, which make humble and noble
analogs congruent in ever more inclusive patterns, leave them cold.
So we find that the New Catechism, in the chapter on the Eucharist,
gives to the doctrine of the real presence only as much attention as it
gives to the commemorative aspect of the rite. It says rather more
about the Eucharist as a thanksgiving, about the togetherness of the
people who celebrate it, and the symbol of the common meal and
nourishment. The doctrine of the transformation of the bread into
divine body is played down and the other modes of Christ’s presence
(particularly the ‘Word’) played up (Higher Catechetical Institute,
Nijmegen, 1967:332–47). They can’t take it, the Dutch bishops who
issued this catechism and the open-minded English teachers who
seize on it as a watered-down expression of a faith that has
practically lost meaning for them. The mystery of the Eucharist is
too dazzlingly magical for their impoverished symbolic perception.
Like the pygmies (I say it again, since they seem often to pride
themselves on having reached some high peak of intellectual
development) they cannot conceive of the deity as located in any one
thing or place.
   But, if my interpretation of Bernstein’s research is right, vast
unlettered flocks scattered over the globe do not share this
disability. By reason of their positional upbringing and social
experience they are capable of responding profoundly to symbols
of orientation and boundary. I will show in Chapter 5 that they
already use their own bodies as symbolic analogs for thinking
about society and the universe. They respond less strongly to

50 The Bog Irish

verbal exposition. They probably feel less need for personal
justification by good works. What is too strong meat for their
pastors is their natural food. ‘The hungry sheep look up and are
not fed.’ There is no question now that the flocks are neglected
by jolly, hunting parsons bent on pleasure. But there seems to be
a case for arguing that serious, well-intending pastors
misunderstand the need for a nourishing food, because it does
not seem to suit their own digestive systems. But this would still
not be pitching the case against them strongly enough. There is
no person whose life does not need to unfold in a coherent
symbolic system. The less organized the way of life, the less
articulated the symbolic system may be. But social responsibility
is no substitute for symbolic forms and indeed depends upon
them. When ritualism is openly despised the philanthropic
impulse is in danger of defeating itself. For it is an illusion to
suppose that there can be organization without symbolic
expression. It is the old prophetic dream of instant, unmediated
communication. Telepathic understanding is good for brief
flashes of insight. But to create an order in which young and old,
human and animal, lion and lamb can understand each other
direct, is a millennial vision. Those who despise ritual, even at its
most magical, are cherishing in the name of reason a very
irrational concept of communication.
   I have dared to compare Christian ritual with magic and
primitive notions of taboo. I am aware that the argument will
hardly serve to recommend ritual to the non-ritualist. Yet his
contempt both for magic and rules of impurity is based on
ignorance. The drawing of symbolic lines and boundaries is a way
of bringing order into experience. Such non-verbal symbols are
capable of creating a structure of meanings in which individuals can
relate to one another and realize their own ultimate purposes.
Learning and perception itself depend on classifying and
distinguishing. Symbolic boundaries are necessary even for the
private organizing of experience. But public rituals which perform
this function are also necessary to the organizing of society. One
could suppose that industrial society, which is organized by
economic exchange, does not need to be activated by symbols
necessary to create solidarity in small communities. This might
account in straight Durkheimian terms for the withering away of
interest in ritualism today. It does not at all account for the lack of
ritual in some tribal societies. But if the argument works for
ourselves there is a dreary conclusion for those who turn to good

                                                     The Bog Irish 51

works to solve problems about their own identity. They are liable to
be frustrated on every count. First, it would seem that they must
give their good causes over to the bureaucratic energies of industrial
organization, or they will have no effect. Second, although any
office or clinic is capable of being organized by positional symbolic
patterns, since these people are incapable of appreciating the vale of
symbolic behaviour they will never be able to arrange their personal
relations so that a structure of non-verbal symbols can emerge. We
all know the seminar chairman who takes a different seat every
week so that no symbols of authority or precedence can invest the
spatial relations of the group. Some of us may even know the small
publisher’s office where the office boy has to be consulted now and
again about the quality of a book and where the manager makes the
tea because it is felt that solidarity requires continuous confusion of
roles. An anthropologist told me that his inhibition against
exercising authority was so strong that his first fieldwork had to be
made extremely difficult by his refusal to employ a servant. These
very people, who prefer unstructured intimacy in their social
relations, defeat their wish for communication without words. For
only a ritual structure makes possible a wordless channel of
communication that is not entirely incoherent.
   The confirmed anti-ritualist mistrusts external expression. He
values a man’s inner convictions. Spontaneous speech that flows
straight from the heart, unpremeditated, irregular in form, even
somewhat incoherent, is good because it bears witness to the
speaker’s real intentions. Either he is not a man who uses speech as
a façade to conceal his thought, or on this occasion there was no
time for polishing it up: incoherence is taken for a sign of
authenticity. In the same way, leaders in a Pentecostal church
compete to demonstrate their holiness by ‘talking with tongues’,
that is by pouring out a stream of incoherent speech. The more
unintelligible, the more evident to the congregation that the gift of
tongues is present. At the same time the anti-ritualist suspects
speech that comes in standard units, polished with constant use;
this is the hard coin of social intercourse, not to be trusted as
expressing the speaker’s true mind.
   In rejecting ritual forms of speech it is the ‘external’ aspect which
is disvalued. Probably all movements of religious renewal have had
in common the rejection of external forms. In Europe Manicheeism,
Protestantism and now the revolt of the New Left, historically they
all affirm the value of the follower’s inside and of the insides of all
his fellow members, together with the badness of everything

52 The Bog Irish

external to the movement. Always we find bodily symbolism
applied, from the values placed on internal and external parts of the
body, on reality and appearance, content and form, spontaneity and
established institutions. David Martin has recently written of
contemporary religious existentialists in these terms:

  Radicals tend to reject ‘religion’ by comparison with the gospel.
  Religion is a complex of institutions built around an idol ‘God’
  who is falsely regarded as an existence alongside other
  existences. The proper use for the word ‘God’ is to refer to the
  qualitative aspect of all existence. Religion obscures Him in
  forms and formulae, ritualizes him sacramentally when in truth,
  He can only be known experimentally and experientially. Only
  thus can He become true for the individual person. Bound up
  with false religion is morality, understood as a body of rules
  rather than as genuine personal responses to the uniquely
  situational character of moral choice…The existentialist
  movement expresses an ageless tension between the experiential
  and the formalized, the objective and the personal, the
  individual and the institutional.
                                           (Martin, 1965:180–81)

Why the elect always carry in themselves a confidence in their own
inner purity and their capacity for direct, unmediated access to
God is something best accounted for by the psychoanalysts. But it
is a paradox of this study that those who most readily despise
ritual should not be exempt from the longing for non-verbal
communication. Melanie Klein, writing of the close contact
between the unconscious of the mother and of the child, said:

  However gratifying it is in later life to express thoughts and
  feelings to a congenial person, there remains an unsatisfied
  longing for an understanding without words—ultimately for the
  earliest relation with the mother.
                                                (Klein, 1963:100)

And again, of an infant’s attitude to the breast of his mother:

  I would not assume that the breast is to him merely a physical
  object. The whole of his instinctual desires and his unconscious
  fantasies imbue the breast with qualities going far beyond the
  actual nourishment it affords.

                                                    The Bog Irish 53

     Footnote: All this is felt by the infant in much more primitive
  ways than language can express. When these pre-verbal
  emotions and phantasies are revived in the transference
  situation, they appear as ‘memories in feelings’, as I would call
  them, and are reconstructed and put into words with the help of
  the analyst.
                                                     (Klein, 1957:5)

If it is true that we are moved all our lives by longings for an ideal,
impossible harmony derived from memories of the initial union
with the mother in the womb, then it is understandable that we
should also idealize non-verbal communication. Alas for the child
from the personal home who longs for non-verbal forms of
relationship but has only been equipped with words and a
contempt for ritual forms. By rejecting ritualized speech he rejects
his own faculty for pushing back the boundary between inside and
outside so as to incorporate in himself a patterned social world. At
the same time he thwarts his faculty for receiving immediate,
condensed messages given obliquely along non-verbal channels.

Chapter 4
Grid and group




It is illuminating to consider ritual as a restricted code. But more
problems arise in applying this insight than I am ready to handle.
Bernstein argues that the restricted code has many forms; any
structured group that is a group to the extent that its members
know one another very well, for example in cricket, science or
local government, will develop its special form of restricted code
which shortens the process of communication by condensing
units into pre-arranged coded forms. The code enables a given
pattern of values to be enforced and allows members to
internalize the structure of the group and its norms in the very
process of interaction. Much of the writings and conference
proceedings of anthropologists, or of every other body of
scholars, would have to be classed as ritualistic or restricted code
in so far as the citing of fieldwork, the reference to (often
impossible) procedures, the footnotes etc., are given as pre-coded
items of social interaction. Allegiances, patronage, clientship,
challenge of hierarchy, assertion of hierarchy and so on, these are
being obliquely and silently expressed along the explicit verbal
channels. If this is so, then Bernstein, by working within the
broad framework of a dichotomy of restricted and elaborated
codes, is at the stage of Durkheim when he distinguished
mechanical and organic solidarity, or of Maine, distinguishing
societies governed by contract or by status. As he himself says,
the distinction between restricted and elaborated codes must be
relative within a given culture or within the speech forms of a
given group. Thus the question of whether there are primitive
cultures in which all speech is in the restricted code is
meaningless, since it ascribes absolute value to the definition.
Bernstein would suppose that in any social group there are some
areas of social life more responsible for policy decisions and more

                                                Grid and group 55

exposed to the need to communicate with outsiders. Therefore in
any tribal system he would expect to find some people who had
been forced to develop a more elaborated code in which universal
principles can be made explicit and meanings detached from a
purely local context. I am not convinced of this myself. If the
situations requiring policy decisions were only part of a repetitive
cycle it would be possible to discuss them fully in terms of
preorganized units of speech. Only the need for innovation in
policy would call forth the effort to use an elaborated speech
code. This question poses intriguing problems of method for the
ethnolinguists. But it is not central to my theme. More pertinent
is how to use the idea of the restricted code to interpret different
degrees of ritualization.
   If ritual is taken to be a form of restricted code, and if the
condition for a restricted code to emerge is that the members of a
group should know one another so well that they share a
common backcloth of assumptions which never need to be made
explicit, then tribes may well vary on this basis. One can well
suppose that the pygmies might never get to know each other
very well. Their social intercourse might be likened in intensity
and structure to that of the provisioners of a French seaside
resort who move down from Paris in June to open their shops
and hotels for the tourist season. They know each other quite
well, there is a field of common assumptions to be sure, but it by
no means exhausts their interests. They could be expected to
develop a restricted code with reference to their local concerns.
So we can also suppose that the pygmies and the Persian nomads
who join their respective hunting or pastoral camps for a season
and may not necessarily be together for next year, use one
restricted code for those of their common concerns to which an
enduring social structure corresponds, and variant forms of
restricted code for communication within their own families.
This analogy from speech codes suggests good reason for the
poverty of ritual forms in the two cases. It fits the Durkheimian
premise that society and God can be equated: to the extent that
society is confused in its structure of relations, to that extent is
the idea of God poor and unstable in content.
   The restricted code is used economically to convey
information and to sustain a particular social form. It is a system
of control as well as a system of communication. Similarly ritual
creates solidarity and religious ideas have their punitive
implications. We would expect this function to be less and less

56 Grid and group

important the less is effective social coherence valued. We cannot
therefore be surprised that the pygmies have not developed the
punitive aspects of religion. They are content with a minimal
level of organization. Here again a range of comparison is
suggested which would predict something about the presence and
absence of ritualism in human societies. We need some way of
comparing the value set on organization and social control. It is
all very well to illustrate my theme by references to exotic tribes.
At some point the problem of comparison must be brought under
control. Not only is it dubious practice to compare preachers
with pygmies. It is just as dubious to compare hunters with
pastoralists, or hunters in Africa with hunters in Australia. I will
try to control this problem of cultural variation by staying as
much as possible within a given culture. But first, the task is to
adapt Bernstein’s diagram of systems of family control. It was
designed to reflect the increasing influence of the division of
labour in industrial society on two variables, speech and
techniques of control. Our first step, then, is to eliminate the
effect of the division of labour by choosing slightly different
variables. Since Bernstein’s work relates to the structure of
London families it is concerned with personal face-to-face
relations. Consequently it needs very little adaptation for tribal
society. His two lines measure different aspects of what he calls
positional behaviour in families. Where the division of labour has
least effect, the speech code and the control system support a
differentiated structure of relations in the family. If we want to
follow his work closely we must first do violence to the subtlety
of his thought. In Bernstein’s diagram (p. 30), speech codes
respond to the pressure exerted from the decision-making areas
at the centre-top of industrial society for more and more verbal
articulateness. Family control systems respond to the same set of
pressures demanding children capable of mastering intellectual
abstractions concerning human behaviour. His quadrant was
designed to show how the two responses are not produced in the
same combination in all sectors of industrial society. The area of
maximum structuring of social relations in the family is on the
left: the area of maximal openness and freedom from structuring
is on the right. In the bottom right the individual emerges as free
as possible from a system of socially structured controls. His
diagram illustrates some effects of a single pressure to move from
the positional to the personal control system. The vertical line
expresses changes in the use of speech. It shows the possibility of

                                                  Grid and group 57

speech being used as an intensifier of positional control, with this
possibility diminishing as the central pressure to be intellectually,
verbally and symbolically free of the local positional structure
develops. The people who have been freed most completely from
structured personal relations are among those most involved in
the complexity of modern industrial structure. Inevitably this
model has to be dismantled to be adapted to tribal society. In
what follows we are working with only a very crude and limping
parody of his idea.
   The task can be simplified if we recall what it is essentially that
he is doing. He is deriving cosmology from control systems, or
rather showing how cosmology is a part of the social bond,
according to the following principles. First, any control system,
since it has to be made reasonable (be justified, validated or
legitimated as Weber put it), must appeal to ultimate principles
about the nature of man and of the cosmos. This applies even at
the family level. Second, that the control system interacts with the
media of control (speech, ritual). Third, that certain consistencies
hold between the coding of the medium and the character of the
control system. That they should match is a long-run prediction. In
a short run the transition process might obscure the match. Our
task starts therefore by identifying the control aspects of the
cosmology.
   Somewhere far away from the level of the English family and
home, some machinery is grinding out a set of social pressures.
Naked power is decently clothed and made legitimate. Its demand
to be made legitimate reaches into the most intimate recesses, even
into the dealings the English mother has with her own child. She
learns to assert her control in certain ways and to justify her
authority by reference to general principles. The child is thus
indoctrinated into the assumptions of his society. His curiosity is
checked or roused, his expectations for himself are set in the most
hidden way—not by the overt doctrines handed out, but by what is
left implicit. Bernstein exposes two implicit world views carried in
our styles of speech. He finds them generated in two
distinguishable systems of control. To match his exercise, we
should look to systems of control and the hidden assumptions
which validate them. We are not ready to deal with how the media
vary. This is for the next chapter. So, leaving aside speech codes, at
this stage I would need to produce a comparison of control
systems which will contrast an entirely personal form of
relationships, unstructured by fixed principles, with a system

58 Grid and group

equivalent to his positional family. We can concentrate, it seems,
upon the interaction of individuals within two social dimensions.
One is order, classification, the symbolic system. The other is
pressure, the experience of having no option but to consent to the
overwhelming demands of other people. Consider order first.
Social relations demand that categories be clarified and
orientations given. Order is the basic requirement for
communication. It could conceivably be possible to compare
symbolic systems according to the clarity of definition given to the
categories used. There is a hint of such a programme in the first
pages of Primitive Classification.

  For us, in fact, to classify things is to arrange them in groups
  which are distinct from each other and are separated by clearly
  determined lines of demarcation…. At the bottom of our
  conception of class there is the idea of a circumscription with
  fixed and definite outlines. Now one could almost say that this
  conception of classification does not go back before Aristotle.
  …Not only has our present notion of classification a history, but
  this history itself implies a considerable pre-history. It would be
  impossible to exaggerate, in fact, the state of indistinction from
  which the human mind developed. Even today a considerable
  part of our popular literature, our myths, and our religions is
  based on a fundamental confusion of all images and ideas. They
  are not separated from each other, as it were, with any clarity.
  …If we descend to the least evolved societies known, those which
  the Germans call by the rather vague term Naturvölker, we shall
  find an even more general mental confusion.
                                  (Durkheim and Mauss, 1903:5–6)

The authors go on to compare this weakness of definition to the
growth of consciousness in the individual from childhood to
adulthood: distinctions when they first appear are fragmentary
and unstable; only gradually does a steady circumscription of
elements of experience lead to classification. However this is not
the basis for a comparison of classification systems which I
propose to use here. I shall take it as axiomatic that the clarity of
bounding of different categories within the total system does not
vary, or that, if it does become fuzzy here and rigid there, this is
not a difference which I wish to take into account. I shall instead
try to compare the overall articulation of the categories which
constitute a world view. A classification system can be coherently

                                                     Grid and group 59

organized for a small part of experience, and for the rest it can
leave the discrete items jangling in disorder. Or it can be highly
coherent in the ordering it offers for the whole of experience, but
the individuals for whom it is available may enjoy access to
another competing and different system, equally coherent in itself,
from which they feel free to select segments here and there
eclectically, not worrying about the overall lack of coherence.
Then there will be conflicts, contradictions and uncoordinated
areas of classification for those people. In effect, loss of coherence
results in a narrowing of the total scope of the classification
system. We can therefore take the scope and coherent articulation
of a system of classification as one social dimension in which any
individual must find himself. I shall call it grid.
   As Durkheim himself has powerfully argued, any given
classification system is itself a product of social relations. Bernstein’s
example of the positional family above shows people putting
pressures on one another in terms of classifications. When the
pressures are strong and when they uphold a set of classifications,
then a process of mutual reinforcement is at work. Such a social
system is likely to remain stable, unless counter-pressures develop
from outside or unless new knowledge weakens the credibility of the
classifications. In either case, the social change will be wrought in
the other dimension, that of action or pressure. To draw the
dimension of grid vertically up from zero towards more and more
comprehensive articulations allows us to consider what absence of
classification would mean. The zero would represent a blank, total
confusion with no meaning whatever. Rulelessness could be anomy,
the suicide’s doubt. It could be the mystic’s moment of dissociation
when all classifications are in abeyance. It could also represent, as
the quotation from Primitive Classification suggested, the child’s
first undifferentiated awareness. To distinguish among these
possibilities a little, let us separate the publicly accepted
classification system from the private one. An increasingly coherent
but entirely private system of classification would point away from
communication with others, eventually to madness. This world of
private thought we draw downwards from zero.
   On the horizontal axis, draw pressure, increasing from zero to
the right. At zero, no demands are made on the individual. He is
free of pressure. This means he is alone. But another case would
have to be located on the vertical line. When pressures and
counter-pressures completely balance out, the point of indecision
would be recorded here. It is the moment before conversion and

60 Grid and group




Diagram 4 Grid and group



commitment. Towards the right he is increasingly under the bond
of other people. For reasons which will be clear later, I call the
tendency towards the maximum personal control the line of group.
A child’s life starts far along that line (since he is completely
controlled by others) and low on the line of grid: as he grows he
may be progressively freed from personal pressures and
progressively indoctrinated in the prevailing classification system.
If he is clever at internalizing the categories and their implications,
he can turn them to his own defence against personal tyranny. He
can even use them to tyrannize. To allow for this, we can extend
the horizontal line from zero to the left. On this side the individual
has escaped pressure from other people. He is exerting pressure on
them.
   Although the public grid of classifications is used by other
people to control the individual, he can evade it if ever the
insulation breaks down. The mutual reinforcing of grid and group
keep the system stable only if it is perfectly insulated. But perfect
insulation is rare and there is some scope for change. We have now
in hand a device which could consider social change as a dynamic
process. We can see the individual under strong pressure to accept
a system of classification which degrades him and commits him to
a life of servitude. We could assess the other options open to him,
and the relative weight of competing pressures. But this is not the
exercise I am attempting. Our problem is to find some relation
between cosmological ideas and characteristics of social relations.
I shall argue that several systems which spread in different patterns

                                                   Grid and group 61

across the diagram are liable to develop recognizable trends in the
way that the universe is constituted. The first task is to investigate
more closely the properties of the chart.
    Above the horizontal line is the area of public classification.
The social system will always be centred here. Close to the line
and below it lie the fringe elements, the marginal sectors of
society: the more to the right they are found, the weaker their
option not to be exploited by others to the left operating the
public system of classifications; towards the left and zero are the
voluntary outcastes, tramps, gipsies, rich eccentrics, or others
who retain their freedom, at a cost. This line across the page
separates the area of conformity from innovation. Given the way
we have defined the vertical dimension we are not suggesting that
anyone is dreaming up new conceptual systems from scratch.
What is private and innovatory is the way the common cultural
categories are articulated. Progress further down that line to
greater coherence of the private philosophy depends on an
accompanying isolation from social pressures. Beyond a certain
point of originality the thinker can give up any reasonable
expectation of his ideas being received. This follows from the
relation between grid and group above the horizontal line of
zero. The framework of institutional life and the distribution of
power is the result of a long-term adaptation between social
pressures and classification. The big push that changes
classification must be big enough to redistribute power as well.
To the far right the fringe area of private thought is socially null.
It is under more pressure than it can exert. Far to the left it is in
high public esteem: hordes of people to the far right would be
applauding each new impulse emanating from the far lower left.
It is worth pausing to consider how a person can be located in
that quadrant. A musician can innovate, a painter, inventors and
writers too. If his idea be ignored, he is still on the right. For most
of his long working life the Flemish painter James Ensor endured
that fate and revenged himself on the public that denied him
honour by cruel caricatures. If successful, though, the innovator
may see the public system of classification change in his own
lifetime. If he wants to stay original, he will have to keep
thinking of something new to surprise them with, or devise a
technique for maximizing the unexpected, as John Cage has done
for his music. To remain free of the public system of
classification, the person needs above all not to covet its rewards.
Every glance he cocks towards the prize-giving juries makes him

62 Grid and group

vulnerable to their criticisms and liable to be sucked into the
general grid. Thus, though it is difficult to stay there, it is
possible for people to pass in their lifetimes through different
points in the bottom left quadrant.
   The bottom right quadrant can be filled for infancy. Here is the
personal family in which the child is controlled by being made
sensitive to an inventory of his parent’s aches and pains: no public
system of classification is used to explain the universe and his
place in it, but (theoretically at least) he is taught to develop a
classificatory system of his own. However, publicly known
categories implicitly underline their behaviour and he is quick to
deduce them as he grows older. It is surely impossible for an adult
to accept heavy social pressure and yet to develop a privately
articulated philosophy. If he wishes to have intellectual privacy he
must inevitably achieve a solitary state, and so the tendency would
be for such a person to move across from right towards the vertical
line of no control.
   This leads us to considering further the relations between the
distribution of power and the coherence of public classifications. It
is axiomatic that a steady pattern of control is needed for a
coherent system of classification. The more distinguishable places
in the control system and the more these are co-ordinated into a
lasting hierarchy of responsibilities, the more the public
classification system differentiates its categories. So a society
spread across the diagram from the highest point mid-way
between public grid and group on the right and across to some
high point mid-way at the top left is a complex social system. Time
depth and corporate institutions are implied in that pattern.
Conversely, one political shake-up makes many classifications
irrelevant and drags down the coherence of the symbolic system;
the expectation of continuing change sets the level lower still. A
society that is spread across the diagram at a low level of
classification is likely to become one that is continually subject to
political upheaval and a changing profile for the distribution of
authority. This will be important for our theme.
   We should now examine the different ways these dimensions
organize our material. Some tribal systems will be spread mostly
through the top right-hand side of the diagram without showing
on the left. A classic instance of high classification which
anthropologists would recognize are the Tallensi of the Volta
Region of Ghana as described by Meyer Fortes in the colonial
period. Here the public system of rights and duties equips each

                                                 Grid and group 63

man with a full identity, prescribing for him what and when he
eats, how he grooms his hair, how he is buried or born. Most
Tallensi, probably all, are under pressure from the others. The
chiefs and priests are no exception. The person whose soul is in
revolt is regarded as abnormal and needing special ritual curing
(Fortes, 1959). In this society piety is the order of the day, piety
towards senior kinsmen and piety to the dead, even though the
ancestors are seen as aggressive punishers. The only enemy is the
rank outsider, bound by no ties of clanship. A few miserable old
women outlawed as witches are either hounded from village to
village or merely tolerated. Who knows their thoughts? If they are
totally mystified by the public grid which rejects them we could
locate them below the horizontal line, though far to the right
where options are weakest. I will argue later that a social system
characterized by high classification would display the same
cosmological bias. Strong grid and strong group will tend to a
routinized piety towards authority and its symbols; beliefs in a
punishing, moral universe, and a category of rejects.
   Any bureaucratic system which is sufficiently secure and
insulated from criticism will tend to think the same way. This is the
monastic life, or the military society. Most clearly it is the stable
tribal system discovered by anthropologists in Africa in the
colonial era just before and after the Second World War. It is no
accident that a functional analysis produced an equilibrium model
of primitive society at that time. For the colonial regime itself
provided the insulation and protection from the effects of war and
famine. It tended to freeze the native social systems into patterns
of reinforcement and stability.
   However the effect was not the same in Central Africa as it was
in Ghana. Here the long nineteenth-century wars with Arabs and
other slave-raiders had already broken up the local social
structures before the colonial freeze came down. The tribes in the
region around Lake Nyasa are very differently characterized in the
writings of the 1950s when labour migration, cash crops, and
taxation accelerated the process of change. Here we also find small
communities. But as to grid they come much lower on the line of
coherent classification than the Tallensi. Their culture promises
them contradictory rewards and holds out impossible goals. They
believe that it is good to be loyal and obedient and never to split a
village into factions. They also believe that the proper ambition of
every man is to become head of his own village—impossible
without disloyalty and friction. They put immense pressure on one

64 Grid and group

another and strive incessantly to define and close the circle of their
friends. Accusations of witchcraft are the political idiom of out-
casting and re-definition of social boundaries. The broad,
normative concept of a human being for whom moral obligations
are binding is contrasted with that of the man-eating witch. To
convict a rival of witchcraft is to finish him politically. This is the
second of the main types of social environment I shall refer to
throughout the book. For convenience I shall call it small group. It
is a social system which clusters low on the right side of the
diagram. Its members know one another and can count their ranks
and prospects of promotion. They are not conscious of remote
control by leaders located far to the left. Hemmed in and face to
face, their destiny is in their own hands and they meet it with
intrigue and jealousy. The contrast of small group with the
previous case of high classification ranges over many aspects. For
example, high classification requires a well-defined category of
rejects and anomalous persons. But small group broadens the
category of potential rejects to include the whole range of
acquaintance, male, female, kinsman and unrelated.
   The third type to distinguish from these two is the society which
spreads widely across our diagram instead of being tidily clustered
on the right. The leaders in the small-group case are down in
among their community, struggling against their peers. In this third
case which I shall call strong grid, the leaders are remote powerful
beings, rarely seen face to face. We shall need to deal separately
with the social environment of the leaders and of those who are
subject to them.
   During the colonial period, for reasons we have suggested,
anthropology was much concerned with the properties of
corporate groups and with rights and duties transmitted down
enduring channels of control. Colonialism itself checked internal
evolution and limited tribal political systems to the mere
replacement of personnel in a fixed pattern of office. But research
in newly independent countries, and above all in newly
discovered New Guinea, has focused attention on what is called
the network of links a man has to a circle radiating out from
himself. In a complex society, networks are the minimum level at
which social relations can be investigated. They are the
sustaining base line of social ties from which corporate
institutions arise. But if corporate organization is so weak that
each man has to muster support ad hoc for every venture, a
system of networks and temporary action-sets may describe the

                                                   Grid and group 65

way the whole society functions. Philip Gulliver has summarized
ably the problems of description and analysis which the
anthropologist faces in such societies (1971). I wish to
concentrate on one of two possible variations of the network. In
the case which Philip Gulliver himself describes, of the
Ndendeule in Tanzania, no person stays in any position of
eminence over others, there are no chiefs and there are no
effective boundaries to the spread of the open network in all
directions. For each man the meanings of society are centred
upon himself but the meanings are the same for him as for others.
By contrast, in other variants, it is possible for leaders to become
effective and to entrench their power in their lifetime at least.
Such a leader will gather his own network of allegiances
powerfully round himself and create a centre offeree for the rest
of society. The Big Man system, as it is called in New Guinea, is
found all over the world, in Indonesia, among northern
Californian Indians, in the Philippines. I take it for my fourth
social type, to contrast with the other patterns. Its interest is the
wide spread across the diagram of grid and group at a low level
of classification. Success breeds. There are few overriding
community interests to check the leader’s impetus. The greater his
influence, the more support he attracts. A positive feedback
propels him further out to the left; it increases the subjection of his
followers, so they move to the right. If his success in wealth and
war encourages him, he may end by eroding their existing system
of obligations and become a law unto himself. Then the inevitable
trend would be to lower the level of classification for everyone in
his orbit. He has made their lineages and ancestral shrines less
meaningful for them than his own favour. The big categories
however, solvency, worth, equity, remain as containers into which
a changing synthesis of meaning is poured from year to year.
However, the leader has to reckon with rivals creeping near to him
in eminence. The world of his peers is a sparse and fluctuating
scene of coalitions. Each is bent on success. If they are realistic,
their followers recognize that right goes with might and line up
accordingly. This type of social system in its various stages has
now been frequently and well described. There are many more
examples from New Guinea. The interesting difference between
them is the range within which the competition of Big Men must
use existing corporate institutions or can override them and in
doing so attaches large parts of the public system of classification
to the whims of the Big Men themselves.

66 Grid and group

   We have now distinguished three types of social environment:
high classification, small group, strong grid which includes the
heroic society of competing Big Men and that of their followers.
The latter come low on the vertical line of classification because
coherence is achieved only at some very general level of
abstraction which is compatible with the syncretizing rivalry of
distant giants. But the spread across the diagram expresses the
strong control which these people experience. Recruited and
harnessed to a competition which seems to hold glittering
rewards for all, they find themselves trying to work a complex
system of rules. In the name of the rules the Big Men justify their
demands. Whether it be rules of monetary exchange, debt and
credit, or rules of etiquette and hospitality, the system constitutes
an oppressive grid. Londoners too know what this can mean. As
a system of control industrial society is impersonal. Some more
than others feel their lives controlled, not by persons, but by
things. They wander through a forest of regulations,
imponderable forces are represented by forms to complete in
triplicate, parking meters, inexorable laws. Their cosmos is
dominated by objects of which they and fellow humans are
victims. The essential difference between a cosmos dominated by
persons and one dominated by objects is the impossibility of
bringing moral pressures to bear upon the controllers: there is no
person-to-person communication with them. Hence the paradox
that some of the people whose metaphysics are most fuzzy and
who respond only to very diffuse symbols—in short, who in their
cosmology are most like pygmies and Arizona peyotists—are
those who are much involved in certain sectors in industrial
society. To this paradox I shall return.
   For the leaders who have spiralled down far to the left the same
impersonal rules of exchange are made like rungs on a ladder of
promotion. The Big Men live in a world of noble pacts, hard
bargains, dastardly betrayals and revenges. Apart from the exotic
cases given, there are examples nearer home. Our ancient Anglo-
Saxon vengeance and inheritance laws defined a set of responsible
kin radiating from each particular individual. The Norse sagas
expressed a corresponding world view.
   With these four social types distinguished it will be possible to
show that they generate distinctive cosmologies. The system of
control is validated by a typical bias in the system of belief. These
tendencies are the subject of this book, for they make their own
typical demands on the media of expression and thus produce

                                                   Grid and group 67

natural systems of symbolic behaviour. A brief summary of the
types of belief would go as follows. With high classification, piety
and sacralized institutions, strong boundaries between purity and
impurity; this is the prototype, the original Durkheimian system in
which God is Society and Society is God, where all moral failings
are at once sins against religion and the community. With small
group there is less confidence in the power of God to protect the
faithful, a dualist cosmology reckons with the power of demons
and their allies; justice is not seen to prevail. Strong grid tends to a
pragmatic world view, sin is less understood than shame for loss of
personal honour, face or solvency. In the first type a profit and loss
calculus applies to the spiritual economy of the whole community;
strong grid focuses on the honour of the individual, the number of
supporters he can summon up, the control he has over his women
folk. Strong grid divides between the heroic society of the Big
Men, and the recurrent millennial tendencies of their subjects.
Finally the positions near and around zero should be specially
noticed. When public classification and pressures are withdrawn
or cast aside, the individual left alone with himself develops a
distinctive cosmology, benign and unritualistic.
   As Durkheim suggested, this experience is the beginning of
consciousness, with all the emotional force that that implies. The
sense of escape from others and of self-discovery is possible with
any shift towards the left of the diagram. Out here, especially
below the vertical line, where the individual is articulating his own
classificatory system, the thinker does not see his fellow human
beings as the principal determinants of social life. Fellow humans
do not put their imprint on the world as models of controlling
influence. In consequence the cosmos is not anthropomorphic.
There is less call for articulate forms of social intercourse and no
need for a set of symbols with which to send and receive specific
communications. Thus we have already identified one area of the
diagram in which there will be less regard for ritual. Furthermore,
it suggests another dimension which is not on the diagram, that
lying between density and sparsity. When populations are sparse
and social relations infrequent, interrupted and irregular, a person
does not have the impression of inhabiting a man-dominated
world. What preoccupations about his fate he may entertain
concern drought, pasture, livestock, movements of game, pests or
growth of crops. He is controlled by objects, not persons. Objects
do not respond to personal modes of approach. Fellow humans are
fellow sufferers.

68 Grid and group

   It is tempting to try to assimilate whole cultures to the general
outlook of individuals dropping to near zero. But sparsity conceals
too many variables; better to stick to those on the diagram. There
is ample material there for explaining the similarity between the
world view of pygmies in the Ituri forest and that of certain
Londoners deeply implicated in industrial society. First we should
turn to the media of social relations. If the pattern of social
relations put their stamp upon speech forms, as Bernstein’s work
shows, they no doubt put a pattern upon non-verbal forms of
communication as well. If the speech forms thus produced
themselves control the kind of social responses possible in a given
social environment, we should expect the usage of the body for
communication to exert a parallel constraint.

Chapter 5
The two bodies




The social body constrains the way the physical body is perceived.
The physical experience of the body, always modified by the social
categories through which it is known, sustains a particular view of
society. There is a continual exchange of meanings between the
two kinds of bodily experience so that each reinforces the
categories of the other. As a result of this interaction the body itself
is a highly restricted medium of expression. The forms it adopts in
movement and repose express social pressures in manifold ways.
The care that is given to it, in grooming, feeding and therapy, the
theories about what it needs in the way of sleep and exercise,
about the stages it should go through, the pains it can stand, its
span of life, all the cultural categories in which it is perceived, must
correlate closely with the categories in which society is seen in so
far as these also draw upon the same culturally processed idea of
the body.
    Marcel Mauss, in his essay on the techniques of the body
(1936), boldly asserted that there can be no such thing as natural
behaviour. Every kind of action carries the imprint of learning,
from feeding to washing, from repose to movement and, above
all, sex. Nothing is more essentially transmitted by a social
process of learning than sexual behaviour, and this of course is
closely related to morality (ibid.: 383). Mauss saw that the study
of bodily techniques would have to take place within a study of
symbolic systems. He hoped that the sociologists would co-
ordinate their approaches with those of perception theory as it
was being developed then by Cambridge psychologists (ibid.:
372). But this is as far as he got, in this gem of an essay, to
suggesting a programme for organizing the study of ‘I’homme
total’.

70 The two bodies

   Whereas Mauss was concerned to emphasize the culturally
learnt control of the body, other scholars, before and after, have
noticed unconscious correspondences between bodily and
emotional states. Psychoanalysis takes considerable account of
what Freud called ‘conversion’ of the emotional into the physical
condition. This insight has had immense therapeutic and
theoretical importance. But the corresponding lessons have not yet
been drawn for sociology. Many scholars have made shrewd
observations of unconscious bodily enactment. I cite as an isolated
example Rudolph Otto’s idea of ‘natural magic’:

  Modes of behaviour exhibiting some simple analogy and
  carried out quite unreflectively and without any basis in
  theory…. It may be noticed on any skittle-alley or bowling-
  green. A bowler aims and plays his ball, wishing it to run true
  and hit the jack. He watches eagerly as it rolls, nodding his
  head, his body bent sideways, stands balancing on one leg, jerks
  over violently to the other side as the critical point is reached,
  makes as though to push the ball on with hand or foot, gives a
  last jerk—and the end is reached. Its hazards past, the ball rolls
  safely into position.
                                              (Otto, 1957:117–18)

Such observations do not remotely approach a general sociological
theory such as Mauss was seeking. Nor, in my opinion, does Edward
Hall’s contemporary research in bodily symbolism amount to a
theory. The Silent Language (1959) deals with well-observed
differences of convention in the use of space, time and gesture. But
that is all. There is no attempt at a hypothesis by which cultural
variations can be explained. Lévi-Strauss’s monumental analysis of
the structure of symbolism does not come much nearer to the
programme enjoined by Mauss. For though he promises to
incorporate into the analysis of symbolic structures culturally
specialized attitudes to mobility and immobility, eating and fasting,
cooking and not cooking and so on, he is seduced away from this
programme by his interest in a universal structure of thought
common to all mankind. He seems to offer a perspective in which
social controls on the human body can be included in a vast psycho-
sociological analysis of controlling schemata (Mythologlques, 1964,
1966, 1968), but he cannot come up with anything interesting about
cultural variations (which are local and limited) since his sights are
set on what is universal and unlimited to any one place or time. His

                                                   The two bodies 71

analysis of symbolism lacks an essential ingredient. It has no
hypothesis. Its predictions are impregnably, utterly irrefutable.
Given the materials for analysis (any limited cultural field), given
the techniques of analysis (selection of pairs of contrasted
elements)—there is no possibility of an analyst going forth to
display the structures underlying symbolic behaviour and coming
home discountenanced. He will succeed, because he takes with him
a tool designed for revealing structures and because the general
hypothesis only requires him to reveal them. He is not asked to
correlate particular kinds of symbolic structures with predicted
social variables. He will inevitably bring out of his research a series
of structured oppositions which are all finally resolvable into the
contrast of culture with nature. Lévi-Strauss has given us a
technique. It is for us to refine it for our own problems. To be useful,
the structural analysis of symbols has somehow to be related to a
hypothesis about role structure. From here the argument will go in
two stages. First, the drive to achieve consonance in all levels of
experience produces concordance among the means of expression,
so that the use of the body is co-ordinated with other media. Second,
controls exerted from the social system place limits on the use of the
body as medium.
   The first point is a familiar principle of aesthetics. The style
appropriate to any message will co-ordinate all the channels along
which it is given. The verbal form, syntactically and lexically, will
correspond to the kind of situation to be expressed; tautness,
slackness, slowness, speed, will give further information of a non-
verbal kind; the metaphors selected will add to the meaning, not
diminish it.

  Then let us give praise to the Lord, brethren, by our lives and by
  our speech, by our hearts and by our voices, by our words and
  by our ways. For the Lord wants us to sing Alleluia to Him in
  such a way that there may be no discord in him who gives
  praise. First, therefore, let our speech agree with our lives, our
  voice with our conscience. Let our words, I say, agree with our
  ways, lest fair words bear witness against false ways.

So preached Augustine in Carthage in the year 418. The sermon is
quoted more fully by Auerbach and analysed as an example of a
peculiar kind of rhetoric (Auerbach, 1965:27–36). Augustine’s
problem was how to present the enormously difficult paradox of
Christianity as if it were something obvious and acceptable. He

72 The two bodies

tried to solve it by combining the grand sweep of Ciceronian
rhetoric with robust simplicity. Cicero had taught that there are
three distinct levels of style, the sublime, the intermediate and the
lowly; each level was supposed to belong to its own class of subject
matter, so that some situations and things were noble in themselves
and should be spoken of in the sublime manner and others too
humble for anything but the lowly style. The unquestioned
assumptions on which such values could be assigned imply a
restricted code. But Augustine argued that Christianity turned all
previous values around: the most humble objects became sublime.
He therefore proceeded to detach the styles of rhetoric from classes
of things and acts and related them firmly to the social relations
holding between speaker and listener. The sublime style was for
rousing emotions, the intermediate for administering praise or
blame and the lowly for teaching. It is wholesome for
anthropologists struggling to interpret ritual to recall this long
tradition of inquiry into the relation of style to subject matter and
social relations. Auerbach’s book is devoted to the study of what
changes in the traditional form of discourse occurred under the
impact of Christian ideas. Note too that the lowly style was called
lingua humilis, related to humus, soil, and meaning literally low,
low-lying and of small stature. Christian teaching attacked the
established pattern of values by mixing the humble style with the
sublime. So the manner itself in which the message was given
added more of the same meaning. In the same way Barthes (1967)
writes of a French editor of a revolutionary journal opening his
editorial with a sprinkling of obscenities. They were only relevant
to the matter being discussed in that their style had the same
revolutionary impact. In any kind of communication whatever, if
more than one band is being used, ambiguity would result if there
was no smooth co-ordination of meanings. Hence we would
always expect some concordance between social and bodily
expressions of control, first because each symbolic mode enhances
meaning in the other, and so the ends of communication are
furthered, and second because, as we said earlier, the categories in
which each kind of experience is received are reciprocally derived
and mutually reinforcing. It must be impossible for them to come
apart and for one to bear false witness to the other except by a
conscious, deliberate effort.
   Mauss’s denial that there is any such thing as natural behaviour
is confusing. It falsely poses the relation between nature and
culture. Here I seek to identify a natural tendency to express

                                                  The two bodies 73

situations of a certain kind in an appropriate bodily style. In so far
as it is unconscious, in so far as it is obeyed universally in all
cultures, the tendency is natural. It is generated in response to a
perceived social situation, but the latter must always come clothed
in its local history and culture. Therefore the natural expression is
culturally determined. I am merely relating what has long been
well known of literary style to the total bodily style. Roland
Barthes gives a contemporary description of style as a non-verbal
channel of meaning.

  Imagery, delicacy, vocabulary spring from the body and the past
  of the writer and gradually become the very reflexes of his art.
  Thus under the name of style a self-sufficient language is
  evolved which has its roots only in the depths of the author’s
  personal and secret mythology, that sub-nature of expression
  where the first coition of words and things takes place, where
  once and for all the great verbal themes of his existence come to
  be installed whatever its sophistication. Style has always
  something crude about it: it is a form with no clear destination,
  the product of a thrust, not an intention, and, as it were, a
  vertical and lonely dimension of thought…. It is the private
  portion of the ritual, it rides up from the writer’s myth-laden
  depths and unfolds beyond his area of control.
                                            (Barthes, 1967:16, 17)

Such bodily styles as we are writing of arise spontaneously but are
also interpreted in the same spontaneous way. Read the impression
made by John Nelson Darby, a leader of the Brethren movement in
the 1820s:

  A fallen cheek, a bloodshot eye, crippled limbs resting on
  crutches, a seldom-shaved beard, a shabby suit of clothes and a
  generally neglected person, at first drew pity, with wonder to
  see such a figure in a drawing-room…. With keen logical
  powers, he had warm sympathies, solid judgment of character,
  thoughtful tenderness and total self-abandonment. He before
  long took Holy Orders, and became an indefatigable curate in
  the mountains of Wicklow. Every evening he sallied forth to
  teach in the cabins, and roving far and wide over mountains
  and amid bogs, was seldom home before midnight…. He did
  not fast on purpose, but his long walks through wild country
  and indigent people inflicted on him much severe deprivation….

74 The two bodies

  Such a phenomenon intensely excited the poor Romanists, who
  looked on him as a genuine ‘saint’ of the ancient breed. The
  stamp of heaven seemed to them clear in a frame so wasted by
  austerity, so superior to worldly pomp and so partaking in their
  indigence…. I was at first offended by his apparent affectation
  of a careless exterior. But I soon understood that in no other
  way could he gain equal access to the lower and lowest orders,
  and that he was moved not by asceticism, nor by ostentation,
  but by a self-abandonment fruitful of consequences.
                       (Quoted from Francis William Newman, in
                                              Coad, 1968:25, 26)

Note how the word self-abandonment occurs twice in this passage.
Nelson Darby through all his life wrote against organization as if
it were the greatest betrayal and sin for the Brethren to organize
themselves into a Church (ibid.: 127).
   Now for the second stage of the argument. The scope of the
body as a medium of expression is limited by controls exerted
from the social system. Just as the experience of cognitive
dissonance is disturbing, so the experience of consonance in layer
after layer of experience and context after context is satisfying. I
have argued before that there are pressures to create consonance
between the perception of social and physiological levels of
experience (Douglas, 1966:114–28). Some of my friends still find
it unconvincing. I hope to bring them round by going much
further, following Mauss in maintaining that the human body is
always treated as an image of society and that there can be no
natural way of considering the body that does not involve at the
same time a social dimension. Interest in its apertures depends on
the preoccupation with social exits and entrances, escape routes
and invasions. If there is no concern to preserve social boundaries,
I would not expect to find concern with bodily boundaries. The
relation of head to feet, of brain and sexual organs, of mouth and
anus are commonly treated so that they express the relevant
patterns of hierarchy. Consequently I now advance the hypothesis
that bodily control is an expression of social control—
abandonment of bodily control in ritual responds to the
requirements of a social experience which is being expressed.
Furthermore, there is little prospect of successfully imposing
bodily control without the corresponding social forms. And lastly,
the same drive that seeks harmoniously to relate the experience of
physical and social, must affect ideology. Consequently, when once

                                                 The two bodies 75

the correspondence between bodily and social controls is traced,
the basis will be laid for considering co-varying attitudes in
political thought and in theology.
   This approach takes the vertical dimension of experience more
seriously than the current trend in the structural analysis of
symbolism which requires meanings to be found horizontally, as it
were, by the relation of elements in a given pattern. It is what
Rodney Needham, following the phenomenologists and Bachelard,
has called analysis in depth (1967:612). In linguistics it may well
have been a blind alley to seek to interpret the selection of sounds
by reference to their physical associations. Structural analysis of
language has foregone considering whether sibilants have
onomatopoeic associations with running water, snakes and the
like. Structural analysis should, perhaps, not be interested in the
psychological significance, or social, of a particular symbol. But
when anthropologists apply this technique to the analysis of ritual
and myth, the vertical references to physical and social experience
are generally slipped in, without apology, as extensions of the total
structure. Surely the account we take of the vertical dimensions of
analysis must be made explicit, in order to understand the basis of
natural symbols. A study of anti-ritualism must focus on the
expression of formality and informality. It seems not too bold to
suggest that where role structure is strongly defined, formal
behaviour will be valued. If we were to proceed to analyse a range
of symbolism under the general opposition of formal/informal we
would expect the formal side of every contrasted pair to be valued
where role structure is more dense and more clearly articulated.
Formality signifies social distance, well-defined, public, insulated
roles. Informality is appropriate to role confusion, familiarity,
intimacy. Bodily control will be appropriate where formality is
valued, and most appropriate where the valuing of culture above
nature is most emphasized. All this is very obvious. It goes without
saying that any individual moves between areas of social life where
formality is required and others where it is inappropriate. Great
discrepancies can be tolerated in differently defined sectors of
behaviour. And definition may be in terms of time, place or
dramatis personae, as Goffman showed when he considered what
criteria women use to decide when it is and is not permissible to
walk in the street in slippers and hair nets (1971:127). Some
individuals groom their whole appearance to the same pitch of
formality, while others are careful here and relaxed there. James
Thurber once remarked that if some writers dressed as carelessly

76 The two bodies

as they wrote they would be prosecuted for indecency. This range
of personal experience can build up a demand for more and more
formal symbols of distance and power where a crescendo is held
appropriate—and vice versa a diminuendo in symbols of formality
on other occasions. The need and ability to switch from the one set
of symbols to its contrary is often discussed in terms of reversals.
But here I am concerned not with reversal, but with the possibility
of a fading out of control, a general détente, and its symbolic
expression.
   So far we have given two rules: one, the style appropriate to
a message will co-ordinate all the channels; two, the scope of
the body acting as a medium is restricted by the demands of the
social system to be expressed. As this last implies, a third is that
strong social control demands strong bodily control. A fourth is
that along the dimension from weak to strong pressure the
social system seeks progressively to disembody or etherealize
the forms of expression; this can be called the purity rule. The
last two work together, so I shall deal briefly with purity first,
before illustrating how they dictate the bodily media of
expression.
   Social intercourse requires that unintended or irrelevant organic
processes should be screened out. It equips itself therefore with
criteria of relevance and these constitute the universal purity rule.
The more complex the system of classification and the stronger the
pressure to maintain it, the more social intercourse pretends to
take place between disembodied spirits. Socialization teaches the
child to bring organic processes under control. Of these, the most
irrelevant and unwanted are the casting-off of waste products.
Therefore all such physical events, defecation, urination, vomiting
and their products, uniformly carry a pejorative sign for formal
discourse. The sign is therefore available universally to interrupt
such discourse if desired, as the editor of the revolutionary journal
mentioned above knew. Other physiological processes must be
controlled if they are not part of the discourse, sneezes, sniffs or
coughs. If not controlled, formal framing-off procedures enable
them to be shorn of their natural meaning and allow the discourse
to go on uninterrupted. Lastly, and derived from the purity rule,
are two physical dimensions for expressing social distance; one is
the front-back dimension, the other the spatial. Front is more
dignified and respect-worthy than back. Greater space means
more formality, nearness means intimacy. By these rules an
ordered pattern is found in the apparently chaotic variation

                                                  The two bodies 77

between diverse cultures. The physical body is a microcosm of
society, facing the centre of power, contracting and expanding its
claims in direct accordance with the increase and relaxation of
social pressures. Its members, now riveted into attention, now
abandoned to their private devices, represent the members of
society and their obligations to the whole. At the same time, the
physical body, by the purity rule, is polarized conceptually against
the social body. Its requirements are not only subordinated, they
are contrasted with social requirements. The distance between the
two bodies is the range of pressure and classification in the society.
A complex social system devises for itself ways of behaving that
suggest that human intercourse is disembodied compared with that
of animal creation. It uses different degrees of disembodiment to
express the social hierarchy. The more refinement, the less
smacking of the lips when eating, the less mastication, the less the
sound of breathing and walking, the more carefully modulated the
laughter, the more controlled the signs of anger, the clearer comes
the priestly-aristocratic image. Since food takes a different place in
different cultures this general rule is more difficult to see at work
in table manners than in habits of dress and grooming.
   The contrast of smooth with shaggy is a member of the general
set of symbolic contrasts expressing formal/informal. Shaggy hair,
as a form of protest against resented forms of social control, is a
current symbol in our own day. There is no lack of pop-sociology
pointing a moral which is fully compatible with my general thesis.
Take the general run of stockbrokers or academics; stratify the
professional sample by age; be careful to distinguish length of hair
from unkempt hair; relate the incidence of shagginess in hair to
sartorial indiscipline. Make an assessment under the division
smooth/shaggy of other choices, preferred beverages, preferred
meeting-places and so on. The prediction is that where the choices
for the shaggy option cluster, there is least commitment to the
norms of the profession. Or compare the professions and trades
one against another. Those which are aiming at the centre top,
public relations, or hair dressing, and those which have long been
fully committed to the main morality, chartered accountants and
the law, they are predictably against the shaggy option and for the
smooth drink, hair style, or restaurant. Art and academia are
potentially professions of comment and criticism on society: they
display a carefully modulated shagginess according to the
responsibilities they carry. But how shaggy can they get? What are
the limits of shagginess and bodily abandon?

78 The two bodies

   It seems that the freedom to be completely relaxed must be
culturally controlled. What do we make, therefore, of the fact that
most revivalist movements go, in an early phase, through what
Durkheim called ‘effervescence’? Emotions run high, formalism of
all kinds is denounced, the favoured patterns of religious worship
include trance or glossalalia, trembling, shaking or other
expressions of incoherence and dissociation. Doctrinal
differentiation is deplored. The movement is seen to be universal in
potential membership. Generally the stage of effervescence gives
way to various forms of sectarianism or to the growth of a religious
denomination. But it is not true that effervescence must either be
routinized or fizzle out. It is possible for it to be sustained
indefinitely as the normal form of worship. The only requirement is
that the level of social organization be sufficiently low and the
pattern of roles sufficiently unstructured. We do not have to look for
strain, change, deprivation or tension to account for effervescent
religious forms. They can be found in steady state religions. Talcott
Parsons’s definition of the contrast of structured and unstructured
helps to identify those tribes which celebrate social solidarity by the
greatest abandonment of conscious control.

       In a highly structured situation there are a minimum of possible
       responses other than the ones required by the norms of the
       situation; adaptation is carefully defined; and usually the
       situation is not very confusing psychologically.
                                       (Parsons and Smelser, 1956:236)

The less highly structured, the more the value on informality, the
more the tendency to abandon reason and to follow panics or
crazes, and the more the permitted scope for bodily expressions of
abandonment. We can summarize the general social requirements
for ritualism on the one hand and effervescence on the other:

SOCIAL DIMENSION                    SYMBOLIC ORDER
A    Conditions for Ritualism
 (i) high classification, strong    condensed symbolic system;
     control                        ritual differentiation of roles
                                    and situations magical efficacy
                                    attributed to symbolic acts (e.g. sin
                                    and sacraments)
(ii)     assumption that inter-     symbolic distinctions between
         personal relations must    inside and outside
         be subordinate to public
         pattern of roles

                                                      The two bodies 79

(iii) society differentiated and      symbols express high values set on
      exalted above self              control of consciousness
B     Conditions for
      Effervescence
 (i) weak control by grid and         diffuse symbols; preference for
      group                           spontaneous expression, no interest
                                      in ritual differentiation; no
                                      magicality
(ii)  little distinction recognized   no interest in symbolic expressions
      between interpersonal and       of inside/outside
      public patterns of relations
(iii) society not differentiated      control of consciousness not
      from self                       exalted

The second case provides the social conditions for a religion of
ecstasy as distinct from a religion of control. Ethnographic reading
suggests that the attitude to consciousness is not merely neutral, as I
have written it here, but that there is a positive affirmation of the
high value of consciousness whenever the corresponding social
structure demands control of individual behaviour. So we tend to
find trance-like states feared as dangerous where the social
dimension is strongly controlled. According to my general
hypothesis, the inarticulateness of the social organization in itself
gains symbolic expression in bodily dissociation. The religious cult
of trance is material especially suitable to the present thesis. When it
occurs at all, the reporting tends to use very vivid language, the
ethnographer trying to convey something of ecstasy or fear. The
general atmosphere and mood are on record. It is usually quite clear,
when trance takes place, what the onlookers think about it. Among
the Samburu trance occurs regularly, but is not part of religion, no
beliefs are connected with it (Spencer, 1965:263). Among Nuer, it is
held to be dangerous; among Dinka it is held beneficent. Trance is a
good point on which to test my hypothesis. The prediction is that, as
trance is a form of dissociation, it will be more approved and
welcomed the weaker the structuring of society.
   Raymond Firth has distinguished three kinds of trance states.
To his classification I will add a fourth class. His series runs
from minimum to maximum control by the human group of an
invading spirit. First, there is spirit possession in which a
human passively loses control to the spirit. The latter is in
power. The friends of the possessed person try to pacify it and
send it away. Then there is spirit mediumship, in which the
invading spirit speaks through the possessed person, and the

80 The two bodies

group tries to get occult information and power from it. Third
is shamanism. Here the spirit is to a large extent domesticated
and made to do the will of the human host (Firth, 1967:296).
Significantly, perhaps, an entirely distinct category of trance
has been omitted. It may happen that the human person loses
consciousness, but the state is not regarded as undesirable or
dangerous; the onlookers may make no attempt to control and
try to use, nor to change the state, pacify or send away the
invading influence. They assume that it is a channel of benign
power for all. This is the positive cult of trance as such. I would
only expect it to take place in the main morality cult where
social life comes closer to the zero. Let me give two vividly
described examples which are worth quoting.
   The Western Dinka pay cult to the divinity, Flesh, which
manifests itself in a red light. A hymn begins: The Flesh kindles
like fire. Yet Flesh confers judgement and truth, it shows itself in a
cool heart, peacefulness, harmony and order. Godfrey Lienhardt
describes a sacrifice thus:

  As the invocations proceeded, the legs of some of the masters of
  the fishing-spear began to tremble, a trembling which came
  from the quivering of the upper leg and thigh. This, it was said,
  was the divinity Flesh, which was beginning to awaken (pac) in
  their bodies.
     The divinity Flesh was specially manifested in this
  quivering of the legs and thighs, which sometimes spreads
  further to the whole body. The masters of the fishing-spear
  continued to invoke with the mounting force of Flesh in
  them. They did not become ‘hysterically’ possessed, as do
  those who are possessed by free-divinities. Two young men,
  members of these spearmaster clans though not themselves
  masters of the fishing-spear, then also began to show signs of
  the ‘awakening’ of Flesh in them. They were much less
  controlled, and their arms and legs were soon trembling
  violently. One was sitting, one standing, and both gazed
  blankly before them with their eyes open and turned slightly
  upwards. It was possible to go up to them and stare closely
  into their faces without either registering that he saw
  anything.
     Nobody at this stage paid much attention to them; it was
  said that when thus possessed by Flesh in the homestead, they
  were safe, and that if the condition persisted for too long the

                                                The two bodies 81

  women would put an end to it by venerating the divinity Flesh
  in their bodies, giving those possessed by it their bangles, and
  kissing their hands. Later, women did kiss the hands of these
  possessed men, but bangles were not offered.
     As the invocations increased in speed and intensity an older
  man became overpowered by the divinity Flesh, and staggered
  about among the invoking masters of the fishing-spear, slapping
  and leaning on the bull-calf and jostling people. His behaviour
  was that of a man who is very giddy. At this stage visiting
  masters of the fishing-spear were in turn pouring libations of
  milk from a ring-decorated gourd over the peg to which the calf
  was tethered. Each made his libation, kissing his own hands
  before and after handling the gourd of the Flesh, the gourd
  reserved for libations to this divinity. When one master of the
  fishing-spear returned from this act of veneration, he told me
  that his own Flesh was ‘waking up’, though he behaved with
  self-control for the rest of the ceremony.
     The mounting or awakening of the divinity Flesh in the
  body seems to be a well-known sensation to all adult male
  members of spear-master clans. Females do not have it. A
  Christian Dinka of the Pakwin clan told me that he dared not
  draw near when a beast was being sacrificed to his clan-
  divinity, as the awakening of the Flesh in him brought on a
  sensation of faintness, which might result in his falling
  unconscious.
                                           (Lienhardt, 1961:136–8)

The veneration of the divinity Flesh in the bodies of those who
manifest it, at least from the ethnographer’s viewpoint, is the most
solemn religious act of these people.
   Here is an account of a possession cult in which the invading
spirit is not feared, not pacified or driven off, not made use of as
an oracle, nor for healing specific sickness. The visitation of the
spirit is respectfully venerated, the presence is sought for its own
sake, for an unmediated form of communion between a god and
his worshippers.
   But what can I say of the social structure of the Western Dinka
which would relate their cult of trance to my argument? Nothing
but a close examination of grid and group as they apply to these
Dinka, and to other Dinka and to other Nilotes in their region, will
be relevant. It should turn out that these Dinka are less closely
controlled by social constraints than other peoples sharing the

82 The two bodies

same cultural postulates but differing in their attitude to trance.
This I will broach in the next chapter.
   After this, it is easy to recognize a rather more ambivalent
attitude to trance. According to Lorna Marshall the !Kung
Bushmen of the Nyae-Nyae region of the Kalahari desert
consider total unconsciousness as dangerous, but intermediate
stages of semi-conscious trance they hold to be the proper
means of procuring health and blessing. Their ceremonial
curing dance is the one religious act which has form and in
which the people are united. Its purpose is general: to cure
sickness and drive away evil. The men wear rattles; the women
clap loudly and sharply.

  The clapping and stamping are of such precision that they
  give the effect of a well-played battery of percussion
  instruments producing a solid structure of intricate rhythm.
  Above the percussion sounds, the voices of the men and
  women weave together in parts, singing the ‘medicine
  songs’…. After several dances have been danced the medicine
  men begin to cure. Almost all the !Kung men are medicine
  men. They do not all choose to practise, for one reason or
  another, but there are always several in a band who are
  active. Medicine men receive no rewards other than their
  inner satisfactions and emotional release. I know that some
  of them feel a deep responsibility for the welfare of their
  people and great anxiety and concern if their curing fails,
  and a corresponding satisfaction if it prevails. Others of
  them appear to be less concerned about the people whom
  they try to cure and more inwardly turned. When the
  medicine men are curing, all of them experience varying
  degrees of self-induced trance, which includes a period of
  frenzy and a period of semi-consciousness or deep
  unconsciousness. They may become stiff or froth at the
  mouth or lie still as if in coma. Some of them habitually
  remain in trance for only a short time, others for hours. One
  man used to remain in a semi-trance for most of the day
  following a dance…. After the curing has been going on for
  some time, medicine men begin to reach their state of frenzy.
  They no longer go around to the people, their spasms of
  grunting and shrieking become more frequent and violent,
  their stomachs heave, they stagger and sway. They rush to
  the fire, trample it, pick up the coals, set fire to their hair.

                                                  The two bodies 83

  Fire activates the medicine in them. People hold them to keep
  them from falling and beat out the flames…they may fall into
  deep unconsciousness or sink down semi-conscious, eyes
  closed, unable to walk.
     The medicine men who have not reached their full frenzy or
  who have passed through it attend to those who are in it. The
  !Kung believe that at such a time the medicine man’s spirit
  leaves his body and goes out…. They call this ‘half-death’. It is a
  dangerous time and the man’s body must be watched over and
  kept warm. The medicine men lean over the one who is in
  trance. They shriek and gurgle. They blow in his ears to open
  them. They take sweat from their armpits and rub him. Some
  fall over him in trance themselves and are in turn rubbed and
  cared for by the others. The women must sing and clap ardently
  while the man is in deep trance. He needs the good medicine of
  the music to protect him.
     The curing dance draws people of a Bushman band together
  into concerted action as nothing else does. They stamp and clap
  and sing with such precision that they become like an organic
  being. In this close configuration—together—they face the
  gods. They do not plead, as they do in their individual
  supplications, for the favour of the divine, all-powerful beings,
  and do not praise them for their goodness. Instead, the medicine
  men, on behalf of the people, releasing themselves from
  ordinary behaviour by trance and overcoming fear and
  inaction, throw themselves into combat with the gods and try to
  force them with hurled sticks and hurled words to take away
  the evils they might be bringing.
                                         (Marshall, 1962:248–51)

Here, though trance is courted and held to be benign in effect, it is
not regarded as altogether safe. Several new intensive studies of
other Bushmen bands are now being made. These may give an
opportunity for the comparisons within a given social environment
which I am hoping will test my thesis. I would ask for study of the
positive cult of trance among different Bushmen groups to work
out detailed variations along the lines of social control by grid and
group. As to the cult of trance itself, I would ask about the way the
roles are distributed: whether it is practised by all, by all males or
by all females, by specialists chosen by birth or by trained and
initiated specialists. About the trance state, I would be interested
in attitudes to varying degrees of bodily control and abandonment,

84 The two bodies

their danger, whether to the person in trance or to others. About
the beneficent powers attributed to trance, I would ask how
general or how specific they are held to be. I would expect more
highly specialized trance roles, more sense of danger in trance,
more specific, narrowly defined benefits attributed to trance where
social control by grid and group is more intense. Referring back to
the diagram of the last chapter, shifts towards zero should allow
the body a fuller range of expression for a smaller range of
intentions. Its full abandon is made available in this direction.
   Where trance is not regarded as at all dangerous, but as a
benign source of power and guidance for the community at large, I
would expect to find a very loosely structured community, group
boundaries unimportant, social categories undefined, or distant
control but impersonal rules strong. Take for example Calley’s
(1965) account of West Indian sects in London. The rule of
limiting the comparison to persons interacting in the same social
field would certainly allow me to compare their bodily techniques
of expression with Pentecostalists in Trinidad or Jamaica where
they share a cultural tradition. But I should also be able to
compare them with the transport workers and others with whom
they interact, at work or in pubs and labour exchanges in London.
Calley finds that the theory of compensation for poverty and
distress does not explain the religious behaviour of West Indians,
who were materially richer in London than at home. But his
account of these London Pentecostal churches gives a clear picture
of the fluid, ever-shifting social units to which individuals were so
loosely attached. A founding minister of a new Church had a hard
task to maintain a stable congregation. Rivalries easily led to a
splitting into two or more groups. The temporary tenure of their
meetingplaces (ibid.: 107) corresponded to the temporary tie of
individuals with their work (ibid.: 140). Calley implicitly makes
the comparison with the tendencies to fission and fusion in
primitive society. But I shall simply compare their state of social
flux with the steady allegiances of the Londoners among whom
they lived. For the Pentecostalists, as the name implies, the greatest
gift of the Holy Spirit is the gift of tongues, which gives insight,
foresight and healing. But, paradoxically, the gift of tongues is
recognized by totally inarticulate gabbling of Allelujahs. The more
he is inarticulate the more proof that the speaker is unconscious
and not in control of what is being imparted to him.
Inarticulateness is taken as evidence of divine inspiration. So also
are ‘dancing in the Spirit’, involuntary twirling and prancing, and

                                                The two bodies 85

involuntary twitching and shuddering taken to be a sign of
blessing (ibid.: 80–1).
    I imagine the English in this same environment spend their
Sunday mornings polishing their cars, or neatly trimming their
lawns and window boxes, or correctly repeating the Lord’s
Prayer in unison. Compared with these English, these West
Indians are weakly structured in several senses. Their groups are
ill-defined; they have no common provenance from a single
country of origin, no common organization; amongst themselves
their social categories are weakly formed, their allegiance to local
groupings undetermined; in relation to the other inhabitants of
their London environment they have few close or permanent
contacts with the representatives of power and authority. There
are few West Indian school teachers, policemen, social workers.
By contrast the non-West Indians with whom they come into
more than casual contact are more clearly categorized and have
more permanent attachments to jobs and homes, and often a
more secure relation with the sources of control. On my thesis, it
is expected that the London West Indians should favour symbolic
forms of inarticulateness and bodily dissociation more than the
Londoners with whom they interact. Their religion is not a
compensation, but a fair representation of the social reality they
experience. If this general correlation between social and bodily
forms of control is to be a useful insight, it must be made clear
that it does not predict anything about the occurrence of
physiologically defined trance states. It is a prediction about
attitudes to bodily dissociation and whereas the attitudes can be
assessed by the ethnographer, the degree of bodily dissociation
has to be taken in the first instance as a construct of the local
culture. It would be inconsistent with the whole argument about
the culturally conditional experience of the body if we seemed to
be asserting something absolute about the place of trance in
religion. What I am saying is that the full possibilities of
abandoning conscious control are only available to the extent
that the social system relaxes its control on the individual. This
has many implications for the deprivation approach to religious
behaviour. For religious movements which take this form are
expressing social solidarity without differentiation: the question
of whether this state occurs as a result of deprivation must be
considered separately in each instance.
    We can add this case to other ranges of symbolic behaviour in
which a tendency to replicate the social situation is observed. Van

86 The two bodies

Gennep (1960) first discerned the common form in all ceremonies
of transition. Where the transfer from one social status to another
is to be expressed he noted how material symbols of transition
were inevitably used and also how the rite itself takes the form of
preliminary separation from and re-integration into the
community. As this applies across cultural boundaries it is a
natural symbolic form. At a more profound level, the social
experience of disorder is expressed by powerfully efficacious
symbols of impurity and danger. Recently I have argued that the
joke is another such natural symbol (Douglas, 1968c). Whenever
in the social situation, dominance is liable to be subverted, the joke
is the natural and necessary expression, since the structure of the
joke parallels the structure of the situation. In the same sense, I
here argue that a social structure which requires a high degree of
conscious control will find its style at a high level of formality,
stern application of the purity rule, denigration of organic process
and wariness towards experiences in which control of
consciousness is lost.
    A friend, criticizing the first version of this argument,
reproached me for trying to stand Freud on his head. I am indeed
insisting that the social imagery which the body carries be
recognized. This is not reversing or taking anything away from
psychoanalytic theory but expanding the social perspective in
which it is set. Psychoanalysis takes account of a very restricted
social field. It makes of parents and siblings the social framework
into which all subsequent relationships are slotted. The restriction
gives it great theoretical elegance and power. But it is difficult to
extend its categories in a controlled way to the wider experience of
society. Those who have tried a macro-application of
psychoanalytic theory to nations and cultures can interpret
imaginatively as they will; anyone else is free to come up with a
contrary diagnosis of the same events. Grid and group are offered
as tools for describing in a more controllable fashion the way that
social pressures reach an individual and structure his
consciousness. The vertical distance between zero and the most
coherent set of classifications offered by his culture is the range of
sublimation possible in it. The span across the diagram from left to
right represents the possibilities of frustration for those with the
fewest options. A society huddled together in the right quadrant,
with strong face-to-face pressure and low classification, will go on
stoking the sibling jealousies of childhood. Strong group and
strong grid working together will uphold the strength of paternal

                                               The two bodies 87

authority. It should be interesting to place the classic psychoses
upon the diagram. But this is a digression.
   The main burden of this chapter is to take up the theme of the
book’s title. Natural symbols will not be found in individual
lexical items. The physical body can have universal meaning only
as a system which responds to the social system, expressing it as a
system. What it symbolizes naturally is the relation of parts of an
organism to the whole. Natural symbols can express the relation
of an individual to his society at that general systemic level. The
two bodies are the self and society: sometimes they are so near as
to be almost merged; sometimes they are far apart. The tension
between them allows the elaboration of meanings.
