assimilation.
       Even older is a Jewish colony in Cochin in southern India, which was
flourishing in 1020, as is shown by a grant of lands and privileges to one of its
leaders, preserved     on copper plates of that date. There are also Jewish tomb-
stones dated 1269. Following the Hindu pattern, these Jews today are divided
into three castes, which do not marry or eat together, though their religion and
general culture are identical. The so-called "White" Jews number less than 150
and are all in one congregation, to which the "Black" are not admitted. These

§   178              JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN MINORITIES IN ASIA                     24I

Whites may include some descendants of the original Jewish settlers in India,
but seem mainly to be of Spanish Jewish stock that arrived in the sixteenth cen-
tury and kept itself separate. They are of about the same complexion as southern
Europeans, and in blood they are very high in type A (§ 72), a distribution char-
acteristic of the Iberian Peninsula.   The "Brown" caste numbers only two or
three      dozen native servants or ex-servants of the White caste converted to
Judaism. The Black caste is some ten times as numerous as the White and has
seven synagogues. They resemble the Cochin Hindus in color and blood type,
and in origin they must be either outright converts from the native population
or the descendants of former cumulative intermai riages of Jewish immigrants
with natives. The two main castes arc old: in 1686 they were described much
as now, and synagogues still in use by the Whites and the Blacks were built in
1568 and 1489, respectively. The Cochin Jews are at once well fitted into south-
ern-Indian civilization and separate from it where they want to be, which         is

                  and group identity. They live in a ghetto street, but from
chiefly in religion
choice. They all learn to read Hebrew, the Blacks as sedulously as the
Whites, for prayers and services, but talk Malayalam along with the rest of
Cochin. Rice is their staple food, as it is in   all   southern India; but they will
never mix curries of meat with those of milk, in conformity with the orthodox
Jewish injunction. They chew betel, paint their nails, play rummy, but have pre-
served their Hebrew ritual and festivals scrupulously. There is much accultura-
tion,     but also a wholly successful maintenance of the integrity of a minority
group and of a subculture around an intact nucleus of religion.
      Equally interesting are the native Christians of Cochin,      who legendarily
stem from the disciple St. Thomas, and at any rate were found long-established
when the Portuguese reached India in 1498. There are five sects of tJiem. Two
groups are Roman Catholics, one using Latin and the other Syriac as the ritual
language. These both acknowledge the Pope, of course, but represent somewhat
different degrees of secondary influence of Portuguese missionaries on the local
Christians. The native Chaldaean Syrians are under the Patriarch of Babylon;
the Jacobite Syrians, under the Patriarch of Antioch. From these latter, the fifth
sect, the Reformed or St. Thomas Syrians, seems to have branched off, with its

own local bishop as head, under the influence of immigrant Protestant mis-
sionaries; this sect rejects confession, relics, masses for the dead, and invocation

of saints.    To these live sects there correspond seven castes, which absolutely
prohibit interdining     and intermarriage, in conformity with standard Hindu
custom. The Roman Catholics of Latin rite comprise three castes, whose basis
of separatism is not clear. Otherwise, each sect is also a caste, except that the
Jacobite     and Reformed Svrians are jointly split—not on the basis of religious
adherence, but of ancestral residence: the northerners, Jacobite and Reformed
alike, claim to have arrived in India earlier, thus being superior, and accordingly

refusing to marry with the southerners.

242                               CULTURE CHANGE                                   §   178

      It is clear that the customary tolerance of Asiatics toward religions, strength-

ened by the dominant Hindu leaning toward caste particularity, afford minority
groups of foreign origin an excellent chance to maintain themselves without
being extinguished by assimilation, and yet to acculture, outside of their             re-
ligion, as far as is convenient to them. At the same time, it is also evident that

the Cochin Jews, and still more the Cochin Christians, have been aided in the
preservation of their particularities by occasional relations with overseas co-
religionists, resulting in their reinvigoration as minorities.     The Jews in China,
remote, inland, and secluded, were beyond such reinforcement, and both their
social and their cultural identity washed away after some centuries.



              179.   VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION
      It is   true that much modern acculturation of minorities is directed by the
majority culture, and that their assimilation       is   consciously furthered as some-
thing desirable. Uniformity has a way of commending itself to majorities. How-
ever, there is some importance in remembering that assimilation and standardi-
zation are not inevitable outflows from anything in the nature of man or his
culture.      A whole lot of human history has unrolled without any notable en-
deavors at uniformizing. The Persian Empire, the Hellenistic states, and Rome
were all notorious for not attempting any total assimilation of their subjects.
One obeyed the authorities, kept the peace, and paid taxes. Beyond that, one was
free to follow the ways of his fathers or to abandon them. And there was a
deal of acculturation nevertheless. Asia Minor and Syria largely turned Greek
in culture and speech; the greatest Greek city in the world was Alexandria in
Egypt; Gauls and Iberians became utterly Romanized             —of their free   will, be-

cause it was to their own advantage or prestige, not because a ruler or a majority
put pressure on them.
    Ethnically at least, the attitude of the Middle Ages was much the same.
Conformity to the Christian doctrine and church was exacted, but little else.
In fact, controlled acculturation came late. Not until well into the modern period
of European history, along with the rise of consciously nationalistic programs,
did the inclination become strong to improve people of other culture and speech
by inducing or forcing them to accept one's own. China and India have always
been notoriously tolerant or indifferent in these matters. The list of "internally
marginal" backward peoples that have been mentioned (§ 175)              —who are of
                                            —
course only partly accultured populations is evidence.
      A few cases to exemplify this generalization —that much human accultura-
tion has been voluntary     —will now be   cited.   One instance will be recent, one
older, the third in the primitive field.
      Since the Meiji reform of 1868, Japan has obviously been making its culture
over to conform progressively to Western civilization, at least in most respects.
Thus, following the charter oath, M'ith its clause that "intellect and learning

 J   179                     VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION                                243
shall be           sought for throughout the world," in 1871 feudalism was abolished.
Then there followed these introductions:
        1872: compulsory universal education
        1872:       (irst   railroad and telegraph

        1874: Gregorian calendar
        1875: girls' normal school
        1   881:    Bank of Japan
        1889: constitution with a parliament
        1890+: new law codes
        1897: gold standard
        1899: abolition of extraterritoriality
        1902: Anglo-Japanese alliance

        All this "Westernization" or adoption of Occidental culture was voluntary.
Perry had used a mixture of persuasion and threats to open the door and estab-
lish relations;             but none of the actual Japanese acculturation was due to com-
pulsion or even to pressure from outside                 —no more than there had been in the
similarly large-scale Japanese taking-over of Chinese civilization                       between a.d.
400 and 800 discussed in § 172-173 and 303. Neither, of course, was there the
least       diminution of Japanese          social,   racial,   or national integrity.    The whole
matter of minorities and absorption was lacking, as was direction or control from
outside the group. And yet                what happened is one of the most sweeping and
important acculturations in history, even though much too brief to be complete.
    The Lithuanians furnish the contrary example of a people voluntarily sub-
merging both their culture and most of their identity. By about 1200 Europe
had been Christianized, and therewith brought into Occidental civilization,
sxcept for the barbarous, independent Prussi, Litva, Latvi, Kor, and other tribes
along the lower Vistula, the Niemen, and the Dwina. These peoples, often
mistaken for Slavs, were not Slavs, but formed in speech an independent, co-
ordinate division of Indo-Europeans, the Baltic or Lettic branch. To their east,
the Russians had previously been Christianized                       from Constantinople      to   the
rites of the Greek Orthodox Church.                  To the south, the Hungarians and the Poles
had been converted to the authority of Rome. So had the Germans on the south-
west and the Scandinavians to the northwest of the Baltic peoples. From Sweden,
Christianity had been carried to the peaceful pagan Finns off to the north of our
Baits; the latter thus formed the one remaining island of heathenism in Europe
—a typical "internally marginal" retardation.
      Then, in 1226, the Teutonic Knights, a mihtant monastic order, began a
crusade for the conversion or extermination of the Borussians or Prussians. Grad-
ually the whole coastal territory along the east side of the Baltic Sea as far as
the Gulf of Finland was subjugated and appropriated by the                       Germans. Its in-
habitants were either exterminated or Christianized by force.                      One group of
tribes alone, the Litva or Lithuanians, a little farther inland than the rest along

244                               CULTURE CHANGE                             §   179

the  Niemen, fought back for their freedom and managed to retain it long
enough to learn about organized war and statehood from the encroaching Ger-
mans. Beginning with Mindvog in 1247, they developed a series of national
leaders. They also commenced for the first time to found fortified towns such
as Vilna. Soon they passed from holding their own to expanding, especially
toward the south, where the recent Mongol storm had left the several Russian
nationalities and states shattered. Gedymin overran White and Volhynian
Russia; his son, Ukrainian Russia beyond Kiev; under the Grand Duke Jagiello,
Lithuanian dominion reached down the Dnieper almost to the Black Sea. In
1386, the heiress to the Polish crown was persuaded to marry this Jagiello, on
condition that he become Christian; and his people followed him. A personal
union of rule thus bound together Poland, much longer civilized, and Lithuania,
perhaps twice as large. The combination being voluntary and reinforced by joint
successes against the    German Knights, the Lithuanian higher classes eagerly
Polonized themselves. They took over not only the CathoHcism but the speech,
manners, dress, customs, and education of the Poles; and by the diet of Lublin
in 1569 they    handed over the old Lithuanian conquests to Poland. That, inci-
dentally, was the basis of the Polish-Russian disputes over eastern Poland after
World War I and during World War IL The population of the disputed area
still is prevailingly White Russian, as it was when annexed by Lithuania six

hundred years before; but it had been under unchallenged and sole Polish rule
for about two centuries. In the home district of Lithuania, the peasants and
serfs continued to speak Lithuanian and to preserve Lithuanian folk customs;

but the culture of the higher classes was Polish. A heavy proportion of eminent
Poles in all fields of accomplishment were Lithuanian in ancestry, but thought
of themselves as Poles. This was much as a Spaniard or a Tunisian of the early
centuries after Christ would feel himself to be really a Roman in citizenship and
civilization; his actual provincial origin was of no particular moment. All three
of the Baltic states founded in 1919 had genuine difficulties to overcome in their
careers, because they were really erected on a basis of the social submergence of
their nationalities.   The nationalities, as linguistic or ethnic groups, were un-
questionably there. But their educated, prosperous, professional, and politically
trained classes were prevailingly either Germanized, Russianized, or Polonized.
Yet in the case of the Lithuanians, their acculturation and semiassimilation had
really been thoroughly self-sought and self-imposed by a respect for an older
civilization.
      Another voluntary reorientation is that made by the Algonkin and Atha-
bascan hunting and fishing tribes of the great transcontinental coniferous forest
of northern Canada, as a result of European demand for furs. Their habitat was
rich in fine pelts, though miserably poor in almost all other immediate resources.
Deer, moose, or reindeer continued to be hunted for food by these tribes; but
mink, marten, beaver, and ermine assumed a wholly new value in terms of what
white men were ready to give for them: steel traps, firearms, tools and kettles,

§    l8o                  NATIVISM, REVIVALS, AND MESSIAHS                        245
woolen blankets, trinkets, and tea, flour, and pork. A dependence of families,
bands, and tribes on trading posts grew up. Caucasian contacts gave the Indians
more comforts, but also entrenched them more firmly as hunters. Their canoes,
snowshoes, and the like were retained because they had been successfully worked
out to fit living off the country. Their present culture thus has a native founda-
tion, but it also has a large Caucasian constituent and at least partial    Caucasian
motivation. And the acculturation was not due to conquest, to missionaries, or
                        swarming in, but to the fact that the Indians, who re-
to dispossessing settlers
main in the majority, changed their ways of their own accord (§ 327).


                    180. NATIVISM, REVIVALS,         AND MESSIAHS
       After two societies have come into sufficiently close contact for one to feel
the other as definitely more populous, stronger, or better equipped, so that its
own culture is in process of being supplanted by the other, a conscious preserva-
tion effort or defense is often produced. Such reactions have been called nati-
vistic     endeavors or revivals. They envelop with a sort of halo the culture that
is   passing away, and attempt to reaffirm or re-establish it, or parts of it.
       An immigrant group in the United States or Brazil almost always forms an
association of its nationals, not only to give its members aid, but to help preserve
the folkways, customs, speech,      and home life characteristic of the old culture.
This may be done even though the immigrants are economically better off than
they were in the homeland and would not think of returning to the conditions
from which they emigrated. People in growing up do get attached to the ways
of their culture, much as they become attached to their kinsfolk or their old
home. By the time they begin to age, their memories of the culture have got
tinged with pleasurable nostalgic sentiments and assume a symbolic value. Folk
dances, for instance, or literary exercises thus may come to mean much           more
than they did in the old country.
   Much the same effect may be produced when the territory of a more back-
ward minority is being occupied by an alien dominant population; when a
people is conquered and forced to change its ways; or even if it only feels its
own culture peacefully giving way under the automatic weight of a neighbor-
ing larger and more successful one. Thus the ancient bardic gatherings called
Eisteddfods were revived in 1798 for the conscious preservation and cultivation
of Welsh speech, poetry, tradition,and music; these were almost all that re-
mained of the national culture of Wales, since Welshmen had long been full
participants in British citizenship, empire, and civilization.
      With primitive tribes, the shock of cultural contact is often sudden and
severe. Their hunting lands or pastures may be taken away or broken under
the plow, their immemorial customs of blood revenge, head-hunting, sacrifice,
marriage by purchase, or polygyny be suppressed, perhaps their holy places
profaned or deliberately overthrown. Resistance is crushed by firearms or by

246                              CULTURE CHANGE                                §   1   80

superior military organization. Despondency settles over the tribes. Under the
blacking-out of all old established ideals and prestiges, without provision for new
values and opportunities to take their place, the resulting universal hopelessness
will weigh doubly heavy because it seems to reaffirm inescapable frustration in
personal life also. At this juncture a prophet is likely to arise and picture a wish
fulfillment a release from the human impasse by supernatural mechanism. The
              :



ancestral dead are to return and sweep the encroaching whites off the land.
Bulletproof shirts will neutralize firearms. The game animals will pour out
from the bowels of the earth whither they withdrew to evade the white man.
The old customs, the old rituals, the old happy gatherings, will all be re-estab-
lished. All that is needed, says the prophet, is faith in the impending miraculous
event, and some slight token observance of faith, such as dancing, or destroying
one's belongings of white manufacture. Therewith a revivalistic       movement of
return to the good old days is launched. The prophet's motivation       may range
from sincere delusion to desire for power, fame, or even money, or be com-
pounded of these. His converts follow him because of the stress of their social
unhappiness. Skeptical individuals or groups are ignored, or finally get caught
in the mass infection too.
     Some of these cults end in an armed clash and defeat. Such were, among
American Indians, the Delaware Prophet's announcements of 1762 and the
Shawnee Tenskwatawa's of 1805, which were followed by Pontiac's conspiracy
and by Tecumseh, the Battle of Tippecanoe, and the Creek War, respectively.
Other movements merely fade away when the date passes and the prediction is
unfulfilled. More often they maintain themselves as a new, hybrid church com-
bining elements selected out of the former tribal religion and out of Christian-
ity— its hybridity conforming to the transitional character of the dissolving

native culture as a whole. Of this character was the revivalistic cult established
about 1884 by the Columbia River Sahaptin Indian called Smohalla, which
ended in a permanent religion with church buildings, half after the Caucasian
model.
        In 1869 a   Walker Lake Paiute of Nevada named Wodziwob began to
preach locally the end of the world, destruction of the white man, and return
of the Indian dead. This "First Ghost  Dance" belief spread intertribally with
increasing momentum. By 1871      had the Indians of northern California in a
                                   it

ferment (§ 239); but from 1872 to 1874 it broke up into three movements. The
first   of these was the Earth Lodge cult, professing to protect the faithful from
catastrophe by having them enter specially built subterranean houses. Next was
the Bole-Maru, which arose after it began to appear that the world would not
end just then, and which therefore relegated the impending catastrophe and
return of the dead into the background; but its prophets or dreamers seized
upon certain spectacular native dances, simplified these, and combined them
with the use of patterned flags and modifications of white women's dresses. The
third current was the Big Head cult, which drifted away to attach special im-

§   l8o                     NATIVISM, REVIVALS, AND MESSIAHS                      247
portancc to a certain type of feather headdress, which was passed on Hkc a fetish
to new converts. Of these three proHferations of the Ghost Dance, only the Bole-
Maru lasted: it still was being practiced after seventy years at the outbreak