plishments, tend to be achieved spasmodically, in intermittent bursts. Also, these
bursts can be associated with the growth and fulfillment of style-type patterns.
Yet there is something else equally associated with the bursts of cultural pro-
ductivity. This is frequency of genius, frequency of extraordinarily gifted
individuals.
      Personalities        of the    very highest ability    —whether in ruling, thinking,
imagining,       innovating,        warring,    or   religious   influencing—have long been
known to occur in concentrations of country and period. The list in § 136 is not
only a tabulation of when drama, sculpture, war, philosophy, and other activities
of culture flourished in ancient Greece; it is equally an enumeration of its great
men, its outstanding geniuses. The philosophy, for instance, is exemplified by
Plato and Aristotle, by their predecessors like Democritus and Socrates, by their
successors like Epicurus and Zeno the Stoic. Or we can equally well say that it is
these men who produced the philosophy. These are but two ways of describing
the   same phenomenon. Obviously, there is not going to be much important
philosophy without able philosophers around, nor able philosophers without
important philosophy to show for it.

      ^ Literally,   of course, it is the minds of designers of dresses that are affected and show
strain in their creations.     But since such individuals tend to be affected and to react more
or less alike, it is their common behavior, and the common drift of their products, that are
historically most significant. This significance in turn justifies the use of short-cut metaphors
like "patterns       being infected," "straining," "moving," "saturating," "freezing."

§    139               THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS                              I45

         Of these two related aspects, the philosophy and the philosophers, the ac-
tivity      and product or the personalities, there is no doubt which        is   the easier
to grasp: the concrete persons. All sorts of Athenian contemporaries saw, heard,
and perhaps touched Socrates, and had quite definite reacticjns to him and judg-
                        —
ments of his merits Athenians who nevertheless knew little and understood
less of his thoughts. Through the accounts of Plato and Xenophon, Socrates re-

mains today a very living and real personality whom one can never quite forget
even if one's interest in philosophy be zero or negative. Hence ordinarily we
tend to think first of Socrates the man and secondarily of what new ideas he
produced. To put it on a lower level, a child cannot comprehend a philosophy,
but it can comprehend events like being married to Xantippe or drinking hem-
lock in prison. The first recognition of the two-faced type of phenomenon                we
are dealing with, accordingly, was in terms of great men and their near-simul-
taneity or clustering. This fact was already recognized by the later Greeks and
the      Romans. Velleius   Paterculus, a historian contemporary          with Augustus,
has quite a little passage on it. No one since appears to have doubted it.
         However, as long as the matter is viewed simply           as   one of persons,   it

remains rather meaningless      —curious but inexplicable.    It   came to be accepted
that there are golden ages thickly studded with great           men achieving unfor-
gettable products; silver ages with somewhat lesser men attaining smaller per-
formance; and ordinary times when men of ability or talent are still available
though the great lights of history just do not put in their appearance. But no
reason was manifest, through   many unstatistically minded centuries, for such
fluctuations,which glaringly violate the principle of random distribution or
accidental occurrence, and therefore suggest that there must be specific factors
at work to produce the      unevennesses.
         Biologically we know that hereditary races are constant to the degree that
if   a     thousand morons and one   man of genius are born per million in this
generation, the proportion is unlikely to be seriously different in the next gen-
eration or for a number of generations following. If Athens for a thousand years
had no great men, began to have a few in the sixth century, produced an aston-
ishing number of geniuses of absolutely first rank in the fifth and fourth cen-
                                then became sterile again and has remained so
turies, tapered off in the third,

until now, there is no known mechanism of heredity which can explain this
fluctuation of incidence of high ability; nor is it within the reasonable bounds
of mere statistical possibility. Galton, who still argued for a change to inherent
race superiority in the Athenians (§90), because Httle         was known before his
time about the heredity of intelligence and ability, already recognized that the
brief upcurve could not be a statistical accident, but that it must indicate some
factor at work. Nor is there any serious doubt now what that factor is, among
the ancient Athenians and in similar cases. It     is,   in general,    what is variously
called the milieu, the social environment, the cultural context, the condition of
civilization.    More specifically, the involved factor may be supposed to be the

146                                     PATTERNS                                    § 139

nature and degree of development of the value or style patterns of the Greeks,
and among them of the Athenians in particular, around 500 b.c. There was a
style of tragedy, for instance, in the     making then. Aeschylus developed this
tragic style farther in the grand manner, Sophocles freed it from the last traces
of archaism, Euripides introduced the final psychological finesses            and tender-
nesses   —and in this style of tragedy there was nothing essential or important
left to   be done. If there had been an unfinished remnant to be achieved, it is
expectable that this remnant would have been contributed. With the exhaustion
of the Greek tragic pattern, no very great Greek tragic poets could arise, it may
fairly be argued. There was nothing left for them to do in the Athenian pattern.

Nor could they, as children of their time and place, conceivably invent Eliza-
bethan or Japanese tragedy, not even in Attic Greek language dress.
      Now this explanation does not mean that the state of the dramatic pattern
in Athens around 400 b.c. prevented the birth of men endowed by nature with
high potential ability of expressing themselves in tragic poetry. Such a direct
reaction of a momentary condition of culture on organic heredity would be an
even more unreasonable belief than Galton's belief that the heredity turned
itself   on and off again within a dozen generations like a playful faucet. What
the situation does warrant us in inferring is that when general cultural condi-
tions and specific dramatic pattern conditions were at their optimum in Greece,
there would be an average of one individual of the poetic potentiality and caliber
of Sophocles or Euripides born      among so and so many thousand or million
Athenians; and also that these rare individuals would be able to realize or
express their gift by writing tragedies. When the general and specific pattern
conditions were not at optimum, there would continue to be just as many po-
tential poetic geniuses  born among the same number of Athenians, but they
would not become tragedians, or if they stubbornly tried to, they would find
that their say had already been said, and that instead of fame they were ac-
quiring mainly a repute for being somewhat dull repeaters. Conceivably, if
they had a somewhat different vein in them also, they might still become great
comic poets, since Athenian comedy ran a somewhat later course than tragedy.
Or if their gifts were not too narrowly specialized but <vere plastically adaptable,
these potential geniuses might have become actualized geniuses in oratory or
history-writing, or perhaps even in philosophy. Here we are at the border of
certainty of opinion, because no one yet knows how far the high capacities that
                                             —
we call genius are congenitally specialized say for poetry and not for prose or     —
                                                            —
on the contrary how far these capacities are general like articulateness of ex-
pression, for instance, or originality of ideas   —and   it is   a matter of conditioning
after birth that   determines whether the inherent genius is to become a writer
of tragedy, comedy, lyrics, or prose.
      In any event, within a very few hundred years there was no form of litera-
ture left active in Athens, and soon after that no form of cultural activity any-
where among Greeks,       in   which a congenital super-AAA genius could any

S    139                  THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS                              I47

longer hope to attain supcr-AAA rating. This was hecause the possibihties of
Greek civilization were so used up, its pattern so exhausted, that no supcr-AAA
achievement was any longer possible in that civilization. The same one-in-four-
thousand or two-hundred-in-a-million births of top-flight                ability   presumably
continued to take place in Greek society in subsequent times as before.' But
these individuals simply no longer had any chance to become top-flighters. They
very likely became the leaders of their day; but posterity would rate them only
BBB instead of AAA, because what posterity can judge, or does judge, is accom-
plishment. What posterity cannot readily judge, of course, and ordinarily is too
busy to try to, is how much of any accompHshment is due to innate or heredi-
tary endowment and            how much due to favorable cultural and environmental
circumstance.
   What we have in this whole matter, in summary, is first the fact that great
men do constellate, or genius does cluster; and second, an explanation of that
fact in    terms of degree of development of patterns of the style type. A third
consideration may be added; namely, the reflection that only a fraction of all
the men congenitally equipped for genius ever actualize as such. Only a frac-
tion are ever found out, or allowed the rank,             by history. This fraction is the
same as the proportion that the number of generations recognized as fruitful and
genius-studded, in all lands, bears to the number of barren, geniusless genera-
tions. This proportion can hardly be reckoned as greater than               one in four, and
may be as Uttle as one in ten, if we take into account all the regions and eras
of the world in which it is customary not to recognize any geniuses as having
occurred.
       There is a point of impressive significance here. Human biological heredity
runs good enough to produce, once in every so many hundred thousand or
million births, an individual so highly gifted as to be capable of becoming one
of the lights of our species, a benefactor or a creator whose work will Uve in
history;    and yet the nature of our culture manages to neutralize or frustrate
from seventy-five to perhaps ninety out of every hundred such great geniuses,
or to depress them into mere second-rank talents or transient leaders of soon-
forgotten days. Ideally considered, this is a tremendous waste from the point
of view of those concerned with            human achievement. It certainly invites the
consideration of eugenicists, to whom it offers the pessimistic prospect that even
if   they should succeed in improving the heredity of our species, three-fourths
or more of the gain would be lost again by the shockingly wasteful way in which
civilization to date has operated.'

      * Gallon computed 248 in a million, or i in 4032, as born in Attica 530-430 B.C.

      " This over-all   wastage of 75 per cent or more of the finest congenital talents born in
the human species       may seem to constitute a blasting indictment of human culture. But
without culture, the waste would be a complete 100 per cent. Culture is admittedly still
an imperfect instrument.

148                                    PATTERNS                                      § 139


        Logically, of course, what we have in this situation about genius   is   a dis-