                                CHAPTER X
                    THE NORTHERN CULTURES
THE coveted amber of Jutland, whose magic virtue was appreciated
as far away as Greece by the sixteenth century, attracted a commerce
which brought fresh ideas and foreign manufactures to Denmark.
      .



Thus stimulated, the local farmers developed an exceptionally rich
culture on the fertile morainic soils left by the recent retreat of the
ice-sheets. At the same time extensive peat bogs provide unusually
favourable conditions for the preservation of relics and for the recon-




      FIG. 90. Northern flint axes arranged according to Montelius' typology.
                   By permission of Trustees of British Museum.

struction of the environment in which they were made and used.
Finally, since the beginning of the nineteenth century Swedish, and
still more Danish, antiquities have been systematically studied by

successive generations of gifted investigators. By 1812 Thomsen had
established the system of the Three Ages, still used by all prehistorians,
and had divided the prehistoric period of the North into Stone, Bronze,
and Iron Ages. By 1870 Worsaae had distinguished an Earlier and a Later
Stone Age that subsequently became Mesolithic and Neolithic respec-
tively. Finally,   Montelius divided the Northern Neolithic Age into
four periods    Neolithic I, II, III, and IV based on the typology of
flint axes (Fig. 90)   and megalithic tombs.
                                       175
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
   During the 19205 the existence of Montelius' Neolithic I as an inde-
pendent period was seriously questioned; for it was then represented
solely by flint axes with pointed butts, found without context. The
remaining periods were designated by the names of the megalithic
tombs by which Montelius had characterized them Dolmen (dyss,
dos), Passage Grave (ganggrift, jcettestuer)  and Stone Cist (hdllkist)
                                                    ,

                                                                1
periods.  But  since  1945  Danish  and   Swedish  prehistorians have
adopted a triple division into Early, Middle, and Late Neolithic (EN,
MN, and LN), each subdivided. The subdivision of Early Neolithic was
originally based on the typology of the funnel-beaker the most dis-
tinctive vase in the dominant culture which is usually called after it,
not at all euphoniously, the Funnel-Beaker culture (Tfichterbecher or
Tragtbagre kultur abbreviated           TRB
                                     culture). But the subdivision
of Early Neolithic had in practice the effect of re-establishing in
                                                                          1
somewhat different form a pre-Dolmen phase equivalent to Montelius
Neolithic I. Hence in the sequel his numeration will be retained albeit
for the sake of brevity alone. Its correlation with other nomenclatures
can be effected with the aid of the following table:




            1
  Montelius typological system had been worked out on the basis of
closed finds from the West Baltic coasts and is still substantially valid
there, though no one now supposes that Dolmen, Passage Grave, and
Long Cist mark stages in a self-contained evolution. But his disciples
and imitators have clumsily extended his system beyond the regions
for which it was devised and have used it as a frame of reference into
which cultural phenomena in Central Europe, South Russia, and even
Turkestan must be fitted! From a fog of misconceptions and distortions
they have evoked a "Nordic myth". The "Nordic" cultures, crystallized
            1
                Cf. P. V. Glob, Danske Oldsager, II (Copenhagen, 1952).

                                        176
                      THE NORTHERN CULTURES
in Montelius' II, would have expanded in periods III and IV till
                                                                   they
reached the Balkans, Anatolia, and the Caucasus. 1 These fantasies were
never accepted in Denmark and have recently been emphatically
rejected in Sweden and even Germany. An explicit refutation here is
accordingly superfluous. None the less, it will be convenient to base
our survey on the Danish and Swedish record which is incomparably
more complete, though not necessarily longer or originally richer, than
that from the Continent.


             THE EARLY NEOLITHIC PERIOD OF THE WEST BALTIC
The first fanners to reach Denmark are represented by the bones of
cows and sheep or goats and by sherds bearing impressions of one-corn,
emmer, club, and dwarf wheats and of barley8 found in several votive
deposits, in certain "Erteb011e kitchen middens", and in one or two
pure domestic sites, all of the Atlantic phase. In all cases the farmers'
archaeological personality is expressed in flat-bottomed funnel-beakers
and amphorae of Becker's A group. Troels-Smith8 insists that these
pots are made by the same technique of ring-building as the standard
Erteb011e jars and lamps, though their walls are thinner, and are
associated with the latter in many kitchen-middens. Hence he con-
cludes that the Erteb011e culture of Late Atlantic times was in fact
the culture of the A group of First Northern Neolithic farmers.
                4
            on the contrary, in 1954 described a pure assemblage of
      Becker,
A types   including flat clay discs or baking plates from a site that
was not a normal kitchen-midden (Fig. 91). So he maintains the con-
trast between intrusive neolithic farmers and survivors of the older
mesolithic population of hunter-fishers. In 1956, therefore, it would be
premature for an English author to try and define too precisely the
economy and the stone industries of the earliest or A group of neolithic
farmers recognized on Danish soil. So much at least is certain.
  About 2600 B.C. (according to a radio-carbon estimation) A farmers
were cultivating cereals (including Triticum monococcum and the
hexaploid club wheat Triticum compactum) and breeding domestic
stock. The latter were not allowed to graze freely but were tethered
by day and stalled at night, being fed during winter on leaves a small
decline in elm pollen, coinciding with the farmers' appearance, has
been attributed to the provision of winter fodder. 6 In the kitchen-
  1
      E.g. N. Aberg in Dos nordische Kulturgebict, and Reinerth, Chronologic derjUngwn
Steinxeit.
  1
    Helbaek in Aarb0ger (1954), 202-4.
  8
    Aarb0ger (1953), 5-62.         Becker, Aarfoger (i954 published in 1956), 127-97.
  *
    Aarb0g*r (1953), 16-21.
                                          177
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
middens, bones of game and fish still predominate. A few polished
flint celts with pointed butts (Fig. 90, i) are the
                                              only notable additions
to the mesolithic stone industry,
  No graves attributable to phase A have been identified, but votive
deposits in bogs give some indication of the current ideology. They
include beside human and animal bones presumably from sacrifices




       FIG* 91, A-type funnel-beakers (bottom), amphora, "baking plate," etc.
                                     After Becker.



  amber beads, the magic value of the resin having been recognized
even in Boreal times.
  Amphorae and funnel-beakers like the Danish A type have been
found in North-Eastern Germany and Poland. 1 They may mean that
the First Northern culture in its A form extended over a wide area
of the wooded plain south of the Baltic.
   In Denmark these cultivators with their tethered stock were followed
by other fanners with larger herds who burnt wide tracts of forest for
pasture and plots and cultivated thereon emmer wheat and barley.
A layer of ashes in the bogs, followed by a sharp decline in all tree
                                                      2
pollen, marks the arrival of these B-group farmers. Doubtless their

 1
     Aarbegtr (i947) 205 ff.; (i934) l68 -9-
 1
     Iversen, "Landnam i Danmarks Stenalder", Dansk. GeoL Undersog., R. II, No. 66


                                           178
                    THE NORTHERN CULTURES
flocks and hards grazed freely in the clearings, but their masters cannot
have remained very long at any one place since in time the forest
regenerated. Nor did they drive out their precursors. At Havnelev 1 in
Zealand a settlement of B farmers is marked by numerous rubbish
pits. In them the bones of cows, sheep or goats, and pigs preponderate
over those of game animals. Polished thin-butted axes were used side
by side with the mesolithic flake axes. The blade tools were inferior to
the Erteb011e types, but polygonal battle-axes of polished stone
                                                                   (Fig.
92) were already in use. The funnel-beakers were sometimes decor-




      Fio. 92. Tongued club-head, Denmark, polygonal battle-axe,
                                                                 Jordanova (J),
                          and flint axe of Eastern type ().


ated with cord impressions below the rim (Fig. 79, 5), but were round-
bottomed, as were the contemporary amphorae and collared flasks.
But not far away on the shore at Strandegaard Erteb0Ue folk were still
living almost exclusively by hunting, fishing, and collecting with a
mesolithic equipment.
  Similarly at Siretorp in Scania* herding folk, using funnel-beakers
adorned with cord impressions and sometimes exhibiting corn imprints,
twice encamped on the same strip of sandy shore. Between the two
periods of herder settlement, Erteb011e hunter-fishers had occupied
the site. To the B farmers may be attributed a grave at
                                                              Virring in
         8
Jutland, large enough to contain only a single contracted adult skeleton,
but no bones survived.
  1
    Mathiassen, Aarbeger, 1940, 3-16.
    Bagge and Kjellmark, Stendlders Boplaisema (1939); but ci. Act* Arch.,      XXII
(1951), 88 ff., where the first occupation is attributed to Northern II-E.N.C
  *
    Bnsndsted, Danmarks, I, 130, 338.
                                        179
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  Pottery appropriate to the B group of First Northern
                                                       farmer-herders
has been found all over Denmark and right across Southern Sweden
to the east coast. 1 On the Continent, B vases are not readily dis-
tinguishable from those just attributed to the
                                               A group.
  In Northern Neolithic II Early Neolithic C the First Northern
culture even in         Denmark dissolves into several local sub-cultures.
All are characterized by the same type-fossils          funnel-beakers, collared
flasks, amphorae, thin-butted flint axes, polygonal battle-axes, etc.,
but are mutually distinguished by divergences in pot forms and
decoration and by burial rites. By this time, too, Denmark and Southern
Sweden themselves form only quarters of a larger province eventually
extending from the Vistula to the lower Rhine.
  Everywhere fanning provided the basis of life, but some Danish
groups followed the practice of their A ancestors in animal husbandry
while others may have grazed stock freely, as in the B phase. By
                                                            substantial
judicious burning of scrub, using the ashes as fertilizers,
communities could live together  for a generation or more.  The village
of Barkaer in Jutland1 consisted of fifty-four one-roomed houses
                                                                   each
arranged on either side of an open space in two continuous rows,
85 m. long.
  The fanners still used thin-butted axes of flint with rectangular
cross-section and mounted directly on wooden handles, but now also
                                                            8
others of fine-grained rock, sometimes splayed at the blade. Numerous
weapons survive arrows, their shafts polished on stone straighteners
like Fig. 113 and tipped with transverse flint heads, polygonal battle-
axes, and tongued club-heads like Fig. 92. The stone celts and battle-
axes with splayed blades evidently copy metal models. In fact,
many minute scraps of copper were observed at Barkaer while a con-
                                          4          a bossed copper
temporary earth-grave at Salten in Jutland contained
disc that can be exactly matched in the graves of Brze& Kujawski

(p. 123). This import not only established
                                              an exact synchronism
between Northern II (EN.C.) and early Danubian III, but also indicates
the source of the metal, already known in Northern Neolithic II,
albeit only as a luxury material.
  The pottery of Neolithic II (Fig. 93) is a development of that made
in Neolithic I, but is now more often decorated with pits, ribs, or im-
                                                               Variations
pressions of whipped cords so as to produce vertical patterns.
in techniques        and pattern serve to distinguish three or four local
  *   Florin,   "Vr4-Kultu>n", KuUurkisioritha Studisr W&gnade N. Abwg (Stockholm,
X9
      fNA. (1949).
      Nordmaim, "Megalithic", fig. 63.
      A*rb*g*r (194?). 250-5.
                                          180
                      THE NORTHERN CULTURES
           1
groups. As charms and ornaments amber beads, sometimes decorated
in the drill-technique inherited from Maglemose times and
                                                          strung
together in necklace3 of several strands kept apart by spacers, were
worn.
  One classical method of disposal of the dead, or perhaps only of
deceased chiefs, which gives its name to the whole period in Denmark,




                       FIG. 93. Pottery from Danish dysser (J).


was ceremonial burial in a megalithic dolmen or dyss. In its oldest
form a dyss is a small chamber formed by four uprights supporting a
                                                              1
single large capstone, and less than 6 ft. long by 2 ft. wide. Such small
chambers sound as if they were designed to contain a single corpse
                                         8
only; though as many as six skeletons have been found in one, they
cannot rank as collective tombs. Later, one end-stone is generally
lower than the remaining uprights, leaving an aperture through which
subsequent burials might be introduced after the completion of the
tomb. A rare and archaic-looking variant of the dolmen is an enclosure
of inward-tilted slabs not supporting a capstone, but                     4
                                                              converging,
just as in Portugal. Small polygonal chambers with a rudimentary
passage and rectangular chambers with more than two side-stones
have also yielded relics of the kind described above and are accordingly
classed as dysser by Danish authorities. Dolmens of all types were
normally partially buried by mounds, sometimes round but often long
and rectangular and demarcated by a peristalith of large boulders.
  The distribution of dolmens along the Danish coasts indicates a
 1                                                t
     Ibid., 141 ff.                                   Aarb0g*r (1941), 63-8; (1947), 266.
     Nordmann, "Megalithic Culture", 26.              Aarbtgtr (1936), x-8,
                                           181
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
population of accomplished seafarers. Indeed, both the basis of the
new economy and the metal tools that were imitated in stone might
have reached Denmark by sea. But no regular supplies of metal were
obtained by this or any other route. The economy of the dolmen-
builders is typically neolithic though they lived when societies in
Central Europe or Britain were already in a Copper Age.
  But even in Denmark and Schleswig-Holstein people, perhaps
descendant of the B group herders, might be buried in non-megalithic
earth graves accompanied by a typical "dolmen" equipment of thin-
butted axes, collared flasks, etc. 1 In such burials one or rarely two
corpses were laid extended on the ground surrounded by,a setting
of boulders, as in Fig. 94, and sometimes covered with an elongated




                      FIG. 94. Grave 28 at Jordanova. After Seger.



mound (in contrast to "Battle-axe" burials, contracted in a pit under
a round barrow).

                        THE DANISH PASSAGE GRAVES
In Northern III about the time of the last marine transgression new
influences affected both the architecture of the megalithic tombs and
their furniture. The spacious passage graves that partly replaced the
dolmens were used as collective sepulchres by clans for several genera-
                                                                  2
tions; for they may contain as many as a hundred skeletons and
pottery of several styles the succession of which serves as a basis for
the subdivision of the period. But owing presumably to the need for
fresh land as old plots became exhausted, the settlements were shifted
  1
      Forssander (1935-36), 2 ff.; NNU.,   X (1936), 22   f.;   Aarb0gtr (1936), 15; (i947)
141 ff.; Brondsted, Danmarks, I, 162, 344.
  *
    Nordmann, "Megalithic Culture", 28.
                                           182
                          THE NORTHERN CULTURES
more often and yield as a rule pottery of only one stylistic phase. 1
A settlement of the first phase at Tr01debjerg on Langdand* consisted
of several apsidal huts, 13 to 18 ft.
                                      long, and a continuous row of
rectangular buildings with a total length of 71 m. Two of these were
certainly houses, each about 28 m. long and apparently subdivided so
that one end was occupied by humans, the other by cattle. The
                                                                  gabled
roof, about           n
               ft. high, sloped down to the
                                              ground on one side and on
the other rested on a wall only 6 ft. high. (Obviously these houses have
nothing to do with the ^Egean and Balkan megaron type but derive
directly from the Barkaer form.) They could accommodate a household
larger than the "natural family" i.e. a clan whose deceased members
might rest in the spacious passage grave.
  Hunting was now relatively unimportant. Hexaploid wheat in
addition to one-corn, emmer, and flax were certainly cultivated, but,
as in England, wheat was far more popular than
                                                    barley.
   Specialization in industry is attested by the existence of communities
of flint-miners and by specialized tools such as
                                                 gouges for the carpenters.
Trade was sufficiently developed to secure for the Passage Grave
builders a certain number of metal took and ornaments. hoard found        A
in Bygholm             in Jutland8
                           and dating from the very beginning of the
period, comprised  four flat axes, a dagger with an imitation midrib on
one face, like Fig. 132, 5, and two arm-cylinders. A distribution
                                                                   map
of copper axes in Denmark and
                                  Schleswig-Holstein suggests that they
were imported by sea, though most of them must have come from
          4
Hungary. Halberds have a similar distribution to axes and certainly
were brought by sea from Ireland. 5 Amber was presumably the
                                                                  prin-
cipal export bartered for metal and was very likely worked locally to
form necklaces. Beads reached Brittany, Central France, and the
Iberian Peninsula, and, as we saw, were common throughout Central
Europe in Unfitician times. In exchange the Danes obtained hammer-
headed pins of Pontic type by phase III. But the supplies obtained by
such barter were quite insufficient to allow metal even to
                                                               compete
with stone and bone. Even the ornaments imported are
                                                        mostly inferred
from bone imitations made locally.
   The emergence of Battle-axe folk during the period (p. 161), com-
bined with the increased competition for land as the population
                                                                        grew,
intensified militarism. The outstanding
                                                    weapons are stone double-
    Mathiassen, Acta Arch., XV, 88; cf. Becker, ib.. XXV, 50-66.
         Winther, Tnldebjtrg (Rudk0bing), 1935, and Tillaeg, 1938.
         Nordmann, "Megalithic Culture 131, fig. 60.
                                          ,

         Foruander, Ostskandinavisckt, 10, 51, etc., Kersten, Zur Alter** nordiscken Bro***-
     ,   7*. 9&
         Arck.,   LXXXVI (1936), 277.
         Aarbtgtr (1929), 204.
                                              183
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
axes, imitating JBgean metal models transmitted      up the Danube
thoroughfare (Fig. 95, 4),        flint
                                daggers,  disc-shaped mace-heads of
Danubian origin and transverse flint arrow-heads.
  The earlier pots, including funnel-necked beakers, are decorated with
patterns executed with whipped or braided cords and arranged vertic-
                                                                                  1
ally or in panels, thus carrying on the Early Neolithic traditions.
                                                                                      Still

in the settlement of Tr01debjerg the distinctive innovations of deeply
cut or stamped incisions in what Sophus Muller called "the grand




       FIG. 95- Pottery (f , J), double-axe (J), and arrow-head (J) from Danish
                                   Passage Graves.


style" and even cardial decoration (p. 353) already appear and with
them new Danubian forms the pedestalled bowl and the socketed
                                                          8
ladle. 2 In a later settlement, like              phase Illb, the tech-
                                          Blandebjerg,
nique  of deep  incision is completely  dominant  and is used to form
basketry patterns   on  angular vases, inspired by basket models (Fig.
95, i) and derived  from North- West  Germany or the early Walternien-
  1 I follow the division established on the basis of settlement finds
                                                                       by Mathiassen in
Acia Arch.. XV (1944)* 89-97* rather than that of Eckholm, Real., IX, 42; cf. now Lffl
Kaelas, Fv. (1951). 35*-7-
  *
    These ceramic types, though proper to Danubian II in Hungary and Moravia, may
have readied Denmark indirectly from the Upper Elbe-Oder region and, if so, would not
justify a synchronism between Northern Ilia and Danubian II as suggested by
Schwabedessin, Offa. XII (i953) 58-64; cf., Miloji<5, Germania, XXXIII (1955), 401-4.
     Winther, Blandtbjerg (Rudkebing, 1940).
                                          184
                    THE NORTHERN CULTURES
burg group of Central Germany. Next in IIIc the profiles are rounded
off (Fig. 95, 2) and rouletted lines, presumably derived from the Bell-
beakers (p. 227), replace the cardial technique in shading. Finally, in
phase Hid the shapes are further simplified while simple incision or
stab-and-drag lines were preferred to rouletted ones for the sparing
decoration. Jhis, however, includes oculi motives (Fig. 95, 3), recalling
the Copper Age of Almeria.
   Of the domestic pots, 50 per cent were decorated in Ilia at Tr01de-
bjerg, but the percentage had fallen to 4 per cent at Lind0 in Hid.
Still, at all times some vessels were ornamented with pits in the native
Erteb011e tradition, indicating how large a proportion of the old popu-
lation was absorbed in the new farming societies. 1 Yet of course un-
absorbed groups of food-gatherers survived.
   As in Early Neolithic times, a non-megalithic branch of the First
Northern 1 culture survived in the succeeding period. But among the
better-known Megalith-builders, soon after the beginning of Northern
     1
III, came in the practice of collective burial in a megalithic passage
grave. The latter cannot be regarded as an independent development
from the dyss such tombs were still used as Montelius' disciples
have contended, but reflects fresh influence from the West, explicitly
imitating the corbelled tholos of the Atlantic coasts (p. 215). The
earliest passage graves, standing closest to the models, are
                                                             polygonal
chambers sometimes with a cell attached, entered through a long
passage and covered with a circular mound. In later versions the
chamber is elongated at right angles to the passage. Passage graves
served of course as family vaults. Some contain as many as a hundred
skeletons. But in others the earlier interments with their gear had been
removed and reburied outside the vault to make room for subsequent
burials. Votive offerings continued to be deposited in bogs during
Northern III, and by this phase, if not before, there is evidence fora
cult of the axe. But at no time did the manufacture of female figurines
in any durable material form part of First Northern ideological-activity.
   In Middle Neolithic II or III a new group of warlike herdsmen, the
Battle-Axe folk, had invaded Jutland (p. 159), while kindred groups
                                                              4
occupied the Danish islands. Then bands of hunter-fishers from the
Scandinavian peninsula began crossing the Belts to win raw flint which
they traded far into Sweden and Norway. They were armed with heavy

  1
      Pomander, "Gropornerad Megalithkeramik", Arsbtr&ttols* (1930-31), 10-30.
    Becker, Act* Arch.. XXV  (1954), 22-5.
    Kaelas, Fv. (1951), 352-7; Bagge and Kaelas, Ada Arc*., XXII (1951)* "*;
Becker. Acta Arch..    XXV  55-66; Berg, "Klintebakken". Medd. L**f*l**ds Mus.
(Rudkebing, 1951).
  4
    Becker, Amrbiftr (1930), 155-251.
                       THE NORTHERN CULTURES
has revealed in Denmark and more hunting in the Continental than in
the Peninsular provinces. In the South province,
                                                  positive evidence for
cultivation with the aid of an ox-drawn plough is
                                                    provided by a clay
model of a pair of yoked oxen from Kreznica Jara near Lublin. 1 But it
cannot be proved that plough cultivation was an original trait and not
a secondary borrowing from, for instance, Baden neighbours. Horse
bones have been reported from many settlements but may have
belonged to game animals* since wild horses had roamed the North
European plain since Pre-Boreal times (p. 9). Centrally perforated
clay discs,? about 4 cm. in diameter, may represent model wheels rather
than spindle whorls, but no vehicles survive.
  Hunters used arrows, armed normally with transverse heads but
occasionally also with lozenge-shaped points, and doubtless clubs.
Flint was preferred for axes, but in the East and South
                                                                 provinces these
do not have the rectangular cross-section favoured in the North and
West, but resemble Fig. 92, 3. The material was extensively traded
from Riigen, and in Galicia banded flint was won by regular mining, 4
while the village on Gawroniec Hill can properly be described as an
                  5
axe-factory.
  Though a trade in flint had been thus early organized, the organiza-
tion did not extend to the distribution of metal, which,       known,
                                                         though
was very little used. So, too, amber ornaments were occasionally worn,
but only in quantities that could have been obtained from local moraines
supplemented by irregular barter. Warlike behaviour is abundantly
attested by stone battle-axes, usually of the polygonal type and always
with symmetrically splayed blades in contrast to the drooping blades
of Battle-Axe cultures. 6
  In pottery, divergent modifications in the form and decoration of
the ubiquitous funnel-beakers, collared flasks, and amphorae illustrate
divergence of taste between local groups and influences from other
         So in the South group the attachment of strap handles or
societies.

nipple feet to flasks and beakers, and still more the flanged character
of the handles (Fig. 96, i), 7
                            might have been suggested by Baden.
Basketry ornament, popular in the West group, might be inspired by
Rossen or by the basketry vessels of an hypothetical pre-existing

      Z Otchlani Wiektw, XVIII (1949), 184; WA., XVII, 120.
    WA., XVII (1950), 228; cf. Germanenerbe* IV (1939), 240; Hanar, Das Pferd, 34-7.
    WA., XVII, pi. XXXV, i.
    WA., VII, 53-4; Krukowski, Krzcmionki Opatowshic (Warsiawa, 1939). Dawna
Kultura, IV (Wroclaw, 1955) 2O 4-
    WA., XVII, 143.
    Jazdrzewski, "Kultura Puhardw Lejkowatych w Polsce" (Bibliothelta Pr*kist. t 2
(Poznan, 1936), 365-8.
  T
      Cf. also   WA., XVII, pis. XXXVII-XLI.
                                         187
                   DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
hunter-fisher population. But, as in Denmark, fruitstands and socketed
ladles must be derived ultimately from Danubian II.
  In the ideological domain, votive deposits in bogs are reported at
least from the East group. Female figurines were nowhere manu-
factured, but figures of animals were sometimes modelled in day in
the South group, as in the Baden cultural province. The characteristic
burial rite everywhere was to inter a single corpse extended in an earth
grave       i.e.   on the ground surface surrounded by a kerb of boulders. 1




       FIG. 96. Furniture of a grave at Zastow (j), and collared flask from grave at
                                       Nalenczow ().


                                                                                       1

But, save in the South group, some persons perhaps only "chiefs'
were interred in stone or perhaps wooden chambers under long or
round barrows. In the East group the Kuyavish graves of Western
Poland2 must have been wedge-shaped mounds, up to 80 m. in length,
bordered with stone kerbs and containing the burial near the broader
east end (Fig. 97). West of the Oder, 8 trapeze-shaped mounds of more
modest dimensions enclose a cist of slabs without entrance passage
                                                    4
(such are termed long dolmens). In the West group long oval or
rectangular mounds bordered with large boulders covered at first
closed chambers and later chambers as long as the barrow generally,
provided with a short entrance passage in the middle of one long side,
and popularly termed Huns' Beds. These North-West German and
Dutch passage graves were collective tombs, presumably inspired by

      Jazdrzewski, op. oil.; for Holland, van Giffen in Drenthe (1943), 435.
  1

  *  W. Chmielewski, "Zagadanie Grobowcow Kujawskich" (Biblioieha Mug. Arched.,
2), L6dz, 1952. He regards them as collective tombs, but the maximum number of
interments recorded was ten and the skeletons were not buried together in a single
chamber.
  *
  4
      Sprockhoff, Megalithkultur, 25-31.
      Ibid., 59 ff.; van Giffen, Hunebedden.
                                               188
FIG. 97. Kuyavish grave, Swicrczyn. After Kodowski.
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
the same ideology as their Danish-Swedish counterparts under round
barrows. They contain, like the latter, fruitstands and socketed
ladles,   decorated with basketry patterns, but also collared flasks
similarly decorated.
  Thus in the West group contradictory chronological conclusions
could be drawn from the tomb types and their furniture. On the
typology established for the North group, the collective tombs, the
basketry ornament on the pottery, and the fruitstands and socketed
ladles would be MN., the collared flasks EN. 1 Did the innovations
reach North-West Germany and Holland from the Atlantic coasts
and the Danubian province before they reached Denmark and Sweden?
That would be a priori likely. But still farther south in Westfalia and
Hesse collared flasks appear in long cists with porthole entries identical
with those of the Paris basin (p. 312) and of Sweden in LN. times. 2
Now the slabs of the cist at Ziischen, Hesse, are carved and the carvings
seem to include representations                  of ox-carts. 8   On the other hand,
among the sparse ceramic finds, two tombs are said to have yielded
minute sherds of Rossen pottery. 4 These sherds, if really part of the
tomb furniture, would accord with the collared flasks in making these
West German long cists EN. in terms of the Northern sequence. But
then they would be a whole period earlier than the LN. Swedish tombs
of identical plan!
  Now, since in 1910 Kossinna purported to explain the distribution of
funnel-beakers, collared flasks, and amphorae on the Continent as the
result of an expansion of Ur-Indogermanen from Denmark, it has been

tacitly assumed that the Continental cultures characterized by these
vases are later than their nearest Danish analogues of Northern II
(EN.C). Such a relation may still hold good for the West group. But
the imported disc from a Neolithic II grave at Salten (p. 180) now
proves that the South group was by then already established between
the Warta and the Oder. So there is no longer any reason to doubt
that the long barrows covering dolmen-like chambers and earth graves
furnished with funnel-beakers, collared flasks, and amphorae in Poland
and North-Eastern Germany were in fact substantially contemporary
with the Danish dolmens and earth graves of EN.C. In this case the
analogues to Early Neolithic A-B vases, found twice under long
barrows between the Vistula and the Elbe, may be as old as the

  1   The flint celts too are thin-butted, but diverge from the Danish forms, Sprockhofif,
NNU., TV (1930), 36.
  *
     Sprockhotf, Megalithkultw, 59 f.; cf. Westfalen, XIX (1934), *5<>-7-
     Mannus,   XXV   (i933) 131-2; Kuhn, Die Fehbilder Ewropas (1952), 153-4.
     Sancmeister, Die Ghckenbecher .    ,
                                           (Die Jungsteinteit in Nordmainischen Hessen,
                                            .



III), Melsingen, 1951, p. 73 and n. 246.

                                                190
                    THE NORTHERN CULTURES
Danish specimens. Thus, though best known from the West Baltic
coasts, the First Northern culture in its earliest manifestations may
already have occupied the whole area from the North Sea to the
Upper Oder, from the Vistula to the Elbe. 'The origin of the First
Northern culture" thus means the origin of this widespread complex.
  Outside this region no single culture is known that exhibits all the
distinctive    traitsceramic forms, battle-axes, arrow-heads, burial
rites,   bog offeringsenumerated above. On the other hand, survivals
of mesolithic Forest culture traditions (transverse arrow-heads, tranchet
axes, antler axes, extended burials, etc.) are conspicuous in the First
Northern neolithic culture. Since even in Boreal times the Forest culture
must have spread more widely on the Continent than the surviving
bone tools can show, and a local invention of pottery cannot be excluded,
the archaeological content of the First Northern culture could be
explained as an autochthonous development of that vigorous and
adaptable culture save for the cereals and domestic stock. The question
of its origin would then be reduced to this: Whence did the Forest-folk

acquire these and learn the arts of cultivating and breeding them?
  Of course, pottery might provide some clue. Hinsch1 has convincingly
stated the case for deriving First Northern pottery from the Western
neolithic.    Becker,
                         2
                           would admit Western or more precisely
                             too,
Michelsberg inspiration    in his B-group vases. Troels-Smith, 8 how-
ever, insists that the rural economy as well as the pottery of the           A
group agrees with that of the Michelsberg and Cortaillod cultures.
     4
Vogt, on the contrary, has contended that Michelsberg itself is not
a Western culture but an offshoot of the First Northern. His thesis has
been substantially strengthened by the subsequent publication 6 of
baking plates, distinctive of the Michelsberg culture, as an integral
element in the First Northern from its earliest, A, phase. Indeed, the
striking similarity of British and Breton long barrows (p. 325), for
which no satisfying explanation has yet been found in South-Western
                                               6
Europe, to Kuyavish graves and long dolmens might provide an argu-
ment for admitting at least a First Northern element even in the Wind-
mill Hill and Armorican Early Neolithic cultures. Still, the First
Northern is not an offshoot of any known Western culture.
   That is not to say it could not spring from some earlier and less-
specialized assemblage from which such Western cultures
                                                           as Windmill


                Universittts Oldsahsamling Arbok (Oslo, 1 951-53), 140-60*
                Aarb0ger (1947). 2O *-
                        (1953). 61.
                       rch., XXIV (1953), 174-86.
                Acta Arch.,
                Aarbtger (1954)*
                Antiquity, XXIII (1949), 130-5; **?$    XXI. 96-101,
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Hill and Michelsberg might also have arisen. Or it could be argued
that on the now submerged coasts of the North Sea representatives
of the Forest culture's coastal variant learned fanning from pioneer
Western immigrants. That too, however, makes excessive draughts
on the unknown, since neither the Mesolithic coastal culture nor that
of the Western pioneers is tangibly represented in the existing archaeo-

logical record.
   On the other hand, First Danubian farmers had demonstrably
spread right to the Baltic coasts between the Oder and the Vistula
and, west of the Elbe, had advanced into territories later occupied by
First Northern farmers. 1 In Denmark itself, while no Danubian settle-
ments occur, stone implements of Danubian type have been* found,
some on Erteb0Ue sites.* The First Northern long barrows could well
be regarded as durable imitations of the external appearance of a
Danubian I long house. 8 Finally, the Triticum monococcum, demon-
strably cultivated in Northern IA could hardly have reached Northern
Europe save through the Danubian province. East of the Oder
admittedly rather hypothetical Forest hunter-fishers could have
learned from the pioneer Danubian outposts to breed stock and till
the soil.
  Still, it remains possible that predominantly pastoral tribes without

pottery, with no specialized kit of stone tools nor ideology expressed
in funerary monuments or figurines of clay, pushed in through Vol-
hynia from the south-east. But for such an invasion there is of course
no positive evidence.


      MIDDLE NEOLITHIC NORTHERN CULTURES ON THE CONTINENT

During what corresponds to Northern Middle Neolithic, the West,
South, and East groups of First Northern cultures in contact with
surviving mesolithic groups and remnants of the Rossen, Jordanova,
and Michelsberg cultures dissolved into a multiplicity of local groups,
known mainly from grave-finds and distinguished primarily by ceramic
peculiarities.
  In the West group the Elbe-Weser culture carried on the traditions
of burial in Huns' Beds and earth graves and of basketry vases. But
Bell and S beakers found even in Huns' Beds illustrate the increasing
dominance of Beaker and Battle-axe folk over the First Northern
elements, and also the late survival of the culture in Danubian III.
  1
    Potxatz NNV. t  XV   (1941), quoted by Miloj&c, Ckro*., 97.
  *
    Glob, Act* Arch..X   (1939). *3*-9.
  *
    Sprockhoff, Megalithkuttvr, 10, emphasizes the similarity of such a long barrow to
a "house with low-pitched gabled roof .




                                          192
                     THE NORTHERN CULTURES
A gold armlet with expanded terminals from an earth grave at Himmels-
                  1
pforten near Stade should in fact belong to Danubian IV.
  The Watternienburg-Bernburg culture* developed on the Lower
Saale and in Havelland out of the local branch of First Northern,
termed the Baalburg culture, 8 through the so-called Salzmunder
culture of MN.i. 4 The angular vases, distinctive of Walternienburg x,
obviously copy basketry models (Fig. 98), but in subsequent phases
the basketry origin seems to have been forgotten. Pottery of this sort
is found in simple pit-graves, grouped in small cemeteries, in mega-




                              i                                          2

         FIG. 98. i, Walternienburg vases, 2, Latdorf drum, and Baalburg jug.



lithic cists or galleries, in Huns'      Beds with lateral passage and in cists
of thin slabs. Axe-heads were made by preference of Wida shale from
the South Hartz; the rest of the Walternienburg equipment seems to be
derived indiscriminately from various Northern and foreign cultures.
It includes double-axes of Passage Grave type, amber beads, crutch-
headed pins, perhaps derived from the Pontic hammer-pins, and metal
ornaments of UnStician type or bone copies of such. The culture,
while beginning in Northern period III, lasts therefore well into
Danubian IV.
  In part of the areas formerly occupied by the East and South groups
  1
      NNU., vii, 50;  x  (1936), 22.
      Childe, Danube, 133-9; Sprockhoff. Megalitkkultur, 106-16.
  1


  *
      Grimm, Mannus, XXIX (193?). x86 *
      /ST., XXIX (1938), 20 ff. For the culture sequence m r ^.
                                                               .
                                                                  r^rmanv .**
                                                           CeatraTGennuty,              ^
Mildenberger, Studie* turn MitUldeutschen Neolitkittum (Leipag. X95x);
                                                                        Behrens, JM     .




(1953). 105; Fischer, Festschr. d. JWw-Gwit.
                                             Zentralm*s**ms t III (Maini, 1953). *75-
                                           193
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                                                                       1
emerged the culture typified by and named after the Globular Amphora.
The type-vase, Hke the other vessels habitually associated with it, is
dearly a copy of leather models and is always decorated in a very
distinctive manner round the neck, with fillets hanging over the
shoulder (Fig. 99), The characteristic vases are accompanied by small
trapeze-shaped axes and chisels of flint, frequently of the banded
variety mined in Galitia, transverse and tanged arrow-heads, bored




      FIG. 99. Bone girdle-clasp, Podolia (}), and globular amphorae, Saxo-Thuringia
                                    and Podolia (i).


teeth and boars' tusks, amber beads and, east of the Oder, ornate bone
girdle-clasps. Antler axes, double-axes of stone, flint knives and other
articles were occasionally borrowed from contemporary groups. Ring-

pendants of bone and other ornaments characteristic of the Scan-
dinavian long cists, and bronze rings and spirals demonstrate the sur-
vival of the culture during period IV.
  The makers of these vases might be interred, extended, in simple
trench graves forming cemeteries of not more than twelve graves,
cremated, or buried, generally squatting, in collective tombs, containing
as a rule not more than seven corpses and generally less. The collective
  1
      Sprockhoff . MegatitMnatur, 120-30; Mark-Brandenburg, 108; JST., XXVIII (1938).
                                           194
                   THE NORTHERN CULTURES
tombs are sometimes megalithic cists or large cists made of thin slabs.
The latter are often divided into two compartments, sometimes by a
porthole slab.
  The principal concentration of Globular Amphorae is in the Saale-
Elbe region and Havelland, but they extend northward to Rugen,
southward into Bohemia, and eastward through Galicia into Volhynia
and Podolia. In Bohemia1 Globular Amphorae are sometimes found on
hilltops in fortified settlements, but even in Volhynia and Podolia they
are normally found alone in characteristic slab-cists, subdivided and
                                 2
containing up to six skeletons. Even the pottery from the cists, divided
by porthole slabs, at Novosvobodnaya in the Kuban valley (p. 153),
is reminiscent of the Globular
                               Amphorae.
   Evidently these vases were made by swine-breeders who roamed
about in small groups far and wide, presumably mainly as hunters and
swineherds, but doubtless engaging in casual robbery and trade. They
were thus agents in the distribution of amber, Galician flint, and even
metal trinkets, but developed no specialized industries of their own
that we can recognize.
   In Holstein a Globular Amphora was associated with pottery of
Northern Neolithic Hid or even IVa, 8 while in Kuyavish graves
Globular Amphorae represent the latest intrusions. An oft-quoted report
of the association of a Globular Amphora with Danubian Ib
                                                                 pottery
at Klein Rietz is quite unreliable and intrinsically improbable. 4 In the
Danubian sequence they cannot be earlier than period III; the Bohemian
sites that have yielded specimens belong at earliest to the Baden
culture.
   Kossinna derived the Globular Amphorae from those of the Danish
dolmens and made them the symbols of his second wave of Indo-
Germanic expansion from the West Baltic coasts. The culture they
typify is still considered by all German writers "Nordic" and is now
supposed to have developed between Elbe and Oder and thence spread
eastward. But, if so, why did it not spread westward too? Forssander,*
on the contrary, suggested that the culture arose somewhere in the
Pontic zone and that its authors introduced into Northern Europe
not only Galician banded flint but also porthole cists, such as we have
in fact met in Novosvobodnaya; presumably the idea then
                                                                     spread from
Central Germany both to Sweden and to the Paris basin. In fact, it is
not easy to derive the culture simply from the First Northern, but it
remains essentially a culture of the woodland zone and its outposts in
    Stock?, BoMme prihist., 128; Proc. Amev. Pkilos. So*., LXXXI (1932), 3o,
  1

  1
    Levitskfl, Antropolgiya, II (Kiev, 1928); Ztpiski V$*-Ukr<*in$kogo Arkh. Komitotu, I
(Kiev, 1931); Briusov, Olerki, 220*3.
    Offa, XII (1953). 8-9.
                               *
                                 Germania, XXXIII (1955), 239.      *
                                                                      Boetaxtkultw, 174.
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Volhynia are separated by a huge tract of steppe, bare of comparable
finds, from the Caucasian group of porthole cists.
   Sometimes associated with Globular Amphorae are curious tubular
pots like Fig. 98, 2 (top), often embellished with crosses and other
symbolic figures and generally interpreted on the strength of good
ethnographic parallels as drums. Most come from the Elbe valley in
Saxo-Thuringia and Bohemia, but they are not peculiar to, any one
culture; the jug from Latdorf is a Baalburg type and some Moravian
drums1 were found in a Baden context.
   We must accordingly imagine numbers of small groups, each dis-
tinguished by peculiarities in pottery and sometimes also in burial
rites or equipment, wandering about the North European plain simul-

taneously. Especially in Central Germany, groups adhering respectively
to Walternienburg, Globular Amphorae and Battle-axe traditions must
have been not only contemporary but also in close spatial contact.
And they must have encountered also Danubian peasants making
stroke-ornamented ware and others making Jordanova pots to say
nothing of makers of collared flasks and miscellaneous megalith-
builders. It is not surprising that such groups frequently interchanged
ideas   perhaps they intermarried; the wonder is that they retained
the individuality of their ceramic traditions so long. The number of
distinct types of pottery tends to give a quite exaggerated idea of the

density of population and the duration of Northern Neolithic III.
Actually the several kinds of vases must have been made by relatively
small and nomadic groups, several of which must have been living
side by side. It is only by trying to arrange all groups in a sequence,
which may really be valid at one particular site, that period III becomes
inordinately inflated. But that it overlaps with Danubian IV may be
once more demonstrated by the metal trinkets associated with Globular
                                            2
Amphorae and Walternienburg vases.

                THE NORTHERN LATE NEOLITHIC PERIOD
During the fourth period of the Northern Stone Age the sharp contrast
between Megalith-builders and Battle-axe folk began to break down in
Denmark and Southern Sweden. Though each party still retained its
traditional burial practices, there is little difference between the furni-
ture of the Long Stone Cists, collective tombs that carry on the mega-
lithic tradition, and that of the Upper (Separate) Graves of the Battle-
axe population. But it is the culture of the latter that is dominant.
   The area of settlement remains unaltered, but the population has
           *
               AR. VI (1954). 652-8.
                   t

           *
               B6hm, Die aUere B*rongezeit in der Mark-Brandenburg, 32.
                                        196
                    THE NORTHERN CULTURES

perhaps increased: in Vastergotland there are 4266 relics belonging to
                                                        1
period IV, as against 3106 from the preceding period. These figures
further indicate that the Stone Cist period can hardly have been
shorter than that of the Passage Graves. But the general economy
remained unaltered. The importance of agriculture may be inferred
from the number of flint sickles, curved in imitation of metal models.




        FIG. 100. Flint daggers (Denmark, J) and porthole cists (Sweden)
                              types of Montelius' IV.


But weapons are still the most prominent relics. The flint axes now
regularly imitate metal axes with a splayed blade;
                                                    but the faces are
seldom polished; indeed, polished flint axes made in period III were
sometimes flaked all over for use in period IV. Battle-axes were still
used, but are less shapely and less metallic. The classical weapon was
the dagger, at first lanceolate in form but culminating before the end
                                                        8
of the period in the famous fish-tailed form (Fig, ioo). The arrow-
heads are hollow-based rather as in the Copper Age of Iberia.
                1
                    Forssander, Ostskandinavische, 162.
                8
                    Ibid., 118, fig. 23; Brondsted, Danmarks, I, fig. 251.

                                          197
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
   The fish-tailed flint daggers certainly copy the bronze-hilted daggers
of Central Europe. The models for these and other weapons were indeed
imported from time to time. A certain number of bronzes from Italy,
Central Europe, and Britain have survived from this period, stray or
in hoards. And before the period ended smiths may have been producing
for a local market in Schleswig-Holstein and even Southern Sweden. 1
To obtain metal for rearmament the northerners had to rely chiefly
on the export of amber. Every scrap of the precious gum was reserved
for foreign trade, so it could no longer be used locally for charms. In
the tombs the place of amber beads is taken by long pendants of slate,
ring-pendants of stone or bone, and a few metal trinkets of UfiStician
        1
type.  But for all their sacrifices the Northerners' equipment and
economy remained essentially neolithic throughout period IV.
  The practice of collective burial persisted, alongside burial in separate
graves in the mass of the barrow. But the passage grave gave place
to the long stone cist or gallery grave generally sunk in the ground.
These are not, as Montelius thought, the result of a degeneration of the
passage grave.* One group might be treated as an evolution of the
dolmen, but even so that evolution must have been inspired by new
ideas from outside the Northern province. A group of Swedish cists,
built of thin slabs and often subdivided by a porthole slab, must be
derived from the Paris basin, presumably through the Westfalian
group mentioned on p. 190. Even the splay-footed pot, characteristic
of the French Horgen culture (p. 313), was reproduced in a variant
in Sweden and Denmark. 4 These new ideas must have been introduced
by immigrant families joining the established communities. But the
normal pottery of the period is represented by flower-pot forms imi-
tating wooden models and decorated with rouletted zig-zag ribbons
(Fig. 83, bottom left) perhaps derived from the Oder Battle-axe culture.
  Imitations of Unfetician pins and UnStician gold ornaments associated
with even the early flint daggers show that the fourth period of the
Northern Stone Age did not even begin till the Early Bronze Age was
well established in Central Europe and in Britain. Though metal-
workers and traders were spreading northward, the Northern Stone
Age outlasted Danubian IV. In Denmark and Scandinavia the Bronze
Age proper begins first in the Middle Bronze Age of Hungary and
Britain. 1 Till that date metal was too scarce for bronze weapons to be

  1
    Forwander, 95 i, 116 ff.; Kersten, Nordiscktn Bronuuit, 98; Broholm, Danmarks
Bnm*eald*r, 2 (1944), 30 ff.
  *
      Nordmann, "Mftgalithir Culture", 44.
  9
      Pomander, Oftskandinavische, 114, 140, 156; Brondited, Danmarks, 290.
      AsA. XL (1938), 14.
            t
  *
      Foratander, O$tskandinavi$che t 176, 196; Kersten,   Nordischen Bronzez   tit t   100.

                                           198
                   THE NORTHERN CULTURES
buried with even the richest chief. And one of the earlier graves fur-
nished with products of the local Northern bronze industry (at lies-
buttel in Schleswig-Holstein) contained an imported spear-head of a
                                                                    1
type characteristic of Middle Bronze Age 2 in Britain, while British
palstaves of the same typological age are included in contemporary
Danish hoards. 1 If the preceding phase of the British Bronze Age be
correctly dated to the fifteenth century by the fayence beads then
imported (p. 339), Northern Neolithic IV must have lasted till 1400 B.C.
in the sense that till then metal weapons were not normally deposited
in native- graves in Denmark, Southern Sweden, and the adjacent

parts of North Germany.    A segmented fayence head was, however,
found in a grave of Bronze Age form in North Jutland.*


                      THE SAALE-WARTA BRONZE AGE
Round the salt deposits and ore lodes of the Saale and Elbe, and along
the trade-route leading thence to the East Baltic amber coast, a peculiar
version of the Un6tician culture had arisen by the beginning of Northern
period IV. Metal had been brought thither in the time of the Jordanova
culture and weapons already by the Beaker-folk in Danubian III.
These or some other unidentified prospectors may have begun the
exploitation of the ores of Vogtland and exported their winnings as
                                            4
ingots in the form of the sacred double-axe. For double-axes with a
shaft-hole too small to take a real shaft are concentrated in that region
and strung out thence across Switzerland to Central France. At the
same time, connections with the Pontic zone to the east are attested
by the hammer-pins mentioned on p. 165. In the sequel Unfitician
fanners had spread down the Elbe and the Oder to the Saale and Warta. 5
Their poor graves contain a few Unfitician ornaments but not the
oldest forms such as knot-headed pins but their pots with provincial
conservatism preserved the pouched form that had gone out of fashion
in Czechoslovakia after the earliest phase of Danubian IV.
  The local bronze industry was based on the same UnStitian tradition,
but it was fertilized by the importation of Britannico-Hibernian manu-
factures6 and very likely by the immigration of Irish craftsmen. Its
products were exported to the still neolithic North and raw amber

    Kersten, Zwr Alttren nordiscken Br<nw*eit, 65.
    Broholm, Danmarhs BrotuMlder, i, 224; M8i.
    Ada Arch., XXV, 241.
    Hawkes. BSA., XXXVII, 144-51.
    PZ.,   XX  (1929), 128 ff.
    E.g. Irish axes from Dieskau and Leubtagen, Arck., LXXXVI. 303; PPS,, IV,
272 ff. Note that the Irish axe from Dieskan is rich in tin, the other "brontes" from th
hoard contain none! JMV.   t   XXXIV (1950), 00   ff.


                                          199
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 obtained in exchange. Some of this was re-exported in the raw state
 to England, there to be worked up into amber cups and crescentic
 necklaces.Local chieftains succeeded in concentrating the profits
 derived from this commerce and thus accumulated capital for the
 industry's further development. Their rich burials under imposing
 barrows present a striking contrast to the flat graves of Ungtician




                        FIG. 1 01, Section of Leubingen barrow.



farmers and confer a distinctive character upon the Bronze
                                                                           Age of the
province quite reminiscent of the Kuban.
  At Leubingen, 1 for instance, an old man and a young girl had been
interred in a lean-to chamber of stone slabs and oak beams
                                                              (Fig. 101)
enclosed by a circular fosse 20 m. in diameter, and furnished with
bronze rounded-heeled daggers, gold pins and lock-rings of Ungtician
types, a halberd derived from the Irish series, a massive gold bracelet,
and a perforated stone axe (or ploughshare).
    Even richer burials were discovered in a barrow cemetery at Leki

                                                        ci also JST.. VI (Hdmsdorf); I
n
(Baalberg), and perhaps Kiittiau, Silesia (Gftit-jfriJ., 84-9), and Anderiingen. Hanover
Jb. PrwMus. Hannover, 1907-08, 242-4, and Arch., LXXXVI, 225.
                                         2OO
                      THE NORTHERN CULTURES
 Male in Poznania during 1953.1 A wooden chamber built in a
                                                                  shaft
 grave at the centre of a barrow, 30 m. in diameter, had contained the
 remains of a man and a woman. The former was
                                                     accompanied by a
 bronze-shafted halberd like Fig. 102, I, a flat
                                                   knife-dagger, a flat
 Ungtician axe, a knot-headed
                                pin of poor bronze, and two gold lock-
 rings, the woman by only two bronze bracelets. A
                                                    secondary grave on




             FIG. 102. i, Bronze-shafted halberd
                                                  (t), 2, halberd-blade from
                                 Leu bin gen barrow (J).


the periphery contained a bronze-hilted
                                        dagger of Elbe-Oder type, an
axe, a Bohemian eyelet pin and three gold lock-rings. Horses, oxen,
pigs, and sheep were represented, in that order of
                                                   frequency, among
the remains of funerary feasts under the barrow.
  Such richly furnished barrow burials must belong to chieftains who
had won economic power as well as authority by            toll on the
                                                                 taking
trade that traversed their territories.
                                                 They established no kingdoms
guaranteeing order and security beyond the narrow limits of tribal
  1
        Kowiariska-Piaszykowa and Kuraatowski, "Kurhan Kultury Unietyckiej", FonUs
Arckmol. Posnanitnsts, IV (Poraan, 1954), 1-34 (with
                                                     analyses of bronees, and English
re* s u me").


                                          201
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
domains. A large number of merchants' hoards of bronzes and amber
beads vividly illustrate the dangers to which traders and perambulating
metal-workers were exposed between these local realms.
  These hoards, together with the grave goods just mentioned, show
how by blending varied foreign traditions in producing for their warlike
                                                                      1
patrons local craftsmen had created a variety of original types
halberds, modelled on late Irish types, but decorated with grooves
and triangles and ultimately mounted on bronze shafts (Fig. 102, i),
curious narrow "double-axes", daggers with bronze hilts, cast in one
piece with the blades either oval in imitation of daggers like Fig. 70,
or flat like the gold-studded Anglo-Armorican weapons, 2 and what may
be clumsy imitations of the elegant crescentic axes of the Kiflgs of Ur. 8
Their products were exported to North Germany and across Poland to
Sammland. 4 Thence and from Denmark came          in exchange amber
beads to be used in turn for barter with England, Bohemia, Hungary,
and Italy.
  Though definitely Early Bronze Age, the graves and hoards contain-
ing these products need not be early within Danubian IV. As compared
with Britain, the actual imports establish synchronisms only with
phase II of our Early Bronze Age. In Central European terminology
graves and hoards containing true Middle Bronze Age Reinecke B-C
  types are practically non-existent in just those parts of Central
Germany and Poland where the chieftains' graves occur 5 there the     ;



archaeological record seems to recommence with the Lusacian culture
generally attributed to Danubian VI! That might suggest that the
Saale-Warta culture occupies part of Danubian V too. 6 On the other
hand, in Southern England and in Brittany we shall witness the abrupt
emergence of richly furnished barrow graves whose furniture, though
stillEarly Bronze age, exhibits specially close affinities with, if not
derivation from, that of the Saale-Warta chieftains' tombs, 7 and the
English graves at least seem fairly well dated by JEgean connections
between 1600 and 1400 B.C.
  1
    Childe, Danube, 242-4.
  *
    GMMe-Fest., 93, and PZ., XVI, 205; cf. p. 335 below.
  1
    PZ., XXXIV      (1949-50), 238, Taf. 15, i; cf. Childc, NLMAE., fig. 91; J
                                                                             Jahn in
JM  V.. XXXV    (1951). 65-70.
  4
    See lor halberds O'Riordain's map, Arch., LXXXVI, 277, and for narrow double-
axes, Storm's Die Bronxezeit im Osibaltikum (Berlin, 1936), 32.
  1 Cf.
        Childe, Danube, 313.
    One bronze-shafted halberd of Saale-Warta type is said to have been found with
a socketed celt, Mannus, XIII (1923), 42-55.
   7
     So the characteristic Wessex and Armorican daggers seem to be derived from the
Elbe-Oder type, the Anglo-Armorican gold-studded hilts were copied in the Saale
region, Wessex amber pendants copy bronze-hilted halberds.



                                       202
                                 CHAPTER XI
              SURVIVALS OF THE FOREST CULTURE

THE circumpolar zone of Eurasia, extending from the Norwegian coasts
across the Baltic and the North European plain far into Siberia, offered
no propitious soil to neolithic cultivators, but was rich in game, wild
fowl, fish, nuts and berries such as mesolithic Forest-folk had pursued
or collected round the North Sea and the western Baltic in Boreal
times. By then the Forest-folk had perfected an efficient equipment for
the exploitation of these natural resources. They continued to use a
similar equipment long after farmers had colonized Denmark and
Southern Sweden; for the coniferous forests or taiga to the north con-
stituted a botanical environment very similar to that of Britain and
Denmark in the Boreal phase. In it much of the Maglemose culture
survived. Now, the survival of equipment implies also continuity of
tradition prescribing its manufacture and uses. And
                                                      continuity of
tradition means in turn some continuity of population too. However
much immigration or invasion have modified its genetic constitution,
cultural traditions have been preserved locally for eight or nine
thousand years (cf. p. 14).
  But continuity of culture is not equivalent to immutability. In fact,
the environment was neither static nor uniform. Cultures were modified
to take advantage of new opportunities, were differentiated to exploit
local resources, and were enriched by inventions and
                                                    borrowings. Nor
was the population of the European taiga zone homogeneous; by Sub-
Boreal times Mongoloid, Lapponoid, Europeoid and hybrid types are
represented in the graves.
  Throughout the period here considered the Forest-folk remained
food-gatherers. All indeed possessed domestic dogs which were some-
times fed on fish, 1 but nowhere were animals bred for food save in
Eastern Sweden, where the hunter-fishers, perhaps inspired by the
example of the B group herders (p. 178), kept pigs of native stock. On
the Norwegian coasts, round the Baltic and along the shores of the
White Sea the pursuit of aquatic mammals provided an important
element in the food supply and evoked a specialized equipment of
harpoons, ice-picks, and blubber-axes, while fishing was universally a
major economic activity. Hence the most permanent settlements were
        1
            E.g. at Panfilovo in Central Russia, IGAIMK., 106 (1935)* I2 5-
                                        203
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
dose to the coast or along the shores of lakes and rivers. Even these
the so-called Dwelling-places (Bopladser) seem mere encampments
where not more than ten households congregated temporarily. Large
cemeteries of 49 graves on Gotland1 and of 150 on Deer Island in Lake
Onega* do not necessarily imply large and permanent villages.
   But despite their comparatively nomadic mode of life, all the hunter-
fishers save those in Northern Norway made pots from Sub-Boreal
times on, and these help to define local and chronological groups. From
Sweden to Siberia indeed all pots were manufactured by the same
technique of ring-building, all taper downward to a rounded
                            8                                       base
and all may be decorated with horizontal rows of pits, frequently
combined with zones of comb-impressions. 4 The whole ceramic family
is therefore termed "pit-comb ware". But west of the Baltic most




FIG. 103.   i,   F.II pit-comb vase from Karelia ($); 2, vase of East Swedish style from
                   Aland Islands (}); 3. flint figures from Volosovo (fV).


vases have a concave neck separated from the conical body                         by a
shoulder, while farther east neckless ovoid vessels predominate. Within
these branches variations in the technique and arrangement of
                                                                        5
the decoration demarcate stylistic groups and phases. In Sweden
              6
and Finland four consecutive styles can be arranged in chronological
order by the relations of the coastal dwelling-places on which typical
sherds occur to the receding shore of the Litorina Sea; for the land here
was still rising, so that the higher a camp is above the present strand
the older it should be. The Swedish scheme can be correlated with the
  1
    M. Stenberger, Das Grab/eld von Vasterbjers auf Gotland (Stockholm, 1943).
  1
    SA, t VI (1940), 46-62; cf. Gerasimov, Litsa, 296-320; physically the population was
mixed Europeoid and Mongoloid.
  1
    The techniques have been admirably described by Voyevodskil, SA.,l (1935), 51-78*
  4
    Made at first with the curved and notched edge of a fiat pebble, later with short-
toothed bone combs figured by Voyevodskil, loc. cit.
      Bagge, Ada Arch., XXII (1951), 56-88.
  *

      Ayr&paa, Acia Arch., I, 165-90, 205 ff.; he discusses correlations with Sweden in

                                            2O4
            SURVIVALS OF THE FOREST CULTURE
subdivisions of the Northern Neolithic indicated in the last
                                                                                   chapter
and less precisely with the Finnish. An extension of the latter to North
and Central Russia has been attempted by Finnish prehistorians,
while Gurina1 has outlined a roughly parallel sequence based on observa-
tions    round Lake Onega and the White Sea. But other Russian
authorities 2 reject such generalizations
                                      and deny the extension of




FIG. 104. Ncwtvet (i) and Suomusjftrvi (2) celts (|), and
                                                            (3) polished chisel and adse (i).

pit-comb ware to the Urals altogether. 1 Nevertheless, we shall apply
the Finnish scheme to the whole region, using the expressions F.I,
F.II, F.III, and F.IV to denote similar styles and to indicate relative
positions in local sequences rather than contemporaneity throughout
the zone, and assigning to F.O assemblages not associated with
                                                               pottery
that are probably pre-ceramic.
  1
      MIA.. XX (1951), 77-140.      *
                                      Kg. FOBS, MIA., XXIX (1952); Briusov, O&rAt.
  *
      Wrongly since good comb-ware is cited In SAT., LVTI (1950), 5-22.
                                          205
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  F.O then denotes the Suomusjarvi culture, characterized by rough
stone adzes (Fig. 104, 2) and slate points 1 that in Finland appear in
Atlantic contexts and do recur in the Urals, and assemblages of Magle-
mosian types in North-West Russia similarly dated by Russian pollen-
         8
analysts. F.I pots, decorated with broad zones, sometimes of whipped-
cord impressions, are reported from the Baltic coasts to Lake Onega
and the White Sea and from one site in the Upper Dniepr basin. 8 F.II
would be well represented also in Central Russia and up to the Urals




      FIG. 105. Eastern Maglemosian types (J); 1-4, Esthonia, after Clark; 5, Ukraine;
                           6, leister from Ural peat bogs (J).


if itinclude stylized representations of aquatic birds. 4 (Fig. 103, i.)
Subsequently local divergences are too great to allow of correlations
presumably owing to the rise of Battle-axe cultures on the Baltic
coasts and in Central Russia. But pit-comb ware of F.IV styles was
    being made by hunter-fishers when a few socketed celts of Late
still

Bronze Age types and even iron were reaching Finland and Northern
Russia.
  For fishing, leisters with bone prongs (Fig. 105, 6) more or less like
the Maglemosian, were in use throughout our period from Norway
  1   Also transverse arrow heads; SM., LIV (1947-48), x-x8; LVII (1950), 9.
      Lower V*tye (Foss, MIA.. XXIX), Pogostiiee, i          (ibid..   XX, 46); cf. Briusov,
Octrki, 28-31.
      Mapped by Gurina, MIA., XX, 95-
      MIA., XX (1951), no, Gurina's group 3; SM., LX (1953), 33-44           F.IIIl
                                           206
          SURVIVALS OF THE FOREST CULTURE
to Siberia. Fish-hooks of the Boreal Pernau
                                        type (Fig. 105, 5) survived
too in North Russia and even on the Desna, but      the Sub-Boreal
                                                                 by
were supplemented throughout the zone by composite
                                                         implements
with a notched shank of stone or bone and a separate barb. 1 But net-
fishing was at least equally important.
                                                 8

   Of the Maglemosian hunting-equipment, slotted bone points survived
everywhere, conical bone arrow-heads* and the type of Fig. 105, 3 as
far as the Urals and from F.O to F.IV. Flint
                                             tips for arrows and darts




 FIG. 106. 1-3 Slate knives and dart-head, Sweden
                                                     (J), 4-5 stone mace-heads. Finland
                            (}),   and 6 slate pendant (}).

with little invasive retouch on the bulbar surface,
                                                    occurring in F.O
and F.I sites may be derived from the Swiderian and were
                                                            copied in
slate. Rare transverse arrow-heads4 found with the oldest F.I
                                                 ,


pottery in Finland and on early sites along the Oka, could be derived
from the Ukraine as well as from the West Baltic.            trimmed
                                                                 Bifacially
arrow-heads, generally leaf-shaped, appear first in F.II and in F.III
were translated into slate, as were older flint and bone
                                                         types with a
triangular or rhomboid cross-section (Fig. 106,       Rhomboid dub-
                                                               3).
 1
   SA. t III, toi; V, 44; cf. dark, Ant. /., XXVIII (1928), 67-8.
 1
   Imprints of nets are often found on pit-comb wmre, IGAIMK., 106, tig.
 ! Stf* Jttf
 4
                mnd
                   *$*        by Foit'*"     XXIX
   FM. t LXII, 30-3; firiuaov, Oterki, 5 8, 69.      OWk  46; cf. TCIM.. XXIX. 108 f.


                                          207
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 heads like Fig. 106, 4, current from Norway to the Urals and the Lower
        1
 Volga,   may be descended from Maglemosian spiked weapons.
    For woodworking, antler wedges* and socketed bone chisels remained
 in use in Norway as in North Central Russia, but in the north were
 supplemented by more efficient adzes, gouges, and chisels of polished
 stone (Fig. 104, 3); in Central Russia such tools of polished stone are
not apparently found before the rise of the Fatyanovo culture. So too
                               1
the Maglemosian boars tusk knife survived in Norway, Sweden, and
Central Russia, 8 but was translated into slate in the north, giving
rise to forms like Fig. 106, i.
   For land transport the man-pulled sleighs of Boreal age were supple-
mented by dog sleighs, represented by runners found Irom Sweden
to the Urals and dated in Finland as early as F.II. 4 A still heavier
sledge, suited for reindeer traction, is attributed to "the transition from
the Stone to the Bronze Age" in Finland. Skis too are attested in
Finland and Sweden. 6 For use on water, the skin boats, inferred for
the Maglemosian, are actually depicted in a Norwegian rock engrav-
ing, while paddles of the Maglemosian type have been dug up from
Ural peat.
  Each little group of hunter-fishers could be self-sufficing, but this
economic independence did not exclude interchanges of goods and
materials. Indeed, the seasonal hunting trips,  imposed by their pre-
datory mode of subsistance, might well be       combined with inter-
communal barter and easily grow into trading expeditions. So Russian
flint was largely imported into Finland during F.II, but was ousted
                               7
by Scandinavian flint in F.III. Chisels like Fig. 104, 3, were manu-
factured east of the Baltic, but were imported into Sweden. 8 Forest
folk had discovered the amber deposits of Sammland and carved it in
their own naturalistic style, but exported it to Norway, Central
                                          9        10
Germany, Finland, and Central Russia. Becker has convincingly
attributed to Forest hunter-fishers the surprisingly wide distribution
of South Swedish or Danish flint attested by regular hoards of celts
from Northern Scandinavia while Clark11 has envisaged an export of
dried cod from Norway in return.

    Aflio, Woknplatzfundc, 29, 33; SGAIMK. (1931)* No. 6, 7, found with contracted
  1

skeleton in an "ochre grave".

  8
      Veretye and Kubenino, MIA .. XXIX; Lyalovo, near Moscow, RAZ. t XIV (1923). 37.
                                                                                ' J/
      Fv. (1924), 298; RAZ., XTV, loc. tit.
 4
      SM., LVI (1949), 1-26.
      SM., XLI, i-io.
      dark, Preh. Europe, 283, pL IV, b.
 7
      Act* Arch., I, 2x0.
      Real., VI, 222.
   tower,      Din orttt*** SttnMder, 185; Real., i. 436; IGAIMK., 106, 132.
 w Aarbiger (1950). 155-245-
                                                      u Prtk.
                                                                Europe 88, 256.
                                           208
              SURVIVALS OF THE FOREST CULTURE
  The ideology, as far as it is expressed in the archaeological record, was
as uniform as the economy on which it reposed, So the dead were
always buried extended, often accompanied by lumps of red ochre
or sprinkled with that colouring matter, either on camp sites or in
distinct cemeteries. 1 The latter are usually very small, 8 to 22 inter-
ments, but those at Vasterbjers on Gotland comprised 49 graves,
on Deer Island in Lake Onega over ISO. 2 In the latter cemetery five
bodies had been interred standing erect in deep pits and accompanied
by an exceptional profusion of hunting weapons of flint and bone (all
of types appropriate to F.O.I) and personal ornaments. They must
belong to chiefs and reveal distinctions in rank within hunter-fisher
societies.
  At least east of the Baltic human figures, some explicitly male,
were carved in bone or wood and later modelled in clay. 8 The ideological
purpose they doubtless served was probably not the same as that
fulfilled by the familiar female statuettes         made by neolithic peasants,
and the style is quite different. In Norway elks and reindeer were
                                                             4
engraved on rocks in a style as realistic as the Magdalenian. In Sweden
and North Russia figures of animals, birds and men and even ritual
                    5

scenes were pecked out on ice-smoothed surfaces in a far more con-
ventional manner. Beasts and birds were carved realistically in bone,
stone, and wood by all the Forest hunter-fisher tribes, but curious little
flint sculptures 6 are concentrated rather in Eastern Russia from the
Oka to the White Sea.
  The authors of these relatively uniform cultures did not constitute
a racially homogeneous population. Most of the skulls from sites in
North and Central Russia are described as Lapponoid, some as Euro-
                           7
peoid, Mongoloid or hybrid, and even on Gotland one skull has been
diagnosed as Mongoloid.
  The most economical account of the hunter-fisher cultures just
surveyed would be to treat them all as derived by divergent adaptation
from the North Sea West Baltic Maglemosian of the Boreal phase.
   1
     North Russian burials are described and listed by Gerasimov, Vostanovlenie litsa po
terepu (Trudy Inst. Etnografiya, XXVIII), Moscow, 1955, 328-65. Stenberger, Das
Graofeld . .; the cemetery should be Northern III, D, or F.III.
          .

   1
     SA., VI (1940), 46-62; Ravdonikas dates the cemetery to F.III or IV, but Briuaov
(Olerki, 108) to the Atlantic phase, i.e. F.O.I See also Gerasimov, op. tit.
   1
     Foss, MIA., XXIX, 35 ff.; Ayrapfta, SM.. XLVIII (1941), 82-119. Save perhaps
for the bone figurine from Deer I., all seem late.
  4
     B0e, Felsemeichnungen in wesilichen Norwegen (Bergen, 1932).
     Ravdonikas, Les Gravures rupestres des boras du lac Onega et de la M*r Blanche
  *

Trudy Inst. Etnografiya), Moscow, 1936, 1938.
   Zamiatnin, Miniatiurnye kremnevye skulptury", SA., X (1948); Hausler, Wiss
                <r

Zts. d. Martin-Luther Universitat, Halle-Wittenberg,   HI (1954). 767-82.
  f
    Briusov, Ottrki, 35-6; KS. Inst. Etnografiya,      XVIII   (i953*   55-^5: Gemsiinov.
Vostanovltnie litsa (1955), 296-395.

                                          209
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 The anthropological data would      suffice to exclude such an over-

 simplification.    Becker 1
                          without of course denying its Maglemosian
                               ,



 constituents, regards the culture symbolized by the pit-comb ware of
 Scandinavia as introduced there immediately from beyond the Baltic.
 Russian prehistorians deny vehemently all dependence of the Central
Russian, Uralian, and Siberian aspects on the Baltic cultures. Accord-
                2
ing to Briusov, the Urals would have been colonized in early post-
glacial times from the Aral-Caspian basin, Central Russia and the East
Baltic from the Pontic region; the classical cultures distinguished by
pit-comb ware would have crystalized in the Oka-Upper Volga and
Upper Dniepr basins. His account involves rather heavy draughts on
ignorance. The early cultures of the North Pontic zone aifd Trans-
caspia are still very ill-defined. The chronological relations of assem-
blages from the Ural peat bogs, from sand-dune sites in the Oka- Volga
basin, and even from the White Sea-Onega-Ladoga belt to those
collected round the Baltic are quite ambiguous. Few pollen-diagrams 3
have been published, and their interpretation in terms of the West
Baltic zonation remains disputable.
   Types proper to the Boreal phase round the Baltic do indeed occur
in the Ural bogs, but their context is unknown. They
                                                        might theoretic-
ally have spread westward rather than eastward, but without inde-
pendent evidence of date no final decision is justified. So, too, ovoid
pots, similar in technique to the Swedish and Finnish, are found both
in Siberia 4 and across the Pontic steppes to the Caucasus. 6 The coarse
ware, associated with Tripolye pottery at all stages, is technically
akin to pit-comb ware. Whipped-cord patterns that might have
                                6
inspired Finnish styles I and II were at some time very popular in
the Ukraine and Dniepr basin. But the relative antiquity of all these
phenomena is uncertain. The apparent brevity of culture sequences
round the Urals, in Central Russia, and in the Ukraine gives the West
Baltic a semblance of priority. But that brevity is partly due to de-
ficiencies of exploration and of publication and, in so far as archaeo-

logical events are occasioned by climatic changes or land movements,
to the greater stability of the continental environment.
   The archaeological data here summarized do prove that the hunter-
fisher populations of the
                           taiga zone, however sparse, constituted a
continuum for cultural transmissions all        thethrough      zone
                                                                  circumpolar
  1
     Aarbegtr (1950), 251.
  1
     O&rto, 30-40, 164-74, 147-49; Ayrftpaa, too, seems to favour a south-east origin
for pitxomb ware, FM., LXII, 32.              TGIM., XXIX (1956), 70.
  4
  *
    E.g. M IA. t XVIII. 169 ff.; but some pots in addition to pits bear net impressions.
    Hanar, Kauhasiens, pi XXIX.
    A. Rosenberg, Kulturstrfimungcn in Euvopa zur Steinuit
                                                              (Copenhagen, 1931).
                                         210
            SURVIVALS OF THE FOREST CULTURE
of Eurasia and between it and the parklands and
                                                                steppes to the south.
They prove too that this was not a one-way traffic, but they give no
measure of the relative importance of contributions from the efcst, the
south, and the west respectively. The technique of bifacial retouch on
flint flakes and blades is more
                                likely to have reached the north from
the south-east than from the south-west; the contemporary apprecia-
tion of amber must have been diffused in the opposite direction. The
heavier bow introduced into Denmark by the pit-comb traders may
have been of the composite type attested in Siberia by the Serovo
     1
stage and ancestral to the Turko-Mongolian type, but even the
Maglemosian bows had been re-inforced with sinews. The transmission
through the food-gathering cultures of the taiga of Asiatic contributions
to European civilization is in fact better attested in Sub-Boreal than
in Boreal times, but still eludes precise evaluation.
  The cultural continuum thus constituted was disrupted by the
arrival of warlike farmers and herdsmen of the Boat Axe and Fat-

yanovo cultures. The former occupied the East Baltic coastlands, but
beyond a frontier, sharply defined in Finland, 8 left undisturbed the
old hunter-fishers. These preserved intact the old ceramic tradition
of pit-comb ware, though they sometimes used asbestos as
                                                                  temper
for the pots, and continued to rely on stone implements and
                                                                 weapons




FIG. 107. Knives and axe from Seima hoard: i, (J); 2,   (t);   3 (detail of 2), (i); 4-5, (4).


with the addition of local imitations of boat axes even when a few
imported socketed axes of Swedish Malar and East Russian Ananino
      8
types proclaim that the Final Bronze Age had already been reached
in Denmark and Southern Sweden. So too in Central Russia the Fat-

yanovo warriors did not replace the older population of the Volga
valley. Camp sites, yielding pottery made in conformity with the old
  1
      Okladnikov, MIA., XVIII (1950), 220.
  1
      SM., LIX (1952), 6-24.         ESA. XI (1937). *6-3; MIA.. XX (1951),
                                             t


                                       211
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
prescriptions, though now sometimes decorated with textile impressions,
illustrate the survival of a predominantly neolithic hunter-fisher
population when socketed celts and other metal types represented in
the hoard from Seima (on the Oka west of Gorki) 1 were filtering in
from the Late Bronze Age cultures of the srubno phase to the south and
east. The realistic elk's head of the Seima knife-handle (Fig. 107, 2-3)
has indeed analogues in Siberian and Chinese bronze-work, 1 but
springs from the naturalistic art of the Eurasiatic hunter-fishers and
can be closely matched not only on stone battle-axes that have turned
up from Norway to the Urals8 but also on the bone dagger from the
Deer Island cemetery on Lake Onega. But such belated survivals of
the Stone Age lie outside the scope of this book.              *


  1
      Tallgren, "Ett viktigt fornfynd",   FM. (1915), 73 ff. and ESA.
                                                           f            t
                                                                            II (1926). 137,
remains the best publication of this "hoard".
    Childe, Ins*. Arch.. AR. X (1954), "-25.
  *
                                t
  >
    Clark, Northern Europe, 186; SM.,     XXXV (1928), 36-43.
  For further details consult in additions to works mentioned in the footnotes:
  on Norway: "Vistefundet", Stavanger Museums          Arsheft,   1907; Gjessing, Norges
      StevAlder (Oslo, 1945).
  on Latvia: Balodis, Det dldsta Lettland (Uppsala, 1940).
  on Estonia: Moora, Die Vorzeit Estiands (Tartu, 1932).
  on Finland: Aflio, Steinxeitliche Wohnplatzfunde in Finland (Helsinki, 1909).
  on the whole region: Gjessing, "The Circum-Polar Stone Age", Ada Arctica, II (Copen-
      hagen, 1944)-




                                          212
                                 CHAPTER XII
             MEGALITH BUILDERS AND BEAKER-FOLK

                                MEGALITHIC TOMBS

THE diffusion of Oriental culture in Western Europe must have been
effected in part by maritime intercourse. And evidence of such inter-
course is supposedly afforded by the architecture of groups of tombs
spread significantly along the coasts of the Mediterranean and the
Atlantic and along terrestrial routes joining these coasts. Judged by
their contents, the tombs in question do not belong to a single culture
and were not therefore erected and used by a single people. But archi-
tectural details recur with such regularity at so many distinct places
that a general survey of the main types at this stage will save repetition.
  The most intriguing tombs of the series, which consequently received
the first attention from archaeologists, are built of extravagantly large
stones. They are therefore termed "megalithic". But as the same plans
are followed in tombs built in dry masonry with small stones and in
others excavated in the ground (rock-cut tombs) the application of the
term to the whole series is misleading. In Portugal, 1 for instance,
beehive chambers entered through a low, narrow passage were exca-
vated in hillsides where the soft limestone facilitated digging. Where
the subsoil was shallow and the rock hard, the same plan was repro-
duced above ground in dry-stone masonry roofed by corbelling if the
local sandstone or schists broke naturally into convenient slabs. Where
the rock     is   more refractory,
                                 like granite, large blocks set on end,

orthostats, supporting large capstones or lintels form the framework for
chamber and passage. And tombs constructed by all three methods
often contain the same furniture.
                    2
  Many authorities therefore contend that in such regions the method
of construction is conditioned by local geology alone. That thesis will
be adopted in the sequel with the reservation that it is not universally
applicable. "Rock-cut" tombs could easily have been excavated in
the chalk of the English Downs, but in fact the burial chambers here

  1
      V. Correia, "El Neolitico dc Pavia", Mem. CIPP., XXVII (1921). 63   .;   cf.   Forde.
Am. Aptkr., XXXII (1930), 41.
  *
     Elliot Smith, "The Evolution of the Rock-cut Tomb and Dolmen", in Essays and
Studies presented to Sir William Ridgeway (Cambridge, 1913), was a pioneer in this
interpretation.
                                        213
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
were always built above ground. At Antequera and other cemeteries
in Southern Spain (p. 274), orthostatic and corbelled tombs of differ-
ent plans stand side by side. In such instances the method of con-
struction   must have been dictated exclusively by the                    traditional

prejudices of the tombs' builders. In a preliminary survey, however,
it iscommunity of plan that is most significant.
  Among a bewildering variety of local deviations it is convenient to
                                                        of a chamber
distinguish two main types Passage Graves consisting
entered by a distinct passage, lower and narrower than the chamber




            FIG. 1 08. Rock-cut tomb, Castelluccio, and corbelled tomb,
                                     Los Millares.


proper; and Long Cists (Gallery Graves) in which the chamber itself is
long and narrow and entered directly through a portal without any
preceding passage. But if this conventional distinction be rigidly main-
tained, it leads to quite arbitrary classifications.          A
                                                      tomb like Fig. 153
is on plan as much a Gallery Grave as Fig. 109,      but by its furniture
and method of construction it belongs to the same group as Fig. 152.
Long Cists may be covered by long or round barrows and so may
Passage Graves. No complex of relics is peculiar to one type rather than
the other save that the SOM culture (p. 312) is regularly associated
with Long Cists of the Paris type. Hence even in Western Europe the
facts do not authorize us to postulate the diffusion of two distinct
versions of the "megalithic idea". 1
  The Passage Grave is the most widely distributed type, being com-
                       *
                           Cf. Daniel, PPS. t VII (1941), 1-49.

                                         214
         MEGALITH BUILDERS AND BEAKER-FOLK
mon throughout the East Mediterranean area, in Sicily, Sardinia,
Southern Spain, Portugal, Brittany, Central Ireland, Northern Scot-
land, Denmark, South Sweden, and Holland. Cellular annexes open
off the main chamber in the rock-hewn tombs of the East Mediter-

ranean, Sardinia, and the Balearic Islands and in some corbelled
tombs in Southern Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and Scotland, in a few
orthostatic tombs in Brittany and Denmark. Roughly circular chambers
characterize the corbelled tombs of Crete and the Cyclades, the earlier
rock-hewn tombs of    Sicily, and many South Spanish, Portuguese,
Breton, Irish, and Scottish sepultures and the oldest Danish ones. A
corbelled passage grave of circular plan is often called a tholos (Figs. 44
and 108).
  In rock-cut tombs the passage is often a descending ramp. Where
the ground surface is nearly level it may be reduced to a stepped shaft,
producing the pit-cave (Fig. 25, 2) already encountered in Greece and
South Russia and to meet us again in Sicily. If the chamber is cut in
the face of a cliff, the passage may be abbreviated to a mere doorway
as often in Sicily (Fig. 108). A well-marked variety of passage grave,
built with large orthostats, has been termed an undifferentiated passage

grave because the passage gradually expands towards the chamber
which is generally bottle-shaped. Near Aries and in the Balearic Isles
the rock-hewn chambers are themselves long and narrow and not
preceded by any length of passage though cellular annexes sometimes
open off the chamber (Fig. 109). In Menorca the same type is repro-
duced above ground in dry-stone masonry in so-called navetas.
  The long stone cist or gallery reproduces this Balearic plan in ortho-
staticmasonry. In Sardinia the orthostats support dry-stone walling
                              But in the classic form represented in
corbelled in to a barrel vault.
the Paris basin, Brittany and Jersey, Belgium, Western and Central
Germany, and Sweden the uprights support the lintels, and the long
narrow rectangular chamber is preceded by a short porch as wide as
the chamber. Most cists of the Paris type are subterranean, being built
in an excavated trench. Variants on the long cist occur in South Italy,
Sardinia, Northern Spain, France, Britain, Denmark, and Holland.
On the slopes of the Pyrenees, in Northern Ireland, and South-West
Scotland gallery graves are divided into a series of intercommunicating
compartments by low, transverse slabs, termed septal stones, sometimes
combined with upright portals; such tombs are known as segmented
cists (Fig. no).
  Dolmen is a term applied sometimes to any megalithic tomb, but
generally only to small rectangular or polygonal chambers without
entrance passage, formed of three to six megalithic uprights. Even
                                    215
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 when thus restricted, the name obscures the genetic and functional
 variety of the monuments to which it is applied. Some "dolmens", for




                                    10        20        50

             FIG. 109. Rock-cut tomb, Mallorca, and naveta, Menorca.


instance in Sardinia1 and in the Cotswolds,* appear to be just the most
stubborn remains of more complex monuments destroyed by culti-
   Antiquity, XIII, 376.
   Crawford, Lo* Barrows ofike CotswMs, 21; Daniel, Antiquity, XI (1937), 183-200.
                                      2l6
          MEGALITH BUILDERS AND BEAKER.FOLK
vators or road-builders. Some are dosed chambers, not collective
tombs. Others are obviously just abbreviated gallery graves. 1 To
avoid confusion we have used the Danish name dyss (plural dysser) for
dolmens which are xtiarked by furniture as well as structure as a distinct
type. But even the classical dyss, as defined on p. 181, might be regarded
as a segmented cist abbreviated to one compartment only.
  The portal of the tomb was treated with special care, and one form
  termed the porthole slab must be mentioned here. A round or sub-
rectangular aperture, 45 to 80 cm. (i ft. 6 in. to 2 ft. 8 in.) across is




          FIG. no. Segmented cist in horned cairn, North Ireland, and Giants'
                                   Tomb, Sardinia.

cut out in a slab or in the proximal edges of two juxtaposed slabs
which closes the entrance to chamber or passage (Figs. 81 and 100).
Porthole slabs were a regular feature in Caucasian "dolmens" and
occur even in the Indian ones. They form the portals to megalithic
cists and rock-cut tombs in Sicily, to the
                                        gallery graves of Sardinia, to
corbelled and other passage graves in Southern Spain,* to long cists
of the Paris type not only in the Seine valley, but also in Brittany,
Jersey, Central Germany, and Sweden; they were even incorporated in
the megalithic temples of Malta.* A porthole stone often enhances the
resemblance of a built tomb's doorway to the entry into a natural
  1
      For instance Adam's Grave near Dunoon is just a segmented cist reduced to a
cringle segment.
                   Studi*n t I (1938), 147-35.         *   Ank. LXVIH, 166.
                                                               t


                                                 217
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 or artificial cave. The desire to emphasize the similarity has in fact
 been suggested as an explanation for the porthole stone's origin. 1 But
 a porthole slab was employed to form the portal of a tomb cut in
 friable rock at Monte Salia, 2 and the device does not
                                                                     always simulate
 a cave mouth at all realistically.
   Built chamber tombs, when not erected in an artificial excavation,
were probably always put underground artificially by burial in a
mound or cairn. The latter was always carefully constructed and was
often, if not always, supported by a built masonry revetment wall,
or by a peristalith of large uprights. Masonry revetments are well
illustrated in the Balearic navetas, in some Almerian round cairns, and
in the long cairns of the Cotswolds and Northern Scotland. But it is
doubtful whether these finely built walls were intended to be seen
in Britain, since the faces were masked
                                             deliberately by an "extra
revetment" 8 of slabs piled obliquely.
  The passage or portal of a chamber tomb often gives on to a fore-
court so carefully planned that it must have played an essential
                                                                   part
in funerary ritual. Semicircular forecourts cut in the rock
                                                            precede
some Sicilian tombs, and are delimited by built walls in front of Sar-
dinian gallery graves and North Scottish passage graves and
                                                                 by ortho-
stats in front of tholoi at Los Millares in Almeria and Barro in
                                                                  Portugal
and of North Irish and South-West Scottish segmented cists4 (Figs. 108
and no). In England the forecourts are more often cuspidal in plan,
as are those connected with one or two Mycenaean, Danish, Swedish,
and Armorican passage graves. 6 More careful examinations of the
environs of chamber tombs or of the barrows covering them will
certainly reveal the presence of forecourts in other regions. Despite
their careful construction, the forecourts in Great Britain are
                                                                             generally
found filled up with earth and rubble. This filling may be deliberate.
In any case the entrances to tombs have usually been
                                                                         intentionally
blocked up and hidden. That need not mean, as Hemp 6 has inferred,
that the numerous skeletons found in such tombs had all been laid
to rest simultaneously, after which the vault was
                                                    finally sealed up.
The initiated could always rediscover the entrance and remove the
blocking, as happened at Mycenae (p. 82). Irrefutable evidence of the

  1
      Kendrick, Axe Age, 48.
  1
      BP., XUII, 17, fig. 6.
    Arch., LXXXVI, 132; PPS.,    ., IV (1938), 201..
                                            ,
  *
       * X ?YI    75' *"*<>***> I. 7J **    Sc. (1920), 304; Corrda, "Pavia", 72; Childe,
Prehistory of Scotland, 26, 33. Vestiges of such a forecourt can be seen in Balearic
navetas (CIPMO., 26), and with timber revetment in English unchambered
                                                                            long-barrows
(P* 3*5   below).
      Nordmann, Megalitkic, figs. 36-9.
      Arch. Comb. (1927), 13, 17.
                                           2l8
         MEGALITH BUILDERS AND BEAKER-FOLK
use of tombs for successive interments is forthcoming from one or
two graves in Scotland, Brittany, and Denmark, 1 as at Mycenae.
   The distribution of chamber tombs is presumably due to the spread
of some religious idea expressed in funerary ritual. Save in
                                                             Egypt, they
seem everywhere to have served as collective sepulchres or family
vaults. A family likeness between the skeletons buried in the same
tomb has been reported in England and Denmark* as at Mycenae, and
the features noted in Crete (p. 23: fires kindled in the chamber, con-
fusion of bones) are repeated almost universally. Collective burial
alone can hardly represent the unifying idea, since collective burial in
natural caves was practised even in mesolithic Palestine (p. 23). It
has indeed been suggested that the tombs were just copies of cave
              8
ossuaries,        and Wheeler4 describes the erection of megalithic tombs as
"the mass production of artificial caves" by populations accustomed
to collective burial in natural ones.            But in Scotland and elsewhere
perfectly good natural caves were neglected; collective burial comes
in simultaneously with megalithic sepulchral architecture. But
                                                                    mega-
lithic tombs were not always used as communal ossuaries. The finest
tholoi, the Mycenaean, were designed for a single chieftain and perhaps
his spouse. The most elaborate rock-cut tombs of the Maine contain

only a few skeletons, the rest a hundred or so. Moreover, burial practices
were far from uniform. While inhumation, generally in the contracted
attitude, was everywhere the normal practice, cases of cremation have
been reported from many South Spanish, South French, Armorican,
and British tombs and are conclusively attested in Northern Ireland.
  It is in fact only detailed agreements in seemingly
                                                                 arbitrary peculi-
arities of plan and in accessories, such as porthole slabs and forecourts,
that justify the interpretation of megalithic tombs as evidences of the
diffusion of ideas. The grave goods afford little support for this inter-
pretation. They are characterized at first by purely local idiosyncrasies
and would suggest to the typologist differences in date. In Egypt,
Cyprus, and the ^Egean even the earliest tombs contain a relative
abundance of metal objects, and such are not uncommon even in the
first Sicilian and Sardinian vaults. Moreover, in all these
                                                                 regions
chamber tombs continued to be built and used even in the Iron Age.
In Portugal, as in Malta, some megalithic tombs seem to be genuinely
pre-metallic, but in most tombs in the Iberian Peninsula and South
France, too, despite numerous stone tools, the grave goods are explicitly
Copper Age, while during the Bronze Age collective burial in chamber
         1
             Childe. Scotland, 43; Nordmann, Megalithic, 28.
         1
           PPS., IV, 147; Aarbtger (1915), 319; Nordmann, Megalitkic, 30.
         1
           Hemp, in PPS., I (1935), no.
         * In
              Eyre, European Civilitaiio*, II, 182.
                                           219
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
tombs went out of fashion. In Brittany metal is exceptional in chamber
tombs. In Great Britain and the rest of North-Western Europe such
tombs contain an exclusively neolithic furniture and in general went
out of use as bronze became available.
  This disparity has been used to support the thesis that megalithic
tombs, invented in the extreme north or in Portugal in a fabulously
ancient Stone Age, were carried thence to reach South Spain in the
Copper Age and the ^Egean in a still later Bronze Age. In reality the
quantity of metal from the tombs is no criterion of their absolute age.
In North Europe we have proved conclusively that at least the later
"Stone Age" passage graves and long cists were in use during the full
Bronze Age or Danubian period IV in Central Europe and thftt none
of the dysser even need be appreciably older than period III. On the
short chronology outlined on p. 339 megalith building in Denmark
should begin about 2500 B.C., or several centuries later than the Early
Minoan and Cycladic tombs, to say nothing of the Egyptian.
   The extreme rarity of metal and indeed of other imported objects
in the megalithic tombs of Northern and North- Western Europe seems
an almost fatal objection to the theory that the idea of building such
tombs was diffused by "prospectors" or "Children of the Sun" 1 setting
out from Egypt or some other East Mediterranean centre to settle in
regions where ores or precious stones, valued for magical qualities as
givers of life, were to be found. There is a general, but far from exact,
correlation between the distribution of such substances (for instance,
copper in the Iberian Peninsula, the Pyrenees, Sardinia, Ireland,
Galloway, and the Crinan district, tin in Galicia and Cornwall, gold
in Brittany, Ireland, and the Strath of Kildonan, pearls in Orkney,
amber in Jutland, etc.) and foci of megalithic architecture. The tomb
furnitures afford surprisingly little evidence for the exploitation of
these resources (no Scottish copper, gold, or pearls have been found in
a local megalith) and none whatever of Egyptian or ^Egean imports
obtained in exchange for their exportation. Yet such products would
be expected in the graves of merchant princes enjoying such prestige
that they could persuade local savages laboriously, if rather barbar-
ously, to copy for them the sepultures appropriate to their rank at
home, and inspired also with the desire for securing their own immor-
tality by necklaces of pearls and gold beads.
   The rarity or complete absence of imports from megalithic tombs
is furthermore a serious obstacle to their correlation with
                                                               any inde-
pendent sequence   of cultures by  which  their relative or absolute age
might be determined. Once in Sicily, very frequently in Sardinia, the
                      1
                          Perry, Th* Growth of Civilisation.
                                      220
        MEGALITH BUILDERS AND BEAKER-FOLK
Iberian Peninsula, South France, and Brittany, occasionally in Scot-
land and even Denmark, Bell-beakers or their derivatives are found
in megalithic tombs of almost every form. From individual tombs in
                                             1
Brittany, Spain, Scotland, and Denmark it has been proved con-
clusively that the Beakers were associated only with the later inter-
ments in the tombs concerned. The Beaker-folk cannot therefore have
been the vehicles in the original diffusion of the "megalithic idea", nor
can their expansion, which reached the Danube basin late in period HI,
fix the relative age of the earlier chamber tombs.

   Gallery graves in Central France, Brittany, and Jersey and even
in the Balearic Islands and Southern Sweden regularly contain relics
of the Horgen culture (p. 198). Indeed, it may be said that Horgen folk
diffused the Paris type of long cist to Brittany and across Germany to
Sweden. In Central Europe the Horgen culture too seems to belong to
a late phase of period III, and lasts into IV. But megalithic tombs are
not attached to the best-dated Horgen settlements, and the long cist
may be a secondary accretion in their culture.
   In default of better founded chronologies, a resort to typology is
tempting. In Scandinavia the sequence, dyss (dolmen), passage grave,
long stone cist really seems to hold good, though it is no longer regarded,
as it was by Montelius, as a self-contained process of evolution and
degeneration. Similar sequences have been applied by Leeds, Ober-
maier, and Bosch-Gimpera* to the Iberian Peninsula, and by Mackenzie
to Sardinia. 8 Bosch-Gimpera, by labelling some ruinous tombs in
Northern Portugal "dolmens", traces their development into ortho-
static passage graves, rock-cut tombs, and lastly tholoi. But of the
Iberian Peninsula Forde could write4 quite justly, "small passage
dolmens have a poorer, but not earlier furniture and represent a pro-
vincial degradation typical of peripheral areas". In the sequel, however,
it has been established that some orthostatic passage graves are really

earlier than any tholoi in Portugal, while the still unpublished furniture
is   said to confirm the yet higher antiquity of "small dolmens", con-
taining it would seem only a single burial. Mackenzie's "dolmens" in
Sardinia prove on closer examination to be just badly ruined Giants'
Grave. 6 Only in Denmark is the priority in time of the simplest types
proved by grave goods. But even in Denmark out of hundreds of dysser
only 57 are dated by their contents to Northern II; a very large

    L'Anthr., XLIII (1933), 248; Cbilde, Scotland, 43; Nordmann, "Megalithic", 122;
  1

Leisner, MegalithgrAber, 554.
                            T
    Arch., LXX, 215 ff.; 'E1 Dolmen de Matarubilla" (CIPP., 26); R*al. t X, 358;
Rev. Antkr.,   XL (1930), 244 ff.; Prtkistoire, II (1933), 189 f.
  1
    BSR.,  V  (1910), 87-137; VI, 127-70.
                                                         *
    Am. Antkr.. XXXII, 16.                                 Antiquity, XIII (1939), 376-7.
                                          221
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 proportion must have been built, like the passage graves, during
 period HL*
   No new typology need be attempted here. The architectural agree-
 ments cited reveal the megalithic province as a cultural continuum.
 Within that continuum culture grows in every aspect poorer as we
 pass westward and northward from the East Mediterranean to Scotland
 and Denmark. We see the same sort of cultural zoning that has been
 disclosed in the Danubian corridor and on the Eurasiatic
                                                          plain.


                                 BEAKER TRADERS
TtaJB^^                                 agency iji opening up communications,
establishing commercial relations, and diffusing the practice of metal-




      FIG. in. Beaker pottery: i, (J) and 2 (I), Palmella, Portugal; 3, La
                Halliade, South France (}); 4, Villafrati, Sicily (}).


           have already mentioned their activities in Central Europe,
and tEey will meet us so frequently in the West that a brief characteriza-
tion becomes convenient at this point.
                          1
                              Brendsted, Danmarks, 198, 345.
                                         222
           MEGALITH BUILDERS AND BEAKER-FOLK
 i Beaker-folk can be recognized not only by their economic activities
but also by the distinctive armament, ornaments, and above all
pottery, associated together everywhere in their graves,/ Indefed, the
inevitable drinking-cup, which gives a name to its users,
                                                           may be more
than a readily recognized diagnostic symptom; it symbolizes beer as
one source of their influence, as a vodka flask or a gin bottle would
disclose an instrument of European domination in Siberia and Africa
                           1
respectively. Millet grains were in fact found in a beaker in Portugal.
   The Beaker-folk are known principally from graves which never
form large cemeteries. When their pottery and other relics are found
in settlements, they are normally mixed, save
                                                     perhaps in Central
Spain, with remains distinctive of other groups./Thus Beaker-folk
appear as bands of armed merchants who engaged in trading copper,
gold, amber, callais, and similar scarce substances which are frequently
found in their            The bands included smiths the mould for
                 graves.^
casting a West European dagger was found in a Moravian Beaker
grave
      2  and women who everywhere fashioned the distinctive vases
with scrupulous attention to traditional details of form and ornament.
They roved from the Moroccan coasts8 and Sicily to the North Sea
coasts, andjrom Portugal and Brittany to the Tisza and the Vistula. 4
                                                                       /
/Sometimes they settled down,! by preference in regions of natural
wealth or at the junctions of important routes. ^At times they obtained
economic and political authority over established communities of
different cultures, formed hybrid groups with these, and even led them
on farther wanderirigs/the Beaker groups that invaded Britain
                                                                                  give
indications of composite^ origin.)
      A
      detailed study of Beaker pottery does not disclose a
                                                              single and
irreversible expansion. It suggests an early
                                              uniformity so remarkable
as to be hardly explicable merely by the rapidity of a migration and the
conservatism of the migrants followed by the emergence of distinct
local groups, but the maintenance of intercourse between some of these
        The "classical" or "Pan-European" beaker (Fig HI, 3-4),*
at least.
made of relatively fine grit-tempered ware coated with a burnished
  1
     CIA A., 1930 (Portugal), 356.
  1
     Casopis vlastenickiho spolku museijniho v Olomouci, XLJ (1929), T, li; Forssander,
Ostskand. Norden, 70.
     Germania, XXXIII (1955), 13-22.
   4
     General review in A. del Castillo, La Culivra del Vaso campaniforma (Barcelona,
1928). and "Cronologia de la cultura del vaso campaniforme", Arqvivo EspaM d*
Archeologia, LIII (i943) 388-435; (i944). i-*7; add for Belgium, Marien, Bui. Mustos
roy. d'Avt et d'Hist. (Brussels, 1948), 16-48; for Poland, Zurowski, Wiad. Arch.. XI
(1932), 116-56; for Central Germany, Neumann, PZ.      t   XX (1929), 35 ff.; for North
Germany, NNU., tl (1928), 25 ff.; X, 20; for Holland, Bunch, Outk. Med. t XIV (1933),
39-122.
      Savory, Revista Guimarfot, LX (1950), 363 ff.
  *


                                          223
             DAWN OP EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
slip that is liable to peel off and brick red to black in colour, is decorated
                             "
with zones of "rouletted hatchings, alternating with plain zones. The
"rouletted" decoration is executed with a comb with very short teeth,
separated by extremely narrow interstices and probably with a curved
edge. It yields a practically continuous "hyphenated line" of round or,
more often, rectangular dots, separated by low septa. The horizontal
zones may be combined with a radial decoration on the base.
    This classic Pan-European style           is   represented in nearly every
region reached by the Beaker-folk, though it grows less common and
       1

characteristic as one goes eastward from the Rhine-Brenner line. But
wherever Beaker-folk settled down at all, local styles grew up. These
are presumably in general later and specialized variants on th origin-
ally common theme. On the other hand, an Iberic style using sharply
incised or stamped lines (well represented at Ciempozuelos and Pal-
mella) (Fig. in, 1-2) is possibly older than the classic style. Be that
                                                               8

as it may, some local or derivative styles have such a wide distribution
that they must denote secondary intercourse if the dispersion of the
rouletted style be ascribed to a primary expansion. For instance,
beakers decorated by a cord, wrapped spirally round the vase, occur
in Northern Holland, Scotland, Brittany, and South France. 8
  In the Iberian Peninsula, South France, and Central Europe beakers
are often associated in graves with shallow hemispherical bowls decor-
ated in the same technique but more often with patterns radiating
from the base (Fig. in, 2).
  lA distinctive weapon associated everywhere with the Beaker com-
plex is the tanged West European knife-dagger (Fig. 113, 2). The tang
may be flanged; the hilt, never riyeted to the blade, was hollowed at
the base in the Egyptian manner explained on p. 130. Flint copies
were frequently made as substitutes at least for funerary use. But
Beaker-folk were primarily bowmen. Arrows were normally tipped
with tanged-and-barbed flint heads in Western Europe, with hollow-
based heads in Holland, Central Europe, and Upper Italy. In Central
Europe (including Italy and Poland), Holland, and Great Britain,
                                                          4
rarely also in Brittany, but only once certainly in Spain, the Beaker
archer wore a concave plaque of stone perforated at the four corners
    E.g. Castillo, pis. VII, 4 (Andalusia); L, 2 (Portugal); LXI (Castellon); LXXVI,
  i

1 (Catalonia);LXXXIV       (Galicia); XCIV (Hautes Pyrenees); CIII (Brittany); CXIX,
2 (Sicily); CXXIII (Po valley); CL, 7 (Bohemia); CLII, 8 (Moravia); CLXXXII, 2
(Middle Rhine).
  1
    Nordmann, "Megalithic", 100; Adas y Mem., XIV (1935), Noticiario, 5; Bosch-
Gimpera, Man, XL (1940), 2; but the stratigraphy of Spmaen on which the latter relies
does not, as published, afford any clue as to the relations between my "classic" and
"grand" styles; Savory, he. cit. t 169.
    Childe, Scotland, 83; PCBI., 93.
  4
    Corona d'Estudis dedica a sus Martins (Madrid, 1941), 128.
                                        224
               MEGALITH BUILDERS AND BEAKER-FOLK
as a wrist-guard for protection
                                    against the recoil of the bow-string
(Fig. 112). In South France, Brittany, and Bohemia1 thin strips of
gold-leaf (Fig. 113, 4), similarly perforated for the same purpose. Thick




                   FIG. 112. Beaker, wrist-guard, and associated vases, Silesia.
                                         After Seger (J).




Fio. 113. West European
                               dagger (Bohemia) and flint copy (Silesia); arrow-straightener
      .



               (Wiltshire); gold-leaf from wrist-guard and copper awl, Bohemia (|).

  1
          Mat., 1881, 552; Cazalis de Fondouce, Les Allies couvtrUs d* Provence; L'Anikr
XLIV, 507; Childe, Danube, 191, 193.
           P                                   225
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 day plaques of the same plan! but flat and also perforated at the comers,
 are found on Beaker sites in Portugal and Spain and may also have
 been used as wrist-guards. Stone arrow-straighteners, 1 used by Beaker-
 folk in Bohemia and Poland and also in Sardinia, do not seem to be
an original part of their equipment since in Central Europe they appear
in pre-Beaker times, in Britain only in the early Middle Bronze Age,
 well after the Beaker invasions were over.
   A distinctive element of the Beaker-folk's costume was a button, of
stone, bone, amber, or jet with V perforations.
   In Northern Sicily, Sardinia, the Iberian Peninsula, South France
and Brittany, and the Channel Islands, Beakers and their normal
associated armaments are found, generally accompanied fcy relics
distinctive of other cultures, in collective sepulchres                     natural caves, 2
                    8             4                                     5                     6
rock-cut tombs,         tholoi,       orthostatic passage graves,           gallery graves,
and segmented cists.        7
                                In no case, however, do they demonstrably
accompany the primary interments, while in isolated instances they
were proved to be secondary (p. 327). Beaker-folk had sometimes
obtained admission to the families or clans entitled to burial in such
sepulchres, but arrived only after the tombs were erected. In North
Italy and throughout Central Europe, Beaker-folk were interred
individually and strictly contracted, in simple trench graves.
   These form cemeteries comprising in Moravia as many as thirty
       8
graves, but normally considerably less, as if the communities settled
in one place were small. But the Beaker-folk must have settled down
and multiplied in Central Europe, since the total numbers of Beaker
burials recorded from Bohemia is about 300, from Saxo-Thuringia I03, 9
and from the small province of Veluwe in Holland I50. 10[ Settled in
Central Europe, the Beaker-folk formed hybrid cultures through con-
tact with other groups^ n Moravia some adopted cremation and
burial under barrows perhaps from Battle-axe folk. From these in the
Rhineland, Holland, and North Germany Beaker-folk adopted barrow-
burial, battle-axes, and some elements even in ceramic decoration,
including presumably the use of cord impressions. Jn fact the contact

    PA., XXXIX (1933), 5<>-3; cf. pp. 102, 106.
    E.g. Villafrati in Sicily, commonly in the caves of Monges, near Narbonne, in
Central and Northern Spain and in Portugal.
    E.g. Anghelu Ruju, Sardinia; Palmel&and Alapraia (Portugal).
    E.g. at Los Millares and other Almerian sites, and in Var.
    E.g. in Brittany and Portugal.
    E.g. in Brittany and in the Paris basin.
    Puig Rodo (Catalonia) and La Halliade (Hautes Pyrenees).
    Cnilde, Danube, 192; cf. Mannus,      XXXI (1939). 467   ff.,   for a cemetery of twenty-
four graves in Swabia.
   PZ., XX,
 " Oudh. Med.45-(1933), 120.
                                             226
       MEGALITH BUILDERS AND BEAKER-FOLK

produced a hybrid population with a composite culture and art. At
least the B2 and C groups of Beaker invaders in Britain are offshoots
of such a hybrid.
  The people buried, with Bell-beakers at Ciempozuelos, near Madrid1
and almost invariably in Central Europe and Britain, are round-headed,
and brachycranial skulls are found in nearly every collective tomb
that yields Bell-beakers, even in regions so dominantly Mediterranean
as Sardinia and Sicily. In Germany, 2 though not representing a strictly
homogeneous population,          skulls   from Beaker cemeteries regularly
comprise a novel racial type, better known in the Iberian Peninsula
and ultimately of East Mediterranean stock. In this instance, there-
fore, it looks as if culture and race coincided and one might legitimately
speak of a Beaker race. Even in Central Europe Beaker skulls had
been trephined.
   Both in form and decoration Bell-beakers of the classic style and
the associated bowls look like copies of esparto-grass vessels such as
are made in the Sudan to-day. 8 Beaker-like vases decorated with zones
of incision which might be clay translations of such basketry vessels
occur in Egypt in the early "Tasian" phase of culture. 4 Potsherds found
in a still undatable settlement on the western edge of the Nile valley
at Armant and in a "neolithic" context in the Sudan and Africa Minor6
show roulette decoration, though rather coarser than that on classical
beakers, while typical beakers have been found in a cave on the
Moroccan coast. 6 A hollow-based hilt like that regularly attached to
West European daggers was attached to flint and copper blades on the
Nile in Predynastic times. 7 Hollow-based arrow-heads were character-
istic of the "neolithic" Fayum and of Early Predynastic Egypt. There
is accordingly some evidence for an African element in the Beaker

culture. Still most authorities hold that the culture as we know it took
form in Andalusia or on the lower Tagus, 8 though plausible typological
arguments favour a North-West German origin.
   The Beaker-folk's expansion, from whatever cradle it started, was
presumably rapid. It thus constitutes a convenient chronological
horizon in several otherwise separated areas. But the number of beakers
and the variety of their decorations in each area imply that such vases

   Bol. JR. Acad. Madrid, LXXI, 22 ff.
   Gerhardt, Die Glockenbecherleute in Mittel- und West-Deutschland (Stuttgart, 1953).
   Schuchhardt, PZ., I (1909). 43-
    Childe, NLMAE., 34, fig. 10; cf. pi. XVIIIb for Mesopotamian analogies.
    Mond and Myres, Cemeteries of Armani, 268 ff., Arkell, Early Khartoum, pi. 89;
Vaufrey, Inst. Pal. Hum., Mem., 20 (1939). 7 2 ff
                                                -


   Germania, XXXIII (1955). 13-22.
   Childe, NLMAE.,       98, fig. 39.
   Castillo, op. cit., Bosch-Gimpera, Real., X, 356; PPS. t   XXIX. 95 3-
                                          227
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
must have been in fashion for several generations.      It is therefore a

grave error to treat all beakers as contemporary. Such vases mark
                                                    1

rather a substantial period of time, not everywhere of equal duration.
In Central Europe beakers go back to period III. On the other hand, in
                                                      8
Moravia, Bohemia, and even on the Rhine, beakers are associated in
graves with round-heeled riveted daggers typical of period IV and in
Austria8 with mature Unfitician forms. A beaker, with exact parallels
in Bohemia and in Sardinia too, reached Denmark, in Neolithic IIIc.
And the bronzes of period IV are often decorated with patterns that
recur on beakers. In other words, beakers remained in fashion into
period IV in Central Europe and the Beaker and Ungtician cultures
overlap. Beakers do not denote a point in time. But the Beaker cultures
are everywhere on the same economic plane. Judged by form and
decoration, most British and Central European Beakers seem to be
later than the "classic type", those from the edge of the Beaker terri-

tory Scotland and Poland looking particularly late.
 1
     Forssander, Ostskand. Nordcn, 37; Childe, Am. Anthr., XXXIX     (1937), *
 *
     Childe, Danube, 190; Forssander, Ostskand. Norden, 72; Mannus, XXXI, 478, fig. 17.
     PZ., XXV. 137.




                                         228
