                                  CHAPTER II
                          THE ORIENT AND CRETE
THE now desiccated zone of North Africa and Hither Asia had been
grassy prairie when Northern Europe was tundra or ice-sheet. On the
upland steppes of South-West Asia grew wild grasses which under
cultivation became barleys and wheats the ancestor of one-corn
wheat (Triticum monococcum) from the southern Balkans to Armenia
and wild emmer (Triticum dicoccoides) from Palestine to Iran. 1 Sheep
and cattle fit for domestication were roving there too. In such an
environment human societies could successfully adopt an aggressive
attitude to surrounding nature and proceed to the active exploitation
of the organic world.
  At Jarmo in Kurdistan 2 the inhabitants of a little hilltop village
were cultivating emmer and barley that already exhibit some effects
of domestication as early as 4750 B.C. In Palestine where the meso-
                                                               8
lithic Natufians had been reaping annual grasses,                  farming may have
                                                  4   But neither at Jarmo nor at
started before 6000 B.C. at Jericho.
Jericho did the first farmers make pottery.
  Stock-breeding and the cultivation of cereals were revolutionary
steps in man's emancipation from dependence on the external environ-
ment. They put man in control of his own food-supply so far that
population could and did expand beyond the narrow limits imposed
by the naturally available supply of wild fruits and game. But the
expansion of population led by its very conditions to the expansion
of the revolutionaries themselves  the primitive half-sedentary farmers
  or their transmutation by a second revolution into a settled peasantry
producing surplus food-stuffs for its own surplus offspring who had
become artisans and traders, priests and kings, officials and soldiers in
an urban population.
  The second revolution was accomplished first in the valleys of the
Nile, the Euphrates, and the Indus. There irrigation cultivation had
produced a surplus vast enough to support the whole superstructure
of literate civilization. By 3000 B.C. archaeology and written history
reveal Mesopotamians      and           already grouped in vast cities
                                 Egyptians
         1
           On the cereals see Helbaek, Inst. Arch. AR., IX (1953). 44-5*-
         1
             Braidwood, R. Antiquity, XXIV (1950), 190-6.
         8
             Childe, NLMAE., 28-30.
         4
             Antiquity,   XXX (1956), 196.
                                             15
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
any one of which might, like Erech, measure two square miles in area,
and in which secondary industry and trade offered an outlet for the
surplus rural population.
   In New Light on the Most Ancient East I have tried to sketch in some
details in that prehistoric background of Oriental history. And I have
tried to show too how the first revolution that precedes it had to spread,
and how the growing demands of the new urban centres of population
and wealth must involve the propagation both of the arts and crafts
on which the second revolution rested and of the economy that sus-
tained it. To find food for rising generations, the simplest step was to
bring fresh land under cultivation and annex new pastures. That
meant a continuous expansion of colonization and the progressive
multiplication of farming villages. But the surplus accumijlated in
Egyptian and Mesopotamian cities could serve as capital for the
promotion of trading expeditions through which the villages thus
founded could share in the surplus and use it in their turn for the
development of secondary industries. To obtain this share by supplying
the effective demands of civilized societies, the Anatolian or Syrian
villages must turn themselves into towns producing a surplus of farm-
produce to support industrial workers and traders. And villages, thus
urbanized, must become secondary centres of demand and for diffusion;
they must in turn repeat the process of propagation, generating thereby
tertiary centres to cany on the work. We should thus expect a hier-
archy of urban or semi-urban communities, zoned, not only in space
but also in time and in cultural level around the metropoles of Egypt,
Mesopotamia, and India. How far does prehistcSif Europe confirm such
anticipation?
  Farming must of course have started in South-West Asia. But in
tracing its primary expansion thence, it must now be remembered
that the first farmers were not necessarily also potters; the first peasant
colonists to reach Europe may not have left a trail of potsherds to mark
            And those tracks were not necessarily on land. Fishing
their tracksl
communities along the Levant coasts could perfectly well have learned
to supplement the produce of food-gathering by cultivating cereals
and breeding stock. Such incipient food-producers, forced to colonize
fresh territories, might perfectly well have taken to their boats and
paddled or sailed on the alluring waters of the Mediterranean to the
next landfall   and then the next.

  By its spatial position and by special favours of the winds and
currents the great island of Crete is easily accessible from the Nile,
from Syria, from Anatolia, and from peninsular Greece. Its fertile
                                     16
                        THE ORIENT AND CRETE
lowlands guarantee a living to farmers and orchardists; its resources
in timber, copper, and other raw materials can supply the needs of
secondary industry; its natural harbours are not only bases for fisher-
men but havens for merchants who can transport Cretan produce to
urban centres and bring back in return the manufactures and also the
science of older cities.
  The ruins of neolithic villages have formed a tell, 6*5 m. high,
beneath the oldest Minoan levels at Knossos in Central Crete, where
the Minoan civilization was first identified. But trial pits have revealed
but little of the neolithic culture. 1 It was formally neolithic in that
pebbles were ground and polished to make plump celts (axes and chisels)          .



But obsidian was imported from Melos and from Yali so that the
farmers were hardly self-sufficing. For the later levels indeed the term
neolithic is not even formally correct, since a copper flat axe was found
on a house floor with stone celts. Stone was also drilled to make spheroid
and pear-shaped mace-heads and worked into studs and even vases.
The latest houses consisted of agglomerations of small chambers with
fixed hearths and stone foundations for their walls.
                2
  Pottery, though hand made, was of fine quality, self-coloured grey-
black or red-brown according as to whether it were fired in a reducing
or an oxidizing atmosphere; the surface was often burnished, sometimes
so as to produce a decorative rippled effect. The forms cannot be
called primitive: the vases may be provided with genuine handles
(including wish-bone, nose-bridge, and flanged ribbon handles) as well
as simple and trumpet lugs; some vases have short spouts, most flat
bases.  Goblets on tall lialf-hollow pedestals and fruit-stands with
hollow feet appear before the period ends. Ladles axe common, as in
neolithic Egypt and Western Europe. Some middle neolithic vessels
have club rims, as in Portugal and Britain. The potter decorated her
products with incised patterns, including triangles and ribbons filled
with punctuations. In the transitional pottery of the Trapeza cave8 in
the mountainous interior a schematized human face was modelled on
the vase rim.
   For their fertility rituals the farmers modelled in day or carved in
soft stone highly conventionalized figurines of the "Mother Goddess",
seated or squatting (Fig. 8). As amulets they wore miniature stone
axes pierced for suspension (axe-amulets). Caves were used for burials
but for individual interments, not as ossuaries. 4
  Since palaeolithic food-gatherers have left no relics on the island, we

         1
         1
             Pendlebury, Archaology of Cr*U (London, 1939). 35-4 1   *



             BSA. XLVIII (1953). 94-134.
                    t


             BSA., XXXVI, 30.                                *SA. XXXVIII, 13.
                                                                         t


     B                                       17
                    THE ORIENT AND CRETE
many Asiatic tells. 1 The mace-heads too belong to an Asiatic family
but recur, like the axe-amulet, in the neolithic village of Merimde* in
Lower Egypt, which also yielded plump axes and clay ladles. But
punctured ribbon decoration and pedestalled goblets have analogies
also in the Balkans .(p. 91), and the wish-bone handle is typical of the
Macedonian Bronze Age, while Trapeza ware is still more reminiscent
of Balkan and Apennine fabrics.
   The "neolithic" phase was ended by a "quickening impulse from the
Nile, which permeated the rude island culture and transformed it"
into the Minoan civilization. Evans suspects an actual immigration
of predynastic Egyptians, perhaps refugees from the Delta fleeing
from Menes' conquest. At least on the Mesari, the great plain of
Southern Crete facing Africa, Minoan Crete's indebtedness to the Nile
is disclosed in the most intimate aspects of its culture. Not only do the

forms of Early Minoan stone vases, the precision of the lapidaries'
technique and the aesthetic selection of variegated stones as his materials
carry on the predynastic tradition: but also Nilotic religious customs
such as the use of the sistrum, the wearing of amulets in the forms of legs,
mummies and monkeys, and statuettes plainly derived from Gerzean
"block figures", 8 and personal habits revealed by clepilatory tweezers
of Egyptian shape, and stone unguent palettes from the early tombs
and, later, details of costume such as the penis-sheath and the loin-
cloth betoken something deeper than the external relations of
commerce.
  At the same time even more explicitly Asiatic traits can be detected
among the innovations distinguishing the "Metal Age" from the
"Neolithic" civilization. Some might indeed have been transmitted
via Egypt: block-vases paint-pots consisting of two or more com-
partments hollowed out of a stone parallelepiped with perforated
corners which were especially favoured in the Mesar, are common
to Sumer and Egypt in Early Dynastic times. 4 But Minoan metallurgy
is based entirely on Asiatic traditions; the coppersmith cast axe-heads

with a hole through the head for shafting in the Mesopotamian manner,
the artists treated rosettes and similar figures in the Asiatic, not the
                6
Egyptian style. The most striking Minoan pot-forms the pyxis with
cylindrical neck and string-hole lid, the jug with cut-away neck and
the side-spouted jar have parallels on the Anatolian, not on the African
side; the so-called teapot with curious spout (Fig. 9) recurs without

            Childe, NLMAE., 218.
            Childe, NLMAE., 39.
            Childe, NLMAE., fig. 36.
            Evans, P. ofM., II, fig. 20; cf. Childe, NLMAE., 94, 142, 163.
            Matz, FrUhkretische Sicgel, 88.
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                                                            1
the handle            away as Tepe Hissar near Damghan and even
                 as far
Anau in Turkestan. The technique of glaze paint that distinguishes
Minoan pottery had been earlier employed by the Tel Halaf potters
of North Syria. So in religion the cult of the Double-Axe is foreshadowed

by Tel Halaf amulets. 2 The use of engraved bead and button seals as
contrasted with carved amulets is a very ancient North Syrian-Iranian
practice later adopted in Egypt as in Crete.




                                               "
           FIG. 9. Early Minoan III "teapots       and button seal. After Evans.


  How far fresh Anatolian or Syrian colonists                   merchants or artisans
  joined with Egyptian refugees in founding the Minoan cities is for
us a secondary question. Minoan civilization was not brought ready
made from Asia nor from Africa, but was an original native creation
wherein Sumerian and Egyptian techniques and ideas were blended
to form a novel and essentially European whole. The admittedly Nilotic
and Oriental elements that we see superadded to the Cretan neolithic
culture may be treated as concrete expressions of the transformation
of the island's economy with the support of capital accumulated in the
great consuming centres that arose, round about 3000 B.C., on the Nile

  1
    Schmidt, Excavations at Ttyi Hissar (1931-3), and MusJ. t XXIII, p. CXVI; cf.
Frankfort, "Archaeology and the Sumerian Problem" (O.I.C. Studies, 4), 57-64. In
Anatolia kindred forms were popular under the Hittite Empires (1950-1200 B.C.)*
MDOG., 75 (1937). 3& Cf. Gordon, Iraq, XIII (1951), 40-46.
  *
      Chflde, NLMAE., fig. 105, 3.
                                          2O
                      THE ORIENT AND CRETE
and the Euphrates. In supplying their needs the Cretan farmer's sons
might find a livelihood in trade and industry; their self-sufficing villages
would become commercial cities.
   On the basis of the stratigraphical sequence, best preserved at
Knossos, Sir Arthur Evans divided the Cretan Bronze Age into the
famous "nine Minoan periods" to which he attributed absolute dates
on the strength of contacts with the literate centres of civilization.
His scheme, columns I and II below, needs some revision after fifty-
five years. Firstly, the chronologies of Egypt and Mesopotamia1 have
been deflated since then. Secondly, Evans' division was based mainly
on the sequence of ceramic styles observed at Knossos. This turns out
to be applicable to other parts of the island only with drastic modi-
                                                          "
fications. The ceramic art, defining Evans* L.M.II, was a   palace style",
in vogue only at Knossos. The same thing had happened before. Once
it looked as if East Crete    had been deserted in M.M.II, since the eggshell-
fine polychrone pottery defining that phase was lacking. In reality this

style too was confined to the palaces of Knossos and Phaestos in Central
Crete. 2 Even in the Mesard, a fortiori in East Crete, the M.M.I style
was still in fashion as late as 1790 B.C. 8 Moreover, at Knossos the Early
Minoan period is poorly represented owing to the levelling carried out
by later builders; Evans' account had to be filled out by large drafts
on material from East Crete and the Mesard. But during E.M. Minoan
culture was by no means uniform so that there is a real danger of inflat-
ing the sequence by using local styles to represent chronological periods.
Thirdly, the first reliable synchronisms based on an actual and dated
interchange of products are afforded by M.M.II vases in Middle King-
dom Egypt securely dated about 1850 B.C. We have no Early Minoan
imports in dated contexts in Egypt or Hither Asia, and, though actual
Egyptian manufactures of Old Kingdom and even predynastic type
were imported into the island, hardly any come from closed finds.
One Egyptian jar from a Late Neolithic deposit is considered by
Reisner to be no earlier than Dynasty I. If he be right, E.M.I must
begin after 2830 or 3188 B.C. whichever date for that dynasty's begin-
ning be accepted. Another imported vase from an E.M.I context,
however, cannot be later than Dynasty III, some four centuries later.
Further Egyptian imports imply an overlap between E.M.III in the
Mesari and East Crete and the rise of Dynasty XII about 2000 B.C. 4
We thus have the following scheme:
  1
    E.g. by Sidney Smith, Alalakh and Chronology (London, 1940).
    Aberg, Chron., IV, aoi ff.; Pendlebury, Crete, XXXI, 300-2; Demargne, Fouilles a
  1

Mallia: Ntcropoles (Etudes Crttoises, VII, Paris, 1945), 65-9.
      Smith, AJA. XLIX (1945). 23-4.
                  t


      Hutchinaon, Antiquity, XXII (1948), 61-3.
                                          21
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION




  No attempt can be made here to evoke in a few pages an adequate
picture of Minoan civilization.       We
                                 must content ourselves with a brief
outline of the economic development and some reference to the indus-
trial products that are relevant for comparative purposes.
   As in neolithic times the foundations of Minoan economy were
fishing, the breeding of cattle, goats, and pigs (sheep
                                                         are not osteologic-
                                       2 and the cultivation of unidentified
ally attested till Late Minoan times)
cereals together with olives and other fruits. But now specialized
craftsmen jewellers, coppersmiths, lapidaries must have been sup-
ported by the surplus produce of the peasantry. And so in addition
to rural hamlets, larger agglomerations of population must be assumed
though no Early Minoan township has been fully excavated. Soundings
at Vasiliki8 in East Crete and beneath the palace of Knossos give hints
of the existence of complexes of rectangular houses of brick and timber
on stone foundations, like the contemporary towns of Anatolia and
Mainland Greece. But even as late as M.M.I we find the rural population
                                                     of a big farm than
living in isolated house-complexes more reminiscent
even a village. A dwelling of that period at Chamaizi was an oval
                                                         4

walled enclosure, measuring 20 m. by 12 m. and divided by radial
walls into eleven compartments exactly like the Iron Age courtyard
houses and wheel dwellings of Western Britain!
  Similar conclusions might be drawn from the graves. The standard

  1 A diorite
              amphora, bearing the cartouche of Thothmes III (1500-1447) from a
L.M.II tomb near Herakleion, gives new precision to this dating; Kretika Chronika,
VI (1953). "
  * Hazzadakis, Tylissos a I'e'poque minoenne (1921)1 77*
  1 Described in Boyd Hawes, Gournia.
  4
    Evans, P. ofM. t I, 147.
                                           22
                  THE ORIENT AND CRETE
Minoan burial practice at all periods was collective interment in a
family or communal ossuary used for many generations. This practice,
foreign to Egypt, Sumer, and the Anatolian plateau, was current all
round the Mediterranean, going back to "Mesolithic" times among
the troglodyte Natufians of Palestine. 1 In the Minoan ossuaries the
bones are generally lying in the utmost disorder. The dislocated con-
dition of the skeletons, which has been observed in collective tombs
farther west too, has been taken as evidence of secondary burial; the
remains would have been deposited in a temporary resting-place until
the flesh had decayed. Xanthudides' 8 careful studies of the Mesara
burials have, however, shown that the disordered condition of the
bones was due in the main to disturbances by those undertaking later
interments who showed little respect to the former occupants of the
tomb in making room for a fresh interment. The bodies had generally
been placed on the floor of the tomb in the contracted attitude. Simi-
larly traces of fire, sometimes noted on the bones, are due to ritual or
purificatory fires kindled within the ossuary rather than to cremation.
  The ossuaries themselves may be natural caves (E.M.I to M.M.I),
rectangular stone chambers, imitating two-roomed houses, or circular
enclosures commonly termed tholoi. In the Mesari the tholoi vary
in internal diameter from 4-10 to 13 m., and are entered through a low
doorway, formed of two megalithic uprights supporting a massive
lintel and often entered from  a small walled enclosure. The walls are
from 1-8 to 2-5 m. thick and the inner courses oversail one another as if
the whole had been roofed with a corbelled vault on the principle
employed in the Cycladic tomb illustrated in Fig. 25, I. While it is
hard to believe that a space 30 or 40 feet across could really have been
spanned by a false dome, the smaller chambers certainly do deserve
the name of tholoi, or "vaulted tombs". In an early example at Krazi8
in East Crete, 4-2 m. in diameter, the corpses must, as in the Cyclades
and Attica (pp. 51, 72), have been introduced through the roof, since
the door, only 0-5 m. high, was completely blocked by an accumulation
of bones and offerings; the "door" would in fact be purely symbolic
as in Egyptian mastabas and some British long barrows.
   Evans has compared the Cretan tholoi to Libyan and Nubian closed
tombs of later date, but Mallowan, followed by Peake, would find the
prototypes of the Minoan tholoi in circular brick constructions of
unknown, but certainly non-sepulchral, use which he had discovered
in the chalcolithic Tel Halaf township at Arpachiya in Assyria that

           1
             Garrod, The Stone Age of Mount Carmel, I, 14.
             Xanthudides and Droop, Vaulted Tombs of the Mesard.
           1
             -4A (1929). 103.
                                     23
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                                  B.C. 1 By that date the
goes back at least far into the fourth millennium
device of corbelling was certainly well understood in Hither Asia, but
it is not attested in Egypt before the Second or Third Dynasty. In fact,

the Minoan tholoi, like the contemporary rectangular ossuaries, may
be just imitations in permanent material of dwellings for the living,
since round houses are attested by a model from Phsestos. As the tholos
tomb was current also in the Cyclades, pottery and ornaments of
                                                        at Krazi, and
Cycladic character were abundant in the early tholos
          idols occur  even  in  the  Mesari  tombs, Marinates  seems
Cycladic
inclined to think that the type of sepulchre may have been introduced
by families from the small islands.
  In East Crete (for instance at Mochlos) the house-tombs may be
                                                                to a
grouped to form small cemeteries such as should correspond
township where several lineages lived together. Tholoi are more often
isolated as if the territorial unit corresponded to a single clan or lineage.
But in the Mesari small cemeteries are known three tholoi and a
                                                              etc. Such
rectangular ossuary at Koumisa, three tholoi at Platanos,
                   the association of several kinship groups in a single
aggregations imply
                                          Middle Minoan have been
village, but no actual settlements anterior to
                             Both in the Mesard and at Krasi, when
yet identified in the vicinity.
the tholoi had become congested, accessory chambers were built on
to the original mausoleum to receive subsequent interments, mostly
of Middle Minoan date. And by M.M.II there developed the practice
of excavating in the soft rock sepulchres designed for a single small
family irregular chambers entered by a short passage or antechamber
                                                                       2
  as attested by the Mavro Speleo cemetery near Knossos.                   Cases of
                                                                     8
cremation occur among the latest interments in an adjacent cemetery.
A small tholos seems to have been built in an excavation in a hillside
in the same period. Subterranean chambers became the standard form
of tomb in Late Minoan times in Crete as in Mycenaean Greece. But
even before the end of Early Minoan, individual burial in small stone
cists, in clay coffins (larnakes), and in jars (pithoi) grouped
                                                                in cemeteries
as contrasted with ossuaries was beginning to compete with ossuary
practice,and steadily increased in popularity during later periods.
The clay coffins4 have early parallels both in Mesopotamia and Egypt,
whereas jar burial is a specifically Anatolian-Syrian rite.
   The variety of burial practices coexistent in Early Minoan times,
like the variety of ceramic traditions, suggests that the island had been
colonized by distinct communities which had not yet fused to form a
              1
                  Iraq, II, 20. figs. 13-14.
              *
                  BSA. XXVIII (1926-27), 263-96.
                        t


                  "Archaeology in Greece", Supplement to JHS. (i955)
                  Man, XXIX (1929), 18-
                                               24
                         THE ORIENT AND CRETE
single people with an homogeneous culture. But they seem to have
lived together peaceably, as no fortifications have been found, and as
members of a single economic system in view of the uniformities in
types of metal tools, stone vases, jewellery, and seals. This system
secured and distributed foreign materials, gold, silver, lead, obsidian,
marble, and perhaps amber (from the tholos of Porti), Egyptian and
Asiatic manufactures such as fayence beads and stone vases that were
copied locally, and perhaps Cycladic figurines. Individual artisans
needed seals (buttons, beads, and prisms) that might bear scenes
symbolic of their craft; merchants stamped therewith bales of goods
exported to Asine and other mainland ports. But no regular system
of writing and ciphering was yet needed nor publicly sanctioned for
correspondence or accounts. Though sepulchral furniture discloses
considerable personal wealth, neither monumental private tombs,
palaces, nor temples indicate concentration of wealth in the hands of
capitalists human or divine. Cult was conducted in rustic sanctuaries
and grottoes. Its symbols              stone figurines imported from the Cyclades
or imitating predynastic Egyptian block figures, phalli 1                and model




        FIG. 10. The Minoan "Mother Goddess" and (left) Horns of Consecration,
                         from a sealing. After Evans.


horns of consecration2 as in Anatolia, dove-pendants8 as in the Cyclades
and Assyria, and votive double-axes4 of copper and lead while fore-
shadowing the distinctive apparatus of later Minoan ritual, still appear
in forms appropriate to domestic worship.

  1
      Koumasa, tholos X.
      Mochlos, E.M.I. (P. ofM., I, 57).
  *                                                      Mochlos (P. of AT., I, 101).
      Mochlos (ibid., 102); cf. Iraq, II, fig. 51, 7.
                                                25
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
   In Middle Minoan times power and wealth began to be concentrated
in the hands of dynasts residing in Central Crete and combining political
and religious authority. Palaces that were also temples, factories, and
warehouses were erected at Mallia, Knossos, and other sites. Special-
ization invades the domain of domestic industry. The potters' wheel,

symbolizing the industrialization of the ceramic art, is attested from
M.M.I. The wheel itself was a large clay disc which itinerant potters
could carry about with them as they do to-day. 1 Wheeled vehicles
are first represented at the same period by a model four-wheeled cart
from Palaikastro. 2 They could hardly be serviceable without roads
maintained by some authority with more than local jurisdiction. And
in fact during Middle Minoan times the divergent local traditions
that had persisted throughout the preceding period wer* gradually
fused until Crete came to enjoy a single civilization. But the dis-
tinction between province          and metropolis becomes prominent. The
provincial potters of Eastern Crete could not compete with the experts
employed in the palaces of Knossos or Phaestos in turning out poly-
chrome ware of eggshell thinness.
  The priest-kings organized more effectively trade with Egypt, Melos,
peninsular Greece, and other foreign lands where even the eggshell
pottery has been discovered            in   Egypt in a Twelfth Dynasty tomb
sealed some time after 1850 B.C. And this commerce must have sub-
stantially augmented their real wealth. For its administration a civil
service would be required. And the perpetual corporation thus insti-
tuted needed a socially sanctioned system of keeping records and
accounts. In fact a conventional script of an ideographic type was
developed during M.M.I and used for accountancy. The idea was
presumably borrowed from the Minoans' correspondents in Egypt or
Syria, where writing had been in use for a thousand years. The actual
conventions were local, though several signs have Egyptian analogues
and the numeral forms are reminiscent of early Sumerian, while the
use of a clay tablet as a vehicle of writing is an Asiatic habit.
   Increase of wealth is usually accompanied by increase of population.
The palace of Knossos was surrounded with an extensive town of two-
storeyed houses, known not from actual excavation so much as from
a mosaic attributed to M.M.IIb. The native population would be
swelled by the immigration of craftsmen attracted by the wealth of
Minoan courts and towns. So professional potters from Asia may have
introduced the potters' wheel and trained native apprentices in its
use. And other specialists such as fresco-painters may have arrived to

 1
     Essays in JEgean Archeology, presented to Sir Arthur Evans (Oxford, 1927), 111-28.
     BSA. Supplementary Volume, Palaikastro (1923), 17.
          t


                                            26
                        THE ORIENT AND CRETE
minister to courtly desires for refinement. But if new arts were intro-
duced by immigrants, the Minoan schools these founded were original
and creative both in devising fresh techniques and in creating a new
naturalistic style that owed little to Oriental models. In beholding the
charming scenes of games and processions, animals and fishes, flowers,
and trees that adorned the Middle Minoan II and III palaces and
houses we breathe already a European atmosphere.
  The development of Minoan civilization was interrupted by catas-
trophes which may be taken to mark the end of the phases termed
M.M.II, M.M.III, and L.M.I. The disasters are usually attributed to
earthquakes and were followed by reconstructions of the ruined palaces
without any break in the continuity of architectural, artistic, and
technical traditions. But after the last a new and simplified script
Linear B      was introduced at Knossos, and with it apparently a new
language; for while the older, Linear          A writings still defy decipherment
in 1956, Ventris and Chadwick have read the L.M.II tablets as docu-
ments in an early Greek dialect identical with that current in Mycen-
aean Greece. Thus it looks as if Knossos had become the capital of a
conquering dynast from the Mainland who established over the whole
island a regular empire of the Oriental pattern. His empire did not last.
About 1400 B.C. hostile forces razed the palace of Minos to the ground.
The hegemony in the ^Egean had passed to Mycenae on the Mainland
(p. 81). But urban civilization still flourished in Crete for two centuries.
Gournia, for instance, in East Crete, now covered six acres and com-
prised some sixty houses. And the richly furnished Late Minoan
cemeteries comprising corbelled tombs (partially subterranean), rock-
hewn chamber tombs, pit-caves, and shaft graves as well as larnax
                                                                        1
burials, remained in use in places even into the Iron Age.
  This inadequate sketch must be supplemented by a brief reference
to certain industrial products that will be cited in later chapters dealing
with less progressive parts of Europe. Tools and weapons are particu-
larly relevant in this context. Obsidian was used for knives, sickle-
teeth, and arrow-heads (including the transverse type). Fine hollow-
based specimens are found even in Late Minoan tombs. At least in
Early Minoan times stone was used even for axe-heads; notable is a
"jadeite" celt from the tholos of Kalathiana in the Mesard. But copper
was being used for celts even in the latest ''neolithic" phase2 and soon
ousted stone. Copper ore exists in East Crete8 and may have been
exploited in Early Minoan times. The addition of tin to copper to

             Arch., LIX, and LXV, 1-94; Pendlebury, Crete. 195, *4*. 306.
         1

         1
             P. ofM., II. 14.
                  9,   Dawn of MtdiUrranea* Civilitatio* (1910)* 290.
                                          27
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
facilitate casting is attested as early as M.M.I,          though the standard
                                   tin was not firmly established till
alloy containing 10 per cent of
M.M.III. Bronze was known to the Sumerians before 2500 B.C. and
                                                          thence to the
knowledge of its qualities was probably transmitted
JJgean  via  Anatolia (p. 38). But  the Minoans'   demand    for tin may
            have  been            from  lodes in  Etruria,  Cornwall,  or
ultimately              supplied
Bohemia,   since in each  country  we shall encounter   ambiguous   hints

of contact with the ^Egean world (pp. 128, 241, 336). Iron is represented
by a ring from a Middle Minoan tomb in the Mavro Speleo cemetery,
but was not used industrially before 1200 B.C.




    Fio. ii. Minoan axes, axe-adzes and double axe (J),
                                                          and seal impressions (f).
                               After Evans and M. A.



  For axes the flat celt of the copper age did not lead, as in Cis-alpine
                                           but was superseded by the
Europe, to flanged and socketed forms,
                                                                    times
shaft-hole axe (Fig. u, i) that had been current from prehistoric
in Mesopotamia. After Middle Minoan III the single-bladed
                                                                 axe  was
ousted in Crete by the two-edged variety the       Double  Axe    known
also to the Sumerians and elevated to become a fetish
                                                           or symbol of
                                                           the Knossian
divine power by E.M.II. Double adzes too were used by
                                      1
workmen by the beginning of L.M.I.            Finally, the axe-adze that may
be regarded as a combination of two types of axe used by the Sumerians
is represented by a gold model attributed
                                               to E.M.II 8 and actual

specimens  from the farmhouse at Chamaizi (Fig. n, 3) attributed to
M.M.I and then the standard Minoan form (Fig. n, 4) from M.M.II on.

           p. ofM., n, 619, fig. 392-                 P. o/Af., I, 193.^.3.
                                         28
                    THE ORIENT AND CRETE
Heavy perforated hammers of metal rectangular in cross-section are
                                 1
reported as early as M.M.II and carpenters' saws are attested as early
as wheeled vehicles, by M.MJ. 2 But elongated flat celts served as
chisels and no sickles older than          LJOIP survive.
   Early Minoan daggers are triangular or provided with a very short
wide tang (Fig. 12, i), and sometimes given longitudinal rigidity by
means of a midrib cast on both faces. They were attached with small
rivets, sometimes of silver, to their bone or wooden hilts that were
surmounted by globular or hemispherical pommels4 of stone or ivory,




      FIG. 12. x t Early Minoan daggers (J); 2, Stone beads (f). After Evans.



                                     rivets to hold them in position.
laterally perforated for transverse
During Middle Minoan times   the blades, still either flat or strengthened
with a midrib, were elongated and assume an ogival form (Fig. 13),
Some have a flat tang, like Asiatic daggers, and the rivets are large.
But the palace of Mallia has yielded a genuine rapier, attributed to
 M.M.I, which is shown by its elongated pommel and its attachment
        6

 to the hilt to be a development of the Sumerian series illustrated in
 the Royal Tombs of Ur. And in M.M.III the great rapiers from the
 Shaft Graves of Mycenae (Fig. 14, 1-3) *** clearly elongations, to the

                  From Hagia Triada and Prisos.
                                           .   XXV; JRAL
                                                   ^XXIV,        I7 .
                  Xanthudides and Droop, pis. XXIII, LIV.
                  Pi of M., II, 272; cf,C&lde, NLMAE.  pi. XXVIa.
                                                           t




                                                29
                                              \
                            L




FIG. 14. M.M.III rapiers (Mycen*) (*) and L.M.I
                                                  homed hflt (Crete). After Evans.

                                      31
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  For removing facial hair Minoans used, in addition to tweezers,
                                                                   1
razors, generally leaf-shaped in Late Minoan times.
   Minoan pottery is too rich and varied to be described here in detail.
During Early Minoan times self-coloured burnished wares like the
local neolithic and Early Anatolian and Cycladic fabrics were current.
                                                 2
They might be decorated by stroke-burnishing or with channelled
                                                             8
                                                 In E.M.II the potters
lines that    may compose concentric semicircles.
of Vasiliki in East Crete covered their vessels with a red ferruginous
wash which they relieved with dark blotches deliberately produced
                                                      4
by the reducing agency of a glowing piece of charcoal. But from the
first the Minoan potter could produce a clear buff ware, probably




  FIG. 15. Late Mycenaean short sword (Mycenae) and Middle Minoan spear-head (i).



fired in a kiln. By coating the vessel with a lustrous glaze paint he
obtained a surface resembling that of the self-coloured burnished
fabrics upon which patterns were drawn in white paint. Alternatively
the paint was used as medium for producing dark patterns on a light
ground. During Middle Minoan times red and yellow were combined
with white, but the light on dark system was predominant. In Late
Minoan on the contrary this style was abandoned altogether in favour
of dark on light. Spiral patterns appear first in E.M.III under Cycladic
influence (cf. p. 54). Some main forms of Early Minoan pottery have
already been mentioned on p. 19.
  Throughout the Minoan epoch vessels of stone, metal, and wood
competed with the potters' products and reacted upon their forms
and decorations. Indeed, from its inception a wealth of stone vases
distinguishes the Minoan civilization from contemporary Helladic and
Anatolian cultures. Though the Egyptians excelled in transforming
hard stones into vessels, stone vases had been used in Mesopotamia
and Syria too since the fourth millennium and were made in Cyprus

      1
          Evans, Arch., LIX, 117; Hood, loc. <*/., 262.
      *
          Eva**. P. of M., I, 59-
                                                      4
          Ibid., fig. 22.                                 Frankfort, Studies, II, 90.
                     THE ORIENT AND CRETE
before the oldest pots. 1 Oi importance for comparison are the block-
vases already mentioned that may have been copied in day in the
Danube valley and the birds'-nest vases that might be the prototypes
for certain Almerian pots; both forms are Early Minoan.
  Metal vessels may. have been in use even in Early Minoan times and
were undoubtedly quite common in later periods. But the competition
of plate on the tables of the rich did not involve any degradation of
the ceramic art in Crete as it did in Mesopotamia and Egypt. Two
shapes are noteworthy a two-handled tankard or cantharos with
quatrefoil lip (represented by a silver specimen from Mochlos allegedly
M.M.I) which is known in pottery from Hittite times in Anatolia
       2




                  FIG. 1 6. Egyptian representations of Vapheio cups.



and the Middle Bronze Age of Hungary and in alabaster from Shaft
Grave IV at Mycenae, and the so-called Vapheio cup of M.M.III to
L.M.II (Fig. 16),* the curious handle of which may after all be inspired
by a wooden model; a clay cup with a rather similar handle turned up
at Nienhagen in Saxo-Thuringia apparently in an Early Bronze Age
cemetery.
  Minoan costume, like the Egyptian, did not require fastening with
pins, so that, apart from a few hairpins, these toilet accessories, so
common in Mesopotamian, Anatolian, and Central European graves,
are missing in Bronze Age Crete. On the other hand, the Minoans, like
the Egyptians, Sumerians, and Indians, were skilled at shaping and
perforating hard stones for beads. Rock crystal and carndian were
used from Early Minoan times as well as ivory and fayence. Two
amorphous lumps from the tholos of Porti have been identified as
                                                4
amber, but Evans has questioned this diagnosis. By L.M.I amber
was certainly reaching Crete regularly from the Baltic, and a gold*
bound amber disc from the cemetery of Knossos (L.M.II) 5 is almost
  1
    Dikaios, Khirokitia (London, 1953); so also at Janno, Kurdistan.
    P. of M. t I, fig. i39a; cf. van dcr Osten, The Alishar HUyVk (1928-29), Chicago
O.I.C. Publication XIX), pi. XI.

  *
      Xanthudides and Droop, 69.                         Arch., LXV, 42.
       c                                  33
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
identical with six found in
                              Early Bronze Age II graves in Wiltshire,
Segmented beads of fayence, copying stone beads that go back to
E.M.II 1 (Fig. 12, 2
                      (top)), were being manufactured in Crete from
M.M.IIL Similar beads have turned up as imports in the Danube
                                                               valley,
Spain, Poland, and England (p. 336, below). Stone hammer-beads occur
even in the E.M. ossuaries of the Mesard.*

                 1
                     U. ofPenns., Anthrop. Publs., Ill, 3, 184.
                 1
                     Xanthudides and Droop, pi. XXXII, 548.




                                     34
                              CHAPTER III
        ANATOLIA THE ROYAL ROAD TO THE AEGEAN

IN the fifth century the Royal Road from Mesopotamia to the                   ,




led not to the Levantine coasts alone but     on across the plateau of
Anatolia a promontory of Asia thrust out towards Europe. Here ran
the route along which Persian armies marched to impose Oriental
culture ori Greece, along which diplomatists, scientists, and merchants
travelled to transmit more peacefully and successfully Babylonian
ideas to the young Ionian states. More than a millennium earlier the
plateau was a bridge along which merchant caravans could travel to
transport westward a share of Mesopotamian capital. Between 2000
and 1800 B.C. the region's wealth in ores had induced a colony1 of
Assyrian merchants to settle at Kanes (Kiiltepe) in Cappadocia; they
maintained continuous intercourse with the cities on the Tigris and
Euphrates, illustrated by their business archives, the so-called Cappa-
docian tablets. They may have had earlier precursors. In any case they
found, if not a literate civilization, at least some degree of urbanization
and an incipient state organization. Rich "royal tombs" at Alaca
       2
Huyiik illustrate the wealth amassed by local princes, several special-
ized crafts, and trade that secured a variety of raw materials. Un-
fortunately these tombs contain no undoubted imports nor even types
that can be dated by reference to Mesopotamian literature. The culture
of the princes' subjects is reduplicated in many little hiiyuks                   (tells),
too small to represent anything but modest villages. In them, copper
was already competing with stone and bone as an industrial material
but without in the least replacing them. This "Copper Age" culture,
as Turkish archaeologists label it, is fairly uniform all over the plateau;
judged by its pottery self-coloured dark-faced wares, jugs and cups
with true handles and side spouts, corrugated ornament its prefer-
ence for the sling, the multiplicity of female figurines it is allied to
the Early Troadic to be described below. It differs sharply from the
latter in burial practice; the dead were regularly interred under the
house floors as in Syria, Assyria, and Iran, and not in distinct cemeteries.
  Many of these peculiarities seem to have been inherited from a
  1
    Tahsim Ozgtt9> KittUpe Hafriyati (Ankara), 19;
  1
    Remzi             Lj
           Ogiz Arik, Lesfouilles d* Alaca HdyUk (Istanbul, 1937); H. Z. Kosay,
    RemziOgiz
                     kara, 1944); id. Alaca HdyUk Kazisi (Ankara, 1951).
bungen von A. H. (Ankara,
                                          35
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
previous phase, termed by Turkish archaeologists Chalcolithic because
copper was already in use if mainly for ornaments. It is very imper-
                                                          1
fectly known from the deeper levels of Alijar in the Halys basin, and
                              1                        8
perhaps from Buyiik Giilliicek and Maltepe near Sivas farther north.
  As compared to the Early ^gean Bronze Age, the Anatolian Copper
Age does not seem early, though the discrepancy may be due to the
more modest guesses of its investigators. 4 A seal of Jemdet Nasr type
from the Copper Age strata and a radio carbon date of 25oo25o B.C. 5
for layer 14 at Alijar might justify more generous estimates. It does not
seem an apt vehicle for the transmission westward of the cultural
achievements of the Tigris-Euphrates at an early date. Nor does the
so-called Chalcolithic disclose earlier Oriental advances on their way
westward. There are indeed stamp seals and figurines, bitf painted
sherds are exceptional, the pottery being mostly self-coloured though
comprising fruitstands. Nothing approaching the precocious neolithic
of Kurdistan and Palestine nor yet mesolithic remains have been
found on the plateau so far, but though unrepresented in the tells,
they may still come to light on other sites. Until they do, no recogniz-
able archaeological milestones mark an ancient route across Anatolia
from the Orient to Europe. Nor do the available data disclose there
an ancient cultural centre nor yet a human reservoir from which the
JJgean coastlands could have been populated.
  On the other hand, at least in the north-western extremity of Asia
Minor, a vigorous and original culture is documented quite early. The
first settlement in the area is represented by pottery found in the

lowest levels of Kum Tepe, a tell in the Troad. 6 Notable are fruitstands
with profiled pedestals, as in Fig. 86, and stroke-burnished ware
which recurs on Samos as well as in Europe.
  In the sequel develops a culture which may conveniently be called
Early Troadic, though it is not strictly confined to the Troad. The same
culture is represented at Poliochni on Lemnos, 7 Thermi on Lesbos, 8 at
Yortan in Mysia and elsewhere. But the classic site remains Hissarlik,
the ancient Troy, a key position on the Hellespont commanding at
once sea-traffic up the straits and a land route's crossing to Europe.
There Heinrich Schliemann last century distinguished seven super-

      van der Osten, Alishar HUyttk (1930-3), OIP, XXIX. Chicago.
      Belleton, XII (1948), 475-6.
      BelUten, XI (1947). 659
      Gdtxe, Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc. f X.CVII (1953)* 215-20.
      Libby, Radio Carbon Dating (Chicago, 195) 71-
      AJA., XXXIX, 33-
      Jahrb. d. Inst., LU; Arch. Am. (193?)* 167-70; Beraabo Brea, PPS. XXI (1955).
144*55-
  *
      Lamb, W., Excavations at Thermi (Cambridge, 1936).
                                            36
      ANATOLIA THE ROYAL ROAD TO THE AEGEAN

imposed prehistoric cities, but left a multitude of crucial issues. Re-
excavation of the site by an expedition under C. W. Blegen, 1 supple-
mented by the stratigraphy of Thermi and Poliochni, has yielded the
following scheme as the standard for the culture sequence in North-
Western Anatolia:

                                                                    Absolute Dates

                                                                     1275-1200
                                                                     1400-1300
                                                                   / 1550-1400
                                                                   I   ? -I550




  All "cities" can be dated in terms of ^Egean chronology by sherds
of actually imported 5gean vases found in the several levels at Troy.
   Troy I and the contemporary settlements on Lesbos and Lemnos
consisted of clusters of two-roomed houses (often of the long rectangular
plan), closely juxtaposed along well-defined but crooked and narrow
streets. The mud-brick walls rested on foundations of stones, some-
times (in Thermi I and IV and Troy I) laid not horizontally but
obliquely in herring-bone formation, an arrangement often employed
in the brick architecture of Early Dynastic Sumer. And as in Meso-

potamia the doors were pivoted on stone sockets. Some houses in
Thermi were provided with low domed ovens of clay only 3 ft, high.
Especially in Thermi III pits (bothroi) were often dug in the house
                                      2
floors and carefully lined with clay.
   But Troy I comprised also a "palace" a rectangular hall 12-8 m.
long by 5*4 m. wide, entered through a porch at the west end. So Troy
was already ruled by a chief, an institution not yet attested in other
Early Troadic settlements. Moreover, Troy I, at least by the Middle
phase, was girt with a massive stone rampart enclosing some i\ acres;
Poliochni was probably fortified at the same time.
   Anatolian economy rested on the cultivation of wheats, 8 barley,
millet, and presumably vegetables, perhaps also of vines and fruit-trees,
the breeding of cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs, and fishing with hook
and line or with nets. Axes and rare adzes were made from pebbles
  1                                   H
     Blegen, Caskey, etc., Troy, I (1950):    (1931); HI (i953). Princeton.
     On bothroi in general, see JHS., LV (1935). x-9.
     One-corn is attested, though perhaps later at Troy and Kusura (Arch., LXXXVI,
10), emmer only at Thermi, where there
                                           are some traces of vines.
                                       37
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
ground and polished and also from stags' antlers pierced for a shaft-
hole, knives, and sickle-teeth from flint blades simply trimmed. But
stone battle-axes with drooping blade, precursors of ceremonial
weapons like Fig. 21, i, must immediately be copies of metal weapons.
In fact, copper battle-axes of the same pattern have been found at
Yortan as at Polatli on the plateau and in the Royal Tombs of Alaca. 1
Bone splinters, pointed at both ends, served as arrow-heads, while the
armoury comprised also sling-stones and maces with spheroid stone
heads.
  But trade already brought metal even to Lesbos, and at Thermi I
and Troy I there were specialized smiths available to work it. A
crucible was found on virgin soil at Thermi, and small metal pins and
trinkets were comparatively common at all levels. Most were made
from unalloyed copper, but a pin from Thermi II contained as much
as 13 per cent of tin, and a bracelet of this rare metal was found in
town IV. Indeed, by the time of Thermi II and III metal was common
enough for large implements to be left lying about for modern ex-
vators to find, while at Troy lead rivets were employed for repairing
pots. The smiths produced flat chisels with rounded butts, as in Egypt
and protoliterate Sumer, flat axes and axes with the sides hammered
up to produce low flanges implying that celts were mounted as axes
                           2

in knee-shafts as in Central Europe and as weapons flat-tanged
daggers like Fig. 20, 2-4, cast in two-piece valve moulds of stone.
  The types of metal daggers and pins suffice to show that Troadic
metal-workers    followed    Asiatic   rather   than Egyptian traditions.
Though shaft-hole axes of the normal Mesopotamian pattern were not
manufactured, the earliest dated battle-axes are represented by clay
models from al'Ubaid levels in Babylonia. 8
  But the most distinctive types and actual imports point explicitly
to intercourse with Greece, the Cyclades, and the Levant coasts.
Emery and marble vases were imported from the Cyclades; bird-headed
pins are common to Thermi I and Syros; polished bone tubes like Fig.
27, I, from Thermi III-IV and Troy I recur not only on the ^Egean
islands but also in Syria and Palestine in the last-named area in an
E.B.III context (after 2500 B.C.). 4
  Despite the specialization of the metallurgical industry and the
ramifications of commerce, pot-making was not sufficiently industrial-
ized for the use of the wheel. The self-coloured, burnished vases, vary-

   Prausnitz, Inst. Arch. AR. t XI (i955)> 20 ff.
  1
  1The same device is seen in the Copper Age township of Ahlatlibel near Ankara,
Turk Tarih Arkeologya ve Etnografya Dergisi, II (Ankara), 1934.
   Childe, NLMAE., fig. 60.
   Prausnitz, Inst. Arch. AR., XI (1955), 23 and 28; cf. Childe, NLMAE., 231-7.
                                       38
   ANATOLIA THE ROYAL ROAD TO THE AEGEAN

ing in hue from deep black to brick red and often copying gourd or
leather vessels, are representative of a tradition common to the whole
of Anatolia. A conspicuous peculiarity throughout the province is the
popularity of genuine handles in addition to simple lugs. The handles
                         11
are often of the "thrust type the lower ends being inserted into a hole
at the side of the vessels1 a trick popular in later periods too and in
other parts of Anatolia. Forms distinctive of West Anatolia are bowls with
lugs growing from the inverted rims (Fig. 17, column i), jugs with cut-




 FIG. 17. Pottery from Thermi I-II (A) and III-IV (B). After W. Lamb, BSA., XXX.


away necks (Fig. 17, columns 2-3), tripod vessels, and collared pyxides
with string-hole lugs and lids (Fig. 17, column 4). Significant changes in
form, documented by the stratigraphy of Thermi, are the expansion of
the ends of the tubular lugs on the bowls to "trumpet lugs" in town III
and the contemporary transformation of tripod legs into model human
feet. At Troy the trumpet lugs grew into regular handles, flanged and
                                                                         Decoration was
angled, quite reminiscent of Cretan
                                        neolithic types.
effected by bosses, ribs, corrugations, and incisions forming rectilinear
                                                              at Thermi
patterns. White paint on the dark ground, quite exceptional
and Troy,  was very popular   at Yortan. The  patterns were always recti-
linear.
                                           arts too. Their importance
   Spinning and weaving would be domestic
is attested by the numbers  of spindle-whorls, and day spools. The
             1                          cf. Frankfort, Studies, ii. 86, n. i.
                 Blegen, Troy, I, 65;
                                             39
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
weaver may have used perforated arcs of clay up to 9 cm. in length,
represented in Thermi III, that seem to be forerunners of the narrower
crescentic loom-weights so common in the Hittite levels of Kusura and
          1
Ali^ar,
   The domestic fertility cults of a superstitious peasantry may be
illustrated by numerous female figurines of stone and clay, the former




                         FIG. 18. "Megaron" palace, Troy II.



always highly conventionalized in the manner of Fig. 8, i3-i6 clay
                                                                          2
                                                                              ;


figurines begin later at Thermi and sometimes indicate the division
between the legs. But at Troy itself the "Mother Goddess" (if such she
be) was represented on a more monumental scale: an owl-like visage
had been carved in low relief on a stone slab, 1-27 m. high, that was
found standing just outside the city gate. But to domestic cult again

   Arch., LXXXVI, 55, fig. 15; Alishar, fig. 30.
  >
  1
   Very similar figurines tarn up sporadically as if imported in Mesopotamia about
2750 B.C.; Speiser, Ttpe Gawra, pi LIII, b. Frankfort, "Iraq Excavations", QIC.
Communication, 19, fig. 24.
                                         40
      ANATOLIA THE ROYAL ROAD TO THE

belong clay phalli from Thermi and perhaps a horned clay spit-support
(? altar) rather like Cretan horns of consecration. The dead were

apparently buried, if adults, outside the town in regular cemeteries
enclosed in jars, judging by the case of Yortan.
   After the long period of relatively peaceful development repre-
sented by the 4 metres of 'Troy I" and the four successive townships
at Thermi, unrest led to a concentration of power and wealth. Though
its population was already dwindling, Thermi V was fortified with a
stout stone wall supplemented by complicated outworks. Even so, the
site was soon deserted; it has yielded vases imported from Trpy Ha,
but nonfe of those proper to the later phases of that city. Poliochni in
Lemnos likewise declined. But at Troy potent chieftains had arisen
who exploited to the full the strategic advantages of their site and
concentrated in the city West Anatolian trade to the ruin of their rivals.
Troy II was now encircled with a new stone wall, surmounted with a
parapet of mud-brick. But, though larger than Troy I, the circuit of
Troy II still enclosed only some 7850 sq. metres,      or less than two
                                                "
acres. Its ruler built himself a palace of the    megaron" plan a hall
with central hearth, 66 feet long by 33 feet, preceded by a porch 33 feet
long and wide (Fig. 18). The citadel had reached the apex of its glory
in phase He, but underwent four further reconstructions before it was
taken by hostile assault and burnt. But before the final catastrophe
the defenders had hidden many of their valuables. Our knowledge of
Trojan metal-work and jewellery is mainly derived from these hoards
that the plunderers had missed.
  Ere its destruction Troy II had become economically, if not physic-
ally,a city. Through its monopoly of Hellespontine trade, its citizens
amassed wealth to support an industrial population and pay for
                                                           that bronze
imported goods. Tin was obtainable in such abundance
containing the standard proportion of 10 per  cent tin and  90 per cent
                                               obsidian  were  also im-
copper was in general use. Gold, silver, lead,
ported; lapis lazuli from Iran and
                                    amber   from   the Baltic  are also

represented in hoard L, the date of which is not, however, quite
                                                                    certain.

Specialist jewellers, potters,
                                 and other craftsmen, trained in Asiatic
schools, settled in the rich city. The jewellers introduced solder, filagree
work,      and the         making beads from two discs of gold
                         trick   of
soldered together or from two folded tubes each ending in spirals
        devices                                              in   the third
all                   employed by Mesopotamian goldsmiths
                  1
millennium.
  The potters' wheel, indicating a further advance in urbanization,
was introduced in the time of Troy He, but the products, turned out
               Childe, NLMAE., 162; cf. Iraq, IX (194?)*
             1


                                       4*
                   FIG. 19. Pottery from Troy II (J).




                   34                                         *
Flo. ao. Knife (*) and daggers (*) and gold veaseto (i). Troy II.
             Treasure A. Museum f. Vorgeachichte. Berlin.
                                   42
                                                                  2-6 from
   ANATOLIA THE ROYAL ROAD TO THE JEGEAN
en masse by the new specialist craftsmen, carry on the native traditions
in form and surface treatment and did not replace hand-made vessels.
Shapes easily recognized as emerging during the lifetime of Tit>y II
are anthropomorphic lids and jars ("face-urns", Fig. 19, 2 and 6),
jugs with flaring mouths (Fig. 19, 4), and curious two-handled depas
(Fig. 19, 5). But these appear already hand-made in phase He and are
merely exaggerated expressions of tendencies inherent in the earlier




     FIG. 21. Battle-axe (J), gold-capped bead (J), and crystal pommel (JJ from
        Treasure L, and stray axe-adze (J). Museum f. Vorgeschichte, Berlin.


and more generalized Anatolian tradition. The representation of the
"Mother Goddess" on the face-urns is significantly like that on the
handles of early Sumerian funerary jars1 but the convention is already
                                                ;


foreshadowed in the stele from Troy I. Side-spouted jugs, multiple
vessels, jugs with double necks, zoomorphic vases are essentially
Anatolian and not confined to Troy II. Improvements in the prepara-
tion of the clay and firing, probably introduced at the same time as
the yrtieel, allowed the potter to produce harder, paler, and less porous
vessels. But to preserve the effect of the old-self-coloured vases, their
                            *
                                ChUde, NLMAE., fig. 98.
                                         43
           DAWK OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
surfaces were normally covered with a ferruginous wash that turns
red on firing (red wash ware) a device popular at Aliar and farther
east, and employed even in the Middle Danube basin.
  Despite the abundance of metal, stone, flint, obsidian, bone, and
antler were still freely and almost predominantly employed for axes,
battle-axes, agricultural implements, knives, awls, pins, and combs.
The battle-axes carry on the tradition of Troy I, but include some
superbly polished weapons of semi-precious stones (Fig. 21, i) (from
Treasure L) that must be ceremonial.
   The jewellery from the hoards not only demonstrates the wealth of
Troy but the divergent ramifications of its commerce. Many items are
specifically Eastern; the earrings and lock-rings with flattened ends,
the spiral filagree work (Fig. 22, 3), the gold disc beads, etc., may be
                                                                      1
regarded as Sumerian and the technique of the knot-headed pin was
known there as in predynastic Egypt. Pins with double spiral heads
(of which Fig. 22, 3, is a glorified version) are found all across Anatolia
and Iran to India and Anau.* A "spear-head" identical with the
Cycladic specimen of Fig. 23, i, from Treasure A, belongs to a family
                                                             8
represented also in Central Anatolia, Cyprus, and Iran. Earrings like
Fig. 22, i, are worn by foreign dancing girls depicted in an Eighteenth
Dynasty tomb-painting. A gold hammer pin from 2g is ultimately
                        4                                6

a South Russian type, but was familiar also at Alaca. At the same time,
so many types common at Troy recur in Central Europe as to prompt
the suspicion that Trojan tin came from Bohemia, copper from Tran-
sylvania or the Balkans. On the other hand, bdssed bone plaques,
like Fig. 115, indicate connections westward as far as Sicily and Malta,
but their stratigraphical position at Hissarlik is a little doubtful and
                                              6
they have gold analogues to the east at Alaca. Ring pendants of stone,
paralleled in gold in Wallachia and Transylvania, might disclose one
source of Trojan gold while copies in Sweden and Sammland may be
counterparts of the amber beads from Treasure L. If Troadic trade
were founded on Oriental demand for metal, Troy II was itself a centre
of accumulated wealth, providing capital for development of industry
and trade in our Continent.
  Yet Trojan merchants seem to have managed without writing. They
did not even, like the Minoans, engrave stone seals. Two cylinders were
found at Troy, 7 but their attribution is uncertain. But the Trojans did
             Childe, NLMAE., 63, 196.
             Ibid., 196; LAAA., XXIII, 119; Alaca (1951), pi. CXII.
             Alaca (1937), pi. CCLXXV; Schaeffer, Straiigraphie, 38.
             Aberg, Ckron., IV, n.
             Blegen, Troy, I, 376, and fig. 357, 37.5*8.
             Antiquity, XXX, 80-93.
             Sch&mann, lUon, figs. 500-3; cf. PPS.. XXI, pi. XVII.
                                      44
FIG. 22. 1-2, Gold earring and pendant from Treasure A, 3, pin from Treasure D,
      4 bracelet from Treasure F, and 5, knot-headed pins (f). Museum f. Verge-
                                schichte, Berlin.




                                       45
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
copy Asiatic seals in clay while an imported sherd from lib bears the
imprint of an Early Minoan seal
  The old native fertility cult continued without any notable changes,
but the figurines, now predominantly of stone, are all highly conven-
tionalized (Fig. 8, 15), and the phalli are made of stone.
  After the sack of Troy II a reoccupation of Hissarlik on a smaller
scale is represented by the ruins of towns III, IV, and V, 1 each fortified
and each reconstructed several times. All were urban in the sense that
they comprised specialized potters and smiths and relied upon trade,
though a marked increase in the proportion of game bones in the food
refuse from town III may denote a temporary decline in farming.
Throughout the pottery attests unbroken continuity of tradition.
But face-urns are commoner in Troy III than in II. Pots found on
Euboea and at Orchomenos look like exports from Troy HI, while a
                                                                      2
copper pin from that town is taken for a Cycladic manufacture.
                8 taller
Domed ovens,             than those from Thermi, appear at Troy for the
first time in IV, In town V -dEgean imports are rare. But bowls adorned
with a red cross in the interior that are characteristic of Troy V have
dose parallels on E.H.III sites in Greece, while analogous vessels are
found at GSzlu Kale, Tarsus, together with Cappadocian tablets. 4
   With the sixth settlement 6 Troy approximates more closely than
ever before to the dignity of a city. It was girt with a new and more
formidable stone rampart enclosing an area of over five acres. But
revival seems due to the advent of a new people who introduced pottery
foreign to the native tradition, novel domestic architecture, the practice
of cremation and probably the horse, whose presence is osteologicaUy
attested first in Troy VI. The new pottery is termed Minyan ware
a fine grey ware, owing its colour to the reduction of the iron oxides
in well-selected day by controlled firing in a kiln  and accompanied
    a
by red oxidized variant. These are the characteristic native wares
of Troy VII too. The houses no longer conform to the megaron plan,
but are entered through doors in their long sides. No cemeteries of
Troy I to V, nor even of Early and Middle VI, have been located, but
that of Late VI was an urnfield in which the cremated bones were
enclosed in cinerary urns. The first Indo-European Hittites at Bogaz
Kdy had likewise laid out an urnfield and deposited remains of horses
with the urns, while burial in urnfields was characteristic of Period VI
in Central Europe and began in Hungary even in Period IV.
  Under the new rulers trade and industry flourished luxuriantly once
more. Middle III, Late Helladic I, II, and Ilia but hardly any Illb
   1                                *
   4
       Htegen ct d.> Troy, II.          Ibid., g.                  Ibid., 107.
                                    *
       Ibid., 229.                      Blegen et al, Troy, III.
                                   46
      ANATOLIA THE ROYAL ROAD TO THE
vases were       imported from the ^Egean, white-slipped ware from
Cyprus, ivory from Syria or Egypt through the ^Egean, but not a
                                                                    1
single Hittite manufacture. Bronze sickles, of Asiatic looped type,
show that metal was -now cheap enough for use in rough agricultural
work. Smiths produced a chisel provided with a socket formed not
by casting but by hammering a projecting tang of metal round a
mandril as in Hittite cities. 2
  Judged by the imported ^Egean vases, Troy VI should have lasted
from about 1700 to 1300 B.C. Then it fell, overthrown perhaps by an
earthquake, perhaps by the Homeric Achaeans under Agamemnon.
In any case the site was reoccupied and Troy Vila a rather poorer
city survived for another century, only to be destroyed
                                                          with obvious
violence. For the last twenty years it has been held that Troy Vila
was Homer's Ilion, but that view was plausibly challenged in 1955.
In any case, after its destruction barbarians settled at Hissarlik and
introduced a coarse wart-ornamented pottery without, however,
exterminating the older population or suppressing the old ceramic
tradition; for grey wares, like Minyan, were still manufactured in
Troy Vllb. On the other hand, socketed bronze celts cast on the spot
by the usual Central European method leave no doubt as to the origin
of these invaders.

  1
      Childe, "The Balanced Sickle", in Aspects of Archeology (ed. Grimes; London, 1951).

  1
    O/P., XXIX, fig. 289; this was, of course, the method used for providing spear-heads
with sockets in Crete earlier (p. 30) and in Sumer in the third millennium.




                                            47
                                  CHAPTER IV

         MARITIME CIVILIZATION IN THE CYCLADES

THE Cydades are scattered across the ^Egean, remnants of a land-bridge
between Anatolia and Greece affording a passage for cultural ideas
from Asia to Europe. To mere food-gatherers or self-sufficing peasants,
the islands, often small and barren, offered no attractions. But to
mariners crossing from Asia to Europe they offer convenient halting
places and lairs to any pirates
                                who might wish to prey on more peaceful
           Moreover,   they  contain raw materials of the sort needed by
voyagers.
urban   civilizations   copper (Paros and Siphnos), obsidian (Melos),
                 and                                            while larger
marble (Paros         others), emery (Naxos). Accordingly,
islands like Chios  and   Samos  seem  to  have  been  settled  by  neolithic
                               were at first            but        colonized
peasants, the little Cyclades                passed by,      early
                                                 in commerce and perhaps
by communities that could find a livelihood
in piracy too. Such communities      must   have  lived near the shore and
                                                                     1
presumably in townships.       But  only   at Phylakopi in Melos has a
                                                    three consecutive town-
Cydadic settlement been fully explored. There,
                                                  some   earlier occupation
ships could be distinguished, preceded by
                                    beneath   the  oldest house-floors. The
represented by sherds collected
                                        the sea,  but  must  have extended
city has been partially engulfed by
well over four acres. The first town was apparently unfortified, the
second and third   girt   with strong stone walls, 20 feet thick in the
latest phase. Fortified settlements are also         known at Chalandriani 2
on Syros, on Paros, and elsewhere. But these fortifications seem
                          8


relatively late. Soon after
                            the foundation of Phylakopi II, M.M.Ib

polychrome   vases were imported from Crete; the city is accordingly
                                               it is frankly Middle Cydadic.
hardly older than the twentieth century B.C.;
   For the remaining    islands and   for earlier   periods we are reduced
to estimating the size  and  stability of the  settlements    from the ceme-
teries. Few have been fully explored,         but     they were   admittedly
extensive. Three on Despotikon comprised 50 to 60 graves each;
                                                                          on

Syros one cemetery at Chalandriani
                                   was composed of nearly 500 graves,
a second of more than 50; on Paros, Tsountas mentions nine cemeteries
     For Phylakopi see Excavations at Phylakopi in Melos (Society for Promotion of
Hellenic Studies, Supplementary Volume, IV, 1904).   w         .
                                                                   ,    , A
  *
     For tombs on Amorgos and Faros, see Tsountas, Kv*Aaa<*a, in 'E. Apx*, 1898;
for Syros and Siphnoe, ibid., 1809.
    AM., XUlf (1917). i       &
                                       48
       MARITIME CIVILIZATION IN THE CYCLADES
of from 10 to 60 graves. Of course, all these burials are not contempor-

ary. While it has been customary to assign most cemeteries to the
                                              1
Early Cydadic period (before 2000 B.C.), Aberg has shown that some
graves must be Middle or even Late Cydadic. Fortunatdy Cydadic




                     FIG. 23rTomb-group. Amorgos (J).



imports in Egypt, in Crete, at Thermi and Troy, and on Mainland
Greece suffice to show that the islands' culture reached its zenith in
the third millennium. Marble idbis like Fig. 23, 2, were imported into
Crete diiefly during E.M.III, a blade like 23, i, from the same tomb
on Amoigos, was induded in Treasure A of Troy II; Cydadic iiaarble
                        i
                            Cktonologie, IV, 71, 84.
                                      49
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
vases were used in Thermi I-III, and the bird pins of Thermi
                                                                   I recur

          a
on Syros; pin    with double        wire head  like Fig. 27, 9, was found
                             spiral
   an          Helladic tomb  at                               with  spiral
in     Early                      Zygouries; "frying-pans"
decoration  like        were  found  in the oldest  Early  Helladic  town-
                   Fig. 24
                                         in the E.H.III level at Asine; duck
ship at H. Kosmas in Attica, and




                FIG. 24. Cycladic "frying-pan" and sherd showing boat.


vases (like Fig. 28, 2) were imported into ^Egina in Early Helladic
times though they continued to reach Eutresis in Bceotia during Middle
Helladic I (pp. 70 #.)
   Finally, a zoomorphic
                         vase of Parian marble was recovered from a
                       Egypt while a cylinder seal of Jemdet Nasr
                            1
              grave in
predynastic
style
       2   had been buried in a tomb of the Pelos group on Amorgos.
   The inference that the density of population on the islands was
   *Frankfort, Studies, II, 103.
    Frankfort, Cylinder Seals (London, 1939), 232, 301;
                                                           the   tomb group is in the
 Ashmolean Museum, Oxford.
                                          50
     MARITIME CIVILIZATION IN THE CYCLADES
made possible by trade and manufacture is confirmed by the list of
exports just given. And of course that list is by no means exhaustive.
Obsidian was quarried on Melos and exported as nuclei or blades to
Crete,  Mainland Greece, and the other islands. The Cycladic grave
goods comprise the products of specialized craftsmen smiths, jewellers,
lapidaries  and prove the use of copper, tin, 1 lead, silver, and other
materials which in some cases must have been imported. The rdle of
maritime intercourse is further emphasized by the frequent repre-
sentation of boats on the vases (Fig. 24) 2 But the islanders do not seem
                                                       .



to have needed writing for their business transactions and did not even
make regular use of seals like the Minoans. The prominence of weapons
in the tombs (especially of Amorgos) and the fortification of the settle-
ments may indicate that piracy was already combined with legitimate
trade. In any case, being dependent on overseas trade, the prosperity
of the islands might be expected to decline when that trade was
"cornered" by monopolistic princes in Crete and the Troad. A real
contraction of population during Middle Minoan II-III and Late
Minoan I-II would be perfectly comprehensible. In that case the bulk
of our material would really be Early Cycladic.
   But this Early Cycladic culture was by no means homogeneous.
Culturally the islands fall into a southern and a northern group over-
                         8
lapping only on Naxos. To the former belong Melos, Amorgos, Des-
potikon, Paros, and Antiparos; to the northern Syros, Siphnos, Andros,
and also Euboea. The contrast is revealed in burial practices as well as
in grave goods. In the southern group, though shaft graves and chamber
tombs of uncertain age are plentiful near Phylakopi, 4 the early graves
                                                                           6
were normally trapezoid cists. In the oldest cemeteries (the Pelos
group), definitely antedating Phylakopi I, the cists served as ossuaries
and contain several skeletons together with vases like Fig. 28, i, and
"fiddle idols" like Fig. 8, 10-12. The later tombs were individual

graves; they contain idols like Fig. 23, 2, marble
                                                    vases and weapons.
On Syros  6 in
               the northern group rectangular or oval  tombs were built
in excavations in the hillside and roofed by corbelling (Fig. 25). But
these too served as individual graves, and the single body was intro-
duced through the roof. As at Krazi in Crete, the door (only -50 m.
square) was merely a ritual element. In
                                        Eubcea 7 the tomb was a pit-

                                                          but a ring contained 13-5
          dagger from Amorgos was of unalloyed copper,
  1 One

per cent tin.
    On ^Egean ships see Marinatos in BCH., LVII (1933). *7 &-
    Aberg, Chronologic, IV, 59 f.
    Phylakopi, 234-8.
    Pelos in Melos, BSA., Ill, 40; Antiparos, JHS. V, 48.  t


    'E#. 'Apx. (1899); cf. p. 23, above.
    Papavasileiou, IIcpl   M   i* Etfpol* dpX<""" T   ^" (Athens, 1910).
                                               51
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
cave, excavated in the ground and containing only a single corpse
(Fig. 25). The earliest vases of the Pelos group
                                                 are mud-coloured, imitat-

ing the shape of marble vessels and are decorated with simple basketry
patterns (Fig. 28, i). Late pottery from the
                                                northern isles includes
dark-faced fabrics often decorated with running spirals and excised
triangles (Fig. 24). Technically it corresponds
                                                to the Early Helladic I
                                                        1
of the Mainland, though Cycladic imports at Eutresis prove that on




                      I                                   2

                          FIG. 25. Tombs on Syros and Euboea.


                                                                   times.
the islands this fabric remained current in Middle Helladic
Favourite forms are the so-called frying-pans and globular or cylindrical
                                      on Syros pottery of- this class is
pyxides with lids. In some graves
associated with marble idols like Fig. 23, 2, which are
                                                           common to both
                                                           8
                   2               on Syros and Naxos contain sauce-
groups of islands. Other graves
                                             vessels decorated in lustrous
boats, jugs with cut-away necks and other
glaze paint in the style of Early
                                  Helladic HI   (p. 69). Finally,
                                                                  Anatolian
                                         and   one  tomb          on Euboea
forms are common in the northern isles,                    group
contained exclusively Troadic vases (like Fig. 19, 3-4)        and   daggers

(like Fig. 20, 2).
   The fish emblem carried by (Northern) Cycladic boats had been the
                                                           survive into
standard of a predynastic parish in the Delta that did not
historic times in Egypt. So Fish-folk from the
                        4                       Nile may have fled to

  1   Goldman, Eutresis, 182.                                 ,,   .         .     ,   ,
                                                        the frying-pans were decorated
  1
    Aberg, Chron., IV, 102, nos. 13, 15; in both graves
                                                               be earlier.
with concentric circles so that those with running spirals may
    Aberg, Ckron., IV, 86; Congres
                                     Int. Arch. Athens (1905).     2-
  4
    Evans, P. of M. t II, 26.
                                             52
      MARITIME CIVILIZATION IN THE CYCLADES
the Cyclades when Menes conquered the Delta. Other Cydadic traits
   the tweezers (Fig. 26, 2), the popularity of stone amulets and par-
ticularly the type represented in Fig. 27, 4; the use of palettes (though
the Cycladic specimens are generally more trough-like than the
                           1
Egyptian and Minoan ) and the preference for stone vases may also
be Nilotic traits.
  Metal-work, pottery, and dress, on the contrary, are rather Asiatic




       FIG. 26. Slotted spear-head (showing method of mounting), halberd and
                                tweezers. Amorgos (J).



than African. Broad flat celts were used as axe-heads. Shaft-hole axes
are represented only by an axe-hammer and an axe-adze from a hoard
on Cythnos. 2 Daggers with a stout midrib and rivets, sometimes of
silver as in Crete, are common chiefly on Amorgos. Spear-heads were
slotted for mounting as shown in Fig. 26; the type with hooked-tang,
shown in Fig. 23, i, has already been connected with Asiatic models
on p. 44.
  At least in the northern islands clothing had to be fastened with pins,
as in Anatolia, and the types with double-spiral and bird heads have
already been encountered in that area. Rings, bracelets,
                                                            and diadems
of copper or silver were also worn as in Asia. The        silver diadems
resemble gold ornaments from an E.M.II tomb at Mochlos           in Crete

  1
    These palettes, perforated at the four corners, resemble, but only superficially,   the
wrist-guards of the Beaker complex; cf. BSA., III, 67.
  1
    B.M., Bronte, fig. 174.
                                           53
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
and from the Royal Tombs of Ur. 1 Some of the beads and amulets
may be Asiatic, notably the dove-pendants that are found even in
the early tombs of the Pelos class. 2 The so-called phallic (or winged)
beads (Fig. 27, 3) might be compared with the fly-amulets of Egypt
and Mesopotamia, 8 but probably derive from a form fashioned of
deers' teeth by the mesolithic Natufians of Palestine. 4    speciality   A
of the northern isles was the decorated bone tube designed to contain
pigments (Fig. 27, i). But similar tubes have been found in Troy IV
and Va, and at Byblos in Syria6 as well as on Levkas in Western Greece.




                          a        3

              FIG. 27. Early Cycladic ornaments: 2-8 Pares; i, 9, Syros (f).


  The self-coloured sepulchral pottery belongs in a general way to
the same Anatolian tradition as the early Cretan, and some vase forms
such as the pyxides are in the same vague way Anatolian. Even the
curious frying-pan form so common in the northern graves recurs, in
                                                                6
copper, in a "royal tomb" at Alaca Hoyiik in Central Anatolia. (The
excised decoration and the form of the handles show    that these odd
utensils are copied from wooden originals.) On the other hand, the
running spiral design on North Cycladic pottery has generally been
considered a Danubian motive. Weinberg, 7 however, suspects inspira-
      Evans, P. o/M., I, 97; Woolley, Ur Excavations: The Royal Tombs, p. 139.
      Aberg, Chron., IV, 62-3.
      Cf. Chiide, NLMAE., fig. 36 (Gerzean).
      Garrod, Stone Age of Mt. Carmel, I, p. XV, 2.
      Aberg, Chron.. IV, 13, 87; ATA., XXXVIII (1934), 229, 231.
      Hamit Ztibeyr Kosay, Ausgrabungen von Alaca Hdyttk (Ankara, 1944)* pi* LXXXIII,
60.
  7   In Ehrich, Relative Chronologies in Old World Archeology (1954), 95-
                                           54
     MARITIME CIVILIZATION IN THE CYCLADES
tion from the disconnected impressions of spiral shells such as appear
on the early Ghassulian pottery of the Jordan valley while Kaschnitz-




     FIG. 28. Cycladic pottery: i, Pelos; 2, Phylakopi I; 3, Phylakopi II (L.C.).



Weinberg considers that the incised spirals on the pots copy the wire
           1


spirals of early Sumerian and Anatolian gold-work.
   As already indicated, Cycladic culture declined when Minoan palaces
indicate a Cretan grip on maritime trade and the warlike "Minyans"
                             *   pz.   t   xxxiv (1950), 196.
                                               55
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
occupied the Helkdic townships. On most islands only a few graves
are dated by long rapiers or imported Minyan vases to Middle or Late
Cyeiadic I-II. The "halberd" of Fig. 26, 3, comes from a M.C. shaft
                              1
grave at Akesine on Amorgos. Its interpretation as a halberd, imported
or copied from the West, is indeed uncertain, but M.C. pottery like
that from the tomb, turning up in the Western Mediterranean (Fig. 41),
does at least suggest Cyeiadic enterprise in that direction. But her
resources in obsidian secured to Melos a share in Minoan commerce,
and Thera1 too benefited from her neighbours' wealth until a volcanic
convulsion overwhelmed her inhabitants. Phylakopi II was a fenced
city with regular streets. Imported M.M.I-II polychrome pottery
                                                                          and
Minyan vases from Greece found together on the earliest house floors
show how dose was the island's connection both with Crete and with
the Mainland. Conversely, the matt-painted Middle Cyeiadic I pottery
of Melos is significantly like the Early Bronze Age or Cappadocian
ware of Ali$ar, in Central Anatolia, as if the island had also connections
with the East. At a later stage in Phylakopi II a large building equipped
with pillar-rooms like a Cretan palace and decorated with a frescoe of
flying fishes in M.M.III technique might be the
                                                    residence of a Minoan

governor  or consul. The potters'  craft was industrialized, but the wheel-
made vases were decorated with lovely naturalistic patterns in matt
paint imitating the Minoan style of M.M.III-L.M.I (Fig. 28, 3).
                                                                       But
         ceramic            and          changed, there  is no break in the
though            technique       style
tradition; matt paint had replaced the glaze medium at the beginning
of Phylakopi II or even earlier though the patterns at first were
                                                                      times
geometric, as in Early Cyeiadic. In Late Mycenaean-L.M.III
the fortifications of Phylakopi were strengthened; the walls were now
20 feet thick, and near the gate a staircase led up to a tower or rampart-
walk. Most of the other islands have yielded traces of occupation at
this time, but their culture now was just a variant of the Mycenaean
"koine" described on p. 81.
                 1
                      Festschrift P. Goessler (Stuttgart, 1954). 26-34.
                  1
                      See Aberg, Ckr<m., IV, 127-37.
                              CHAPTER V
             FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
THE southern extremity of the Balkan peninsula,
                                                     though intersected
by J agged mountain ranges, chasms, and
                                           gulfs, yet displayed as much
cultural unity during the prehistoric Bronze
                                               Age as it did during the
historical Iron Age. In the Stone
                                  Age,     though peninsular Greece fell
for a time into two divisions,    Macedonia and even Southern Thrace
belonged to the same cultural province. Hence the stratigraphy,
observed at citadels, continuously occupied, and in rural tells,
                                                                 provides
a chronological frame applicable to the whole
                                                    region with certain
reservations. In Classical times Thessaly, Arcadia, and the mountainous
country of North- West Greece and still more Macedonia were cultur-
ally backward as compared with Bceotia, Attica, and Laconia, while
Thrace was frankly barbarian. A similar retardation can be observed
in the Bronze Age. Then from the
                                     beginning of the Bronze Age Mace-
donian culture diverged so far from that of peninsular Greece as to
deserve a different name Macednic that may be
                                                     applied to Thessaly
too.

  Subject to these limitations, the Mainland Bronze Age has been
divided into three main periods termed, on the
                                                 analogy of the Cretan,
"Early", "Middle", and "Late Helladic", and each subdivided. The
preceding Neolithic is similarly subdivided; but Early Neolithic is still
very shadowy, and Middle corresponds to the first or "A" phase in the
old sequence. Absolute dates can confidently be
                                                  assigned to the Late
Helladic or Mycenaean period by interchanges of goods with Crete and
the literate countries of the East Mediterranean: L.H.I began no later
than 1500 B.C., L.H.IIIb ended just after 1200. The beginning of
Middle Helladic about 1800 B.C. is deduced from the association of
M.H. and M.M.II pottery at Phylakopi on Melos (p. 48). Finally, Minoan
seals and sealings from E.H.III layers demonstrate a
                                                      parallelism with
E.M.III Crete and Egypt between Dynasties VI-XI. For estimating
the antiquity of earlier periods the relative depths of
                                                          deposits are at
least suggestive: at Eutresis 4 m. out of 6-5 are
                                                  composed of E.H.
ruins, at Korakou 2 m. out of 4*5 m. But in the Thessalian tell at
Tsangli, occupied in Early and perhaps Middle Jgean times, 5 m, out
of a total height of 10 m. is attributable to Middle Neolithic debris.
In conclusion,   it   must be recalled that the Helladic and Neolithic
                                    57
                   DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                                and are in fact usually
periods are generally defined by pottery styles
treated as the period when pottery of the distinctive style was being
manufactured at a particular site. Now on Levkas, in the backward
north-west, rapiers of L.H. or at least M.M.III type were apparently
                                   1
associated with good E.H. pottery, Hence the absolute dates for Early
and Middle Helladic         above are valid only for the ^Egean coasts
                               given
and their immediate hinterland. In peripheral regions a retardation
of several centuries must be allowed for! Moreover, the distinction
between Late Neolithic and Early Helladic I is nowhere very sharp.
In fact, a substantial overlap between some Late Neolithic and E.H J
                                               2
isgenerally admitted. Weinberg                     equates Late Neolithic in Thessaly
with E.H.I in the Peloponnese.


                            EARLY AND MIDDLE NEOLITHIC
While palaeolithic food-gatherers had reached peninsular Greece, no
remains have yet been found of any mesolithic successors, perhaps
                                      for such remains has been made.
merely because no systematic search
In 1956 the archaeological record begins with mature neolithic cultures
characterized by well-made pottery and little else. From Corinthia to
                                                  8 seems to character-
Thessaly "variegated ware", part pink, part grey,                     4
ize the earliest levels. But from the next level at Otzaki magoula
                                                         6 come sherds
in Thessaly as from the cave of Khirospilia on Levkas
ornamented with the edge of a Cardium shell or by rustication that
we shall find are the symbols of the earliest neolithic farmer-colonists
throughout the Balkans and round the
                                              Western Mediterranean too.
With them are associated distinctive          female  figurines. From the

figurines and from the incipient
                                    tell formation it may be inferred that
the rural economy and ideology of these early      colonists coincided with
those of still earlier cultivators in South- Western   Asia, some of whom
                                                    6
did decorate their pottery with Cardium impressions, as of their
better-known kinsmen farther north (p. 86) and of their successors
                                           7
in the Middle Neolithic phase.
                                                            mountain-
  By the latter a rich culture already ruled throughout the
                 from Servia in Western Macedonia   to Asea in Arcadia
ridged peninsula
and from Levkas on the west to the coasts of Attica. It is best illus-
trated in the fertile valleys of Thessaly and Central Greece and is
         Dflrpfeld, AU-Ithaka, R. 7 and
     i                                   R. 24.
         AJA..     U(X947). *7*; MilojOc, Chron., 39.

     :
         JKA2  &tt<ZZ?W "-3.                               ^feld. 4WIM* 335.
           NLMAE..
         Childe,       218; Godinan, Tarsus. II (1956), 66.       ^w  ^.
                                                                              AJA TLIT
    Mykmas, 'H reduce* *Bx* fr 'EXAddi (Athens, 1928). Cf. Weinberg, AJA .,
                and Schachermeyr,  Die HMesten Kultoren  Gntchenlands (1955)-
(1947); 167-85,
                                                   58
FIG. 29. Thessalian stone axes (A-C) and adzes (B-D). After Tsountas




FIG. 30. Pottery of Sesklo style, white on red and red on white. After Wace
                           and Thompson (i).




                                   59
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 usually named after the Thessalian site of Sesklo on the Gulf of Volo.
 In Thessaly and Central Greece the peasants found an environment
 that they could exploit from self-sufficing hamlets, continuously
 occupied. They fived in modest round or rectangular huts of wattle
 and daub or of mud-brick on stone foundations. A model from Sesklo
 shows a house with gabled roof. The repeated reconstruction of such
 dwellings has converted the settlements into little tells (toumba or
 magoula). Such mounds are very numerous but generally small: 100
 by 75 m. is an average area for a Thessalian tell, but at Hagia Marina
in Phocis the mound covered 300 by 200 m.
  Now tell formation implies a rural economy advanced enough to
maintain the fertility of the fields, if not orchard husbandry that ties
the farmer to his fruit-trees. In phase A the villagers lived by culti-
                                                        1
vating cereals, probably also vegetables and fruit-trees and breeding
                                     2
cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs.

                             up by hand delicate vessels, imitating
      Unspecialized potters built
baskets or perhaps even metal vessels8 in an extremely fine burnished
ware, generally red, in the Peloponnese sometimes black or mottled. 4
The pots might be decorated with simple rectilinear patterns formed
by wedge-shaped or round punctuations or by lines in white paint.
In Northern Greece the vase surface was more often covered with a
white slip on which designs were painted in red; in Central Greece and
the Peloponnese the white slip is often omitted. The patterns, often
very elaborate, are clearly derived from basketry originals, but each
hamlet developed its own distinctive style of painting. Ring bases
and genuine handles betoken an unusual degree of sophistication,
while an imitation of a leather bottle from Nemea approximates to the
Early Helladic askos (like Fig. 36, 2).
  Simple stone vases too were found at Sesklo, but a bone spatula like
Fig. 45 must come from an unrecognized Early Neolithic settlement.
  Though self-sufficing communities, the neolithic hamlets were not
mutually isolated; they exchanged pots 6 and doubtless other com-
modities. War is not attested; the only definite weapons found were
sling-stones, probably used by hunters. Peaceful commerce outside the
province is disclosed by the general use of obsidian. At Tsani a stone
button seal bearing a cruciform design was found, and clay models of

    Barley is attested for period A at Tsani, wheat, barley, figs, pears, and peas for
  1

period B at Sesklo and Dimini, vulgar* wheat from Rakhmani IV (D). Triticum durum
from Servia I in Macedonia.
  *
    BRGK., 36 (1955), i-5o.
  *
     Forsdyke, British Museum, Catalogue of Greek and Etruscan Vase*, I, pp. xvi and 23.
  4  The surface colour is determined by the firing, an oxidizing atmosphere yielding
red, a reducing Wack. See Blegen, Pro$ymna, 368-9; Htsperia, VI, 491-6.
  *
     Wace and Thompson, 241.
                                         60
             FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
seals are reported from Sesklo, Hagia Marina, and from Nemea in the
Peloponnese. The type is certainly at home in Hither Asia and there
                                                          1

generally occurs in a "chalcolithic" milieu, and copper may wejl have
been known to the "neolithic" Greeks. Some of their pots seem to
imitate the shape and even the rivets of metal vases, and at Hagia
Marina Soteriadhes 2 claims to have found riveted copper daggers on
virgin soil in a Sesklo settlement. Still, no sustained effort was made
to secure regular supplies of metal.
  Surplus energies were devoted rather to domestic                    fertility cults.




         FIG. 31. Neolithic figurines, Thessaly. After Wace and Thompson, (i, f;
                                         3-4. fc * I-)


For these figurines (Fig. 31) were modelled in clay, depicting, often
with considerable verisimilitude, a female personage, standing or
seated, or, in one example from Chaeroneia, nursing an infant (the
                                  or altars (Fig. 32) were also manu-
"kourotrophos"). Model thrones
factured. As ornaments and charms the peasants wore bracelets of
stone or Spondylus shells (as on the Danube), and stone nose-plugs as
in the al'Ubaid culture of Sumer.
   In its rural economy and ideology and in more specific items of
                                      use of the sling instead of the
equipment mud-brick architecture,
bow as well as the shape of the clay missiles, familiarity with stamp
  *
      Childe, NLMAE., 112, 120, 139, *95*    9, but at Byblos clay stamp* are neolithk,
  1
      Mylonas, op. cit. fig. 64.
                     t


                                            OI
                    DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
seals,the decoration of kiln-fired pots with basketry designs in dark
paint the Sesklo culture reveals just the westernmost outpost of the
South-West Asiatic province, extending from the Mediterranean coasts
to Iran and Turkmenia. Peculiarities of the pottery alone connect it




                 FIG. 32. Miniature altar or throne. After Wace and Thompson (J).



more specifically with Syria than with the Anatolian plateau. Technic-
                                                      1
ally the chalcolithic pottery of Cyprus is very like the red-on-white
ware described above and may constitute a link with the Hassuna-
Halaf complex farther east. At the same time connections with the
cultures of the Lower and Middle Danube valley are already discernible;
significant common elements are shoe-last adzes, triangular altars,
and shell bracelets. 2
  The Sesklo culture endured for a long time: at Tsangli five out of
ten metres of settlement debris are attributed to it, and four out of
eight occupational levels at Zerelia. But eventually the continuity
of tradition was interrupted. Changes in ceramic
                                                    technique, in art,
in architecture, and even in economy not only define a new
                                                           period, the
Late Neolithic, but also may betoken an infiltration of new colonists.
Among these two groups at least may be distinguished Dimini folk
in Eastern Thessaly   and Corinthia, and Larisa people in Western
Macedonia and Thessaly, Central Greece, and Corinthia. But the break
is nowhere complete. Thus female figurines were still modelled in
                                                                  clay;
in Eastern Thessaly the kourotrophos survived,
                                                painted in Dimini
style, and later a very schematized type emerged in which the head
is       a stumpy cylinder of stone or              clay,   fitted into   a legless torso

     1
    Dikaios, Khirokitia (London, 1953), 314-24; Schaeffer, Missions en Chypre, no.
The chalcolithic and proto-chalcolithic of Herein in Cilicia provide even better analogies,
Garstang, Prehistoric Mersin (Oxford, 1953), 54*124.
     *
         AM. LVII (1932).
             t


                                               62
            FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
Fig. 31, 4)   a type that recurs beyond the Danube in the Gumelni^a
culture. 1 Hence it may be assumed that the old population absorbed,
or was subjugated by, the new settlers. The latter's cultural affinities
seem to lie in the Balkans, but the manifestations of their advent
differ in different regions.


                                LATE NEOLITHIC
At Dimini near the Gulf of Volo a completely new settlement was
founded. In contrast to the earlier open hamlets it was defended by a
complex of stone walls (Fig. 33). Sesklo was probably fortified at the




             FIG. 33. Plan of fortified village of Dimini. After Tsountas.



same time. 2 In both citadels houses of the megaron type with porch
and central hearth were erected. At Dimini and Sesklo the bevelled
  1
    Dacia, VII-VIII (1940). 97-
  1
    It is possible that the fortifications and megara at both sites are Middle Helladic
and so unconnected with the Dimini culture.
                                          63
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
adze (D) went out of use, and axes (Fig. 29, C) were employed for the
first time. Adzes were hafted at Dimini with the aid of perforated
antler sleeves. Copper and gold were now imported; they are repre-
sented respectively by two flat celts and a ring-pendant (Fig. 34, 2),




                                           I                             2

           FIG. 34. Dimini bowl (J) and gold-ring pendant (f). After Tsountas.



all from Dimini. In East Thessaly the vases were              now decorated with
spirals    and maeanders normally combined with the older basketry
patterns; the designs may be incised or painted in white or warm black
on a buff, red, or brown ground, and may then be outlined with a
second colour black or white; the fruitstand a dish on a high
pedestal is an important innovation. Similar pottery turns up in
Corinthia and the Argolid, again in a Late Neolithic context. 1
  Technically Dimini pottery is inferior to that of Sesklo; ring-bases
were abandoned, true handles give place to pierced lugs, though some
of these are horned or elaborated into animal heads. So Dimini ware

cannot be treated as
                        an autochthonous development of the native
Middle Neolithic tradition. It was surely introduced by a new people,
come most probably from the Danube valley; for there spiral and
maeander patterns were always popular and antler was extensively
used in industry. Technically Dimini ware is identical with the painted
ware of the Balkan Stardevo culture, where, however, it is associated
with rusticated ware such as we have already met in Early Neolithic
Greece. The patterns, however, whether painted or incised, can best
be matched in the Tisza-Maros region.*
  1   At Gonia and the Argive Heraeum.
      Cf. Schachermeyr,   MAGW., LXXXI-LXXXIII (1953-4), *-39>* below, p. rrz.
                                       64
                FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
   In Thessaly the Dimini culture is confined to the east. To the west
its place is taken by the Larisa culture, found also in Central Greece
and Western Macedonia. In the latter region the Late Neolithic phase
began with the violent destruction of the Sesklo village of Servia. The
site was reoccupied by a new people whose Larisa culture is as different
from that of Sesklo as is Dimini, at least judged by its pottery. The
commonest ware is self-coloured, generally black and highly burnished,
but sometimes at least in Macedonia parti-coloured black inside and
round the rim, elsewhere red like the grey and pink variegated pottery
of the Early Neolithic. Vessels no longer stand on ring bases, handles
are replaced by lugs that may be horned. 1 Decoration is effected by
stroke-burnishing, shallow fluting or channelling, incisions, or rarely
by thin lines of white paint. (Crusted ware occurs in Eastern Thessaly,
but in a later horizon.) The patterns are generally rectilinear, but
include occasional spirals. Besides self-coloured wares a light fabric
was made and covered all over with shiny brown or black paint. This
              "
ware, termed    neolithic urfirnis", looks like an attempt to reproduce
the             of black burnished ware in kiln-fired vases, but is said
       appearance
to begin in Middle Neolithic times in Corinthia. 2
  As at Dimini, adzes were mounted in perforated antler sleeves, the
sling was still preferred to the bow, but
                                           an arrow-head was found at
Servia. Personal ornaments    include bracelets of Spondylus shell and
of marble and bone combs      rather like those of the Danubian Vinia
culture (Fig. 47).
   Larisan ideology was still expressed in the production of female
figurines, now very conventional,
                                   but one burial was found in the
settlement at Servia.
           new ceramic fabrics and shapes found at Servia (except
      All the
white painted ware) recur in the Vinfia culture on the Danube and Tisza,
                                                                                    1
as do bone combs, shell bracelets, and other traits. Hence Frankfort,
            4 and           5 have deduced an invasion from
Grundmann,          Heurtley                                   beyond
the Balkans. On the other hand, many of the ceramic innovations can
be paralleled equally in Crete and in Hither Asia. Agreements between
Cretan neolithic and Mainland Greek black-polished wares have already
been noted. Stroke-burnishing decorated one E.M.I fabric (p. 32) but
was also applied in the chalcolithic of Kum Tepe in the Troad (p. 36).
White painting on polished black ware was also later popular at Yortan
                                                                    Macedonian sites,
  1
      True handles are attached to jugs at Olynthus and a few other
but    Stk      b^Tes they are nifluenced by Early JBgean models and not truly
"neolithic".
                ,   VI. b, c.; AJA.. LI,

                            ,   102 ft, LXII. 56-69.
                                                 65
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
and in South-Western Asia Minor, 1 while parti-coloured wares are
characteristic of central Anatolia and Cyprus, but not before the time
of Troy I. Finally, black polished wares, sometimes decorated by
                                    2
stroke-burnishing, in North Syria precede the painted fabric with
which Sesklo pottery has been compared. If the inference drawn from
this comparison be correct, it would be chronologically impossible to
attribute this Syrian neolithic to any Danubian inspiration. Hence,
as Miloj&c has argued most cogently, the Larisa culture should mark
not a transplantation of the Vinfta culture from north of the Balkans
but a stage in the spread of an AsiatkxflEgean culture thither or at
least a parallel emanation of the latter. That would further accord
with Weinberg's3 equation of the Late Neolithic of Thessaly and
Macedonia with Troy I and E.H.I. Nevertheless, these archaeological
arguments are not so conclusive as to exclude absolutely the idea of
an invasion from the Danube valley, should other, e.g. philological,
considerations make that imperative.


                         THE EARLY AEGEAN BRONZE AGE
The influx of new settlers in Late Neolithic times had not involved
an immediate transformation of the economic structure of Hellas;
despite its copper axes, the Dimini culture can be termed neolithic
as legitimately as its Sesklo precursor. The succeeding period witnessed
a real advance towards the Urban Revolution and the nuclei of the
classical City States were founded in peninsular Greece.
   Not only there, but also in Macedonia and even in Thrace (at least
at Mikhalic 4 on the Maritsa close to its junction with the Tundja), the
Mainland Bronze Age is marked by innovations in domestic architec-
ture and in pottery that find precise parallels on the eastern coast of
the   gean. Architectural tricks such as herring-bone masonry (in
Boeotia and Attica, cf p. 37) and bothroi in house floors (in Macedonia
                               .

                                                                               '
and, by E.H.III, in peninsular Greece) and ceramic novelties                       'thrust
handles", pyxides, jugs with cut-away necks, bowls with tubular or
trumpet lugs growing from the inverted rims suggest a transfer of
Anatolian culture across the JEgean and the Dardanelles. A closer
study of the pottery, however, shows that no one known Anatolian
culture was reproduced on the European shores. If a migration from
Asia Minor be assumed, it will be necessary to postulate several streams
  1   Anatolian Studies, IV. (1954)* 202-5.
      Childe. BSA., XXXVII (1936-37), 31-5.
      AJA., LI (1947). I7<T4-
  4
      Ratto&ki i Proulvaniy*, I, Narodcn Arkh. Muzei (Sofia, 1948), 8-ao; cf., Anatolian
 ti*die*,   VI (195$)' 43-8-
                                           66
              FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
with different starting-points. Only the Early jEgean
                                                      pottery from
Thrace and Macedonia is explicitly Troadic, while the local post-
neolithic Thessalian pottery seems derived from the
                                                      Early Macednic.
In Macedonia and Thrace stone battle-axes occur at the same time,
but they are not distinctively Troadic. In the Peloponnese and Attica
Cycladic features in pottery and burial rites are prominent, as if the
islands had been at least stepping-stones on the way from Asia. At
Asine the best analogy to one of the earliest E.H. pots is to be found
in the Copper Age of Aliar in Central Anatolia. 1 On the West Coast
Ithaka seems to have been colonized from Corinthia. 8 Even in Thrace
and Macedonia horses' bones occur on Early ^Egean sites, while on the
Troad that animal appears first in Troy VI.
  Perhaps, then, the striking agreements could be explained as parallel
adjustments of related cultures when visiting merchants and prospectors
from the Levant and the Nile introduced metallurgical and other
techniques and opened up opportunities for securing a share in the
surplus accumulated in Sumerian and Egyptian cities.
  All Early Helladic, Macednic, and Thracic societies of course still
lived mainly by farming, though viticulture is now dedutible from
grape seeds at H. Kosmas in Attica, while in Thrace and Macedonia
horses'  bones occur. The early ^Egean settlements in Thrace and
Macedonia indeed remained simple villages, as did those at most inland
sites in Central Greece and the Peloponnese (e.g. Asea in Arcadia).

Many had already been occupied by neolithic peasants. Both in Mace-
donia and peninsular Greece Late Neolithic sherds are found on the
oldest Bronze Age floors. But at least in peninsular Greece new settle-
ments were established on sites chosen with a view to trade or piracy
rather than agriculture. These, though often of no larger size physically,
approximate to fenced cities in their location on naturally defencible
sites and their protection by ramparts of stones, combined on yEgina
with timber beams as at Troy.
  The townsmen lived in long two-roomed houses, closely grouped
along narrow lanes, as at Troy and Thermi. But in the more rustic
villages houses were oval or apsidal and more scattered. At Tiryns
and Orchomenos monumental circular structures were built, probably
to serve as granaries. 8 By E.H.III tiles were already used for roofing.
                                           4 at least
Finally, by that phase the town of Lerna              comprised a regular
palace of several rooms grouped    about   a  spacious court or hall and
roofed with tiles and slates. So in at least one Mainland centre the

  1
      FtOdin and Persson, Asine, 204.
      Hartley, BSA.  t   XXXV (1934-35). 39-              .
                                                              VVTTT
      Marinates, BCH., LXX (1946), 337
                                                4
 1
                                                    &*sp*r*a. XXIII (1954), 81-4.
                                           67
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
social surplus was being concentrated and communal activity directed
by a chief as at Troy   .


  Stone was still employed for axes, adzes, and knives even in the
Peloponnese, and so extensively farther north that Thessalian and
Thracian villages look positively neolithic. Obsidian was used for
knives, sickle teeth, and hollow-based arrow-heads; for the bow is
now attested for the first time, without, however, ousting* the sling.
In Thrace and Macedonia, but not in pensinsular Greece, stone battle-
axes were now being made as in the Troad; one from H. Mamas in
Macedonia     (Fig. 35),    though in course of local manufacture, repro-




  FIG. 35. Axe and battle-axes from H. Mamas. After Heurtley, BSA:,   XXIX (}).

duces a South Russian type. At Mikhalic in Thrace miniature battle-
axes were modelled in day as toys or votives.
  But copper, tin, lead, silver, and gold were everywhere imported
or distributed and worked. Close to the shore at Rafina in Attica,
a convenient port for Cycladic or Cypriote ores, were found two large
furnaces for smelting copper surrounded by quantities of slag and
broken moulds. At Cirrha on the Gulf of Corinth, Davies1 reported a
crucible with tin oxide adhering to it in an open working from which
all ore had been extracted, but tin ore in this context is almost incon-
ceivable. Even in Macedonia 2 gold slag and a crucible have been described.
   At least south of Thessaly the distribution of metal was so well
organized that copper could be freely used for craftsmen's tools.
Though most have been melted down in prehistoric times, an axe-
adze and a flame-shaped knife like Fig. 20, i, survived in the E.H.II
level at Eutresis. 8

    JHS., XLJX (1929). 93-4*
                                       *
  1                                      Vardaroftsa and Saratse, Heurtley, PM.
  * Two copper battle-axes found stray in peninsular Greece and now at the British
School in Awns may weU be Early Helladic.
                                       68
          FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
  Whether or no the techniques of metallurgy were implanted by
immigrant prospectors or itinerant artificers from Asia, the capital
for industrial development was secured in the last resort by supplying
the demand of cities on the Nile and the Euphrates. As in Crete and
the Cyclades, the coastal populations of peninsular Greece had now
turned to trading. Perhaps they colonized the Ionian Islands and the
west coasts to extend their commerce as the Dorians colonized Corfu
in historical times.
  The importance and wide ramifications of Early Helladic commerce
are illustrated not only by the materials used but by actual foreign
manufactures imported or copied locally: leg amulets as in Crete and
                 1                 2
Egypt (Zygouries, Hagios Kosmas ), Cycladic bone tubes (Hagios
Kosmas and Levkas), frying-pans (Hagios Kosmas, Eutresis, 8 Asine),
marble idols and palettes (Hagios Kosmas), and a double-spiral pin
like Fig. 27, 9 (Zygouries). From Asia came an arm-cylinder of twisted
silver wire (like a gold one from Troy II) found in a grave on Levkas.
In the E.H.III level at Asine lumps of clay stamped with E.M.III-
M.M.I seal-impressions must have sealed bales of merchandise or jars
of oil brought from Crete. And the Early Helladic merchants themselves
felt the need of seals; seals, probably imported, have been found at

Hagios Kosmas, Asine, and other sites. One from Asine is almost
identical with a Sixth Dynasty Egyptian seal. The counterbalancing
exports may possibly have included tin from Cirrha. Early Helladic
vases were certainly exported to Troy from peninsular Greece (p. 37).
A depas found near Mikhalic in Thrace, and another from Orchomenos
as well as some other vases from that site and Eutresis may well be
Troadic imports.
  The ceramic industry was not industrialized, since Early Helladic
vases are all hand-made. The fabrics that appear first (from E.H.I
onwards) are dark and self-coloured, burnished and decorated with
incised and excised patterns. In a later phase (E.H.II) begins in penin-
sular Greece a buff ware which is covered with a dark glaze paint to
reproduce the effects of the old burnished fabric. It is generally
                                                                        known
                                                     4
as Urfirnis and probably denotes Cretan influence though red wares
had been coated with a rather similar "glaze"   in  Late  Neolithic times.
In E.H.III the glaze paint is used as the  medium     for producing dark
                                                 in the
geometric patterns on a light ground chiefly             Peloponneseor
as a ground on which similar patterns are drawn in white in
Central Greece. The rectilinear light-on-dark designs recall Cretan
                                 ries (Cambridge, Mass.,   1928).

                                        ;ai Ertrtsi* in Booto (1931).
               4   Fr&din and Pertson, Asine. 433.
                                        69
                  DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
E.M.II-HI patterns, but are also foreshadowed on the black neolithic B
vases of the Mainland. Distinctive Early Helladic II-III shapes are
sauce-boats (also manufactured in gold 1), hour-glass tankards, askoi and
                                                2
globular water-jars, at first with ring-handles, later with flat vertically
pierced lugs, on the belly (Fig. 36).
      North of Othrys in Thessaly, Macedonia, and Thrace, Early ^Egean




       FIG. 36. Early Helladic sauce-boat (i), askos (2), tankard (3), and jar (4) (|).

potters did not use a kiln that would produce clear ware and so did
not manufacture Urfirnis ware. Its place was taken by self-coloured
wares as in Early Helladic I and Early Troadic. Save for "sauce-boats",
most of the forms popular in peninsular Greece were reproduced in
local variations looking rather more Troadic than the latter (Fig. 37,
i, 2, 6). Even horned handles had been current at Troy, but in Mace-
donia a distinctive development was the wish-bone handle (Fig. 37,
  *
      /firs.,   XLIV (1924), 163.
  1This form resembles the Corded Ware amphora, Fig. 84 (cf Fuchs, Die griechische
                                                                    .



Fundgruppen det frilhen Bronzezeit, 1937), Du * a^ 8 good Anatolian forms (Germania,
XXIII. 62).
                                             70
             FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
3, 5), analogies to which have met us in neolithic Crete. In Thrace the
vases from Mikhalic, where askoi are missing, look more Troadic still.
But here, as in Chalcidice, trumpet lugs grow out of the inverted rims of
bowls. Now in Lesbos this type of lug appeared first in Thermi III,
having grown up out of the simpler tubular lugs of Thermi I (Fig. 17).
For once pottery discloses an irreversible relation. Finally, a few sherds




                    *               *             45
          FIG. 37. Early Macednic pot-forms. After Heurtiey, BSA., XXVIII.
                                                                               67
from Mikhalic in Thrace, from H. Mamas in Macedonia, and from
E.H.III levels at Eutresis and H. Marina in Central Greece are decor-
ated with cord imprints. This "corded ware" has usually been con-
nected with the battle-axes and horses' bones from the Thracic and
Macednic sites as evidence for an invasion from Saxo-Thuringia1 or
at least from somewhere north of the Balkans. The forms of most vases
have however nothing in common with Saxo-Thuringian corded ware, 2
while the similarities of the amphorae are due at most to a common
pre-ceramic prototype (p. 173).
   Imported marble figurines of Cycladic type may have been used in
domestic fertility rites, but clay figurines do not seem to have been
manufactured unless the ''anchor ornaments" (Fig.
38) be really ultra-conventionalized versions of such.
They constitute one of the most distinctive type
fossils of the Early ^Egean Bronze Age, being
found in E.H.II-HI layers from Asea in Arcadia
to Servia in Macedonia and Mikhalic in Thrace,
and from Rafina and Asine on the east to Levkas
and Ithaka on the west. 8 Really they are no more
likely to be ritual than the clay
                                   hooks common to FIG. 38. E. H. An-
                                                           chor Ornament,
                                                horns
Early Thracic, Macednic, and Troadic. Clay                   Kritsana (J).
of consecration from Asine on the other hand
point to rites like the Minoan and Anatolian.
                                                 But the principal super-
stitious impulse to accumulation of wealth    was  supplied by the desire
for a good burial. In the Peloponnese   and  Attica  the dead were buried
      1
          So Fuchs, Die griechische Fundgrupptndtr frUhen Bromezeit (i937)
      *
          Milojfitt, Germania,   XXXIII (i955)> I5i'4- ^   JJ m   _   .
                                                                          f.
      *
          Listed by Weinberg, AJA., LI, p. 168, n. 26; add Mikhalic and Rafina.
                                             7*
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
in fanuly vaults outside the settlements. At Zygouries the tombs were

pit-caves or shafts cut in the rock, one of which contained fourteen
skeletons. At Hagios Kosmas in Attica, the earlier ossuaries were cists
with a false door facing the township. The cists were later replaced
by built ossuaries like Fig. 25, i, but still used as collective tombs;
in each case the bodies, in the contracted attitude, had been introduced
 through the roof. Such cemeteries of family vaults show that in
 peninsular Greece quite a number of lineages or clans lived together
in a single township. Out of six skulls measured from H. Kosmas three
 were long-headed, but two round-headed. 1
   In the north-west quite different burial practices prevailed. On
 Levkas DSrpfdd described a so-called royal cemetery of thirty-three
 round tombs. Each "tomb" was a circular platform of stones defined
by a built wall and suggesting a denuded cairn, in or on which were
burial pithoi, cists, or shaft-graves each containing a single corpse
 (allegedly roasted)  and the ashes of a "pyre". Among these lay burnt
human and animal bones and remains of metal ornaments and weapons.
The pottery from the graves is typically Early Helladic, but the metal
gear from the "pyres" includes besides good Early ^Egean types a
                                            2
couple of rapiers and gold hilt mounts that elsewhere would be
Mycenaean or at least M.M.III. The cemetery must be a whole period,
perhaps four centuries, later than that of H. Kosmas in Attica. The
burial rites are equally abnormal. Cremation in situ must have taken
place on the pyres, a rite otherwise unknown in Bronze Age Greece.
The platforms sound like cairns, and in 1955 a cairn with pithos burials
very like our round tombs was found in Messenia, but was M.H. in
date. So the warriors and rich women buried on Levkas did not possess
the standard Early Helladic culture though they used Early Helladic
pots and Early jEgean weapons and ornaments.
   The standard Early Helladic burial practices are in sharp contrast
to the Troadic, but conform rather to Cydadic, Minoan, Cypriote and
Levantine traditions. They cannot have been introduced from the
Troad. But no Early 5gean burials have been recognized where
Troadic parallels are clearest north of Attica and Eubcea or in Mace-
donia and Thrace.
   In peninsular Greece, Early Helladic societies had created a polity
and an economy under which some at least of the peasant's younger
sons might find a livelihood in industry or commerce, but only in
reliance on Oriental markets opened up by maritime transport. Remote
from access thereto, the contemporary inhabitants of Macedonia had

            Coon, j
            DOrpfold,   AuMak* 229 (R- 7).
                                t



                                     72
          FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
no alternative but to occupy fresh land. So they filtered southward
into Thessaly. The culture that used to be attributed to Neolithic III
and IV there was in fact basically Early Macednic. 1 But local Late
Neolithic traditions were blended with the Anatolian. So clay figurines
were still manufactured, but now male as well as female. At Rakhmani
in Eastern Thessaly spiral patterns were applied in crusted technique.


                              MIDDLE HELLADIC
The Middle Helladic period is ushered in by the violent destruction
of Orchomfenos and other sites. Many were reoccupied. But abrupt
changes in architecture, pottery, burial rites, and general economy
indicate the dominance of new and warlike settlers. The latter can be
most easily recognized by their pottery the reduced grey ware




      FIG. 30. Spear-head,
                *          knives, and dagger from M.H. graves in Thessaly.
                                After Tsountas (i).


described on p. 46 and unhappily termed Minyan by archaeologists
and by the practice of burying the dead contracted in small cists or in
jars among the houses. The
                             martial character of the invaders is dis-
closed by the deposition in the graves of metal weapons (Fig. 39)
knives, ogival daggers, and spear-heads
                                        with a socket, cast like a shoe
on one or both faces of the blade (Sesklo, Levkas, Mycenae). Hoflow-
                       *   BSA. XXVIII (19*6-37). 180-94.
                                t


                                     73
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
based obsidian arrow-heads were still used, but now the archer used
also grooved stone arrow-straighteners like Fig. 113 (Asine, Levkas,

Mycenae)* Perforated stone axes appear for the first time at Eutresis
and Asine and antler axes and sleeves at Asine. On the other hand, such
craft tools as saws and gouges are first found in a Middle Helladic
grave (on Levkas).
  The Minyan invaders did not exterminate the older inhabitants or




     FIG. 40. Minyan pottery from Thessaly (|), and imitations from Thermon,




destroy their economy, but added to the population and accelerated
the accumulation of wealth. Malthi now attained its maximum popu-
lation; the walls comprised, within an area of 3| acres, 305 rooms, while
the citadel was supplied with spring water by an aqueduct. The houses
are more often agglomerations of rooms than long rectangular halls. 1
Tin-bronze was now worked by the smiths, and stone moulds for
casting spear-heads like Fig. 39, 1, and Minoan double-axes were found
even at Dimini in Thessaly.
  The potters' craft was soon industrialized. The grey-ware vases were
fired in a closed kiln and either formed in a mould or thrown on the


                              AJA., XLVIII (1944). 342-
                          i


                                        74
           FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
wheel. A family of Minoan potters settled on JSgina, bringing with
them their clay wheel as used in Crete. 1 Perhaps such immigrant
craftsmen were responsible for introducing the wheel from Crete every-
where, but there is nothing Minoan about their products. The favourite
"Minyan" forms are ring-stemmed goblets, high-handled cups (Fig. 40),
craters, and amphorae. Both in hue and form such Minyan vases imitate
silver models. Indeed, in one Late Helladic grave the silver originals




 FIG. 41. Matt-painted bowl and pithos, ^gina (^); and Middle Cycladic jugs from
                      Marseilles harbour and Phylakopi (|).


were actually found together with the clay skeuomorphs.   On the other
                                                                     2


hand,  the influence of woodwork    is patent  notably  in the horned
handles from ^Etolia (Fig. 40, 3), which are repeated in good Minyan
ware at Troy but have a long Balkan ancestry. But grey Minyan
vases had to   compete with hand-made vessels of the same shapes in
                                            wares.
polished brown or black and vitreous red
   Perhaps later, pithoi, bowls, and other shapes were built up by hand
in clear wares and decorated  with                    in matt paint (Fig.
                                   geometric patterns
                                                  vessels
41); In form and decoration   these matt-painted          agree precisely

                    Jhb. d. Inst., LII, AA. (1937).
                i                                 2 -5-
                                                             % o
                    Persson, New Tombs a/ Dendra (Lund, 1942), 87.
                                         75
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
with Middle Cydadic pots from Melos and show the same Central
                                                             1
Anatolian affinities (p. 56). A M.H.III beaked jug from Asine looks like
an imported "Early Hittite" manufacture. On the other hand, at Liano-
kladhi in the Spercheios valley the Macedonians, who had occupied the
site in Early ,<Egean times, now learned to make in matt-painted ware

jars, tankards, and bowls with wish-bone
                                            handles of good Macednic or
Early Helladic shape, and decorate them with Macednic patterns,
including pot-hook spirals, in Middle Helladic technique (Fig. 42).
                                                                      A




        FIG. 42. Matt-painted jar, Lianokladhi III. After Wace and Thompson (J).



similar fabric appears at Thermon in ^Etolia together with "imitation
Minyan" vases, but not before L.H.II (fifteenth century) and also in
Levkas. This Lianokladhi painted ware thus illustrates people of
MacednioMiddle Helladic traditions surviving into Late Helladic times
whom Heurtley plausibly identifies with the Dorians' ancestors. 2
  In peninsular Greece trade with Crete was at first interrupted by
the invasion, but obsidian was still secured from Melos and the metal
trade was unimpaired. Soon Middle Minoan II polychrome pottery
was being imported into ^Egina and imitated at Eutresis. A bossed
  1
      FrOdin and Persson, Asine, 286; cf. van der Oaten, AHshar, 1928-9, OIP.   t   XIX
pi.   IV, b 1671.
      BSA. XXVIII (1926-27), 179 ff.
            t



                                          76
             FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
bone plaque like Fig. 115 and a hammer pin, 1 from M.H. layers at
Lerna, illustrate connections at once with Anatolia and with Sicily.
   The dead were generally interred in cists or jars under or between
the houses within the settlements. But on Levkas ten or twelve such
burials might be grouped together in rectangular or circular "platforms"
                           2
(cf. p. 72). In MeSsenia     Middle Helladic pithos burials lay on the
periphery   of a regular cairn 14 m. in diameter.
   The intrusive culture typified by grey Minyan ware is found all over
Greece to the Ionian Islands, Levkas, Thessaly, and even Chalcidice.
Only in inland Macedonia did the native culture persist quite unaffected
by it. Now most authorities agree that the Minyan invaders were the
first Greek speakers in the peninsula. From them should have sprung
the new dynasty that began to write Indo-European Greek at Knossos
in L.M.II (p. 27). If so, the origin of the invaders becomes a major
issue for European prehistory. In 1914 Forsdyke suggested a Troadic
                          8
origin for the invaders. But, though Minyan ware was the normal
pottery of Troy VI, it did not begin demonstrably earlier there than
in Greece. Burial among the houses contrasts as much with Troadic
as with Minoan and Early Helladic practice, but was normal in Central
Anatolia and farther east.            Now grey vases, technically allied to
Minyan and including pedestalled goblets, are characteristic of Hissar II
                                                          4
in North-Eastern Iran and allied sites in Turkmenia, where again
the dead were buried among the houses. On the other hand, Persson
                                                        6
insists on Northern features in the intrusive culture. None is really

convincing, and the most significant can already be found south of
the Balkans in Thrace and Macedonia in Early ^Egean times. If fresh
"Northern" elements entered peninsular Greece and the Troad at the
beginning of Middle Helladic there is no evidence for bringing them
from beyond the Balkans.

                            MYCENJBAN CIVILIZATION
The martial prowess of the Minyan invaders eventually allowed them
to win by force of arms a share in the wealth accumulated in Minoan
and Oriental cities while their war-chiefs, becoming kings, concen-
trated some of it for use as capital in the development of a Mainland
civilization. The kings attracted or compelled Minoan craftsmen to
settle at their courts while merchants brought regular supplies of raw
materials and luxury goods. By Late Helladic times the Middle Helladic
townships had grown into little cities.
  *
      Htttorio, XXIII (*954),   i;   v, 160.        JHS. (1955). SuppL. p. 11.
                                                *
    JHS., XXXIV. ill                                Arnc, Excwations at Skak-up*; cf.
  9 FrOdin and
               Persson, Asin* 433,
                                t                     p. ao, n. i.
                                           77
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  The urban revolution was apparently first consummated at Mycense,
a citadel that commands a main artery of communications between
the south-east and the north-west. The old settlement, founded in
Early HeUadic times, became the capital of a potent dynasty. The
kings with their families were buried with regal wealth in two Shaft
Grave cemeteries, each enclosed by a circle of upright slabs. Schliemann
discovered a circle of six tombs, numbered I to VI, that had subse-
quently been incorporated in the walls of the Late Mycenaean citadel.
A second circle comprising 14 shaft graves (designated by Greek
letters) farther out and disturbed by the erection of the 'Treasury of
                                               1
Clytemnaestra", came to light in igsi. In both, the shafts, cut 10 to
15 feet into the rock and provided with a ledge 4 or 3 feet%bove the
floor to support a wooden roof, normally contained several skeletons

lying on their backs with the legs extended or drawn up; one skull
had been trepanned. These may have been buried in wooden coffins,
but at the bottom of the latest and largest shaft in the new circle
had been built a stone mortuary house, divided into chamber and ante-
chamber and roofed with a corbelled barrel vault. Stelae, carved in
low relief with spiral patterns framing scenes of war and of the chase,
once marked each grave. Now they provide the earliest evidence for
the use of horse-drawn war-chariots in the ^gean. A little imported
M.M.IIIb pottery together with native matt-painted and Minyan
vases suggest that the earliest interments in some graves go back into
the sixteenth century; the latest dateable sherds from any shaft grave
are L.M.II. The Shaft Grave period covered roughly the century 1600
to 1450 B.C.
  The equipment acquired by the Shaft Grave kings is largely of
Minoan inspiration. Their palace was equipped with a light-well, like
those of Knossos, and decorated with frescoes in Minoan technique.
Most vessels and ornaments are evidently products of Minoan crafts-
men. On figured documents men wear the Minoan drawers and women
the flounced skirt of the island. Minoan signets were adopted for official
business. The cult of the Mother Goddess, associated, as in Crete, with
the symbols of the dove, the double-axe, the sacred pillar and horns
of consecration, was practised with Minoan rites at Mycenae, and
draughts were played as in Crete. No one denies that craftsmen trained
in Cretan schools produced the objects in question though many must
have been executed at Mycenae itself to the order of the local king.
An immigration of Cretan potters seems to have initiated the local
manufacture of Mycenaean vases, decorated with shiny paint in the
best Minoan tradition. It no longer seems likely, as it did thirty years
   1   G. Mylonas, Ancient Mycenae, the Capital of Agamemnon (Princeton, 1956).
                  FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
ago, that Mycenaean civilization was founded by Minoan princes
carving out for themselves kingdoms on the Greek Mainland. The
martial character of Early Mycenaean culture, as revealed in the forti-
fication of the citadel, the abundance of
                                                                      weapons, and the popularity
of battle scenes in art, is quite foreign to the Minoan
                                                                                  spirit. The kings
of   Mycenae wore beards; the Minoans generally shaved their faces.
In their tombs native Minyan and matt-painted vases are
                                                           juxtaposed
to vessels painted in Cretan style and technique. An arrow-shaft-
straightener in Shaft Grave VI and a Mainland spear-head like       i                      Fig. 39,
(Grave IV), occur side by side with arms in Minoan tradition. Though
the terrible rapiers, nearly a metre long, like Fig. 14, i,
                                                            may be Middle
Minoan types, the flange-hilted variant of Fig. 14, 2, is Mainland rather
than Cretan. A round-heeled dagger from Shaft Grave VI would seem
more at home in Central and Western Europe1 than round the ^Egean.
Mycenaean warriors wore helmets plated with boars' tusk laminae, but
so did Minoans (p. 30). Amber for beads found in several shaft
                                                                                              graves
must have been imported from the Baltic, a newly
found        crescentic           necklace        with      pattern-bored
             2
spacers          (Fig. 43) of that material is likely to be
of English manufacture.
     Finally, the horse-drawn war-chariots, at once
the     symbols and the decisive instruments of
Mycenaean kingship, are certainly not Minoan.
The horses that drew them point north of the
Jgean basin. That is not to say that Minyan
invaders had brought chariots and horses with
 _       .           ,     ,      .                                             FIG. 4.3, Terminal and
them into Greece in the eighteenth century. A
                                             .



                                                                                pattern-bored spacer-
small group                                                                     bead from amber neck-
           r of charioteers could easily seize
                 ,                                                              lace. Shaft Grave at
                      .   ,   .       ,,     .,      .,,_       .1.         ,

power and maintain authority with this new and              Mycenae (i).
potent weapon. Structurally the Mycenaean shaft
                                             ''             '

graves agree closely with the yamno' graves of the Pontic steppes, which
do contain wheeled ox-carts and hammer pins (p. 151). Whatever the
ancestry of the Shaft Grave rulers, by concentrating wealth, won by
                                       8
pillage, mercenary service in Egypt or more peaceful trade, and so
attracting or  compelling expert   craftsmen   to settle on the Mainland,
they prepared   the way   for an urban  civilization.
   Between 1500 and 1400 B.C. the same process of acculturation was
accomplished at other sites which had remained rural townships during
   1
     The identification of another blade from this grave as a halberd is incorrect, Blegen,
in 'ETtTiJ^oy X. Trowrat (Athens, 1951), 423 ff; cf. PPS. t XIX, 231.
    Germanio, XXXIII (1955), 316-18.
    Schachermeyr, Arcktv Orientalni, XVII (Praha, 1949), 331-50, suggests that the
Mycenaeans learned to build and use chariots while helping Ahmose to expel the HyksosI
                                                         79
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
the Early Mycenaean Shaft Grave epoch. Here again the change coin-
cided with the rise in the townships of chieftains, concentrating the
local wealth for expenditure on the products of secondary industry and
trade. These celebrated their elevation by erecting stately beehive
tombs or tholoi. Such tombs are   significantly located near the heads
of southward-facing gulfs and along natural trade-routes by sea or land.
On the east coast these Middle Mycenaean tholoi extend as far north as
the Gulf of Volo, on the west to Cakovatos in Elis. At Mycenae itself,
rulers, perhaps of a new dynasty, erected a series of tholoi in
                                                                which
Wace traced the typological development from earlier and ruder vaults
to the celebrated       'Treasuries" of "Clytemnaestra" and "Atreus",
                                                                                   1
built in ashlar masonry and provided with richly sculptured portals.
  The oldest dated tholos, one at Navarino, 2 contained only matt-
painted and (a minority of) Cretanizing L.H.I vases, so should have
                                                                    been
                                             8
built in the sixteenth century.    Kakovatos    and  a  few other  tholoi
                                                                                  a
yielded good L.H.I pottery pointing to a foundation before 1450 B.C.,
                                                         ''treasuries*' at
larger number are L.H.II, the rest, including the finest
Mycenae, were Late Mycenaean. A very rich tholos,       found   intact at

                                                                 gold and
         4
Dendra, contained no pottery earlier than L.H.III, but      the
silver vessels are L.M.I in style and illustrate a survival of  heirlooms
for half a century at least!

   Mycenaean tholoi are corbelled chambers entered by a long unroofed
passage or dromos. Many were erected in an excavation in a natural
hillside, but others stood on level ground or on a hilltop and were
covered by an artificial mound or cairn5 (Fig. 44).
  Much of the grave goods from the Middle Mycenaean tholoi are
either imports from Crete or products of craftsmen trained in the
Minoan schools. So too the contemporary palaces at Tiryns and
Thebes, neither a megaron, were decorated with frescoes in Minoan
technique.
  But the idea of the tholos tomb can hardly have been introduced
from Crete; in that island no tholoi are known to bridge the five
centuries between the building of the Early Minoan ossuaries and the
erection of the Mainland vaults. On the other hand, the architectural
similarities   between the Mycenaean tholoi and the corbelled passage
graves of Southern Spain and Portugal are familiar, and there typo-
logical series   can be produced to illustrate the development of the
  1
     Wace, BSA. t XXV, 387; the contrary theory of Evans, making "Atreus" the oldest
tholos (PM., IV, 236 f.), has been refuted by the discovery of the new grave circle.
    Hesptna. XXIII (1954), 158-62-
    AM., XXXIV, 255; Ftiriimark, Chronology of the Mycenaan Pottery (1941), 4.
  4
    Persaon, The Royal Tombs at Dendra (Lund. 1931)*
    So at Kakovatos, Bodia (Messenia), etc.; Corolla Archaologica Gustavo Adolpho
dedicate (Lund, 1932), ax; ff.
                                        80
          FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
tholos from simpler forms. 1 So if the idea of the tholos were introduced
into Greece, it may have come from the Iberian Peninsula.
  In any case connections with the West are conspicuous in Mycenaean
culture. L.M.I (or L.H.I) pots were exported to the ^Eolian islands,
L.H.I metal-types were copied in Sicily (p. 238). The colonization of
Kakovatos and the wealth of its ruler must be connected with the
amber trade. His treasures included a crescentic amber necklace with
pattern-bored spacer plates (Fig. 43), reputedly made in England.
   Burial in a tholos must have been the prerogative of kings and their
families. But even in the fifteenth century some of their urban subjects

began to prepare for themselves family vaults.            Villagers,      however,




         FIG. 44. Mycenaean tholos tomb on Euboea. After Papavasileiou.


were still buried singly in cists or pithoi. Similarly throughout L.H.II
native potters continued to turn out Minyan and hand-made matt-
painted vases.
  But by 1400 B.C. the Mainland had thoroughly mastered Minoan
techniques and assimilated the Cretan industrial system. Native
workers, having been apprenticed to Minoan craftsmen, could turn
out en masse rather shoddy articles that satisfied the less refined tastes
of the Mainlanders and gradually ousted the products of household

industry. Thus equipped, the Mainland took over from Crete the political
and economic hegemony in the ^Egean. Knossos was sacked; the Conti-
nental megaron replaced the ^Egean palaces at Phstos and Phylakopi.
The Mycenaean cities were more numerous and perhaps more populous
than the Cretan; the acropolis of Mycenae alone, not to mention un-
walled suburbs, covered about       n    acres, that of Asine nearly 9, Gla
               1
                 Cf. Piggott in Antiquity. XXVII (1953). X4-3-
                                       8l
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
in L. Copals no less than 24 acres. The immense cemeteries of rock-
cut chamber tombs adjacent to each city are even more convincing
than the areas. Each tomb, an irregular chamber entered by a narrow
passage or dromos, was a family vault. Some contain as many as twenty-
seven          Though carefully sealed up after each interment, such
         corpses.
tombs were in fact reopened periodically and used over several genera-
tions; vases of L.H.II, L.H.IIIa, and L.H.IIIb styles were found
                                                                      in
one and the same tomb at Mycenae, showing its use for burial for at
least two centuries (1450-1250 B.C.). And a family likeness could be
                                      1


detected on the skeletons from the same tomb. This collective burial
practice, though deeply rooted in the ^Egean
                                              and still current in Crete
in Middle Minoan times, is in sharp contrast to the "Mifiyan" usage
and looks like a reversion to Early Helladic customs or an imitation of
the royal practice.
  The populous cities sought an outlet for their goods and overflowing
population in trade and colonization. Mycenaean pottery and other
products were exported in quantities to Troy, Palestine, Syria, Egypt,
and Sicily, rapiers to Bulgaria and perhaps the Caucasus. The ^Egean
and Ionian islands and even the coastal tracts of Macedonia received
contingents of Mycenaean traders, potters, and metal-workers and
                                                                  were
incorporated in the Mycenaean economic system. Mycenaean colonies
denoted by tholos tombs were planted even on the coasts of Asia Minor
and Syria. 2 In the fourteenth and thirteenth centuries a complete
cultural uniformity prevailed over the whole ^Egean world a uni-
formity that embraced the political diversity reflected in the Iliad.
  The zenith of Late Mycenaean civilization, as fixed by Mycenaean
imports in Egypt and Syria and Egyptian imports in Greece, was
reached in the fourteenth century. After 1300 B.C. trade with Egypt
declined, wealth diminished, art decayed as piracy and militarism
took the place of peaceful commerce. Only the armament industry
expanded; commerce with the barbarous West alone was intensified.
  The fortifications of Mycenae, Tiryns, and Athens were extended. 8
Greaves4 and probably corselets were worn as well as helmets. A new
type of flange-hilted sword was introduced in which the flange is
                               6
carried right round the pommel (Fig. 15). Swordsmen were mounted
on horseback to become the first cavalrymen of antiquity. 6 The sup-
  i
      Arch., LXXXII (1932).
    AJA., LII (1948), 145 ff.; Schaeffer, Stratigraphie, 9-12; Stubbings, Mycenaan
Pottery from the Levant (Cambridge, 195*)-
    AJA.. LII (1948)* 109-14.
  4 Found in a tomb near Patras,
                                   AJA., LVIII (1954), 235; c* Lorimer, Homer and
the Monuments.
      Evans, Arch., LIX (1905), 501; cf. Benton, PPS., XVIII (1952), 237-
      Hood, BSA., XLVIII (1953). 85.
                                          82
             FROM VILLAGE TO CITY IN GREECE
plies of amber, copper,       and tin from the north and west were main-
tained. As a consequence, a flange-hilted sword of the new type was
                       1
exported to Cornwall, there to be buried with the chief of a tribe that
controlled access to the tin lodes (p. 336). Relations with the West were
more intimate than a mere interchange of goods. An Italian smith
came to the court of Mycenae and there cast in a stone mould 8
Continental winged axes like Fig. 119, 2. Peschiera daggers (like Fig.
                                       8
119, 4), cut-and-thrust swords, and fibulae (both like Fig. 122, and
with flattened leaf-shaped bow) 4 appear in such numbers as to imply
changes in ways of fighting and in fashions of dress, if not in population.
They herald the cataclysm that submerged the Mycenaean civilization
  the "Dorian Invasion" dated by Classical tradition about noo B.C.

     Childe, PPS., XIV (1948), 185 f.
 1
 *
     BSA., XLVIII, 15; the actual mould was found.
     Schaeffer, Enkomi-Alasia, I (Paris, 1952), 237-42.
 4
     Blinkenberg, Fibules grecques et myctniennes (Lindiaha V), (Copenhagen, 1926).
