                               CHAPTER XIII

       FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
SPREADING westward by sea, the neolithic economy would be expected
to reach the Apennine Peninsula next after Greece. This expectation
is justified by quite early settlements in Apulia, in Sicily and on the

adjacent ^olian Islands, and along the coast of the Tyrrhenian Sea.
But ecologically Italy is less uniform than Greece. In the south and
on the Tyrrhenian coasts a rural economy that had worked in the
Levant would still serve. It would need drastic adjustments to meet
the more continental conditions that reign on the northern slopes of
the Apennine chain. In fact, the two sides of the Peninsula enjoyed
very different fortunes in the neolithic phase, but during the Bronze
Age a remarkable degree of uniformity was attained.
  The general outlines of Italian prehistory were sketched last century
                                                                          1
by Pigorini and Orsi and summarized for English readers by Peet.
After fifty years of stagnation they have been corrected and filled in
largely as a result of stratigraphical excavations by Bernabo Brea in
                                                            2
Liguria, on the ^Eolian Islands, and in Sicily. His division of the Italian
Neolithic into Lower, Middle, and Upper will be followed in the sequel.


    THE NEOLITHIC COLONIZATION OF SOUTH ITALY AND SICILY
In the south and in Liguria the record begins with settlements char-
acterized best by rough-looking but well-fired vases of quite sophisti-
cated shapes that agree very closely both in technique, form, and
ornament with the "barbottine" ware of Starievo, that we have
encountered all over the Balkan peninsula. That their makers came
by sea is dear from the coastwise distribution of the sites and the
occupation of small islands in the Tremiti and ^Eolian archipelagoes.
It must have been the rich deposits of obsidian that attracted early
neolithic voyagers to the ^Eolian Islands; for fertile though they be,
water supplies are totally lacking. In fact, the volcanic glass was
extensively exported and used in neolithic villages all over the main-
land and Sicily* These first settlers might have come direct from the
   1
     The Stone and Bronze Ages in Italy and Sicily (Oxford, 1909)- No equally compre-
hensive survey has superseded this work save for Sicily, where Bernabo Brea, 'La
Sicilia prehistoric*", Ampunas, XV-XVI (1954), has replaced Onri's system,
   1
     Bernabo Brea, Gli Scavi nella Cavern* deUe Arene Candid* II (Bordighera, 1956)
                                                              ,


(cited AC., II), 155-292.

                                        229
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Balkans, but the occurrence, together with simple rustication, of
patterns executed with the edge of a shell (generally Cardium) and
in particular the so-called rocker motive might suggest a parallel but

independent movement from the Levant where this motive was
popular on neolithic pottery. Still, "rocker patterns", executed with
a notched stamp if not a shell edge, occur on "neolithic" pottery in
the Urals, in the Sudan, and widely in North Africa, and cannot all
be plausibly traced to a single origin! This distinctive pottery is found
only exceptionally unmixed with other styles. Hence the Lower
                    1

Neolithic culture, introduced by these maritime colonists, cannot be
further defined. In Sicily it developed directly into the Stentinello
culture. This takes its name from a village on the shore just north of
Syracuse, but is represented at similar sites at Matrensa and Megara
Hyblaea. All three villages lie near the coast on level ground, but were
girt with rock-cut ditches and internal ramparts of some kind. At
Matrensa the ditch was interrupted by frequent causeways as in
English and Rhenish neolithic camps. On these sites, as elsewhere in
Sicily and at Castellaro on Lipari, the rough-looking rusticated pottery
is associated with a very fine local ware characterized by the use of a

greater variety of stamps, more diversified motives, their composition
to form well-ordered patterns (in contrast to the casually scattered
finger-tip or cardial impressions of the "rough ware"), and an equal
diversity of shapes; the latter include simple round-bottomed types
such as are attributed to the "Western Neolithic" in Chapter XV, and
also sophisticated vessels with, for instance, ring handles rising above
the rims.
  The economy evidently was based on cultivation, stock-breeding,
hunting, fishing, and collecting, but no weapons survive save sling-
bullets. Blade tools of local flint or of obsidian from Lipari include
neither bifacially worked nor geometric types. Ground stone celts were
rare.
  The only burial attributable to the Stentinello culture is that of a
skeleton in a round pit lined with slabs on edge. Nor do female figurines
survive to attest a fertility cult of the Asiatic-Balkan type. A few clay
animal heads may be ritual or merely ornamental.
  While the Stentinello culture was still flourishing in Sicily, the
Middle Neolithic phase in Apulia had already been initiated with the
advent or development of a distinct culture which will here be called
the Molfetta culture, characterized by painted pottery. It is known
from numerous ditched enclosures, revealed by air photographs, 2 of

            Perhaps at Coppa Nevigata, MA.. XIX (1909), 340-5; cf. AC., II, 162-6.
        1

        1
            Bradford, in Antiquity,   XX (1946), 191; XXIII, 60-5; XXIV, 86-8.
                                             230
  FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
which only a few have been excavated. 1 The enclosures can, from the
plans alone, be classified as villages and homesteads. The former cover
very large areas often subdivided into an inner enclosure, containing
within its ditch smaller round enclosures and representing the inhabited
area, and a larger outer space, presumably fields or pastures. The
inner enclosures, of which there may be 100 in one village, measure
60 to 50 feet across and must be farmyards, like Irish raths, each
corresponding to one household. Homesteads too may be divided up
into an infield or yard of about an acre in area and a larger demesne
outside it. Bradford from air-photographs alone has identified over 200
                                                                 miles. So
villages and homesteads in an area of less than 1500 square
the neolithic population must have been quite dense even if not all
sites were Middle Neolithic.
   The population was engaged in breeding cows, pigs, sheep, and
                                                                8
allegedly buffaloes, while sickle-teeth and saddle querns demon-
                     2

strated the cultivation of cereals which were stored in the numerous
pits that are found within the farmyards. Again
                                                     the sling is the sole
weapon    attested. Obsidian   was  imported  from  the  ^olian Islands.
Ground stone celts were supplemented by roughly flaked chopping-
tools. The pottery4 comprises on the one hand hard-fired burnished

ware, generally red and often decorated with rectilinear patterns
scratched after firing, and on the other light-coloured fabrics painted
with designs in red, or red and black. Some vases show a nose and two
eyes, just below the rim, as in the Trapeza ware
                                                       of Crete. 6 Similar

painted vases may illustrate the spread of the Molfetta culture to the
^Eolian Islands, Ischia, and Capri, 6 but on Sicily it is represented only
by stray painted vases (Fig. 114, 3) found on Stentinello sites. On
Lipari some of these vases are provided with vertical subcutaneous
       7


handles, foreshadowing a device already encountered in Central Europe
in the Baden complex, and to meet us shortly in the Rinaldone culture
of Central Italy. And the painted ware is associated with black bur-
nished vases, some provided with broad ribbon handles as in Early
Neolithic Greece. These black vessels are sometimes crusted after
firing with red or black colours 01 incised with
                                                  maeanders or less often
spirals  in a manner  that really recalls Dimini   and Balkan-Danubian
styles.

    BP., XLIV (1924), 107-21; MA,, XX, 238 ff.
    BP., XLV, 92.
    But on Lipari the querns are saucer- or even trough-shaped.
    Stevenson, PPS., XIII ('347). 88-92.
    Rellini, La piu antica Ceramica dipinta in Italia (Rome, 1935)* 56-62.
    Rellini, op. cit. The style of painting represented on Capri, Lipari, and Sicily diverges
substantially from the Apulian.
    Bernabo Brea, APL., Ill (1952); BP.. n.s., X (1956), 18-24.
                                            231
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
   The Molfetta culture is usually supposed to have been introduced
 into Apulia from the Balkan peninsula. But
                                              except for the maeander
 and spiral patterns on Lipari no decisive parallels can at
                                                            present be
 found on that side of the Adriatic.

                           THE LATER NEOLITHIC PHASES
 A second division of the Middle Neolithic (M.N.II) is conveniently
 defined on the mainland and on the ^Eolian Islands
                                                       by the "fine
 painted ware" classically represented at Serra d'Alto near Matera.
 The walls and ditches of the enclosures had been allowed to                           col-
                     1
 lapse or fill up,       but the sites were still inhabited or used a$
                                                                               burying-
 grounds.     Much of the old culture persisted, but ceramic forms and




FIG. 114. Middle Neolithic painted pottery: 1-2, black on buff, Serra d'Alto
                                                                             ware, M.N.II;
                     3, red and black on buff, Megara Hyblaea (J).


decorations are quite novel. The vases, including on           2
                                                         Lipari rare
square-mouthed vessels, are painted, but only in warm black, and with
stumpy spirals or maeanders and step, ladder, or windmill motives
(Fig. 114, 1-2). One vase from Apulia stood on model human feet.
Long horizontal tubular handles, perforated axially, are quite dis-
tinctive; they might be surmounted by conventionalized heads of
bulls or rams.
    The dead were buried flexed in pits lined with stones and
                                                                           provided
with a special niche for the feet. 3 Rare clay
                                                     stamps or piniaderc* long
  1
     E.g., at Molfetta, MA., XX, 251-58; Mosso mistook the ruined wall for a street!
  *
     BP. (1956), 25-8.
  *
      MA, XX, 255-8; Rellini, Ceramica, 67; Mayer, Matera und Molfetta, Leipzig
          t
                                                                           r 6
(1924), 20-30.
  *
    Mayer, MaUra, 67, pi. IX. 19; BP. (1956), 27; analogies to the Italian piniadere
come from early ^gean levels at G5zlu Kale (Tarsus) in Cilicia, ATA., XLU (1038)
                                                                                  t   *a /.
39 -and from Neolithic Byblos.
                                          232
  FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
and narrow in plan in contrast to the ^Egean-Balkan forms, may
belong to the ideological equipment, but clay figurines are missing save
on Lipari.
  The Serra d'Alto culture, like its predecessor, is generally considered
to be intrusive in Apulia and of Balkan origin. Similar painted pottery
has in fact been found in the cave of Khirospilia on Levkas, and the
pintadere could be derived from Balkan clay stamps. But no exact
counterpart to the culture has been identified outside Italy. Now
        1
Puglisi has recently reported Mycenaean sherds associated with typical
"fine painted ware" in the Caverna di Erba in the heel of Italy. If his
observations be confirmed, the whole culture sequence in South Italy,
Sicily, and Malta will have to be drastically curtailed. But on the
acropolis of Lipari Serra d'Alto pottery is stratified well below the
layer containing abundant L.M.I imported vases, while Diana and other
groups, distinguished mainly by typology, should be intercalated
before this horizon.
  In the Late Neolithic phase, more sharply distinguished in the
village of Diana on Lipari than on the mainland, painted wares went
out of fashion to give place to highly burnished red vases. These still
retained the horizontal tubular handles of Serra d'Alto which, at first
of exaggerated length and expanding towards the ends like trumpet-
lugs, subsequently degenerated into unpierced ridges. But by this
time fresh impulses were reaching the province. At Diana on Lipari
occur a few bifacially trimmed hollow-based arrow-heads and even
metal slag. 2 On the mainland at Bellavista near Taranto8 polished vases
with Diana handles but also spouts were found in a small cemetery
of rock-cut collective tombs.



                        THE TRANSITION TO A BRONZE AGE
The phenomena just mentioned herald the transition to a new division
of the archaeological record traditionally termed Chalcolithic, most

clearly documented in Sicily. There the Serra d'Alto culture had been
                                                                                     4
represented only by a few t ypical vases found as far west as Palermo.
Vases of Diana style are more widespread and occur even on Stentinello
sites, though perhaps in intrusive graves. But in the chalcolithic
cultures of Sicily the Stentinello tradition seems to be blended with,
or transformed by, fresh foreign impulses.
  So in the San Cono culture5 we find both single interments in stone-

  1
      Riv. Sc. Pr., VIII (1953). 86-93-
      BP. (1956), 31.               B.P., XXXII (1906), 36-48.
  *

            LLV, 113.               BP.,   XXV (1898), 53; XXXIV (1908), 119; XLV, 62.
                                             233
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
lined pit graves, as at Molfetta, and at least one rock-cut pit-cave,
used however for a single interment. The pottery is dark-faced, some-
times incised and incrusted with red or white colour, but occasionally
painted in bright red before firing. Small polished celts, hitherto rare,
are now common, and bifacially trimmed arrow-heads appear, as at
Diana. Metal is practically unrepresented, but obsidian was freely
imported and rough celts, some sharpened with a tranchet blow, were
manufactured in regular factories on the slopes of the Iblean Moun-
tains and systematically distributed. 1 From this culture developed in
North-Western Sicily that termed Conco d'Oro,* known mainly from
small groups of pit-cave tombs each containing one, or exceptionally
two corpses; sometimes two chambers open off a single shafti Hollow-
based arrow-heads, stone beads, and an axe-amulet are among the
grave goods, and a variety of pots. Besides self-coloured wares decor-
ated by incision or rarely with white paint, clear buff ware was manu-
factured and covered all over with a dark slip that might be used as a
ground for designs in white paint. Cups and mugs are provided with
                                                   1 '

good handles, some nosed; "salt-cellars      paired bowls linked by a
high loop handle were conspicuous. The tomb type, the pot forms
and the dark-slipped pale ware vaguely suggest East Mediterranean
influence. On the other hand, a Bell-beaker, imported from Sardinia
or Spain, was found in a sepulchral cave at Villafrati, and another
Beaker, perhaps a local imitation, came from a Conco d'Oro tomb at
Carini.* The Conco d'Oro culture lasted until the Casteluccio culture
was established in South-Eastern Sicily, and Late Minoan I pottery
was reaching the ^Eolian Islands in the fifteenth century. 4
  By then the Serraferlicchio 5 pottery style of Southern Sicily had
developed and disappeared. The vases, red surfaced and painted in
black, include handled mugs, amphorae, and spouted jugs that look
vaguely ^Bgean though the patterns can be best matched in the
"Neolithic" of Acarnania. On the ^Eolian Islands 8 the period is
represented by the village of Piana Conte, where imported vases of
Serraferlicchio style were found together with local vases
                                                              provided
with vertical subcutaneous string-holes or horizontal tunnel-handles.

                          THE SICILIAN BRONZE AGE
The foreign influences foreshadowed in these rather nebulous tran-
sitional cultures culminate in the rise of the Castelluccio
                                                            culture,
                                                          MA., XL (1944), i-i?o.
     1
         Ampurias (1954)* 158-60.
     *
         Annales de Giol. et PaUontol. (Palermo, 1900), No. 28.
     *
         APL., Ill, 85-7; BP. (1956), 31-
         Ariat in MA., XXXVI (1937), 695-838.
         Ampuwu (1954)* 1^1-2; APL., Ill (1952), 78-9.
                                            234
  FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
Orsi's Siculan I, in South-Eastern Sicily. Now actual JEgean imports

supplement ceramic and architectural analogies and provide an his-
torically dated horizon not only for the environs of Syracuse but for
Malta and the Moli&n Islands too.
   In Eastern Sicily, as on the ^Eolian Islands, the lowland coastal
villages had been replaced by little townships planted on naturally
defensible hilltops or promontories and well fortified. The walled areas
were still small; in two cases the estimate given is one hectare or 2 J acres.
But large cemeteries of collective tombs imply a substantial population
settled in one place for several generations; 32 tombs have been actually
examined at Castelluccio, 20 at Syracuse,            n
                                                 at Monte Salia, and each
tomb contained from 50 to 200 corpses. 1 The population, of course,
still depended primarily on farming         the bones of horses are now
reported   in addition to those  of food animals    but produced a surplus
to support craftsmen and traders.
  Flint    was still systematically mined at Monte Tabuto by expert
miners     who were presumably specialists. Metal was imported and
apparently worked locally into simple flat axes (known only by a
couple of miniatures made for funerary purposes), triangular riveted
daggers and ornaments such as spectacle-spirals, and tubes of coiled
wire. However, metal was so rare that polished stone axes and roughly
flaked picks were still made and used even for carving the tombs.
Stone beads were manufactured for the first time.
  Foreign trade is explicitly disclosed by bossed bone plaques (Fig. 115)
found in several tombs, 2 in the ruins of Troy II, in a Middle Helladic
layer at Lerna (p. 77), and in the "neolithic" temple of Hal Tarxien in




              FIG. 115. Bossed bone plaque, Castelluccio. After Evans (J).



Malta. Its effects may also be recognized in a bone pommel8 of the
same type as the Trojan pommel shown in Fig. 21, 3, in a Middle Helladic
matt-painted cup from tomb V at Monte Salia, and in numerous axe-
amulets, but some alleged "amber" beads may be made of a local resin.
  Pottery remained a domestic industry, but the forms of the hand-
made vases        hour-glass tankards, high-handled mugs (Fig, 116, 4-5)
and pedestalled bowls with handles joining bowl and stem       are quite
      1
          von Dunn, Italische Grfiber kunde, 71-9.
          Antiquity,   XXX (1956), 80-94.                *   BP- XLIII, pL II. 6.
                                            235
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
alien to the Stentinello tradition. They may be plain or painted in
black on a reddish ground with geometric designs. On some vases from
Vallelunga the black is outlined in white, giving somewhat the effect
of Dimini ware.
      The dead were now buried in rock-cut tombs of East Mediterranean
style (Fig. 108). The chambers are generally more or less circular in
plan and may be preceded by a smaller ante-chamber. When cut in a




FIG. 1 1 6. Early Apennine Copper and Early Bronze Age pottery: 1-2, pit>cave, Otranto;
                    3. "dolmen" of Bisceglie; 4-5, Castelluccio ware (J).



vertical cliff face, the entrance is normally a small window-like aperture,
rebated to receive the blocking stone. The blocking stone in one tomb
at Castelluccio was carved with spirals in low relief; the entrance to
the inner chamber of another tomb in the same cemetery was closed
by two carved slabs, which, combined (Fig. 117), produce the effect
of the funerary goddess carved on many megalithic tombs in France
and on the stele from Troy I mentioned on p. 40. The tombs often
open on to a semi-circular porch or forecourt cut in the rock, the walls
of which were in at least one case carved with pilasters. 1 In some late
  1
       von Duhn, pis. 4, 18; 6, 22 and 7, 23; BP. XVIII, 75; Not. Sc. (1920), 304; Ausonia,
                                                t


1.7-
                                            236
  FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
tombs at Monteracello the vault had been reproduced above ground
in a rectangular cist (2*05 m. by 1*2 m. square) framed with four large
slabs on edge in one of which a square window had been cut out, con-
                                              1
verting it into a sort of porthole slab. The disused galleries of flint-
mines were also used as burial-places. All these tombs served as family
vaults in which numerous skeletons were deposited, sometimes seated
as if at a feast. Ritual objects from domestic sites include clay horns, 2




                FIG. 117. View'into chamber tomb, Castelluccio.



used perhaps against the evil eye. Such horns had, however, been used
already at Serraferlicchio and in contemporary sites on the ^Eolian
Islands.
   In a general way the Castelluccio culture, economy, and funerary
ritual might   be attributed to a further extension of the causes that
occasioned the rise and westward expansion of Early Helladic culture
in Greece. But the sepulchral architecture has more analogies to the
West than to the East. The pottery, despite Early Helladic parallels
(e.g. to the tankards of Fig. 116, 2), has been more aptly compared by
Bernabo Brea8 to Anatolian wares particularly the Cappadocian
current at the time of the Assyrian colony at Kul-tepe between 1950
and 1850 B.C. The bossed bone plaques may be just versions of the gold
ornaments from the earlier Royal Tombs of Alaca, but find their
closest analogues in Troy and Middle Helladic Lerna (p. 44). The
 1   BP. XXIV, 202.
        t
 1
     MA., XVIII, 643; BP., XXXVI, pi. 12.                Ampurias (1954). W**-
                                       237
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
matt-painted cup from Monte Salia unambiguously attests contact
with Middle Helladic Greece, probably after rather than before 1600 B.C.
More precise limits can be deduced from vEgean imports on the ^Eolian
Islands,
  The islands had now become points of trans-shipment for coastwise
trade between the ^Egean and the West or lairs for pirates who preyed
thereon. In contrast to the earlier open villages, settlements of the
Early Bronze Age Capo Graziano culture (so-called after a site on that
promontory of Filicudi) are located on naturally defensible sites or
fortified. 1 That on the acropolis of Lipari comprises over ten oval
huts with stone wall bases and internal diameters between 3-2 x 3-0 m.
and 4-5x3-1 m. which are grouped round a much larger ovsfl building
in an inner enclosure that seems a sanctuary rather than a chieftain's
palace. Though the culture is termed Bronze Age, no metal survives
   collective tombs that might have contained some had been pillaged

long ago and obsidian was still quarried and worked. But a relative
abundance of Minoan and Mycenaean vases attest frequent contacts
with the JSgean. Most sherds are L.H.I-II, only a tiny handful might
be L.H.IIIa. Hence the Capo Graziano villages flourished mainly
between 1500 and 1400 B.C. Only a couple of sherds of Castelluccio
ware have been recognized on the ^Eolian Island sites. On the other
hand, the earliest Bronze Age pottery of Malta is related to native
Capo Graziano ware, while imported specimens of the latter have been
                                               2
reported from Conco d'Oro tombs at Villafrati.
  Hence in North-Western Sicily the Conco d'Oro culture must have
lasted till 1500 B.C. Only thereafter was it replaced by the Castel-
luccio culture* By 1400 B.C. in South-Eastern Sicily the latter culture
had been replaced by that now named after a cemetery at Thapsos
Orsi's Sicilian II.

  By then Sicilian economy had been transformed into one of full
Middle Bronze Age type by the incorporation of the island into the
                                                      8
^Egean commercial system. Late HeUadic III pottery, gold rings,
                                 4
bronze vessels, mirrors, rapiers, and fayence beads were imported
                                                           6
from Greece.    gean influence was so strong that Evans suspected
a Cretan colonization of the island under a Minoan prince.
  But basically the Thapsos culture was rooted in the native traditions
of the island. Pottery was not industrialized. The hand-made grey
vases, though unpainted and decorated in a novel style, preserve many
 1
    BP. (1956), 43-52-
 1
    Not in the tame tomb as the Beaker, though with the same local variety of pottery.
  1 Fullest list
                 by Levi in Paoli Orsi a cura dell'Archivio Storico per Calabria (Rome,
1935): <* BP. (1936-37). 57 ff-
  *
    Evans, Arch., LIX, 1906, 108 fi.                            M
                                                            P. of   ., I, 3.

                                         238
  FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
Castelluccio forms. Large cemeteries of rock-cut tombs carry on equally
old traditions. But though the cemeteries comprise far more tombs,
each chamber contained far fewer corpses, serving as the burying-
place of a single family, as at Mycenae.
          1
   Ischia, the ^Eolian Islands, and the adjacent promontory of Milazzo
in Sicily were also now incorporated in the orbit of Mycenaean trade,
but not in the Thapsos culture. They seem rather to be frontier posts
between the ^Egean and the Continental-West European commercial
                                      2
systems. The cemetery of Milazzo consists not of chamber tombs
but of pithos burials; these reproduce the practice of Argaric Spain,
of Anatolia, and of Middle Helladic but not Mycenaean        Greece. The
grave goods include amber, imported from the Baltic, and fayence
from the ^Egean. On the acropolis of Lipari and in the natural fortress
of Milazzesi on Panarea8 imported Mycenaean vases and Thapsos
pottery turn up in villages of oval, or exceptionally rectilinear, houses,
built on stone foundations 23 survive at Milazzesi. Native vases,
inscribed with characters derived from the first Minoan linear (A)
script, show how deeply ^Egean influence had penetrated the islands'
culture. Associated are ritual objects of clay, almost identical in form
and size with the anchor ornaments so popular in Greece and Thrace
in the Early ^Egean period nearly a millennium earlier. A hoard of
imported beads found on Salina contains more segmented fayence
beads than have been found in the whole of Britain! But side by side
with these ^Egean and Sicilian elements are sherds of early Apennine
ware. They indicate strong influence, if not some actual colonization,
from the Italian mainland as early as 1350 B.C. Thereafter the ^Eolian
Islands were annexed to the mainland province of the Apennine
culture, doubtless as a consequence of the invasion by Ausonians, of
which Diodorus has preserved a tradition.
   An extension of this current to Sicily may be inferred from an
urnfield at Milazzo 4 the cremation rite is that proper to the mature
                        ;


Bronze Age of peninsular Italy; the funerary vases are of Apennine
type. But one at least is decorated in the old Thapsos style. Thus the
cremationists should have arrived at latest about 1150, which would
agree strikingly with the traditional dates given for the arrival of the
Sicels by Hellanikos and Thucydides! But in South-Eastern Sicily the
old tradition of inhumation in chamber tombs was maintained in the
cultures of Pantalica and Cassabili 5 (both were included by Oisi and

   Buchner, BP., n.s., I (1936-37), 65.
   Ampurias (1954). 184; BP. (1956), $*>~7-
   APL. III, 71-4, 80; BP. (1956), 53-63.
         t

   At a different place to the pithos cemetery; Ampurias (1954)* 203-5; BP. (1956), 78.
   Ampwits (1934).      3-5.

                                          339
                    DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Peet in Sicilian II). But here too ceramic styles have changed, Mycenaean
imparts have ceased, the settlements and cemeteries have been trans-
ferred from the coastal plains to more defensible fastnesses farther
inland. Some of the metal-work is still based on Mycenaean traditions




                               I                                         2

                             FIG. 118. Knife and razor, Pantalica (J).



(shaft-hole axes, knives like Fig. 118, i). Razors and fibulae conform
to Continental types. By the Late Bronze Age even Sicily was domin-
ated by the traditions of Temperate Europe.


                      THE EARLY METAL AGES IN SOUTH ITALY
In tells1 and caves* strata containing plain burnished leather-coloured
pots of Apennine types seem to be immediately superimposed on those
yielding Serra d'Alto ware, and the local Apennine culture they typify
lasted, through a period when Mycenaean pottery was imported, into
the Iron Age. The Mycenaean levels should correspond to the Thapsos
phase in Sicily and to the Middle Bronze Age of Upper Italy. Earlier
                                                   8               4
phases may be represented in some sepulchral caves, chamber tombs,
and "dolmens".'
  The latter are either passage graves with a chamber, no wider than
the passage, or long cists, one actually a segmented cist. 6 One was
provided with a porthole slab, placed however in one side instead of at
the end. 7 Of the furniture, a few amber beads and a cup with an axe-
handle (Fig. 116, 3) survive. Identical cups will meet us in Liguria,
South France, and Catalonia associated in the latter regions with a
late phase of the local megalithic culture. So it looks as if the South
Italian dolmens were an offshoot of the South French megalithic
culture. Puglisi 8 suggested that it was brought
                                                  through Corsica and
  1
    E.g., Punto del Tonne, Taranto, Safiund in Dragma Martino P. Ntisson (Skrifter
Svendc. Instt), Rome, 1939, 458 ff.
      Riv. Sc. Pre., VIII           *M3-
                             (1953).
      BP.   t   XXI (1905). 153; Qaagliati, La Puglia preistorica (Trani, 1936); MA. XXVI
                                                                                     t


(1921), 494-
  4
      LAAA., II, 80; BP., XLIV, 116; ib., n.s. (1938), 42; Riv. Sc. Pr*., V (1950), 126;
von Duhn, 72-4.
      Gervasio, I Dolmen (Ban, 1913).
      Ib., p. 63.                  Ib., p. 68.             Riv. Antr. t LXI (1954). i-Ji-
                                                 240
      FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
Sardinia by pastoral groups, who, landing in Tuscany, would have
helped to develop the Apennine culture which they brought with them
by land routes to the southern extremity of the peninsula.
   But some interments in chamber tombs and natural caves may be
earlier, for some of these contain Diana ware (p. 233) or vases with

striking parallels in Thessaly III. The chamber tombs themselves
                                   1

might denote ^Egean influence as in Sicily and equally early.
  If so, similar funerary practices should reveal the same influence in
Central Italy too. After all, in historical times the first Greek colony
in the West was planted at Cumae near Naples, not in
                                                                      Sicily nor the
heel of Italy.      A cemetery of pit-cave tombs at Paestum (Gaudo) near
Salerno* might represent a precursor a millennium earlier. Most
chambers contain only one, or at most two, flexed skeletons, but some
were genuine collective tombs with 17 or even 26 corpses, while occa-
sionally two chambers open off a single pit. The funerary pottery,
monochrome, generally black, rarely ornamented with incised designs,
includes some very ^Egean-looking forms, notably askoi and pyxides
with string-hole lids, while "salt-cellars," globular vases with strap
handles, and some other types could be paralleled in the Conco d'Oro
(p. 234) as well as in Apulia. Transverse arrow-heads were found in
one tomb, but bifacially trimmed tanged arrow-heads and lance-heads
and a single copper dagger with prominent mid-rib are types proper
to the Rinaldon<e culture farther north.             Of thirteen skulls examined,
five were brachycranial, three long-headed.
  Trade from such a "colony" might have promoted the rise in Central
Italy of the Rinaldone culture, first distinguished from the North
Italian Remedello culture by Laviosa-Zambotti in 1939.* It is repre-
sented by burials in pit-caves or natural grottoes in Latium4 and
Tuscany.* There are tin lodes in Tuscany and there a sepulchral cave
in Monte Bradoni contained two V-bored buttons of metallic tin, a

dagger like Fig. 121, a of Early Minoan affinities and brachycranial
                                   t


skeletons. Kite-shaped or triangular daggers and flat, or exceptionally
hammer-flanged, axes recur in other Rinaldone tombs. But while the
tomb form and the metal gear may be of JEgean inspiration, other
items in Rinaldone equipment are not. Bifacially trimmed daggers and
  1
      Stevenson, PPS., XIII, 197.
  !
       *'* J& 1 (W*). 49, 257; H, 284-92.
                    /
      St. Et. t XIII (1939), 58.
  4
      A sepulchral cave at Sasso near Civitavecchia containing a hundred skeletons (one
with trepanned skull), ding bullets but no arrow-heads is assigned by the excavator
(BP., VIII (1953). 43-* : Riv <*'****> XLI ( X 954). 4-5<>) to "Middle Neolithic", but a
                                   '


cup with elongated handle would seem more appropriate to an Upper Neo. or even
Apennine context,
   To Feet's list add BP.. XL, 53; XLIII, 97;    . VIII (1951), 109; Atti i,. Con. Pnk.
Mtd. (Firenie, 1950), 334-4; Riv. Sc. Pr., V (1950), iaa; VI, 3, 151.
                                          241
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 tanged arrow-heads of           flint       are   common to all the "chalcolithic"
cultures of the peninsula. Stone battle-axes with symmetrically splayed
blades must be connected with the "polygonal" weapons of Northern
Neolithic II or their copper prototypes of Danubian III. In the pottery,
which is dark-faced, burnished but undecorated, the most distinctive
form is a bottle provided with no handles but vertical subcutaneous
string-holes like those of the Danubian III Baden culture or of M.N.I
on Lipaii But at Punta degli Stretti (Grosseto) 1 good Rinaldone types
seem associated with an axe-handle cup like Fig. 116, 3.
  Thus if southern and western influences travelled northward along
the Tiber-Arno corridor, it provided a channel also for cultures, adapted
to the Temperate zone, to spread south, and in the Apeniftne peninsula
these proved the more viable.
  The Apennine culture that succeeds Rinaldone in Central Italy and
that had reached the Tyrrhenian coasts and South Italy by Mycenaean
times is still known almost exclusively by its highly characteristic
pottery. This has indeed been found in some semi-megalithic tombs
under round cairns in Tuscany which, resembling the late passage
                             1

graves of the Gausses d Aude, might provide the required link between
South France and the South Italian "dolmens". 2 But these tombs had
been re-used in Etruscan times and robbed of any non-ceramic grave
goods. Most of the pottery comes from hilltop settlements, much eroded,
and from caves used for collective inhumations over a long period. 1 The
distinctive monochrome burnished pottery is characterized by an
exuberant development of bizarre handles (cf. Figs. 116, 1-3, and 119),
all inspired by wooden models. Some vases are decorated with incised

punctured ribbons forming spirals and meanders, as at Butmir and
Vinia, or with excised ornament imitating the chip-carving of wood, as
in the West Alpine Vutedol culture. Such metal-work as is associated is
all based on North Italian and Central European traditions, but is more

appropriate to the Middle and Late Bronze Age.
   No doubt the amber trade across the Brenner went on to Greece,
either along the Adriatic or across Italy by the Arno and the Tiber. But
the inhospitable Italian coasts of the Adriatic offered no convenient
halting-places to merchantmen, while the rough herdsmen and farmers
of Central Italy do not seem to have benefited by any transit trade.
Many Apennine sites yield so many stone tools as to look quite neolithic. 4
    ArcMvioptr A*rop. ed Etoog., XLII (1912), 263; BP., XXXVIII (1923), 132.
  1
  *
    Pugliai, Riv. Antrop., LXI, 1-22.
    Especially Belleverde (Cetoma), Not. Sc. (1933). 5<> *; St. EL, X (1936), 330-8; XII,
    fi.; and Manacore (Gargano), BSR., XIX (1951). 23-38; XXI, 1-31.
227
  *
    According to Bcrnabo Brea, AC. II, 259, BeUeverde does in fact go back to the
Rl                                       t
  FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
Metal types, proper to Danubian IV, are very rare in
                                                                    Italy south of the
Pg   basin.   A single hoard from Montemerano near Grosseto comprising
halberds and a dagger with triple midrib 1 is the sole link with an
                                                                                 equally
isolated cist grave furnished with a flat axe, a bronze-hilted
                                                              dagger and
perhaps a halberd at Parco di Monaci near Matera. The funerary caves
of Central Italy do indeed contain amber beads, but associated with
daggers, swords, winged axes, fibulae and other types not known before
Danubian V. By then the M.N.II settlement at Punto del Tonno* near
Tarentum had grown into a Bronze Age village the prolonged occupation
of which converted the site into a
                                   regular tell. Here were found a winged




FIG. 119. Apenninc vase-handles (f), and bronzes (i) from Punto del Tonno
                                                                          (winged
                    axe, razor, Peschiera dagger, angled sickle).



axe, a North Italian flanged sickle, a Peschiera dagger (Fig. 119), a
razor, and a fibula like Fig. 122, together with Apennine handles. Im-
ported Late Mycenaean pottery and figurines are said to have been
found at a higher level, while the winged axe is the closest known
parallel to that made at Mycenae by an immigrant Italian smith about
1250 B.C. (p. 83). So a mature phase of the Apennine culture and the
closing phase of Danubian   V (Reinecke D) had alike been reached by
1250 B.C. By that time the whole peninsula was dominated by cultures
of Continental European type while Central European traditions of
metallurgy ruled to its southern extremity.

        *
             BP., XXVI (1900), T.I., but cf., ib., HA. (1938), 64.
         1
             Sftflund, Dra^ma Martino P. Nilsson, 458 ff.; Not. Sc. (2900), 440-64.

                                            343
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION

                   NEOLITHIC CULTURES IN NORTHERN ITALY

In the third natural zone of the peninsula a culture sequence, based on
stratigraphical observations, is
                                  available only in Liguria, thanks to
fresh excavations in the cave of Arene Candide conducted by L.
Bernabo Brea since 1939.* It is not applicable to the whole of Upper
Italy; for Liguria belongs still
                                 to the Mediterranean zone and was in
historical times a backward and provincial area. And so in this cave
stone axes were           right up to the last occupation layer,
                                                                  where
                         plentiful
the pottery is appropriate to the fourth or fifth century B.C. Still the
succession provides the only available standard. Twenty-eight separate
layers containing pottery could be distinguished
                                                   above a deep deposit
of palaeolithic and mesolithic occupations. The nineteen lowest have
been grouped together to represent three main periods termed
respectively Lower, Middle, and Upper
                                           Neolithic by the excavator,
while the                 contain ChaJcolithic, Bronze Age, Iron Age,
               topmost eight
and Roman remains.
  The first neolithic occupants of this cave, and of many others in the
coastal zone of Italy and France, were a branch of those maritime
colonists who landed also on Sicily and in South Italy. Continued
contact with that area is illustrated at Arene Candide by obsidian from
Lipari. But some fusion with the
                                             local mesolithic population probably
took place in Liguria.
   In the Middle Neolithic layers (24-17) this old tradition is blended
with Danubian II and Western elements. The former are exemplified
                                                                moulded
by socketed ladles, clay stamps or pintadere, female figurines,
in two parts and then   stuck  together, and the selection of Spondylus
                                                   1
shells for bracelets. Microliths, plain potsherds, arc-pendants (like

Fig. 147),* and others made
                                 from hares' phalanges4 may rank as
Western dements since they occur in the "Cortaillod culture" of South
France. Finally, obsidian and sherds painted in M.N.I style from
Lipari* prove continued relations
                                  with the south and synchronize the
                                           Middle Neolithic pottery in
Ligurian with the South Italian sequence.
Liguria was generally smooth, dark-faced,
                                          and  decorated, if at all, with
scratched lines. The most distinctive form is the square-mouthed vase
                                                     in the Po basin and was some-
(Fig. 120, 2) which was equally popular

  i Gli Scavi neU* Cawma deUe Are** Candide, Bordighwa, I (1946), II,
    Eacalon de Fonton "Les stratigraphies du nfelithique", Bull. Must* d'Antkropohgto
prthistoriqu* d* Monaco, II (1955); 245*52.
      Rio. Si. Ug. t   XV (X949), 28; ?C. II, 218.
                                         t


     Pernod in M.N. layers 21, 23, ind 24, but also in L.N. layers 25 and 27, AC.. II. 65;
cf. Vogt, CISPP.> 3 (Zurich, 1950), 33-
      AC., II. 91-5-
                                             244
      FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
times reproduced on Lipari in a M.N.I context. Among the scratched
patterns are "Danubian" spirals.
  The dead were buried individually and contracted in little stone cists
within the cave. These closely resemble the Chamblandes cists of the
Upper Rh6ne valley and might be linked therewith by similar graves in
the Aosta valley. 1 They would then disclose movements of persons,
perhaps herdsmen with their flocks, across the Alps in Middle Neolithic




            FIG. 120. i, Vase from lake-dwelling at Polada (J); 2, Square-mouthed
                            neolithic pot from Arene Candida (J).



times and help to confirm a synchronism between Swiss Lower Neolithic
and ligurian Middle Neolithic.
   In the Upper Neolithic of Arene Candide (layers 13-9) figurines,
pintadere, and decorated pots have disappeared. The layers are charac-
terized by plain Western pottery more akin to the Chassean of South
France than to the Lagozzian of Lombardy; for pan-pipe handles are
common as in France. In the immediately succeeding layers appear
cups with axe-handles that we have classed as Early Metal Age in South
Italy. Even the Upper Neolithic in Liguria is perhaps equivalent to
the Chalcolithic of Central Italy and the Po valley.
   In the more continental environment of the Po valley and the Alpine
foothills neolithic culture is less well defined and certainly less homo-

geneous than on the Tyrrhenian coasts. The Lagozzian of the Lombard
lake-dwellings is, judged by its pottery, certainly "Western", but not
identical with the Cortaillod culture of the Swiss lake-dwellings nor yet
with the Upper Neolithic of Arene Candide, 2 while microlithic flints
indicate a survival of mesolithic traditions. In Emilia, south of the
Po, the late F. Malvolti* established a succession of three cultures
  1
    sp. XLIII, no*
        t
  *
    Antler sleeves and other types in bone and horn, so prominent in the Swiss Use-
dwellings, are totally absent from the Lagozzian collections in the museums of Como
and Varese, and pan-pipe lugs are equally missing; cf. Sibrium, II, Centro di Studi
Preistorid (Varese, 1955), 99.
  1
    Appunti per **** cronohgia rtfotitw neo-en*olitico emtti&*ot Centro Emiliano di
                                     * **. XVII (1943).
Studi preistorici (Modena, 1953); <*                     3*W * (1952), 13-38.
                                            345
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 Fiorano, Cfaiozza, and Pescalc. But these are little more than ceramic
 styles,though in the second obsidian and square-mouthed vases1
                                           .




 suggest relations with Liguria and a quasi-synchronism with the Middle
 Neolithic there.

                          THE BRONZE AGE IN UPPER ITALY
The archaeological record becomes coherent only in the "jEneolithic
Period" of Italian terminology and discloses the Remedello culture
fully formed in the Po valley. Extensive cemeteries of contracted or
                                                   2

flexed skeletons        117 at Remedello (Brescia), 41 at Cumarola, 36 at
Fontanella         sometimes arranged in regular rows, reveal substantial




                      a                   bed
                 FIG. 121. Copper daggers and flint copies, Remedello (J).



communities occupying the same site for several generations. Metal-
lurgical industry and rudimentary trade were now combined with
farming, hunting, and fishing. The copper-smiths produced flat axes,
some with notched butts or low-hammered flanges (as at Thermi),
daggers of two types (Fig. 121), and occasional halberds. The one type
of dagger with a tang to which the hilt was attached
                                                        by rivets with a
conical head is clearly a derivative of the Early Minoan
                                                              group. The
other form, kite-shaped, was hafted in the Egyptian manner with a
hollow-based hilt held in place by several small rivets (cf. p. 130).
  Despite the contemporary exploitation of Tuscan tin suggested by
the tanged dagger from Monte Bradoni (p. 241), trade was not
                                                                   regular
enough to supply the Remedello smiths with material for bronze, and
even copper was relatively scarce. So polished stone axes were still
    1
        Found also in a cemetery of contracted burials at Quincano near Verona.
    1
        Cf. recent lists, Aberg, Ckronologie, iii, 8, and van Dunn in Real., s.v. Italien.

                                               346
  FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
used, and tanged, riveted kite-shaped and unriveted West European
daggers were each copied locally in flint (Fig. 121). Axes were hafted
with the aid of antler sleeves perforated with square-cut holes for the
shaft. Still even silver was obtained, perhaps from Sardinia. But the
forms produced by the silver-smith suggest more far-flung intercourse.
A hammer pin from Remedello itself resembles, but rather remotely,
Pototicyamno types. A gorget from a tomb at Villafranca near Verona
                                                                      1

recalls the Irish lunulae, but also may be compared to a copper gorget
from a tomb dated to period III-IV at Velvar in Bohemia. Finally,
stone battle-axes, sometimes with knobbed butts, 1 could be treated
as a reflex of intercourse with the copper-miners of Upper Austria.
And there, in the lake-dwellings of the Mondsee and Attersee, have
been found rhomboid daggers of Remedello type and stone axes with
notched butt, mistaken by Pittioni* for prototypes of the copper
specimens, but really just copies thereof.
   Nevertheless, the bulk of Copper Age relics are native products.
Transverse arrow-heads are presumably mesolithic survivals, but the
commoner tanged arrow-heads splendidly worked on both faces have
nothing in common with earlier industries nor yet with those of South
Italy nor the Danube valley. The pottery included vessels with rudi-
mentary thumb-grip or nose-bridge handles in a tradition common to
all the mountain lands north of the Mediterranean from Macedonia
to Spain (Fig. 120). The skeletons from Remedello comprise Mediter-
ranean long-heads and a minority of round-heads.
   Whatever its background, the Remedello culture owes its character
partly to a northward extension of intercourse with the ^Egean, moti-
vated by the tin lodes of Tuscany and attested there, as in the Po
valley, by daggers of Early Minoan type. At the same time contribu-
tions by the Bell-beaker folk must be admitted. Bell-beakers were
found in three graves in the Province of Brescia, once with a character-
isticWest European dagger, and stray sherds of the same ware are
                               4
reported from Remedello itself. The Bell-beaker folk may have intro-
duced from the west the halberd and perhaps the gorget and assisted
in opening up intercourse with the Danube valley. The battle-axes

may well be contributions from Central Europe, perhaps even from
farther east, but hardly suffice to prove an intrusion of Battle-axe folk.
The daggers of Early Minoan type provide a vague upper limit, some-
where about 2300 B.C., for the beginning of the Remedello culture.
Since amber and fayence beads are missing from the graves, the
         1
             BP. LXI. 9 f.; Pomander, Osiskandinaviscke, fig. zo.
                 t

             BP.. XLI (1913). pi. I-
             MAGW. LXI (1931). 74-8o; p. 299 below.
                     t
         *   Relation to cemetery uncertain, Castillo, Campamform*. 133.
                                        247
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
cemeteries had presumably gone out of use before the regular trade
between Mycenae and Bohemia was established about 1600 B.C. So, too,
Danubian IV bronze types are missing from the Remedello cemeteries.
The Beaker graves do indeed establish a connection with period III
in the Danubian sequence, but no one knows whether they belong to
the beginning or the end of the long period represented by the Reme-
dello cemeteries.
  The Bronze Age begins with the extension to Upper Italy of the
Danubian commercial system. Types of period IV flanged axes like
Fig. 69, 3, round-heeled and bronze-hilted daggers, ingot torques and
even a few UnStician eyelet pins are not uncommon. Some, like the
pins, must have been imported from beyond the Alps. Many
                                                                  were
made locally by itinerant or resident smiths who worked in populous
settlements lake-dwellings on the shores of the eastern lakes, marsh
villages like Lagazzi south of the Po, the celebrated terremare on the
southern margin of the marshy plain and caves on the Apennine
foothills.
  The eastern lake-dwellings, among which Polada1 is taken as the
                       8                       8
type site, though Ledro and Barche de Solferino have been better
                                   4 have been founded        before the terremare.
explored, may like Lagazzi
They have yielded pottery carrying on the older Remedello tradition,
hollow-based flint arrow-heads, arrow-shaft straighteners, a few wrist-
guards and buttons with V perforation going back before period IV,
but only a few later bronzes appropriate to period V. The terremare, on
the contrary, are genuine tells            sites of villages     occupied for many
generations from which come Middle and Late Bronze Age relics and
only a few distinctive of period IV. All alike were fanning villages.
Their fields were certainly tilled with the plough; the oldest dated
European plough, made entirely of wood, comes from Ledro, while
ploughs drawn by two or four oxen are depicted in rock-engravings
                                        5             6
high up in the Alps round Monte Bigo. The cereals were reaped with
angled sickles of wood armed   with  flint teeth; the  type is illustrated
by a complete specimen from Solferino      and   was  literally translated
into metal in the Middle Bronze Age (Fig. 119, 5).   In addition to cows,
pigs, sheep, and goats, the terremaricoU   but probably not the earlier
lake-villagers  kept horses and controlled them with bits furnished
  1
      Laviosa Zambotti, St. Et. XIII, 50 ff.; BP. (1940), 120 ff.
                               t
  1
      BP., (1940) 69-79.
      Battalia, ''La palafitta di Lago di Ledro", Mem. del Museo di Storia Natural* detta
Venetia Tridentana, VII (Trento, 1943).
   BP., XVII (1891), i-i*.
   Bicknell, Rock Engravings in the Maritime Alps (Bordighera).
   At Ledro Triiicum monococcum and dicoccum, Hordeum hexastichon, Panicum
miliwwm.
                                           248
  FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
with antler cheek-pieces. Carts with solid disc wheels may well have
been drawn by oxen, but a model six-spoked wheel from Solferino and
a complete wheel from Mercurago could have belonged to a horse-
drawn chariot. The latter specimen, which may belong to period VI,
illustrates the peculiar type later distinctive of Classical Greek country
carts. 1
  The lake-village of Ledro covered only 5000 square metres; Lagazzi
was a cluster of ten huts, probably round, but the terremarc* may cover
from four to eighteen acres. The regular plans, popularized by Figorini,
have been shown to be products of his imagination. We do not know
the plans of the houses, nor even whether the villages were from the
outset defended by a moat and casemate rampart; Saflund considers
these defences additions made in the Late Bronze Age.
  The pottery throughout imitates wooden models such as have
actually been preserved in all stages of manufacture at Ledro. In the
Polada group, that carries on the Remedello tradition, relatively
simple nose-bridge and elbow handles (Fig. 120, i) predominate and
plainly give expression to a fashion detected all along the mountain
zone from Northern Anatolia through Thrace and Macedonia to the
Pyrenees. In the Lagazzian wares, derivable perhaps from the Lagoz-
     8
zian,  begins a fantastic elaboration of handles towards cornute types
(Fig. 119, i) that culminates in the terremare and eventual!} spread
                                                              7



south to the heel of the peninsula.
  Moulds for casting Early Bronze Age types occur in many settle-
ments, but may have been used by perambulating merchant-artificers
who distributed metal-ware as a sideline of the amber trade across the
Brenner; one such left in the cave of Farneto near Bologna the only
surviving example of a mould for a flanged axe. Many hoards contain-
ing ingot torques, daggers, and other Early Bronze Age types illustrate
the travels of these merchants and the danger attendant thereon.
Middle Bronze Age types are not thus represented in hoards as if some
degree of security had been established throughout the Po-Adige basin
by period V. Moulds and other metallurgical appliances are relatively
common in the terremare and may well denote the workshops of resident
smiths. The earlier metal types are mostly derivable from the Unfitician,
as if the local bronze-smiths had been trained in the Danubian school.
But halberds are more likely Iberian, and if so, imply the incorporation
of Western traditions in the nascent North Italian school. To these must
be added the development of the local Remedello tradition, inspired, as

                  Loriiner, JHS. t XXIII (1903), i3-5i*
              i

                  Sftflund, Le Terrcman (Rome, Svcnska Institut, X939)
              1

              *
                  Cf. Bcrnabo Brea, AC., II, 276.

                                        249
                  DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 suggested above, by Early JBgean models. Fresh links with the Levant
 are not discernible.
   North Italian metallurgists had evolved original forms of axe and
 dagger even in the Early Bronze Age and developed these into original
 types in the succeeding phase. They are generally credited with several
 more pregnant inventions, in particular that of the safety-pin1 (Fig.
 122) that was introduced into Greece in the thirteenth century and




                                                                          *
                           FIG. 122. Peschiera safety-pin (fibula) (J).


 diffused in Central Europe chiefly in period VI, but this claim has been
 challenged on behalf of the Ungtitian culture! It was indisputably a
 North Italian craftsman who at this time found a patron at Mycenae
 itself (p. 83) for     whom he cast medial winged axes. Other North Italian
 innovations         are
                    flanged sickles, double-edged razors, "Peschiera
daggers" (double-edged knives with flanged handles) (Fig. 119, 3, 4,
and 5) and cut-and-thnist swords. 2
   No graves attributable to the Early Bronze Age lake-dwellers nor to
the terremaricoli are known. A Middle Bronze Age cemetery of extended
skeletons accompanied by Central European rapiers at Povigliano near
Verona* may be attributed to a group of invaders from beyond the Alps.
The urnfields connected with some terremare are attributed by Saflund*
to a fresh wave of conquerors who would have occupied and fortified
the village sites only in the Late Bronze Age. Finally, the Apennine
herdsmen continued to practise collective burial in natural caves.
  The ideology of some Bronze Age societies found expression in the
celebrated rock-carvings round Monte Bigo near the 7OOO-ft. contour
in the Maritime Alps. 5 They depict warriors, brandishing halberds,
side by side with peaceful scenes of ploughing and other agricultural
operations. To the same period, but to another group, might be
attributed the statue menhirs of the Adige* depicting a male personage
wearing a triangular dagger. They are stylistically allied to those of
South France (p. 311). If they be inspired by a Western cult, its mother
  1
      T.   Sundwall, Die Were itattseher Fibeln (Stockholm, 1943).
      Sftflund, Le Tefremare, 137, n. i, considers that a sword, bearing the cartouche of
Scti II who died in 1x98* te of terramara type.
    Monteliui, CPL. 200.
    St. Et., XII (1938), 18-22.
      Bicknell, PrMttoric Rock Engraving in the Italian Maritime Alps (Bordighera), 1913.
      M. O. Acanfora, "Le Statue antropomorfe deU'Alto Adige", Universita di Padova,
Studi iMa Region* Trentino-AUo Adige (Bolzano, 1953).
                                             250
  FARMERS AND TRADERS IN ITALY AND SICILY
goddess has been transformed into a warrior gdd. The transfiguration
should reflect the conversion of a matriarchal social order into a
patriarchal one.
  The rich and complex culture, formed by the convergence of diverse
traditions in Upper Italy, dominated the whole peninsula and Sicily
too before the end of the Bronze Age. Its manifestations at Punto del
Tonno and on Lipari show that it must have matured in the Po valley
by 1300 B.C.




                                35*
                                    CHAPTER XIV
                 ISLAND CIVILIZATIONS IN THE WESTERN
                                 MEDITERRANEAN
IT is possible to sail coastwise from the ^Egean to Italy and Sicily
without ever losing sight of land. Progress thence westward meant
embarking on the pathless ocean without any guiding point in the
heavens like the Pole Star by which a mariner might selfhis course. 1
Sicily must have set a bound to regular intercourse between the ^Egean
and the western world in so far as such intercourse depended on follow-
ing the northern shores of the Mediterranean. Land routes across North
Africa and even coastal routes along the inhospitable southern shores
of the Mediterranean were of course available, however difficult they

may have been. But they traversed territories so little explored archaeo-
logically that the effect of communications along them can hardly be
even inferred.         We
                     can therefore scarcely expect to find the West
Mediterranean islands clearly revealed in the archaeological record as
stepping-stones in the transmission of culture wholes from East to
West, nor to be able adequately to assess the part they may have played
in transmission from Africa northward.


                    THE MEGALITHIC CIVILIZATION OF MALTA
The barren little islands of Malta and Gozo are last remnants of a
land-bridge from Africa to Europe and offer natural havens to mariners
blown by mischance or groping their way deliberately westward from
the East Mediterranean. They were unsuited to Old Stone Age hunters,
and, save for a questionable Neandertaler, were uninhabited thereby.
In the Holocene they supported a surprisingly dense population of
farmers who developed a vigorous insular culture, 8 through two main
             8
periods.
  The most enduring and distinctive monuments of period I are mega-
lithic "temples", built of really gigantic stones, and labyrinthine burial-
vaults ingeniously carved out of the limestone with stone tools. And so
  1
      L. Hogben, Science for the Citizen, 106.
  1 The beat collection of illustrations and plans of Maltese monuments and relics is
L. M. Ugolini, Malta: Origin* detta Civilti Mediterranea (Rome, 1934), but the views
expressed there are scarcely plausible.
    The culture sequence has been established on an objective basis by John Evans,
PPS.   t   XIX (1953)* 45-89.
                                            252
                         ISLAND CIVILIZATIONS

to-day the most truly native monument of Maltese culture in the
twentieth century A.D. is the village church of Musta, near
                                                                Valetta,
roofed with a dome larger than that of St. Paul's Cathedral. Like    the          it,
neolithic temples .and tombs are
                               eloquent of a devotion to immaterial
ends which inspired the island farmers to
                                           produce a surplus above
immediate needs. And they suggest how "circulation" of this
                                                            surplus
wealth was effected through unproductive works, that,
                                                      just because
they were unproductive, could be repeated again and     again.
   Stratigraphical observations justify the division of period I into
three phases, A, B, and C, distinguishable
                                           by pottery styles and temple
plans. The first colonists who have left distinct traces in the archaeo-
logical record and who presumably initiated this unproductive
                                                              activity
seem to have come from Sicily since they introduced a version of the
Stentinello type of impressed
                                     pottery. The temples of period IA, built
of undressed stones, possess a
                                      simple trefoil plan. This was elaborated
in phase B by the addition of an extra
                                                  apse and further complicated
in the culminating phase C.
                                    By this phase the slabs had been beauti-
fully dressed with stone mauls and sometimes pitted all over decor-
atively. Some are carved in low relief with spirals or even processions
of animals and men. 1

  Community of tradition between this temple architecture and the
sepulchral architecture of West European collective tombs 2 is revealed
in many details of plan and construction    semicircular forecourts in
front of shrines (Fig. 123); the deliberate use of enormous
                                                               blocks;




              FIG. 123. Plan of "temples" at Mnaidra, Malta, Period 1C.

     1
         Cf. T. Zammit, Prehistoric Malta; the Tarcsien Temples (Oxford, 1930),
         Noted first by Leeds, LAAA., IX (1922), 35 fi.
                                         253
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                                                               1
porthole slabs as doorways; roofing of apses by corbelling ; walls in
which uprights set with their broad faces in line with the wall alternate
with slabs projecting at right angles thereto1 cup-marks on many
                                                               ;


stones.
   In fact, in the islands themselves chamber tombs were hewn in the
rock to accommodate collective burials throughout period I, and even
in phase A some replicate the trefoil plan of the temples. Most early
tombs, however, were little more than rock-cut pits containing skeletons
                       8
sprinkled with ochre. But at Hal Salflieni near Valetta a vast and
complicated hypogaeum had been carved in the living rock. Starting
simply in phase A (to judge by the pottery), it was gradually enlarged
till by phase B it already comprised many underground Fooms with

several chambers opening off a central hall. In phase C it was further
elaborated and decorated with spiraliform paintings and skeuomorphic
carvings.
   Cult objects from the temples of phase C include limestone statuettes4
a foot or more in height representing an obese female personage stand-
ing, seated, or reclining on a couch and sometimes wearing a skirt
recalling Minoan or Sumerian fashions, as well as betyls, bells, altars,
and other models in stone. Most belong to phase C, but from a tomb of
phase A2 near Zebbug* came a fragmentary statue menhir, comparable
to those of South France and to the stele from Troy I.
  All these works were executed without the aid of metal tools; the
culture of period I was in this sense neolithic. But flint was imported
probably from Sicily by phase A and obsidian from Lipari in phase C
at least. The flaked stone implements are of the simplest kind without
bifacial working, and ground stone celts are extremely rare. Querns
were made from Sicilian lava while pebbles of fine grained rock were
imported for the manufacture of charms and ornaments. Among these,
axe-amulets are very common, pendants in the form of doves and other
shapes rare. Finally, a bossed bone plaque, identical with those from
Castellucrio tombs and resembling those from Troy and Lerna, from
the Tarxien temple is generally assigned to period 1C. As ornaments
may be regarded hemispherical buttons with V perforation, found
                    6
already in phase A, beads of Spondylus shell and bone, and in phase C
winged beads.
                                   Tempos of Hajar Kim and Mnaidra (Valetta, 1927),
  1
      T. Zamrait, The Neolithic
9 and 28.
  1
      Ibid., 13; the resultant effect is that of the alternating buttresses and recesses that
adorn the trades of early Egyptian mastabas and Sumerian temples;                  cf.   Childe,
NLMAE.. 85 and 125.
  *
    BSR., XXII (1954). MI-
  *
    JRAL,  UV, 67 fL, IPBK. (1927), 131.
  * BSH.
          XXII, 13, pi III.
            t                                    Ibid n.           ,



                                             354
                         ISLAND CIVILIZATIONS

  Vases, too, were carved in stone, probably already in phase A but
with exquisite skill by phase C. Then quite complicated shapes, familiar
in pottery, were reproduced in stone and even fitted with tunnel or

nose-bridge handles. A giant cup from Hagar Qim is 6 ft. in diameter
and equipped with a projecting nose-bridge handle!
  The Maltese ceramic industry was as fine as the stone- work. No less
than 26 varieties of pottery had been distinguished at Hal Saflieni
         1
by igio. These have been arranged in a chronological order, based
on stratigraphy, by Evans, 2 who has also recognized their affinities
with Sicilian and South Italian wares. The earliest are closely related
to the Middle Neolithic Stentinello wares, but even in phase A (Evans'
A2) appear vases still more closely related to the later San Cono group
and probably tubular handles of the Upper Neolithic Diana type, as
well as a little red-on-buff painted ware. In phase B vases were decor-
ated with scratched lines sometimes incrusted in red or white and
forming curvilinear patterns. Elbowed or triangular handles were
already attached to some vases in phase B and in C develop into fully
fledged nose-bridge and even axe-handles (like Fig. 116, 3), while
tubular lugs had been converted by a local evolution into the so-called
tunnel handle; 8 that is a clay tube attached horizontally to the inner
wall of the vase the contours of which are interrupted only by two
apertures corresponding to the tube's ends. Such handles appear in
the Piano Conte phase of the Chalcolithic on the ^Eolian Islands and
will meet us again in Sardinia. Axe-handles too are appropriate to the

Early Bronze Age of Italy.
   Judged by ceramic analogies, therefore, the age of temple-building
and tomb-cutting on Malta should have begun late in the Middle
Neolithic of the Italian scheme, used in the last chapter, and continued
well into the succeeding Chalcolithic. The bossed bone plaque from
Tarxien, if correctly attributed to period I, should mean that period 1C
overlaps with the Castelluccio culture of Sicily. It should, however,
end therein since the earliest pottery of period II can best be paral-
leled in the Capo Graziano culture of the      Lolian Islands that can be

synchronized     both  with  Castelluccio and    with L.M.I. Sepulchral
architecture would suggest rather different correlations with Italy.
Chamber tombs there are at earliest Upper Neolithic, most explicitly
Chalcolithic. In the West, too,   ^perforated buttons are most com*
monly associated with Bell-beakers that are late Chalcolithic.
  If the first settlers on Malta and Gozo were Sicilian in ceramic tastes,
their ideology was rather East Mediterranean. But the architecture
that expressed it is more West Mediterranean; the best analogies for
  1
      LAAA., Ill (1910), 1-22.    *
                                      PPS., XIX. 44-63.       *   /* 55.
                                      55
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 the trefoil temples may be found in the corbelled tombs of Los Millares
 (pp. 270-4). Ideological megalithicism seems again a West European
 disease. The statue menhir could indeed as well be a symbol on its

 way from Troy to South France as a contribution from that direction,
 but V-perforated buttons are explicitly Western. Allowance must
 certainly be made for West European stimuli at the birth of the islands'
 remarkable culture. Fresh inspiration from the East may be suspected
in promoting the brilliant efflorescence of phase C, but despite analogies
to the spiral carvings and painting on Middle Minoan Kamares cups1
and on the Shaft Grave stelae from Mycenae, concrete evidence for this
is lacking.

   Whatever its origins, the megalithic culture of period I wts brought
to a violent end by an armed invasion or a religious revolution. As a
result the temple complex of Hal Tarxien was diverted from its primary
use and      made a cemetery for cremation burials. With these were
             2
deposited  little triangular daggers and flat or hammer-flanged axes
of copper or bronze, pottery in an absolutely new tradition, and clay
                                                        8
figurines curiously stylized to a disc with projections. The novel
pottery includes vases with oculi ornaments, handled mugs, askoi, and
two-storeyed urns. Beads of silver, fayence, and shell were worn as
ornaments.
  On the typological systems, valid for the East Mediterranean and for
peninsular Italy, the metal gear would be Early ^Egean and Chalco-
                   though in Sardinia almost equally archaic bronzes
lithic respectively,
survive in hoards attributable to the first millennium. The pot forms,
too, are definitely Early ^Egean and find vague analogies in the Chalco-
lithic Paestum cemetery.           But in Sicily and Sardinia askoi and similar
^Egeanizing forms reappear after 1200 B.C.* The new burial-rite might
be connected with the urnfield invasion that had reached Northern
Sicily about that date. Indeed, a few sherds of Apennine ware have
turned up in the cemetery and on other period Ha sites. However,
cremation had been practised at Bogaz K6y and Troy much earlier in
the second millennium and might have reached Malta direct from that
direction. Still, the closest parallels to the pottery of period Ha are
found in the village of Capo Graziano on Filicudi, the occupation of
which was roughly contemporary with Castelluccio and L.M.I-II but
lasted nearly to 1400 B.C.* That is not to say that the cremationist
  1
      Evans, P. o/M., II, 182-9.
  *
    The best illustrations of the cemetery furniture are given by M. A. Murray, Corpus
of Bronu Age Pottery of MaUa (London, 1934).
  1
    Curiously like some figurines from Middle Bronze Age sites near the Iron Gates on
the Danube, e.g. Hceraes-Menghin, Urgeschichtt d*r bildend** Kun&t (Vienna, 1925), 4x1.
    E.g. MA., XXV, id. VIII; Not. Sc. (1888), pi. XV, 2; St. Et. III (1929), 21
                                                                t
  *
    Evans. PPS.. XIX, 85; Bernabo Brea, BP. (1956), 31.
                                          256
                                ISLAND CIVILIZATIONS

invaders came from the jEolian Islands, but does suggest that the
Maltese Bronze Age began a little before 1400 B.C.
  It failed to develop. Bronze merchants would not accept the spiritual
commodities that had satisfied pedlars in flint and obsidian, and the
Maltese had nothing else to offer. Nor could they, like the ^Eolian
Islanders, become intermediaries in Mycenaean trade with the West;
for even voyagers to Spain preferred the coastwise route up the

Tyrrhenian Sea to a direct crossing exposed to the western gales in the
fifteenth century A.D., a fortiori in the fifteenth century B.C. 1 No later
bronzes survive in the islands. Still new settlers arrived and converted
some old temple sites, like Borg in-Nadur2 into fortified villages. They
introduced new pottery types, quite unlike those of the Tarxien
cemetery, and made pottery anchor ornaments. A single Mycenaean
(L.H.IIIb) kylix is the sole import or piece of loot that survives from
period lib. It serves to date the phase to the thirteenth century and so
confirms the dating of phase Ila. Moreover, some vases from the
Thapsos cemeteries round Syracuse are thought by Bernabo Brea* to be
imported products of the Borg in-Nadur culture. But anchor orna-
ments, just like Fig. 38, appearing about the same time also at Milazzesi
in the ^Eolian Islands, had been Early Helladic in Greece and so took a
thousand years to reach Malta!
   In the sequel Malta made no further contribution to European
culture. In fact it was only during period I that the island culture was
original and creative. Even then its contributions to the European
heritage can only have been immaterial and may well have been
illusory.

                                      SARDINIA

Sardinia, though apparently uninhabited in the Old Stone Age, is large
enough despite its mountainous character to support numerous, if
mutually isolated, farming communities in its valleys and plains.
Moreover, it possesses natural resources obsidian, copper, and silver
to attract industrial colonists. When the archaeological record opens
clearly, all these opportunities were already being exploited. The
evidence is derived in the main from natural caves and rock-cut tombs
used as collective sepulchres for many generations. Relics of different
periods accordingly occur generally mixed together.
                                       4
   Only in the cave of San Bartolomeo near Cagliari in the south of the
  1
    Clavijo (Embassy to Tamerlane, London, 1928) en rout* from Cadiz to Constantinople
in 1403 sailed from Minorca through the Straits of Bonifacio to the Tyrrhenian c6ast
but was forced to shelter off Upari before passing the Straits of Messina.
    PPS., XIX, 69, 88.
    BP.   t   n.s.,   X (1956), 60.              BP., XXIV (1898), 253 ff.
                                         257
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
island is a stratigraphical separation possible. In an
                                                   upper layer here
the grave goods comprised Beakers, tripod bowls decorated in Beaker
style (Fig. 124, i), West European daggers and a flat axe of copper, and
a prismatic V-perforated bone plaque           in fact a typical "Copper Age'
                                                                                   1




assemblage. Bdiow and separated by a layer of stones from the "Copper
Age" burials was an earlier funerary deposit comprising, as well as




     FIG. 124. Tripod bowl, San Bartolomeo (J), and vase-handle of
                                                                     nose-bridge
                           type, Anghelu Ruju (J).



skeletons, simple obsidian implements and hemispherical and carinated
bowls, one adorned with a stellate pattern of finely incised hatched
ribbons. Technically the last-named vase recalls some vessels from
Villafrati in Sicily, from Hal Saflieni in Malta, and from
                                                           pre-Beaker
horizons in South France. The pottery from the sepulchral cave of San
Michele (Ozieri) 1 includes vessels of the same type, but others with
tunnel-handles quite like the Maltese but decorated with semicircles
executed in cardial and stab-and-drag technique that is
                                                         represented at
San Bartolomeo only in the upper level.
  Sardinian culture of Beaker and post-Beaker age is better
                                                            represented
by the rock-cut tombs, locally termed <fcwM*s di gianos. Some of these
family vaults may have been dug even in pre-Beaker times, since sherds
of the incised fabrics represented in the lower level at San Bartolomeo
occur in them, but others were excavated, or in any case still used, in
the first millennium B.C. Generally the tombs are isolated or        in
                                                               grouped
twos or threes, but at Anghelu Ruju, 1 a cemetery of no less than
                                                                   thirty-
one chamber tombs has been systematically explored. The burial
chambers here tend to a rectangular plan, are often preceded
                                                                    by an
antechamber and entered either by a stepped pit or a passage.
                                                               Subsidiary
chambers may open off the principal compartment. The inner
                                                                  portals
may be carved to suggest a lintelled wooden doorway like the faades
of Early Cypriot tombs.1 In two cases rock
                                            pillars were left standing in
the chamber. On such pillars and on the walls bulls' heads or
                                                                     high-
                                     '
                                         "* * (1904)> 3 5 * MA
                          6x-3.
                                         258
                            ISLAND CIVILIZATIONS

prowed ships have been carved in low relief {Fig. 125). Traces of red
ochre were found on the floors of two tombs. Normally the bodies were
buried in the contracted attitude, but in two tombs (XV and XXbis)
cremated remains were found in small niches and in tomb XX a baby's
skeleton in a jar.
  A series of intermediate forms leads from the subterranean domus di




                FIG. 125. Plan and elevation of tomb XXbis at Anghelu Ruju.



gianas (Witches' Houses) to the megalithic tombs built above ground
and termed locally tombe di giganti (Giants' Tombs) rock-cut tombs
roofed by corbelling in megalithic style, 1 megalithic extensions built on
in front of rock-cut tombs, 2 domus di gianas with the rock face above
and around the entrance carved to reproduce the portal and forecourt
of a Giants' Tomb. 3 Similarly Mackenzie4 has constructed a typological
series leading from simple "dolmens" to the classical Giants' Tomb         a
long narrow gallery walled with megalithic slabs, roofed by corbelling,
covered by a cairn enclosed by masonry walls and entered through a low
arch cut in a tall upright slab or stele from a semicircular space flanked
by masonry walls (Fig. no). Of course, such a series can be reversed
as it is a pure a priori construction and unsupported bya reliable series of
closed grave finds.         The so-called "dolmens" have yielded no datable
furniture. Some are just remnants of Giants' Tombs.* The distribution

  1
       BSR., V (1910), 103, fig. 5.
  I
       Taramelli, // Convegno archeologico sardo, fig. 65.
       Taramelli, // Convegno archeologico sardo, fig. 66; BSR., V, pi. IX, i.
  II



       BSR., VI (1913), 167; BJP., XLI, 15.                 Antiquity. XIII (1939),
                                             259
                   DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
of the latter does not agree so exactly with that of the nuraghe as to
prove contemporaneity. Nuragic and even Roman relics have been
                         1                          8


found in Giants' Tombs. But of course such finds do not establish
erection in the Iron or Late Bronze Age.
       The grave goods recovered at Anghelu Ruju give the best available
picture of Sardinian culture before the Nuragic age, though tomb-
robbing in antiquity has stripped that picture of any pretence at being
complete. Metal was used, but apparently only sparingly; only two or
three West European daggers, one flat axe, one arrow-head, several
quadrangular awls, some beads, bracelets and atypical pins of copper
and olive-shaped beads, and a ring of silver have escaped the ancient
plunderers. Martial activities are indicated by numerous weapons
the copper daggers, spheroid mace-heads of stone, arrow-heads (tri-
angular, tanged, tanged-and-barbed, and even serrated) of flint together
with wrist-guards (these, however, having for the most part only two
perforations, may have been used as whet-stones as in Crete) and an
arrow-straightener of pumice. In the pottery we might distinguish:
(i) carinated vases, and cylindrical pyxides, vaguely iEgean
                                                             in form;

(ii)   vessels decorated with semicircles and other patterns formed either
of     (a)   finely incised    hatched ribbons or of         (b)   stab-and-drag lines;
(iii) Bell-beakers and tripod bowls like Fig. 124, i; (iv) carinated cups

and other vessels with nose-bridge handles (Fig. 124, 2), which persist
into the Nuragic age.
  As ornaments and charms, stone bracelets and rings, axe-amulets,
disc-beads of shell, and tortoise beads (Fig. 126, a, c, f) and conical
buttons with V perforations were worn. Finally, three tombs contained
marble idols, which, although made of local stone, look like deliberate
imitations of Early Cycladic models.
     Plainly many streams have converged in the Copper Age culture
of Anghelu Ruju. Its debt to Crete was admirably summarized by
Patroni*: "Not only the form of the tombs but also the shape and
decoration of some of the vases in them recur in Crete. The symbols
sculptured on the walls and the statuettes of marble show relations
of a nature superior to any external relations of commerce; for they
denote a profound affinity of thought and culture." Giuffridi-Ruggieri
adds anthropological arguments. Noting that fifty-three skulls from
Anghelu Ruju were long-headed and ten round, and that a similar
mixture is detectable in Crete, he concludes that Sardinia was invaded
at the end of the third millennium by a mixed race of Cretans. (It

       1
           RMsta, XX. 6 ff.; BSR., V, 135.
           MA. XI, 268; Not. Sc. 1933, 360.
               t                 t


           Quoted by Ginffridi-Ruggieri in Archivio per Antrop. ed Etnogr., XLVI, 18.
                                              260
                            ISLAND CIVILIZATIONS
 would be safer now to say "East Mediterraneans,
                                                 including the round-
 headed type that reappears among the Beaker-folk"
                                                        (p. 227). The
 invaders, combined with some small pre-existing  population   also of
 Mediterranean stock, created the Copper and Bronze     civilizations Age
of Sardinia.
   If
        Giuffridi-Ruggieri be right, the finely incised wares of our group (ii)




                         FIG. 126. Necklace from Anghelu Ruju (|).



might be taken as representative of the "pre-existing population".
These fabrics are certainly related to those of Malta,
                                                       Apulia, and Sicily
on the one hand, of South France on the other. Their
                                                            origin is not
thereby determined. The Beaker-folk's effective contribution is demon-
strated by their pottery, armament, and ornaments. Some beakets from
Anghelu Ruju resemble especially those from Almeria, but one is
almost identical with specimens from Bohemia and Denmark. 1 The
arrow-straightener, too, though locally made, is a Central European
trait in the West Mediterranean.              But a beaker from a rock-cut tomb
at Cuguttu2 has a rudimentary thumb-grip handle.
  This and related nose-bridge handles and many other traits,
                                                            espe-
cially the V-perforated tortoise beads and
                                            prism-shaped buttons,
betoken particularly intimate relations with Catalonia and South
France. In South France such handles belong to a horizon
                                                                               explicitly
later  than wares like our group (ii) and on the whole
                                                         post-Beaker
(p. 310). In Sardinia they persist into the Nuragic age.

   Despite the industrial development and wide cultural relations
attested at Anghelu Ruju, no urban civilization arose and Sardinia
held aloof from any comprehensive system of
                                              foreign commerce that
might bring   datable  foreign manufactures  into  the archaeological
record. Judging by sepulchral architecture, island culture
                                                                             developed
        1                                               *
            Nordmann, "Megalithic," p. 122.                 Not. Sc. (1909), 103.
                  DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 insensibly into the extremely insular Nuragic phase. This development
 did not take place without renewed contact with the East Mediter-
 ranean.A Cypro-Mycenaean copper ingot stamped with Mycenaean
       was found on the island. About 1200 B.C. maritime raiders,
 letters
termed Sh'rd'n', appear in the Egyptian records. They are depicted
protected by horned helmets and round shields and armed with swords
precisely like those of bronze statuettes from the Sardinian nuraghi.
Whether the Shardana originated in Asia Minor, like the Etruscans,
and only settled in the Western Mediterranean after raiding Egypt, 1
or were actual descendants of the Copper Age Sardinians, 2 their con-
nection with the island in its Nuragic age is indisputable, as is the
stimulus given to West Mediterranean development by their experiences
in the East.
  But the result was not the establishment of a city-state organization
such as the Etruscans created. In the island the highest social unit
was a cluster of round huts sheltering beneath the dry-stone tower
nuraghe of the clan chief. Architecturally as well as sociologically
these complexes are significantly like a modern Nigerian village. 8
Mines and smelting furnaces, as well as many hoards belonging mostly
to founders, disclose indeed an active and efficient metallurgical
industry.
      On the whole, indeed, the Late Bronze Age industry of Sardinia,
like those of peninsular Italy and Sicily, was based on Central European
traditions.Yet the variety of types comprised in the hoards would
suggest trade with, or raids on, both the ^Egean (double-axes, axe-
adzes)  and Atlantic coasts (double-eared palstaves, carp's-tongue
swords). But the island industry was extraordinarily conservative.
Hoards of Nuragic age may contain every sort of axe4 from flat or
flanged types assignable by typologists to the Copper or Early Bronze
Age, up to socketed forms of the Late Bronze Age and of stabbing
weapons from archaic round-heeled daggers* to carp's-tongue swords.
Luckily a few imported manufactures prove that these archaic types
were still current in the eighth or even seventh century B.C., when the
Etruscan Iron Age was in full bloom in Italy. 4
  Yet the nuragic bronzes appear in the archaeological record as the
immediate successors of the Copper Age types just as nuragic pottery
     1   So Hall, Cambridge Ancient History. II, 282.
     *
         BP., XXXIX, zoo; MA.. XXV, 896; Archivio, XLVI (1916), 9; RM.. XIII (1928).
74
  *
    Bosch-Gimpera, Etnohgia, 194.
  *
    E.g. at Monte Sa'Idda, MA., XXVII, 14 ft.
  *
    At Monte Sa'Idda and Ala dei Sardi, Not. Sc. (1925), 466.
  *
    Not. Sc. (1922), 293; (1926), 374; fcf. Bosch-Gimpera in    CIPMO.. 30 f.; Studi
Etruseki. Ill, 20.
                                          262
                           ISLAND CIVILIZATIONS

occurs already in the rock-cut tombs of Anghdu Ruju itself.                  We have
unconsciously overstepped the chronological boundaries of this book.
The excursus demonstrates how dangerous it would be to apply to the
West Mediterranean typological systems that may work well within
the Danubian and British commercial spheres and how difficult it is
to fill with developments in tools and vessels, weapons and tombs any
vast interval between the prehistoric Copper Age or Beaker period
and the proto-historic Bronze Age of the eighth century B.C. Archaeo-
logically a millennium is not very plausible, two quite incredible.


                               THE BALEARIC ISLANDS
In the Balearic Islands the archaeological record begins with the mega-
lithic culture. In Mallorca the normal family vault was a rock-cut
tomb. 1 The chamber (Fig. 109) takes the form of a long narrow gallery
round which runs a shallow bench divided into several stalls by low
ridges of rock. One or more cells may open off the chamber, and it may
be preceded by an antechamber. The entrance is a low arch or window
cut in the rock and may give on to an uncovered forecourt excavated in
the hillside. In Menorca the form of the underground gallery is repro-
duced above ground in megalithic chambers enclosed in boat-shaped
constructions walled with cyclopean masonry and termed navetas. The
end at which the chamber opens is flattened and sometimes even concave
in plan. 2
   Evidence of early contact between the islands and the <<Egean is
afforded only by a matt-painted beaked jug of Middle Cycladic type
like Fig. 41, 3, certainly an import but found without definite context
on Menorca. Otherwise the earliest contacts with the outer world are
                                            3
provided by a single sherd of Beaker ware from the rock-cut tomb of
Felanitx, and a conical button with V perforation from the tomb of Son
Mulet. Both are indicative of the activities of Beaker-folk on Mallorca.
On the other hand, splay-footed vases typical of the Horgen culture
from a rock-cut tomb at Sa Val4 prove connections northward, as do
the similarities of the Balearic tomb plans to those of the Rhdne and
Seine valleys.
   The bulk of the sepulchral pottery from the rock-cut tombs, however,
consists of plain vases sometimes provided with upstanding lugs but
never with true handles. Technically this fabric resembles the Argaric
ware of the East Spanish Bronze Age, and several forms can be matched

                 Arch., LXXVI, 121 ff.; Ant. /., XIII (1933), 33 *: CAS., 113.
             i

             1
                 CIPMQ., 26.
             1
                 Castillo, Catnpaniforme, 125;   CIPMO., pi. II.
             4
                 In museum at Palma unpublished before the rebellion.
                                             263
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
in the same context. But ample round-bottomed and carinated vessels
preserve the traditions of the oldest West European neolithic ceramics.
  Little metal survives among the grave goods. Round-heeled daggers
of "Early Bronze Age" type were recovered from Sa Val and several
other tombs, 1 but one tomb yielded an identically shaped dagger of
iron!
  Indeed, the cultural history of the Baleares is parellel to that of
Sardinia. There is no obvious break between the "Copper Age" culture
represented  in the rock-cut tombs and that represented in the

"talayots".   The latter are fortified hamlets, counterparts of the
                                                           2
Sardinian nuargic settlements, and like these, the talayots continued to
be inhabited into the Iron Age. As in Sardinia, the archaeological
material from the Balearic Isles does not show sufficient typological
development to justify a very high dating for the local megalithic
culture. If, like Hemp, 8 we treat the Mallorcan rock-cut tombs as the

starting-point for the French series of gallery graves, we must
                                                                             still insist

that a reversal of the relations would accord far better with the tombs'
furniture and any chronology based thereon.

  1
      Ant. /., XIII, 35, 39; CIPMO., pi. III.
  1
      So the axes of the Talayot culture include both flat and socketed forms, CIPMO, 21.
      PPS., I (1935), "o.




                                           264
                                        CHAPTER XV
                              THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
THE   Iberian Peninsula1 offers the natural channel through which
Oriental influences, whether transmitted by land ways across North
Africa or by sea along the Mediterranean, might penetrate to Atlantic
Europe. In the Peninsula a substantial Old Stone Age population had
probably been augmented at the end of the pleistocene by makers of
microliths in the Capsian tradition (p. 7). Some of these may indeed
have brought with them at least domestic sheep and goats if not some
rudiments of agriculture. Their traditions of flint-working and of
parietal art at least can be recognized in cultures that are admittedly
neolithic.
      Now Spanish prehistorians to-day recognize two "Neolithic" phases,
I and II, followed by a "Bronze
                                 Age I", equivalent to the old "Copper
Age", that is divided into phases A and B; the old "Early Bronze Age"
(El Argar) thus becomes Bronze Age II. And within the Neolithic they
have long recognized two parallel cycles the Almeria culture and the
Cave culture.

                           MARITIME NEOLITHIC SETTLEMENTS
The Cave culture used to denote a very heterogeneous assemblage; for
at all times hunters, herdsmen, pirates, and outcasts have taken shelter
in caves for shorter or longer periods. But in some caves both in the
Peninsula and in South France, as in Liguria, it is now possible to dis-
tinguish at the base of deep deposits a recurrent assemblage of pots and
implements. This is just that culture, characterized by Cardial ware,
already encountered in South Italy and Liguria. It is found all round
the West Mediterranean coasts in North Africa, 2 the Iberian Peninsula, 8
and South France 4 too. But at least in its earlier manifestations it is
strictly confined to the coastal regions where the Mediterranean en-
vironment is preserved in its most distinctive form.
   It was carried by groups of hunters and stock-breeders, known

  1
     Pericot, Historia de Espafta, I (Madrid, 1947); La Espaiia Primitiva (Barcelona,
1950), 655.
    Rev. Anthr., XLI (1931), 158; A. Ruhlmann, La Grotte prehistoriqu* de Da* es-Sulte*
(Paris, Col. Hesperies), 1951.
    Pericot, Historia, 121; Act. y Mem., XVII, 1942, 88-108.
      Riv. St. Lig.,   XV (1949). 22-5; Baffloud and Mieg, 58-71; AC., II.
                                              265
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
almost exclusively from their occupation of caves. This circumstance
has unduly exaggerated the rdle attributed to animal husbandry in the
economy; for herdsmen periodically shelter in caves even though they
have homes in permanent farming villages. Actually the Cardial herds-
men did cultivate cereals; in their deposits have been found not only
                 1                                                  1
grains of barley, sickle-teeth, and querns, but also both in Spain and
Provence  8  bone spatulae of the specialized type used by StarCevo folk
in the Balkans for collecting flour (p. 84). Perhaps they followed that
system of cultivation, still observable in Corsica and Liguria, by which
the scrub is burnt off and the grains planted between the trees still left
          4
standing. But for hunting they employed bows and arrrows armed
with microliths and clubs, weighted with percussion-f>erforated
stone heads6 both items that could have been borrowed from
local "Tardenoisians".
  The flint-work is generally very simple. Axes, in preference to adzes,
were made from fine-grained rock. The pottery shows leathery forms,
generally round based and sometimes provided with small strap
handles. The vases have been profusely decorated by impressing the
edge of a shell or other stamp in the wet clay. The impressions are
normally arranged to form skeuomorphic patterns recalling wicker
cases in which pre-ceramic vessels might have been carried.
  Bracelets of shell or stone were worn as ornaments together with
necklaces of bored teeth. The dead seem to have been buried in caves,
used as collective ossuaries. 6
  The coastal distribution of this culture leaves no doubt that it was
diffused by seafarers. Though very similar pottery is distributed very
widely in North Africa down to Tibesti and Khartoum, there are no
                                                                         7


convincing grounds for supposing that the maritime distribution of
our culture began from Little Africa rather than the Balkan or Levant
coasts. Cardial decoration is found on some of the earliest neolithic

pottery of North Syria. On the other hand, Startevo ware is related
to Cardial and associated with the bone spatulae that occur in no other
context. It certainly seems that the earliest neolithic cultures, adapted

  1
    San Valero Aparisi, La    Cueva de la Sarsa, Servicio de Investigation Prehistorica
(Valencia, 1950), pi. II.
  1
      Ibid., pi. I.
  *
     Bailloud and Mieg, 71 (ChAteauneuf-lez-Martigues), but in Prthistoire, XII (1956),
89, this is classed as "neolithique cardial".
   4
     Sereni, "II sistema agricola del debbio nella Liguria antica," Mem. della        A cad.
Lunigiantse,    XXV  (La Spezia, 1955).
   * San
          Valero, op. tit., 37-46, argues that these are weights for digging-sticks. Similar
objects are widespread in the North African Capsian, cf . Vaufrey, Prthistoire de I'Afriqut,
I, 413-15. They are too light for digging-sticks.
   *
     Riv. St. Ltg., XVII (1931), 132.
   7
     Cf, Arkell, Shakeinab (London, 1953), 69.
                                           266
                        THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
respectively to Balkan            and West Mediterranean environments, at
least sprang from a common root. 1 In the latter area Cardial herdsmen

may well have mingled with surviving mesolithic hunters and with
neolithic farmers' of Capsian tradition. And so a certain continuity of
tradition may be observed in the cave deposits. But the varied styles
of pottery and kinds of stone tool grouped together in earlier books
to constitute a "Cultura de las Cuevas" are no                      more homogeneous
culturally or chronologically than the relics from the several strata
of Arene Candide. But in Spain they can seldom be distinguished

stratigraphically. At least at El Pany near Barcelona, however, col-
lective burials with Cardial ware were stratified below Bell-beakers
of Bronze I. 1

                              THE ALMERIA CULTURE
A second and possibly earlier stream of neolithic colonists, come this
time from Africa, introduced a different culture that is first recogniz-
able in Almeria and therefore thus designated.
  The neolithic colonists settled generally on hilltops like the type site,
El Garcel, 3 overlooking the fertile valleys; they arrived at a time when
pines still grew on the now treeless hill. In addition to breeding stock
and cultivating cereals they may have introduced the culture of olive-
trees since olive-stones were found, but grape-seeds are said to be
derived from wild vines. 4 The grains were reaped with sickles armed
with serrated flint teeth, like those from the pre-dynastic Fayum,
stored in subterranean silos and ground on saddle-querns. Tied to the
soil by their fruit trees, the villagers lived in round or oval huts, partly
excavated in the soil but roofed with a superstructure of wattle-and-
daub. Huntsmen still used microlithic arrow-heads micro-gravers
found at El Garcel may be by-products in the manufacture of these.
  Carpenters employed ground stone axes, adzes, and gouges. A textile
industry is implied by biconical whorls. Pottery was undecorated and
vases were never provided with true handles, though singly or even
doubly perforated lugs were applied. Forms include jars with pointed
bases (Fig. 127, 3) like the early Egyptian (Gerzean) and North African,*
curious bottles, oval in plan, that also recur in North Africa, and sack-
like leathery vessels related to the neolithic pottery of the Fayum and
Merimde* in Egypt. The leathery sack-like forms continued to be
    Cf. Miloj&il, Germania, XXX, 314-18; Bernabo Brea, A.C., II, 192-8.
    Anuari, VIII (1936), 19 ft; Ampurias, V, 190.
    Siret, RQS., XXXIV (1893), 489 ft, and Les premiers Ages d metdt dans I* surest
de I'Espagne; Go6, Amfvruu, III (1941), 63-84.
    Siret, Questions de chronologie et d' ethnographic iberiques, Paris, 1913*
    BSPF., XXXIII, 633; Rev. Anthr.,       XU    (1931), 150. fig. x, 4.
    Caton-Thompaon, The Desert Feyum; Childe, NLMAE., 58.
                                            267
                   DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
popular in all later phases of Almerian culture. In Siret's second neo-
lithic phase as represented at Tres Cabezos 1 they are provided with
upstanding perforated lugs (Fig. 130, i), while bowls may be carinated,
and even double-vases were made as at Merimde in Egypt. Vessels
were also woven of esparto grass.
  Disc-beads of shell, made also by African Capsians, and bracelets
of Pectunculus* shell and stone, beads of callals and later of steatite
were worn as ornaments. The dead were buried collectively in natural
cave ossuaries or in stone- walled but closed cists, usually circular in
                                   8
plan and covered by low tumuli. Even at El Garcel a very crude




          FIG. 127. i, Gouge, El Garcel (J); 2, schist adze, Portugal (J); 3, jar, El
                                          Garcel (i).


                                                                                  '


fiddle-shaped stone, rather like Fig. 8, 14, may represent a 'Mother
Goddess". She is slightly more recognizable in stone figures from the
tombs that may, however, be Neolithic II.
               4
   Vaufrey         reports "the whole assemblage from El Garce!" flints,
celts, and even pots         "is an almost exact replica of the neolithic of

Capsian tradition" as found throughout the Maghreb. The African
origin of the Almeria culture is thus established. But bifacially trimmed
arrow-heads and richly decorated pottery are missing from its neo-
lithic I phase. Hence the Straits may have been crossed before the


    Siret, Ages du mttal, pi. 3; segmented bone beads, a clay plaque perforated at the
  1

four corners and a heap of ore suggest that this site should be assigned rather to the
Copper Age.
      Siret, Questions, 38; APL., I (1928), 25.
  1
      Leisner, Megalithgrdber, 390-404.
  4   Prthistoire de I'Afrique, 1, Maghreb (Paris, 1955)* 412-
                                             268
                              THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
 main expansion that Vaufrey has traced took place in Africa. And the
 radio-carbon date of 3050 B.C. for the Capsian neolithic in the         1
                                                                 Maghreb
 need not be accepted as an upper limit for its arrival in
                                                            Europe.
   A parallel colonization of the west coast may perhaps be inferred
 from plain baggy pots and microliths, similar to those from El Garcel,
 found in megalithic passage graves that are at best Neolithic II
                                                                   (p. 276
 below). Perhaps the first phase of this western colonization will be
 documented if the furniture of the Portuguese "dolmens" be
                                                                      pub-
 lished. These are reported 2 to be megalithic cists, each
                                                           containing
 a single corpse accompanied by archaic microliths.
   On the east coast Spanish prehistorians have traced the spread of
 the Almeria culture northward to Catalonia     a series of burials of
                                                               by
contracted skeletons in simple pit graves. Their furniture includes
tanged and transverse arrow-heads, Pectunculus bracelets, callafe




                                     rH
                                    ft O
      FIG. 128. Stages in conventionalization of
                                                   parietal art in Spain. After Obermaier.
                                A, Maimon; B, Figuras; C. La Pileta.


beads, and plain "Western" pottery                    once indeed a "square-mouthed
         1
vase'            8
             .
                     Though formally neolithic, these Almerian cemeteries in the
north may be relatively late, but at least once the distinctive
                                                                                      plain
pottery has been found stratified below Beakers. 4
  On their way north these Almerians must have come into contact
not only with Cardial herdsmen but also with descendants of older,
mesolithic, tribes. Interactions with the latter must be responsible
for the curiously African character of some of the East        rock-        Spanish
shelter art. Pericot indeed now believes that the practice of
                                                                               decorating
shelter walls with lively but impressionistic scenes of animals and the
chase began in the Solutrian phase of the old Stone Age. But some
stillquite lively paintings depict side by side with gathering activities
                                 6
sheep, equids, and even a rider. If these neolithic elements be derived

           415-  .

  *
    Leisner, Antas do Conctlho de Reguengos de Monsarra* (Lisbon, 1951), 177.
  *
    Maluquer de Motes, "La Culture neolitica del Valles," Arrahona, 1-2 (Sabadell,
1950), 4-13-
    Ampurias, VI (1944;, 43-58.                *
                                                 AJA.. LIII (1949), 150, fig* 1-4-
                                               269
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
from the Almerian of Capsian i.e. North African tradition, the
                                                                         1
stylistic similarity of some East Spanish paintings to those of Libya
or even Rhodesia would be more comprehensible. But the paintings in
question are demonstrably older than more conventionalized paintings
the figures of which can be matched on Copper Age I vases (Fig. 128)
and tomb walls. Rock-shelter art of this later conventionalized type
is not confined to the eastern coasts, but occurs widely in the Peninsula1
and along the Mediterranean coasts even east of the Rhone. 8 It must
be the work of roving hunting and herding groups whose palaeolithic
traditions had been enriched by interaction with Almerian and other
neolithic farmers.


                        THE RISE OF A METAL INDUSTRY
The Peninsula was rich in gold, silver, copper, lead, and even tin. The
discovery of these natural resources permitted the development of a
new economy in which industry and trade could absorb some of the
rural population, as in the Eastern Mediterranean. It was presumably
initiated by actual prospectors, probably by veritable colonies, from
that direction. It is in fact first and most brilliantly attested in Almeria
at sites adjacent to the Mediterranean coasts whence colonists come
by sea from farther east could conveniently exploit and work neigh-
bouring lodes of argentiferous copper and lead ores. The type station,
Los Millares, 4 a few miles up the Andorax from the modern port of
Almeria, has indeed all the aspects of an    gean township, covering
5 hectares (iz acres) and protected by a wall and fosse. Outside the
wall lay a cemetery of a hundred-odd collective tombs said to have
held up to a hundred interments.             A similar settlement was established
at Almizaraque about a mile up from the   mouth of the Almanzora.
Others may be inferred from corbelled tombs at Belmonte, Purchena,
and Tabernas. 6
  Most of the townsmen were of course farmers who cultivated emmer
and hexaploid wheat, barley, beans, and flax. 6 But the population
included also metallurgists, presumably initiated in the East Medi-
terranean and interested especially in silver and gold. Slags from
                                                                     7
Almizaraque attest the extraction of silver, copper, and lead. Siret
        Cf.
          e.g. Granott,
                        L'Arte ruptotre detta Libia (Napoli, n.d.), 275-85.
      Breuil, Les Peintures rvptstres sekimatiques d$ la Ptninsule ibtriqve (Paris, 1936).
                            ruptstres scl
      BSPF., XLI (1944). 168-
    Siret, RQS. (1893); Leisner, Megalithgrfiber, 19-64.
    Lei*ner, ibid., 10, 13, 73.
    r. dicoccum and compactum, H. htxasticho*', Telles and Ciferri, Trigo$ arqueologieos de
EspaAa, Madrid (lust. nac. de Investigaciones Agronomicas), 1954; Cuademos, I (1946),
38 f.
  f
      Cuademos, III (1948), 117-24.
                                            270
                      THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
 believed that clay arcs, perforated at both ends and
                                                       up to 22 cm. long,
 formed parts of a                   furnace.  But  the  exact Anatolian
                      reverberatory
parallels to such arcs, that are characteristic of most sites of Bronze
                                                                        I,
suggest that they really served as loom weights. The
                                                            copper-smiths
were masters of only the
                             simplest techniques of forging and open-




FIG. 129, Flint arrow-heads: i, Alcala
                                         5, Los Mfflares
                                         ;
                                                            ). Halberd blades; 3. Casa
                   da Moura; 4, Los M Hares (J); 2, Palmella
                                                             points (f).

hearth casting. So they manufactured
                                               only daggers with a midrib on
one face (like Fig. 132, bottom), as at Usatova, or
                                                            quite flat and tanged
(of West European type) together with long narrow flat adzes,
                                                                            cutters,
as in the Cyclades, quadrangular awls, and even saws.
   Trade brought to Los Millares hippopotamus
                                                      ivory and ostrich
egg-shells from Africa, turquoise, callafc, amber, and jet from undeter-
mined sources. But stone was still
                                     normally used instead of metal for
axe-heads, and flint was now superbly worked by   pressure flaking   for
arrow-heads, dagger or halberd blades (Fig. 129, 4), as well as knives
                                         271
                  DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
and sickle-teeth. Apart from transverse arrow-heads which were still
used, 68 per cent of the specimens from Los Millares are hollow-based,
17 per cent tanged-and-barbed, 7 per cent leaf-shaped (Fig. 129, 5).
Thick plaques of clay, perforated at the four corners, may have been
used as wrist-guards or loom-weights. 1 A stone plaque perforated at
each end from Belmonte was used as a whetstone.
  The pottery on the whole carries on the native Almerian tradition,
but some vases are decorated with incised patterns that include oculi
motives (like Fig. 130, 2) and conventionalized stags (Fig. 130, 3), with




      FIG. 130.   i,   "Late Neolithic" vase from Tres Cabezos; 2-3, symbol vases from
                                          Los Millares.


small knobs or even painted in warm black on a light ground. New forms
include squat birds' nest pyxides, sometimes with plaster necks,
cylindrical tumblers and little globular vases with short necks as well
as a few multiple vessels. Beakers were found, apparently as an intrusive
element in only four tholoi at Los Millares, in one each at Belmonte,
Purchena, and Almizaraque, and in five cists. Vases were also made out
of plaster to imitate ostrich eggs, and unguent flasks were carved out
of ivory or white limestone.
  As toilet articles and ornaments, bone or ivory combs were worn at
Los Millares, the clothing fastened with shanked stone buttons, and
simple disc or barrel beads of stone, shell, talc, and imported materials
were hung on strings round the neck. At Almizaraque, conical and
prismatic buttons with V perforation and a grooved bone toggle of a
type found at Troy and Ali$ar were used as dress-fasteners, and in the
tholos at Tabernas and probably also in that at Llano de Media Legua
on the Almanzora, bone pins with grooved cylindrical heads (like
Fig. 132) were found.
  The Almerians were, however, deeply preoccupied with immaterial
ends.The collective tombs were constructed with great care; sixty-
  1   From Tres Cabezos (neolithic), Velez Blanco, Mas de Menente (Alicante, Bronze
Aget).
                                              272
         FIG. 131. Ritual objects: i,
                                        Almeria; 2 and 4, Portugal; 3. Granada
                                                                                 (J).


ive of those at Los
                         Millares, as at Almizaraque, Belmonte, Tabernas
ire corbelled tholoi
                     (Fig. 108), often with cells opening off the chamber
>r
     passage, and with porthole slabs for entries. 1 covered with circular
                          1
                              Leisner, MegaKthgrSber. 289-328.

                                           273
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
cairns supported by a built retaining-wall on to which straight or
curved walls may be built to frame a forecourt. Wooden pillars are said
to have supported the roofs.               A few of the earlier tombs at Los Millares
are rectangular or trapezoid megalithic cists from 2 to 5 m. long, pre-
ceded by a short entrance passage. Ritual objects include owl-eyed
female figurines made by painting bovine phalanges (Fig. 131, i), or
stone and ivory cylinders, plain plaques of schist (Los Millares), and
flat    stone figures without faces like Fig. 8, 13, and, at Almizaraque,
bone models of sandals. Axe-amulets were worn as charms at Los
Millares and elsewhere.
  The urbanization of Almerian economy seen at Los Millares and
Almizaraque is presumably a reflection, however indirect, of Oriental
cities' demands for metal. But the townships thus created, themselves
constituted local secondary centres of demand and radiated their
influence right across the Peninsula. Westward, parallel or colonial
settlements sprang up all across Andalusia to the coasts of Portugal
along the natural route, followed by the modern railways from Almeria
to Algarve, and principally at focal-points (now junctions) thereon or
in metalliferous districts.
  On the plateau of Granada1 are several large cemeteries of collective
tombs round Guadix, Gor, and Gorafe, composed partly of tholoi,
more often of cists of the Almerian form and frequently entered through
porthole slabs. The tombs contain typical Almerian products oculi
vases, flat stone idols, phalange idols, ribbed cylinder-headed pins
as well as a few Beakers. Yet other tombs of the sartie form in these
cemeteries contain pottery and bronzes characteristic of the succeeding
                                                 8
Argaric Bronze Age. Farther west at Antequera and in the ancient
Betica,* the route is marked by superbly built tholos tombs. But near
the princely tholos of Romeral at Antequera is a small cemetery of
rock-art tombs4 that reproduce in miniature the plan of the tholos
but contained mainly Argaric bronzes. On the other hand, stroke-
burnished ware from villages near Jerez and Carmona6 points to fresh
impulses direct from the East Mediterranean. But at Campo Reale
near Carmona, Bonsor* found burials in "silos" really chamber
tombs accompanied by polished stone axes, plain pottery, and a
little painted ware akin to the Almerian and the characteristic clay arcs.

  1
       Lefoner, Megalithgrfiber, 84-168.
  *    Ibi4. t 174-85.
  1
       Ibid., 194-213.
  4 S. Gimenez
               Reyna, "Mam. arqueoL de Prov. Malaga hasta 1946", Informes y
Memorial (Madrid, Junta para Excavaciones, 1946).
  9 Act*
         ArqueoL ffispantca, III (1945), 37; Bonaor, "Lea Colonies agricoles prl-
romainM de U vattfe da B*tis," Rev. Arch., XXXV (1899), in.
      Op. rtt., 36-9, 105-10, fig. 41-2.
                                               274
                       THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
   Then, in Algarve, a metalliferous region where the rocks are suited
to dry-stone masonry, a
                          cemetery of seven tholoi at Alcali1 marks the
site of a smaller Los Millares. The tombs contained flat
                                                         adzes, notched
 daggers with midribs on one or both faces (Fig. 132), awls and saws
 of copper, superbly worked hollow-based arrow-heads of flint
                                                                (Fig.
 129, i), undecorated vases of Almerian type, a marble              a   paint-pot,
clay arc, hammer beads, and beads of amber, callais, and jet, but not
 Beaker ware nor West European daggers. Corbelled tombs extend
                                                                                along




           FIG. 132. Copper daggers and adze, Alcala, and bone pin, Cabeco da
                                      Ministra (i).


the Portuguese coasts as far north as Torres Vedras (Pefla and Barro
with semicircular forecourt). 2 Tombs at Monge and San Martinho,
       8
Cintra, excavated in the rock but roofed by corbelling, illustrate the
transition from the built tholos to the rock-cut tomb.
      Tombs of the latter class, agreeing in plan with the tholoi and, like
them, sometimes preceded by an antechamber, a curved forecourt or
a long entrance passage divided by roqk-cut versions of the
                                                            porthole
slab form regular cemeteries at Palmella, 4 Alapraia,* Estoril, and

  1
   Estacio de Veiga, Antiguidades monumentaes do Algarve (Lisbon, 1886*91).
  1
   Pefla (OAP., XIV, 354), and Barro, with semicircular forecourt; V. Correia, CIPP.
Mem. 27 (1931). 72, relics at Belem.
   Cartailhac, op. cit.\ OAP., II, an.              OAP., XII (1907), 210, 320.
  *
      Afonso do Paco, "As Grutas de Alapraia", Brolma, XXI (Lisbon, 1935): Anals
IV (Lisbon, 1941).
                                         275
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
other sites round the Tagus estuary. 1 From their situation at the
river mouth and from the tomb furniture these cemeteries of the
PalmeUa culture might belong to maritime colonists from the East
Mediterranean like Almizaraque and Los Millares, with which they are
in fact largely contemporary.
  But in the hinterland, including the stanniferous plateaux of Northern
Portugal, are cemeteries of four or five megalithic passage graves
(antas) under round cairns which embody an older tradition of sepulchral
architecture and should belong to a native population of neolithic
ancestry (p. 269) the builders of the unpublished "dolmens". Nearly
all antas had been pillaged in the seventeenth century. The surviving
furniture from most includes beakers and typical relics df the Palmella
culture. But at least two 2 were demonstrably earlier than "Almerian"
tholoi that had been built up against them under the same cairns. And
from a couple of very simple passage graves (Fig. 133) the original
furniture has been recovered intact. 8 Each interment was accompanied
by an axe and an adze, a set of geometric microliths and a couple of
plain round-bottomed "Western" pots and a plate of red-slipped ware.
So the first megalithic passage graves in Portugal were built by a neo-
lithic population akin to the Almerian and at a time at least culturally

equivalent to Neolithic II in Spain. Yet larger, and presumably later,
tombs reproduce in orthostatic masonry all the features of the tholoi and
rock-cut tombs4 with their divided passage and even porthole slabs. 5
  The only settlement yet explored in Portugal is Vila Nova de S.
      6
Pedro, not on the coast, but well in the hinterland of Lisbon. It was
founded before Beaker ware became fashionable locally, 7 but was
occupied throughout the "Copper Age" (Bronze I) and until Argaric
types were locally produced in Bronze II. The villagers cultivated
                       8
hexaploid wheat, barley, and beans and engaged in stock-breeding and
hunting. Local copper ores were smelted at the site and the metal
worked into flat axes, saws, and other types, 9 though perhaps not before
Bronze II. The domestic pottery is characterized by reinforced rims,
                                               10 But
surprisingly like those of neolithic Britain.         beakers and other
vases, found in the rock-cut tombs, were also used, and on the whole
the site reveals just a provincial variant on the Palmella culture.

  1
      Alapraia e S. Pedro, Junta de Turismo de Cascais, 1946; Congresso Luso.-Espanhol.
do Porto, T. VIII, 1943.
      Leisner, Antas do Concelho de Reguengos (Lisbon, 1951), 284-9.
      Ibid., 212 and 310.
   Correia, CIPP., Mem. 27.                                Marburger Studien, i, 150.
   Afonuo do Paco, Act. y Mem.,      XX (1945).
                                                         T
                                                           Id. Broteria, LIV (1952), 7-16.
   Amfts,   V(1954), 280-356, T. sph&rococcum;  cereals from other sites are described here.
   Zepkyrus, III (Salamanca, 1952), 32-9.
 " Childe, Revista GtUmartos,   LX  (1950), 7-12.
                                           276
                  *"                           *."                  ^   ^

FIG. 133. Plan of "neolithic" passage grave (anta) and part of furniture; Alemtejo.
                 After Leisner. Pottery and celts (J), flints (}).


  In the Palmella culture the essential features of the Millares economy
are conserved though less fully than in Algarve. Metal tools and weapons
are rare in the rock-cut tombs and practically confined to the odd arrow-
heads 1 shown in Fig, 129, 2. The place of copper in industry is taken
  1
    One such "point" was found sticking in a skull at Valdenabi, Leon; Corona d'Estudis
dedica a sus Martires (Madrid, 1941), 128.

                                         277
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                                                  halberd
by stone axes and adzes and superbly worked flints, including
blades like Fig. 129, 4, that may be polished on the faces as if in imita-
tion of metal. Arrow-heads include still microlithic types, but hollow-
                                                          in delicacy to
based, tanged, and leaf-shaped forms, none comparable
those from Alcal&, occur in the proportions of 72, 19, and 9 respectively
at Palmella. Trade brought gold, callals, amber, and ivory, while
                                                                      the
connections with Almeida are explicitly attested by cylinder-head pins
from tombs and by clay plaques perforated at the corners from con-
temporary  settlements. But tortoise beads from Palmella and Vila Nova
de S. Pedro conform to the Sardinian-Proven9al type of Fig. I26a,
while a pair of basket-shaped gold earrings from a rock-cut tomb at
          1
Ermageira reproduce a familiar Irish type (cf. Fig. 154). *
  In the Palmella pottery Beaker ware, both of the "grand style"
(Fig. in, 1-2) and of the "classical" variety
                                                        decorated with rouletted
zones, is the most conspicuous element, but plain round-bottomed
                                                                    and
carinated vessels may just carry on the native "neolithic" tradition,
illustrated in the megalithic tombs. Stroke-burnished sherds have
been recovered from tholoi and from sepulchral caves while channelled
and other kinds of incised decoration are also represented in caves and
settlements.
  Among the ritual objects too, besides familiar Millares types-
             Martifiho) and cylinder idols and schist
                                                      sandals (Alapraia)
phalange (S,
   the Palmella tombs contain a variety of peculiar Portuguese forms
                                                                     schist
plaque idols richly decorated with incised patterns (Fig. 131, 2),
croziers, similarly decorated, marble copies of  shafted hoe-blades,  large
                                                                          8
crescentic "collars" of limestone, and pendants in the form of a rabbit.
                                  8


The owl-face of a funerary goddess and even representations of a copper
                                                          tombs. 4
dagger were carved or painted on the uprights of some
   Similarly on the east coasts from   Almeria    northward  to Catalonia
rural communities continued to bury   the dead  in natural cave ossuaries.

While they relied mainly on stone for axes, they      obtained  objects of
copper, and beads of callals, learned to
                                         work   metals and  copied locally
                                                                                      6
such Almerian types as cylinder-head pins and painted phalange idols.
Flint daggers and hollow-based arrow-heads of Portuguese form are
not, however, found north of Almeria. The local pottery preserves the

  1
     Ethnos, II (Lisbon, 1942), 449-58*
  "  Afonao do Paco, Anai's, IV, 122, compares these to Irish gold lunulae, but the per-
foration*, if any, are near the centre, not the ends; comparison with the day arcs might
be equally legitimate.
  *
     Leianer, As Antes de Mensarras (Lisbon, 1952), 145.
    Brottil, L*s P**W*5 npestres scMmatiques, IV (1936), 148.
  4
  ft
     Blanquires de Labor, Murcia, Cuadernos, III, 5.30; Cami Real and
                                                                             Barranc de
                                                  M
CmstelJet, Alicante (Arch. Prek. Levant., I, 31-72)1 o te dc Barsella, Alicante, JSEA.,
Mem. 112 (1930); A PL., II, 115-40.
                                         278
                      THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
rounded Almerian shapes but is generally mixed up with decorated
"Cave wares" and beakers. A round-headed minority is represented in
most of these caves.
  From many Copper Age tombs and settlements, especially in Portugal,
but also in Almeria, bones of horses or just possibly asses have been
reported.
  We might thus recognize in the Copper Age Almerian (Los Miliares)
Andalusian, Algarvian, Portuguese, and East Spanish cultures though
the first four might be grouped together as local fades of one Early
Hispanic culture. Should we distinguish a sixth entity a "pure"
Beaker culture in the Peninsula. Beakers of the Pan-European type,
like Fig.in, 3-4, with their usual accompaniment of West European
daggers and arrow-heads but no wrist-guards, have been found in every
type of Copper Age tomb tholos, rock-cut, megalithic, natural cave
but far more frequently in Portugal than in Almeria. But there are local
variants on this standard model. Fig. in, 1-2, illustrates a Portuguese
variant that may be found in the same tomb as the Pan-European
form. 1 Beakers, decorated in this style, are associated with chalices of
Argaric shape at Acebuchal near Carmona in Betica.* In two tombs at
Gandul in Betica beakers were associated only with the latest (Copper
Age I) and presumably intrusive, interments and must thus be later
than the erection of the tombs. Similarly, at Vila Nova de San Pedro
Beaker ware was missing from the oldest habitation deposit. On the
other hand, at Los Miliares, Leisner assigns beakers to the earliest
phase. So it is impossible in the south of the Iberian Peninsula to
isolate an assemblage of relics and rites that should distinguish archseo-

logically a Beaker people from the rest of the interrelated societies
responsible for the Early Hispanic culture. Physically Beaker-folk were
undoubtedly represented among those societies, and, assuming they
were of East Mediterranean origin, should have been among the first
colonists thence who founded those societies. Yet they did not arrive
as Beaker-folk since Beakers are not known in the East Mediterranean
nor yet at Paestum, where the physical type is represented.
   Presumably they separated out from them in the Peninsula. Margaret
Smith has shown that the beaker cannot be derived from the native
Cave culture pottery of Betica8 and that the Tagus estuary is the most
likely focus for the wide dispersion described in Chapter XIL But

  1
     The alleged stratigraphical evidence for Bosch-Gimpera's view (Man,       XL   (1940),
6-10) making the Palmella style older than the Pan-European, has been demolished by
Castillo, APL., IV (1953), 135 ff.; cf. also Savory, Revista Guimar&ts, LX, 363-6; Leisner,
As Antes nas Herdades da Casa de Braganfa (Lisbon, 1955), 20-27.
   1
     "Colonies agricoles" (Rev. Arch., XXXV), 88-90, 116-23, 132.
     PPS. t XIX  (1953), 95-107.
                                           279
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
unless the fine Wfacially worked arrow-heads they carried with them
evolved in the Peninsula from microlithic forms as Siret suggested,
we might suspect that they had been joined by a contingent of bowmen
from the Sahara, where such arrow-heads were made in profusion,
whether as a local continuation of the Aterian tradition or under
inspiration from the Fayum neolithic.
  The foundation of the Copper Age cultures in the Peninsula, as in
Italy and Sardinia, is generally attributed to an actual colonization by
East Mediterranean prospectors. But these colonists did not, like the
Phoenicians and the Greeks, bring shiploads of manufactured articles;
not a single East Mediterranean export has been recognized on any
Peninsular site before the Argaric period. The metal gear, locally made
by the immigrant smiths, was technically inferior to that current in the
East Mediterranean even during the third millennium but after all
the "prospectors" would have been looking for silver and gold, not
copper. Some Millares pot forms have general parallels in the Early
Minoan ossuaries of Crete, 1 the stone figurines are obviously like
Cycladic and Anatolian ones; the owl-face engraved on plaques and
vases or painted on phalanges and caves belongs to the same "goddess"
whom the Sumerians depicted on the handles of funerary jars and the
Trojans on a stele and on face-urns. The plaque-idols like Fig. 131, 2,
are very like Egyptian block figures (p. 19) or Early Cypriote clay
"idols". 2 The clay arcs have exact parallels in Anatolia, as has the
       8
toggle from Almizaraque; a segmented stone bead from Palmella is
quite like Fig. 12, 2, while the stroke-burnished ware from Betica
(p. 274) is identical with the East Mediterranean fabric. The idea of the
aritficial collective tomb is East Mediterranean and was translated into
corbelled vaults in Crete and the Cyclades in the third millennium.
The tholoi of Los Millares are actually rather similar to Krazi in Crete
(p. 23),    while the contemporary cists resemble those of H.                Kosmas
in Attica (p. 72).
   Still these analogies are distinctly
                                          vague. Collective burial had
apparently been practised in the Peninsula already in the neolithic
period. In Portugal even built collective tombs may be equally neo-
lithic. There, too, megalithic tombs are
                                         demonstrably older than tholoi.
Even for the Almerian tholoi Leisner has expounded a plausible evolu-
tion from the neolithic round cists. The
                                          similarity between tholoi, like
those at Antequera and AlcalS. and the Mycenaean looks indeed
                                                                            particu-
  1
    Xanthudides, Vaulted Tombs, pis. XI, 1850 (stone birds' nest vases),
                                                                       '   XXXI 687
                                                                                 '

(clay tumbler),  XXX, 4982 (stud-<nament), M.M.I.
    Act. y Mem. Soc. EspaA. Anthropologia,        XIX
                                               (1944), 135.
      Schliemann, Ilios, fig. 536; van der Osten, "The Alishar Htiytik, 1928-29," QIC.
Pub*., XIX, fig. 85; for arcs, see p. 40, n. i.
                                            280
                      THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
larly striking. It is accentuated by the cemetery of rock-cut tombs near
Antequera that seem to bear the same relation to the tholos as chamber
tombs do to Mycenaean tholoi. But perhaps the similarity in plan is
deceptive; in Greece the passage was unroofed, where in Iberia it was
always covered. In any case it is no longer plausible to derive from the
Mycenaean the Iberian tholoi any more than to make the latter the
models for thfe Portuguese passage graves. Indeed, it is now just as
plausible to derive the Mycenaean tholoi from the Peninsula (p. 80.)
Hence its East Mediterranean relations provide no indisputable limiting
dates for the Early Hispanic Copper Age.
   Whether as a consequence of East Mediterranean colonization or
no, during the Copper Age the several societies inhabiting the Peninsula,
while asserting their autonomy in divergent ceramic styles, fashions in
amulets, and preferences for arrow-heads, had achieved a considerable
degree of uniformity in stone and metal tools and weapons, in costume
and personal ornaments and from one coast to the other. To this cultural
uniformity no political union need have corresponded. Only in Andalusia
and perhaps Algarve do a few monumental tombs look like princely
sepulchres rather than communal ossuaries or family vaults.
  The exotic materials turquoise, amber, jet, callais and foreign
types, like tortoise beads, from Copper Age tombs illustrate wide
commercial relations, particularly with the North-west. The counter-
balancing exports  at least before the Beaker expansions seem to
have been of a less substantial character elements of a cult. The
passage graves of Brittany are so closely related to the Portuguese in
architecture and furniture as to suggest direct maritime intercourse
                                                                1
foreshadowing that of the Tartessians in the eighth century. The
Northern passage graves should result from a further extension of such
relations that might account for the amber at Los Millares. The symbol-
ism and the technique of ceramic decoration in Brittany and Scotland
point in the same direction, while the magic patterns on Irish bronzes*
are inspired by the hieratic art of Palmella. In the sequel, of course, the
Beaker-folk, presuming they did set out from Spain, played a decisive
role in initiating a Bronze Age in Central Europe and Upper Italy. The
main contribution of the Peninsula to Atlantic and North-Western
                                                                          8
Europe was, however, surely "the Megalithic Religion". With Hawkes
we might imagine the megalith-builders sailing from the Portuguese
coasts, like the Conquistadores, to conquer for that faith a New World.

   1
     As described in the late Latin poem, Ora Maritima, by Avienus; cf. Hawkes in
Ampurias, XIV (1952), 81-95.
   *
     MacWhite, Estudios sobre las relations atldnticas de la peninsula hispdnica (Disserta-
tiones Mairitenscs, II, Madrid, 1951)*
     The Prehistoric Foundations of Europe (London, 1940), 159.
                                           28l
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Or perhaps the saints of the Celtic Church would provide a better
analogy; some actually followed routes marked out by megalithic tombs
while our megalith-builders have left no superior copper weapons to
correspond to the fire-arms with which the Conquistadores vindicated
the authority of the cross.
  The great creative moment was transient. As in the seventeenth
century, after the great expansion, Peninsular culture stagnated
                                                                 and
compared   to Britain  and  Central Europe   declined. Even  in Copper
Age II decline is perceptible. According to Leisner the later tombs at
Los Millares contain a poorer and less varied furniture than the earlier
ones. In the succeeding Bronze Age (Bronze II), though tin was now
obtainable and alloyed with copper and methods of casting were
improved, Hispanic culture seems                less progressive        and its domain
contracts.


                                 THE BRONZE AGE
In Eastern Spain the Copper Age culture of Los Millares develops into,
or is succeeded by, a no less well-defined semi-urban culture of Bronze
                                                      1
Age type, named after the type station at El Argar. Its authors con-
tinued to live in hilltop townships, or citadels, more solidly fortified than
before. There might even be galleries in the walls. The houses are agglo-
merations of rectangular rooms with stone foundations, but the total
areas are small   the acropolis of El Officio covered 2 \ acres. The dead
were no longer buried in collective tombs but individually in cists or
jars among the houses; the 780 graves actually identified at El Argar
give some indication as to how large the population must have become
or how long the Argaric Bronze Age lasted. Metal was mined and worked
locally on a larger scale than in the Copper Age and was effectively dis-
tributed throughout the province. Long-distance trade, on the contrary,
languished; it brought only a few beads of callais and segmented beads
of Egyptian fayence like those from Perjdmos graves. Tin was scarce,
and the smith had generally to be content with copper or poor bronze.
But he could turn out flat axes with splayed blades or even with
hammered flanges, awls, saws, round-heeled daggers that might be
elongated into swords up to 70 cm. long (Fig. 134) and specialized
halberds which seem to be local translations of Copper Age flint forms. 2
Silver was sometimes used for rivets. Whetstones perforated at both
ends were in regular use. Yet polished stone axes are quite plentiful on
all Argaric settlements.


                1
                    Siret, Let premiers dges is the principal source.
                    Arch.,   LXXXVI (1936), 288, 298.
                                          282
                      THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
   Round-bottomed and carinated pots might seem to carry on some
 Copper Age traditions (Fig. 134), but technically the fabric red, black,




  FIG. 134. Arcane burial-jar showing diadem (^);
                                                     funerary vases (1); halberd and
      dagger-blades (J); sword ($). By permission of Trustees of British Museum.



or mottled is surprisingly like Anatolian Bronze Age pottery and its
Danubian IV analogues. The carinated shapes, too, but for the absence
of handles, would fit well into the UnStician repertory; indeed, one mug

                                        283
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
from A typical ccsmetery pear Orihuda is actually provided with a
haiMSe,*
  Ornaments included diadems of silver (Fig. 134, top), beads, rings,
and simple bracelets of gold, silver, or copper, perforated boars' tusks
carrying tiny rings of copper wire, shells, fish-vertebrae, and various
beads (none of amber). Rare burials with diadems (Fig. 134) must
belong to chiefs or nobles, burials of males and female^ together
should be instances of satt A class division of society and a patriarchal
organization are thus attested. Concurrently the cult of a mother
goddess, in so far as it inspired the production of female figurines, was
given up. Indeed, apart from an ''altar" surmounted by "horns of
consecration" at Campos, ritual objects are no longer conspicuous.
In the mixed population, round-heads were mingled with a
                                                             majority of
Mediterraneans. 8
   The Argaric culture might be regarded as a continuation of the old
Almerian stripped of foreign elements after appropriating the technical
advances introduced therewith. 8 The Almerians, having emancipated
themselves from the megalithic superstition, went on to develop the
metallurgy introduced therewith on original native lines. Yet the novel
burial practices, as strange to El Garcel as to Los Millares, but tradi-
tional in Central Anatolia and adopted in Middle Helladic
                                                                  Greece,
suggest that this emancipation was not effected without help from the
East Mediterranean. Indeed, there is better evidence for an East
Mediterranean colonization of Almeria at the beginning of the Bronze
Age than in the Copper Age. Agreements in burial practices are more
specific. The typical Argaric chalices are just ^Egean kylikes of wood
or metal translated into the local
                                    pottery as they were into Minyan or
painted Mycenaean ware in Greece. The fayence beads are actual ^Egean
imports. On the other hand, some would derive the innovations of the
Argaric culture from Upper Italy. Italian prehistorians, however,      to          prefer
regard the halberd-brandishers there as immigrants from the Peninsula.
  The segmented fayence beads from Fuente Alamo in
                                                   any case prove
that the Argaric culture was         at latest      B.C. If due to
                             flourishing        by 1400
^Egean colonists, it could not have started much before 1500, since
even the Minyan kylikes are Late Helladic (p.
                                              75). How long it lasted
is still more uncertain. There are no connected
                                                 remains outside the
Argaric citadels and graves till the Iron Age began after 1000 B.C.,
so that Almeria is in much the same
                                      plight as Sardinia. Outside that
province the position is still worse.
                                                                          No   -   5 (I9a8) -
 *
     Coon, Races. 151. insists on contrast with "Copper Age" population
     So Boach-Gimpera, Archivo Espafiol de Arpuohgia
                                                         (igsfi, 48.
                                         284
                     THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
  Typical Argaric cemeteries, well provided with metal tools, as far
north as Alicante and Valencia1 illustrate the effective extension of the
Almerian economic system. But in the province of Alicante itself in
the Alcoy district. on the hilltop citadels of Mola alta de Serelles1 and
Mas de Menente* axes of Argaris type were cast, or Argaric riveted
daggers used, but the round-bottomed bowls and globular jars pre-
serve purer traditions of the Almerian culture in contrast to the sharper
profiles of Argaric pottery, while polished stone axes were still regularly
employed.
  Westward in Granada some megalithic tombs in the cemeteries of
Gor, Gorafe, and Los Eriales contain Argaric bronzes, ornaments, and
pots.   So at Alcalde near Antequera, 4 rock-cut tombs, reproducing
exactly the plan of the built tholos, contain relics of Argaric type.
Otherwise there is nothing in South Spain till the Iron Age. In Portugal
cemeteries of cist graves containing (? Argaric) carinated pottery are
rare and mainly concentrated in Algarve. 6 Sometimes the capstones of
the short cists are carved with representations of developed metal
axes. 6 Apart from cist graves, only the megalithic passage graves and
natural cave sepulchres are available to fill the gap in the funerary
record between the Copper and Late Bronze Ages; carinated and even
handled pots from such might well be "Bronze Age '. On the other hand,
                                                            1




bronzes of highly specialized type, especially two-eared palstaves, 7
show that there arose in North Portugal and Galicia during the Late
Bronze Age an important centre of metallurgy the products of which
were exported to Britain in a revival of the old trade that had been
reflected in the ear-rings of Irish form from Ermageira and lunulae
from Galicia. 8
  With this revival the Peninsula's Atlantic coast or at least its stan-
niferous northern part at length became again a creative centre of
metallurgy and trade, of which Avienus' verses have preserved a
          9
memory. Yet this Late (Atlantic) Bronze Age began only after 1000 BX,
No Middle Bronze Age is defined by typological landmarks. Into this
vacuum the poor Early Bronze Age cists and even some Copper Age
collective tombs might easily slide! Between 1550 and 1400 B.C.
indirect commerce between Britain and Mycenaean Greece by some

    Bol. R. Ac*d. Hist., LIV, 357; APL., II, 151-63.
    JSEA., Mem. 94 (1927).
    A.P.L., I, 101-12.
    Gimenez Reyna, "Mem. Arqueol. de Malaga", Informes y Mems., 12 (Comisario
gen. de Excavaciones, Madrid, 1946), 49 ff.
    Archive Espafiol de Arq. XXII (1949), 3x0.
                             t


    OA P., XI (1906), 108; Act. y Mem., XXII (1947), 158.
    Savory, "TheAtiantic Bronze Age", PPS.,   XV (1949), 128    ff.

    Cf. MacWhite,   Estudios, 48-64.
    Hawkes, Ampurias, XIV, 81 ff.
                                        285
                          0F EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
western route is positively attested Were AlcaU and Los Millares
points on that route? An affirmative answer seems quite plausible and
                                                                 1

the extra-short chronology for the Hispanic Copper Age cannot be
refuted just by the vague parallels in the third millennium we have
cited. But then the Peninsula's claim to cradle the Beaker-folk would
become precarious unless the chronology for Temperate Europe be
similarly telescoped!

      Bggott, Rwista Gvimartos, LVII (1948), 10 ff. Sir Lindsay Scott (PSAS., LXXXII
  1

(i95<>)* 44) has pointed out the close resemblances between British Middle Bronze Age
"incense cups" and stone and pottery vases from Los Millares and cognate Copper
Age sites.




                                        286
