                                 CHAPTER XVI
              WESTERN CULTURE IN THE ALPINE ZONE
THE diversified region north of the Pyrenees and west of the Rhine
and the high Alps, which had been steppe and parkland during the
Ice Age, in the subsequent forest period still
                                               supported Azflian de-
scendants of the Magdalenian reindeer-hunters and salmon-fishers, of
Tardenoisian immigrants from Africa, and of Forest-folk who spread
southward. These autochthonous food-gatherers were converted
gradually to a food-producing economy by the spread of an exotic
neolithic culture, and, multiplying in response to the new
                                                            opportun-
ities of livelihood, accelerated its
                                     ejq>ansion. This conversion itself
might indeed have taken place in Provence and round the Pyrenees,
where the Cardial herdsmen, as shown in Chapter XV, had implanted
their neolithic culture and economy. It is, however,
                                                     generally attributed
to a second wave of immigrants who would have introduced a Western
Neolithic culture and spread it thence to more temperate
                                                                 regions,
indeed to the Alps and the Channel. Even on the latter view the
primary Western farmers admittedly mixed with native food-gatherers
and, in adapting their rural economy to the novel environment, took
advantage of their experience and equipment. Moreover, in South
France the postulated Western immigrants have left only ambiguous
traces of their passage, and the Western culture
                                                       they should have
brought with them is largely an inference from the "Western" cultures
of Lombardy, Western Switzerland, Central and North Fiance, and
Southern England.
   No doubt in a number of South French caves Cardial ware is replaced
in higher strata by plain leathery pots that can be more or less
                                                                  exactly
matched on the one hand in the Lagozza, Cortaillod, Chassey, and
Windmill Hill cultures, 1 on the other in the Almeria culture and its
Portuguese counterpart (p. 269), while similar pots occur in the basal
levels of caves outside the narrow zone colonized   Cardial herdsmen.
                                                            by
It is less clear whether other distinctive traits occur so
                                                    early in South
France or, if they do, whether they be distinctive of the Western
Neolithic. Leaf-shaped arrow-heads are thus found1 and are distinctive
of the earliest Neolithic in Britain, but not of
                                                           Lagozza or Cortaillod.

     *
         T. Hawkes, Antiquity, VIE, 26-40; Ftegott, L'A*tf*. 9   LVH (1953), 4*3-4*.
                                                                           '
         Piggott, he. cit., 4a6; Bailloud and MTeg, too.
                                         287
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Antler sleeves for celts so distinctive of Cortaillod occur early in Aude
and Arifege, 1 but are missing from the deepest levels in Gard as from
                                               1

Lagozza and Windmill Hill. Hares phalange pendants again occur2
in Gard as in South Spain and in Cortaillod and in the Lower to Middle
Neolithic of Liguria. Hence the South French caves have yielded some
material, stratified below Beaker layers, which could be treated as
intermediate between the Almeria culture on the one hand, the Ligurian
Middle Neolithic and the Alpine Cortaillod cultures on the other. In
the last-named assemblage we have the fullest picture of the Western,
indeed of any, neolithic culture available in Europe.


      THE EARLY NEOLITHIC PHASE ON THE WEST ALPINE LAKES
The Swiss lakes have provided not only an unique picture of neolithic
equipment and economy, owing to the preservation by the waters of
organic materials, but also the clearest record of cultural development
in Western Europe, thanks firstly to the
                                             stratigraphical excavations
on Lake Neuchatel, initiated by Paul Vouga in 1919, and to the subse-
                                 8
quent observations of E. Vogt and others which have clarified and
extended Vouga's sequence. The names Cortaillod-Michelsberg,
                                                                  Horgen,
and Corded Ware denote three culture periods that follow one another
in that order on all the Alpine lakes and bogs. But the earliest neolithic
colonization of the area is not represented by lacustrine habitations at
all, but is known exclusively from cereal pollen blown into some
                                                                 peat
mosses from cultivated fields adjacent to unidentified settlements on
what is still dry land. 4
  So the oldest "lake-dwellings" in Western Switzerland were erected
by farmers who arrived with a complete neolithic equipment, con-
stituting what is termed the Cortaillod culture    now divisible into an
Early and a Late phase. But the majority of Swiss prehistorians by
                         5

     6
I956 have become convinced that "lake-dwellings" were not raised
on piles above the waters but erected on solid, if rather moist,
                                                                 ground,
strung out along the shore between the reed belt and the strand scrub,
which had then been left dry owing to the contraction of the lakes in
  1
      Riv. Sc. Pr., VI (1951)* 130-7; Helena, Les Origins de Narbonne
                                                                      (Paris-Toulouse.
  *

      Germania, XVIII (1934), 91 fi.
                                                         w
      Vogt, CIPPS. (Zurich, 1950), 33; Piggott, he. cit. 430.

      Welten   in   Das                               zur Ur- und
                      Pfahlbaufroblem (Monographic                  Fruhgeschichte der
                                                                         *
Schweiz, XI), (Basel, 1955), 78.
  *
    Vouga,   "Le   Neolithique lacustre ancien", (Universite de Neuchatel Recueil de
Travaux, FacuUe de Lettres, 1934) Antiquity, II (1928), 388-92 ; von Gonzeobach Die
                                     I
                                                                                 '
Cortaillodkultur in der Schweiz (Monographien zur Ur- und
                                                           Fruhgeschichte IQAQ]
    Vo&,Guy**,VfeltenmDasPfahlbauproblem; butTschumi, Urgeschichte der Schweiz
(1948) adhered to the classical theory of pile-dwellings formulated by Keller in i8<u
                                           288
          WESTERN CULTURE IN THE ALPINE ZONE
late Atlantic and Sub-Boreal times. Similarly the so-called "stacked

platforms" (Packwerkbauten) were not artificial islands floating in
bogs, but houses built on firm peat the floors of which required frequent
renewal owing to. subsidence.
  The farmers cultivated wheats (Triticum monococcum, dicoccum, and
                                                             1
compactum) and barley, and also peas, beans and lentils. Plums and
apples were at least gathered; apples were eventually cultivated by the
Lake-dwellers, though not certainly in the Cortaillod phase, and a sort
of cider brewed from them. Horned cattle (Bos brachyceros) were bred
                                                                         2
together with minor herds of pigs and small flocks of sheep and goats.
                                                             8 A
Cattle were tethered and fed on leaves during the winters.       neolithic
                             4
(? Cortaillod) yoke survives, and Vouga con-
siders some stone implements to have been
used as ploughshares, but more probably the
land was tilled only with antler hoes. 6 Game
contributed much less to the community's
diet than domestic stock. But the huntsman
used arrows tipped with double-ended bone
points (Fig. 135), or more rarely with trans-
verse or triangular flint heads. Fish were
caught in traps, in nets weighted with grooved
stones and suspended from birch-bark floats,
and were also speared with antler "harpoons"
(Fig. 135).
                                                            135.        FIG.
  Wood-work was done with stone axes and          ^           A     .          ...   , _
      ,              ,   .       .,   , ,-.-.
                                            -  Antler harpoon (}) and bone
                                                      ,
rare adzes made from suitably shaped pebbles [arrow-head (i). Switzerland,
or sawn-out blocks of fine-grained rock. They
were mounted directly in straight shafts or in tapering antler sleeves
(Fig. 139 A) which were fitted into straight wooden shafts. Antler
axes and picks with square-cut shaft hole were also employed.
     A local flax was cultivated for its seeds and for its fibres, which were
woven into linen, but the spinner did without whorls. Skins were
doubtless largely worn; bundles of bone spines, like the antler combs
of Michelsberg and Windmill Hill, could have served for leather-
dressing. Baskets were plaited with great skill.

   1
     Urgeschichte der Schweig, 597; cf. Beck, Rytz, Steklen, and Tachumi, "Der neol.
Pfahlbau Thun", Mitt, naturforschenden Gtsellschaft (Bern, 1930).
   1
     The proportions are: oxen 39 per cent, swine 21 per cent, sheep and goats each
1 8*5 per cent of food animals;
                                 game only 30 per cent of total animal bones; Vouga,
op. at. Bones of wild horse are reported from Port; Tschumi, Die ur- und friihgeschicht-
licke Fundstelle von Port, im Amt Nidau (Biel,
     *
                                               1940), 73.
         Troels-Smith, Pfahlbauproblem, 49-52; Guyan, %b. t 262.
     4
         Ischer, Pfahlbauten des Bielerstes (Biel, 1928), 43, pi. VII.
         Such actually survive with wooden handles: von Gonzenbach, Cortaillodkultur, 51.
                                                289
                         OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION

  Early Cortaillod pots are of simple leathery forms without handles
save fof lugs, which may be perforated with several vertical holes
 (Fig. 136).   IB the Late phase much more sophisticated forms were
produced and vases were often decorated1 with strips of birch bark,




                   Flo. 136. Cortaillod pottery. After Antiquity (J).


stuck on with birch-pitch to form patterns, including the magic con-
centric circles popular at Conguel and Beacharra (pp. 317, 326), or
just with paired nipples simulating human breasts.
   In Late Cortaillod sites appear some vases of Rossen style or at
least influenced by Rossen and others of Michelsberg affinities. And on
all Cortaillod sites flint instruments were made exclusively of a trans-
lucent yellow flint, strange to the Neuchatel basin but of unknown
provenance. Otherwise Cortaillod sites have yielded no conclusive
evidence for trade.
  Combs for the hair were made of wood. As ornaments were worn
beads of steatite, wood, and bored teeth, cranian amulets (p. 311),
pendants made from segmented tines, from perforated phalanges of
hares, boars' tusks, perforated at both ends, and wooden models of
dubs.
  No cemeteries attached to the lake-side villages have been found,
but some human bones, broken to extract the marrow, turned up in
the villages as if the peasants had practised cannibalism while two
measurable skulls proved to be dolichocranial. On the other hand,
Sauter* has argued that cist graves of the Chamblandes type
                                                            belonged
to Cortaillod people. Cemeteries of such graves, 3 containing
                                                               single
contracted skeletons or a male and female together, extend from the
vicinity of Basel in the Aar valley to the Upper Rhdne and thence
beyond the Great St. Bernard along the Aosta valley into Upper Italy.
The grave goods unpolished flint axes, a triangular axe hammer,
hollow-based arrow-heads, coral and Mediterranean shells, a
                                                              copper
  *
    von Gonwbach, 25; Vcwt, PPS.,     XV   (1949), 50-2.
  1
    Sibrium. II (1955). *33-&
    Tactwmi, "Dfo    steinreitlicbe Hockergrftber der SchweUs,    AtA., XXII-XXIII
                         &
(19*0-21); Altokki*, V, 96
                                        290
      WESTERN CULTURE IN TH                             ALPINE ZONE

disc, a cranian amulet, and a V-perforated button         are certainly very
                                                         1

poor, but  look late. The "Chamblandes     culture'  has therefore generally
been assigned to Swiss Middle or Late Neolithic. But its distribution
agrees very closely with that of the Cortaillod culture, and the grave-
type is identical with that characteristic of the Middle Neolithic levels
of Arene Candide.
   Chronologically the Cortaillod culture, at least in its Late phase,
can be conclusively equated with the R5ssen culture, again mainly
with its later manifestations, 1 thus giving a partial synchronism between
Swiss Lower Neolithic and Danubian II.             A
                                           knobbed battle-axe, how-
ever, from the Late  Cortaillod layer at Seematte,
                                                   1
                                                     must mean that
Swiss Lower Neolithic lasts into Danubian III and Northern E.N.c.
A radio-carbon estimate for the pre-R6ssen Cortaillod of Egolzwil 31 put
the oldest tangible phase of Lower Neolithic at 274Ogo B.C. a figure
that would be perfectly reasonable for Danubian II too, but only on a
"long" chronology.
  In the Cortaillod culture such elements as mounting celts with
antler sleeves, antler harpoons, microlithic arrow-heads, can econ-
omically be derived from the mesolithic heritage. Of the constituents
that make it neolithic, one-corn wheat must be Danubian. But it could
have been introduced by the Rttssen colonists (pp. 117-18), for it is
not yet attested before their influence becomes perceptible, and no
distinctively Danubian artifacts, necessarily older than R&ssen,
                                                                        have
yet been found  in the West Alpine  area. So it still seems  most likely that
the primary impulse i.e.   the  cereals and domestic     stock together with
a tradition of leathery vessels, cranian  amulets,    hares' phalange pend-
ants that engendered the pre-lake village cultivations and the pre-
R6ssen Cortaillod culture of Egolzwill4 came up'the Rhdne despite the
ambiguity of the analogies in South France.

                         THE MICHELSBERG CULTURE
North of the Cortaillod province, in lake-side villages on the Lake of
Constance, in moor villages in northern Switzerland and Wiirttemberg,
in hilltop camps in South-West Germany, and at the flint-mines of
Spiennes in Belgium, the place of Cortaillod is taken by a quite different
culture named after the hilltop camp at Michelsbeig* in Baden.
  1
     von Gonzenbach, 68*76; Kimmig, Bid. F6. (1948-50), 58-64.
     von Gonxenbach, 47; Vogt. Act* Arch., XXIV (i933). *&>, Abb. 2,    ,

   * Das
          Pfahlbwprobbm, 113.
   *
     The culture of this (Vogt, Ztsckr. f. sckwtis. Atortum. , Kunst, XII (1951) 205-15)
                                                                               *

and other villages in Middle Switzerland diverges from that familiar on Lake NeuchAtel;
it might be Cortaillod still quite uninfluenced by ROssen (von Gonxenbach, op. c&> ax).
   *
     Buttler, DonauUhtdische, 79-91; Baer, A., Di* Micktlsbtrgtr Kultur in to Sckwfit.
(Monographic JUT Ur- und FHikgisMchto, BAle.)
                                         291
                     AWH OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
      The moo* villages may comprise up to 24 housfes
                                                                         grouped along regular

 recorded, tout, since a hut might be pulled down at its owner's death,
 they cannot all be regarded as contemporary. The houses themselves
 were again rectangular, varying in size from 6
                                                by 3-6 m. to 5-3 by 3-2 m.
 or less, but normally divided into two rooms with a hearth in the inner
 and an oven in the outer (like Fig. 137). The
                                                    dry land stations in




                             FIG. 137. Plan of a house at Aichbiihl ( 4 V
                                                                     T           ).




Germany were     generally defended by flat-bottomed ditches and
palisades; the ditches of many camps are
                                          interrupted by frequent
causeways as in England.
  The rural economy seems very similar to that of the Cortaillod and
First Northern A cultures. But there are some hints of more
                                                            pastoral
dans separating out from the mass of Michelsberg villagers and
                                                                                           pre-
sumably allowing their stock to graze freely. The principal crop in
Wtirttemberg* was barley, but wheats (T. monococcum, dicoccwn, speUa,
and compactom) too were grown, and apples, strawberries, and other
frtttts collected. Flour was not,
                                  accoiding to Guyan,* converted into
  * See al*> R.
                  K.
                                                                         F***r***moor, Tubingen,
1930 ff.; Paret, Das Sttinxt                                             ,   1955).
  *   Paret.
      Paret, 06. cit., 60.
  1

             op. cit..                                                       t    26$
                                                292
        WESTERN CULTURE IN THE ALPINE 2ONE
bread, but eaten as a sort of gruel, but the ovens* so conspicuous in
most  villages, must surely have served for baking bread. Guyan
                                                                          1

believes that the villagers practised shifting cultivation, deserting their
homes at intervals but returning to the same site as soon as the scrub
had grown up again on their old clearings. The villages were certainly
occupied over considerable periods, during which the house floors at
least had to be renewed more than once    at Ehrenstein near Ulm as
many as thirteen times. 2 The evidence here suggests not reoccupation
but continuous habitation on the same site for fourteen years or
probably longer. Finally, hunting played a far more prominent rdle in
the Michelsberg subsistence economy than it did in that of the Cortaillod
farmers; bones of game animals, including horses,* form a relatively
high proportion in the food refuse.
  Secondary industry and trade played a recognizable part in the
                                                        4
Michelsberg economy. Thus at Spiennes in Belgium lived a com-
munity of specialized flint-miners skilled at sinking shafts and digging
out subterranean galleries. Indeed, the Michelsberg settlers there con-
stituted a specialized industrial community, supplementing their liveli-
hood by exporting the products of their mines and workshops and
Spiennes was no isolated phenomenon within the Western complex. It
implies also the development of hunting expeditions and transhumance
into something like regular commerce. Hoards of Western axes in
Southern Germany may belong to Michelsberg traders. As a result of
such trade some communities, like that at Weiher near Thayngen,
eventually obtained copper axes and amber beads.
  But on the whole Michelsberg equipment is typically neolithic and
agrees generally with that of Cortaillod; axes were preferred to adzes
and often mounted in antler sleeves. The pots are generally plain and
many could be called leathery in shape. But many have flat bases and
jugs have genuine handles. Supposedly distinctive forms are "tulip
beakers" (Fig. 138, i, 12, 14) and flat round plates, reputedly used for
baking cakes, which, however, recur in a First Northern context
(Fig. 91). A few contemporary sites in Wiirttemberg have yielded vases
of more or less Michelsberg shapes but decorated with fine incised
patterns reminiscent of Chassey (p. 303). These represent the "Schus-
senried" style, but do not suffice to define a distinct culture.* For
leather-dressing, bunched antler combs were employed at Spiennes as
in Southern England.
  The dead were normally buried, contracted or extended, within the
 1                                           '
     Ibid., 261.                                 Paret, op. tit., ao.
     Ibid., 66.
 4
     Loft, La Belgique ancitnne, 1,
                               100 ff.; and Maiin,t>s4**Xfs!, 59-79-
     Kimmig, JSGU., XL (1950). 1,50, regards it as a Michelsbcrg-R6en hybrid.
 *


                                       293
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
confines of the settlements, but small cemeteries
                                                 comprising up to seven
graves have been recorded. On the other hand, at Ottenbourg and
Boitsfort in Belgium 1 cremations have been
                                            reported under long mounds,




                                                             16

                            FIG. 138. Michelsberg pottery.


but the latter may be the ramparts of fortified villages rather than
barrows. The skulls examined proved to be dolichocranial to mesati-
cranial, none brachycranial.
  In Switzerland, Michelsberg2 is partly parallel to Cortaillod, and both
 1
     Lo, La Belgiqu* ancienne, 235, 241; Marten, Oud-Belgil. 53-83: L'Anthr LVII 4^10
                                                                                '
     von Gonrenbich, 35, 76; Vo|t, C/SPP. (Zurich); A#a Arc *.f XXIV? i8 T
                                                                          5
                                         294
        WESTERN CULTURE IN THE ALPINE ZONE
overlap locally with Rossen. But farther east on the Goldberg in
Wiirttemberg the Michelsberg settlement succeeded the fortified
              1

R6ssen village. Thus in the Danubian sequence Michelsberg could not
be placed before the final phase of period II. Its persistence well into
period III can be deduced from polygonal battle-axes and even copper
                                  1
celts from Michelsberg settlements. Indeed, Baden influence has been
           in the         from some eastern sites. 8
recognized        pottery
  The main concentration of Michelsberg settlements lies on the
Neckar and the Middle Rhine. 4 There are outposts on the Saale, in
Bohemia, and near Salzburg. Settlements in Belgium and in the Aar
                                                           well prompt
valley likewise look peripheral. This distribution might
doubts as to the Western origin traditionally attributed to our culture.
Indeed, Vogt has argued that the Michelsberg culture is just a south-
western extension of the First Northern culture of (Northern) Early
Neolithic times (p. 191). The Michelsberg rural economy is in fact
strikingly like that of the A group of First Northern as
                                                         described by
Troels-Smith,   and the ceramic agreements  are even closer than Vogt
imagined. All might perhaps be explained more simply by positing an
acculturation of Forest hunter-fishers in Western Germany by im-
migrant Danubian peasants, parallel to that assumed farther east to
account for the First Northern itself. But if the latter originated
farther south-east, Vogt's account would seem the most probable, at
least   until   a primary Western          Neolithic   immigration be better
documented.

                THE MIDDLE NEOLITHIC HORGEN CULTURE
  On Lake Neuchatel, after a flood which overwhelmed the Early
Neolithic stations, many sites were reoccupied and new ones founded
                                       6 the Horgen culture. It is re-
by people of a quite different culture
cognizable too above a Michelsberg settlement at Greifensee, on many
lakes and probably also in land stations. 6 Economically the Middle
Neolithic witnesses a cultural regression. On Lake Neuchitel agri-
cultural equipment is poorer (no more "plough-shares"); hunting con-
tributes more to the meat supply than stock-breeding, the percentage
of bones of game as against those of domestic beasts rising from 30 to
45 per cent; local flint replaces the imported material. But triangular
perforated axes now reach the Rh6ne valley, copper double-axes were
   Germania,    XX(1936), 230.
   E.g. JSGU. (1944), 32.
   Germania, XXXIII (1955), 166-9.
   JSGU., XL, 149.
                                    XXXI (1929), 167-70; Vogt, ib. XL, J93
   Childe, Danube, 171-3; Vouga, AsA.,                           t           *-M-
   Germania, XVIII, 92-4; AsA., XL, 2-4.
                                      295
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
copied in stone and unbored Western celts were mounted as axes in
perforated or heeled antler sleeves and as adzes in socketed ones
(Fig, 139, B). Continued inter-communal specialization is illustrated
                                                                      by
an axe-factory at Mumpf, Aargau. The
                                      pottery is coarse, badly baked,
and ornamented only with raised cordons         used to be            as
                                                        (what                  regarded




          FIG. 139. Types of antler sleeves for axes:
                                                      A-B, Lower; C, first in Middle'
                       D, first in Upper Neolithic; Lake Neuchatel  (f).



early because crude), but the vases have flat and even splayed bases
(cf.  Fig. 146). Spindle-whorls of stone, however, came into use.
     Even architecture declines; while some Horgen houses from the Lake
of Constance are long
                              rectangles, as at Aichbiihl, the occupants of other
sites, like Dullenried,       were content with small
                                                              rectangular houses with
a peaked         roof,   more suited         to              nomads than sedentary
                                                  pastoral
cultivators. 1
   Such a reversion to hunting and pastoralism was
                                                     formerly attributed
to adversities overtaking the West
                                    Alpine farmers. Really it reflects the
advent of fresh settlers with
                              stronger mesolithic traditions. Judged by
its pottery, its perforated antler
                                   sleeves, its arc pendants, and other
artifacts, the Horgen culture is only an
                                         aspect of that which we shall
meet (p. 312) in the collective tombs of the Seine-Oise-Marne
                                                              basins. 2
Moreover, even gallery graves of the Paris type were built near Lake
NeucMtel and on the Upper Rhine, while 'five                 cists are
                                                                  megalithic
known in the area.
  The Altheim culture of the Upper Danube basin
                                                                   may be regarded as
an eastern extension of the Horgen culture. On the
                                                       Goldberg' in
Wiirttemberg the Altheim village, consisting of one-roomed huts like
 *
     Germania, XXI, 155-8; Buttler, Donaul&ndisthe, 76.
                                                                           AsA., XL 2-IA
       Qtrmama, XXI (1937), '49;     cf.   von Gonzenbach, Cortoilhdkul^.76.
                                              296
        WESTERN CULTURE IN THE ALPINE ZONE
those of Dullenried grouped in clusters of four or five, was super-
imposed on the ruins of the Michelsberg settlement and thus occupies
the same stratigraphical position as Horgen layers in the Swiss sites. It
too belongs to period Ilia, but the Altheim culture is so closely linked
with the East Alpine that it can best be considered on pages 299 ff.
below.

               UPPER NEOLITHIC AND CHALCOLITHIC PERIODS

Though separated by a "flood layer" from the Middle, the Upper
Neolithic strata on Lake Neuchatel 1 exhibit essentially the continued
evolution of the Horgen culture; there are new types of antler sleeve
(Fig. 139, D) and tanged-and-barbed or hollow-based arrow-heads. But
battle-axes indicate that warlike tribes were already reaching the
western lakes. On Lake Zurich2 typical corded ware from the im-
mediate successor of a Horgen village attests already the sway of
Battle-axe warriors.
  In the Chalcolithic phase on Lake Neuchitel8 their sway was extended
westwards; for cord-ornamented sherds and fine battle-axes are found
in the Chalcolithic villages. The barrows of the invaders covering
cremation burials were raised in the interior. But in the western lake-
villages the native tradition is presumably illustrated by coarse wares
decorated with finger-printed cordons. This decoration at the same time
recalls that ofsome pottery in North Spain, South
France, and Liguria. On the Lake of Geneva south-
                                                                     ^"^       ^^
                    4
polypod bowls, like the Pyrenaean vase of Fig. 144.
A surplus, perhaps exacted by Battle-axe chieftains,
was now available to purchase foreign material; rare
objects of metal including flat axes and riveted
daggers, Grand Pressigny flint from Central France,
and, on the Lake of Geneva, winged beads (like Fig.
                         5
143, j, n) from the Midi occur in the lake-dwellings.
But not till the Late Bronze Age did bronze-smiths,
                                                              G X          '


supplied with raw materials by regular commerce,          _       1"
                                                          Bone copies of
                                                                                    .

  5 uv  v  xu     i      xv i     A      -11     CM
establish themselves in the lacustrine villages. Stray unStidan pins (j).
axes and triangular and rhomboid daggers, appro-
priate to periods IV and even V, together with bone copies of UnStician
pins (Fig. 140), have indeed been collected from many "neolithic" (in

  1
      Antiquity, II, 398; AsA. t XXXI, 171.                  Germania, XVIII, 94.
      Antiquity, II, 401; VIII, 38; Childe, Danube, 175-6.
  *
      AltscMes.,V    (1934), 102.
      Altschles., V., pi. XVIII, 5.

                                           297
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                           1
Vouga's sense Chalcolithic) lake-dwellings. But the economy remained
formally neolithic.


                             THE WEST ALPINE BRONZE AGE
But to prosperous villages on dry land must belong cemeteries of richly
furnished flat graves in the Rh6ne and Aar valleys. 2 In them the
deceased, buried contracted, were equipped with flanged axes, triangular
or ogival daggers, ingot torques, and ring-head, trilobate, trefoil,
racket, bulb-headed, or even knot-headed and Bohemian eyelet pins.
All types can be derived from Central European models and disclose the
extension westward of the Danubian traditions of metallurgy. Indeed,
two currents from that quarter can be distinguished8 the one charac-    :




terized by classical UnStician pins, ingot torques, and axes brought
Bohemian traditions via the Upper Danube and the Aar to the Rh6ne
valley; the other, distingushed by a preference for ornaments of sheet
metal (Vogt's "Blechstil"), brought the traditions of Kisapostag and
Straubing through Upper Austria and Bavaria to the Upper Rhine and
to Vallais.
   Copper was won from small local lodes to exploit which metal-
lurgists penetrated far into the high Alps. They based their operations
on tiny fortified villages like Mutter-Fellers, 4 Crestaulta, 6 and Borscht
in Liechtenstein. 6 The villagers were primarily farmers who cultivated
wheat and barley and bred cattle, sheep, cows, pigs, and goats, and
                 7
perhaps horses, and who must have devised a rural economy almost as
well adapted to the Alpine environment as that practised there to-day;
for the villages seem to have been permanently occupied. They included
also metallurgists who smelted the local ores and developed from
Danubian models local types spatulate axes, bronze hilted daggers of
Rhdne type, a variety of handsome engraved ornaments. Such were
exported to Upper Italy and France. In return, amber and glass beads
reached Crestaulta, while a quoit-shaped fayence pendant was acquired
by a resident in the contemporary village of Bleich-Arbon in North-
  1
      AsAg., IV, 2    ff.,   Viollier in   Opuscula arch&ologica 0. Montelio dicata, 126   ff.;
MAGZ. XXIX. 200.
         t


      Kraft, AsA.,   XXIX (1927), 5        ff.
  *
      Vogt in Tschumi Festschrift (Frauenfeld, 1948), 54-68.
  *
      ZfoAK.. VI (1944), *5 ff.
  *
      Burkart, Crestaulia (Monographien zur Ur- und FrUhgeschichte, V), Basel, 1946;
JSGU.
  *
      (1947), 4*.
      The Early Bronze Age village succeeded Horgen and Michelsberg settlements, all
stratified; D. Beck in Vols. 47 and 48 of Jahrbuch des historischen Vereins fUr das
Filrstenlum Liechtenstein.
   1
     The bones of 22 bovids, 22 sheep, 22 pigs, 10 goats, and 71 horses were recognized
at Crestaulta.
                                                 298
        WESTERN CULTURE IN THE ALPINE ZONE
Eastern Switzerland. Judged by the types produced, this brilliant Swiss
bronze industry flourished mainly in the latter part of period IV and in
period V. But despite their enterprise and originality, the Swiss smiths
seem to have remained content with supplying a local market. Cut off
from the great trade-routes to the Mediterranean, the West Alpine
Early Bronze Age culture did not progress so far towards urbanization
as did the North Italian or Hungarian.



                                   THE EASTERN ALPS
Altheim1 near   Landshut, Bavaria, Mondsee* in Upper Austria, Vufiedol8
on the lower Drave in Slavonia, and Ljubljansko Blat (Laibach Moor) 4
in Slovenia are patent stations for a series of related cultures
                                                                 extending
along the eastern slopes of the Alps from Goldberg ui Wurttemberg to
Debelo brdo on the Bosna near Serajevo. They are lake-dwellings or
fortified hilltop camps; at Altheim three concentric rings of ditches and

palisades enclosed an area 40 m. in diameter. Their occupants lived
by cultivating cereals which they reaped with crescentic sickles made
from a single flint flake and, on the Austrian lakes, also apples and
beans, by breeding cattle, sheep, pigs, and horses, by hunting and by
fishing in Upper Austria using double-pronged fish-spears of bone.
Stone was still used for axes which might be mounted with antler
sleeves and sometimes notched at the butt* and for weapons                  knobbed
polygonal battle-axes, spheroid mace-heads, daggers, hollow-based
arrow-heads, and sling bullets.
  But copper was generally used, too, both for flat axes and rhomboid
daggers, like Fig. 121, c and for ornaments. On the Austrian lakes and
                               t


Ljubljansko Blat and at Vufiedol it was also worked locally; for moulds
have been found in the settlements (one from Ljubljansko Blat would
yield an axe like Fig. 64, 3) as well as grooved hammer-stones. Indeed,
the Austrian lake-villagers, living at the head of navigation on the
       6
Traun, were supplementing the products of farming by smelting copper
ores and shipping their winnings down the Danube's tributaries. So,
too, Ljubljansko Blat lies at the head of navigation on the Save and
may have been the precursor of the Roman station of Nauportus for
trade from the Middle Danube basin to the Adriatic. Intercommunal
  1
    Bayerische Urgeschichtsfreund, IV (Munich, 1924), 13 ft.; Childe, Da*ub*> 125-8.
  1
     Franz, "Die Funde aus den prahistorischen Pfahlbauten im Mondsee" (Materialien
xur Urgeschickte Osterrtichs, III), Vienna, 1927; Willvonseder, Oberdstorrtick in for
Vorteit, Vienna, 1933, *o-8 (Attersee); WPZ., XXVI (1939), 135; Pittioni, Urgeschickie.
    Chflde, Danube, 210-12; Schmidt, Vuledol', Patay, "Korai Bronxkori", 24-8 ("Zok"
culture).
  4
    Childe, Danube, he. tit.
      MAGW., LXI, 75-80.                         Fran*, "Mondaee", 11-12.
                                         299
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                              by "axe-factories" on the Enns
                                                                                  1
specialisation is further illustrated
and elsewhere.
  Everywhere, many of the vases are coarse and decorated only with
cordons though they have flat bases and include handled cups and jugs.
But on the Attersee and Mondsee and in land stations in Salzburg,
vases were decorated with concentric circles incised in stab-and-drag
technique and filled with white paste (Fig. 141).




                            FIG. 141. Mondsee Pottery (J).


  In the Vutedol or Slavonian ware 2 of the Lower Drave, the Save,
and the Bosna the same magical motives were combined with excised
patterns that imitate the chip-carving of wooden vessels, and dis-
tinctive shapes, proper to the latter, were reproduced in
                                                             pottery.
Among these are bowls or lamps on a cruciform foot, like those of the
StariSevo culture, but even closer to the
                                          lamps from the Pontic Cata-
comb Graves (pp. 86, 156). But some vases from Ljubljansko Blat
are provided with tunnel-handles just as in Maltese "Neolithic
                                                               B",
in Piano Conte on Lipari, and in Sardinia.
  Models of animals were moulded in day on the Austrian                  lakes;
                                                 *
               .,   V,i9.                            Schmidt, Vutedol.

                                        300
         WESTERN CULTURE IN THE ALPINE ZONE
Slavonian ideology1 was expressed in the production also of figures of
human beings fully dressed, of vases in the shape of a bird, and of
models of huts,    tables, and perhaps in "horns of consecration". At
Vufiedol itself the dead were buried in Idss-cut "cellars", formally like
the pit-caves of the Mediterranean and the Pontic "catacombs".
  On the Drave, Save, and Bosna, VuCedol ware, being exclusively
associated with the assemblage just summarized, may serve to define
a distinct Slavonian culture. But vases, decorated in the same style
and including cross-footed lamps, have been unearthed at many
                                                          1        8
points usually fortified hilltop settlements in Hungary, Austria,
                                  4
Slovakia, Moravia, and Bohemia, but always associated with relics
proper to some other culture, generally Baden. Still, in a small
                               6
cemetery at Caka in Slovakia, Slavonian vases alone furnished the
graves, one serving as a cinerary urn. For here the burial rite was
cremation.
  At the Goldberg, the Altheim settlement succeeded an occupation
by Michelsberg folk, and at VuCedol Slavonian pottery was stratified
above Baden wares. Hence the East Alpine neolithic cultures cannot
well begin before period III. On the other hand, though ingot torques
and even metal types of period V have been found in and around the
Austrian lakes, the abundance of well-made polygonal battle-axes
from the lake- villages suggest that their foundation should be put early
in that period. Allied types occur in Slavonian contexts and in the
Rinaldone culture of Italy. The latter should give a partial synchronism
between East Alpine and Italian Chalcolithic.
   Now, the symbolic patterns adorning Mondsee pottery are notori-
ously identical with motives popular on Early Cypriote Bronze Age
vases, while the Mondsee daggers are at least East Mediterranean in
form. If, then, Central European metallurgy were initiated by Torque-
bearers from the Levant coasts (p. 134), these patterns may well be
an ideological reflection of the arrival of a few Asiatic prospectors
among a native Baden-Horgen population whose labour they enlisted
in the exploitation of the adjacent copper lades. Analogies to Slavonian
ceramic decoration at Pescale in Upper Italy (p. 246) and to Vuiedol
tombs in the Central Italian Rinaldone culture (p. 241) might even, if
less plausibly, be interpreted as indicators of the
                                                      prospectors' route,
but even closer analogies in the Pontic Catacomb graves and the cross-

  1
      Schmidt, VuUdol.
      Patay, "Korai Bronzkori", 24-8.
      WPZ., XXVI (1939). 135-47-
  4
    Novotny, Slav. Arch., Ill (1955)* 7-22, lists and maps 15 sites in Bohemia, 3 in
Moravia and 22 in Slovakia.
      Ibid., 16.

                                        3OI
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
footed lamps therefrom (p. 156)* might just as well mark a circuitous
route from the Black Sea coasts.
  In any case, if a trading-post were early established on the Mondsee
during period III, it declined in importance during period IV. Trade
southward was diverted to the Brenner route. 1 Carinthia, Slovenia, and
Slavonia lay outside the system that distributed the metal types of
period IV to Upper Italy and to the Maros valley. The Slavonian
culture presumably lasted through that period, but as none of the
constitutive metal types reached the province, it still looks neolithic.
Even in the Eastern Alps it is not till period VI that the rich graves
of the H6tting umfield culture attest a local prosperity based on
mining for copper and salt and a rural economy adapteckto take full
advantage of Alpine conditions. No counterpart of the West Alpine
Early Bronze Age, described in the last section, is discernible in the
Eastern Alps nor in the North-West Balkans.
  1 As far as
                                           groups could be derived independently from
              the shape is concerned, both
the Star&evo types of
                      period I,
                                but the decoration of the Slavonian and the Catacomb
lamps is also very similar.
  1
    The porterage (from the Adige to the Inn) is much shorter on the Brenner route
than on that across the Julian Alps which replaced it when the Romans had built a road
to Nauportus.




                                        302
                                   CHAPTER XVII
          MEGALITH BUILDERS IN ATLANTIC EUROPE
THE corridors of the Garonne and the Rhone valleys offer passage from
the Mediterranean to the Atlantic West, traversed in historical times
by the trade-route that carried Cornish tin to the Greek colonies round
the Gulf of Lions. Along it perhaps had spread a millennium or so
earlier the megalithic religion in the wake of prehistoric trade from
colonies on the same shores. But still earlier the Western farmers whose
arrival and spread to the north-east were postulated in Chapter XVI
should have expanded also north-westward to Central France, Nor-
mandy, and Brittany. It is convenient to consider the results attribut-
able to such an expansion before describing the impact of megalithic
ideas on South France.


                      CHASSEY AND FORT HARROUARD
The famous but badly excavated station of the Camp de Chassey
                 1
(Sadne-et-Loire) certainly ought to mark a stage in the assumed
expansion of Western neolithic culture. It is a fortified hilltop, and
from it have been gathered many objects distinctive of the West Swiss
Lower Neolithic Cortaillod culture plain leathery pots, tapering
antler sleeves for axes, segmented tine pendants. But collections from
the site include also types that are not older than Middle or even
Upper Neolithic on Lake Neuchitel, such as sleeves like Fig. 139, B,
perforated stone axes, and tanged arrow-heads. If these denote a
second phase of occupation, there are no stratigraphical observations
to decide to which the decorated pottery, often called simply Chassey
     2
ware, belongs. This ware bears hatched rectilinear patterns scratched
on the surface after firing or on the hard-dried clay just before (Fig.
                                                                     4
142, 2).* The "vase-support" is a distinctive shape. Such decoration is
missing from Cortaillod sites in Switzerland, but finds analogies in
Schussenried pottery farther east                 (p.   293).   In Liguria, scratched
decoration was Middle Neolithic.
  1
      D&helette, Manuel,   I,   559; Baffloud   and Mieg, 9?     ;   Piggott, L'Antkr.,   LVII
(1953), 410-32.
  1
    Many authors thus describe all plain Western pottery from France; Arnal and
Benazet distinguish therefrom "Chasseen decori" which they consider earlier than the
plain ware; BSPF., XLVIII (1951), 552-5.
  1
    BSPF., XLVIII, 555.                                  BSPF., XXVII (1930), 268-76.
                                            303
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  After crossing the Massif Central the neolithic colonists would reach
the downlands of Northern France, an area rich in flint 1 and already
inhabited by mesolithic hunter-fishers, probably of the Forest culture.
In the oldest recognizable neolithic settlements the farmers appear
to have adopted much of the food-gatherers' equipment core and
flake axes, transverse arrow-heads, and other items giving the local
cultures a hybrid, "secondary neolithic" aspect. Their neolithic ele-




       FIG. 142. Vase-supports in Chassey style: i, Le Moustoir, Carnac; 2, Motte
                                 de la Garde, Charente.


ments might have been contributed by Rossen farmers, spreading
through the Belfort Gap as far as Yonne or Danubians advancing
                                        2

from the Meuse to the Somme and the Marne as well as by Westerners.
The best picture available of the ambiguous result is provided by Fort
Harrouard8 (Eure-et-Loire), a promontory camp about 17 acres (7 hr.)
in extent, where Father Philippe could distinguish two neolithic strata.
   The villagers lived by cultivating indeterminate grains and breeding
mainly horned cattle; they kept also some pigs and goats and a very
few sheep too, but relied very little on hunting or fishing. 4 They lived
   1 This is the
                 truth underlying Bosch-Gimpera's thesis of the existence in North
France of a "culture de silex" just another way of saying that in this area rich in
flint but poor in fine-grained rocks, flint was the normal material even for axes cf.
Rev. Anthr.,   XXXVI (1926), 320.
  1   At Nermont, Danubian pottery seems to precede Western, Bailloud and Mieg, 50.
      Philippe, "Cinq
                      annes de fouilles au Fort Harrouard" (Socie*te" normande d'^tudes
prhistonques,    XXV bis), Rouen, 1927.
  * The actual proportions are: cattle 68 per cent, swine 18 per cent, sheep 10 per cent,
goats x-5 per cent, game 2*5 per cent; L'Anthr., XLVII (1937), 292.
                                          304
      MEGALITH BUILDERS IN ATLANTIC EUROPE
in irregular oval huts partly excavated in the ground 1 and dressed in
woven fabrics, using whorls for spinning and clay loom-weights in
weaving. The carpenter used polished axes of imported stone occasion-
ally, but relied mainly on the "mesolithic" flint tranchets and "picks",
                               2
together with rare antler axes. Besides transverse arrow-heads the
bowman sometimes used triangular ones. Before the end of the period
Grand Pressigny flint was imported, as were amber beads and arc-
                              8
shaped pendants of schist.
  The pots, baked in the fort in tiny kilns, are typically Western, but
include, besides simple leather forms, baking plates as in the Michels-
berg complex, vessels with pan-pipe lugs perforated vertically and
horizontal tubes expanding at the ends like the trumpet lugs of
Troy I, and vase-supports and other vessels decorated in the Chassey
style.
  Though there are a megalithic tomb and some small long barrows in
sight of the camp, villagers were buried extended, or in one case con-
                              4
tracted, within the enclosure. Female figurines were modelled in clay,
a quite exceptional cult practice within the Western cycle.
  Judging by the pottery, other sites in North France, notably the
                             Le Campigny (Seine Infferieure) (once
celebrated fortified station at
made the patent station for a mesolithic culture) and the Camp de
                6
Catenoy (Oise) were occupied at the same time as Fort Harrouard I.
At that station the second neolithic stratum illustrates a development
of the older culture. While cattle-breeding predominates, a large breed
of Bos brachyceros now co-existed with the small cattle of the older
herds. Goats had died out, but game bones now amount to as much
as 8 per cent of the total. And oysters and other shell-fish were imported
from the coast. Finished implements, such as daggers and lance-heads
of Grand Pressigny flint, were also obtained by barter. But the old

types of tools, including the "mesolithic" core and flake-axes, were still
retained. The pottery shows a development of the Chassey style with
much coarser incisions combined with rusticated wares.
   Since the late Chassey style inspires the decoration of "Incense
Cups" at the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age in Southern England,
it must follow that Fort Harrouard II falls at least into the "Beaker"

period of the West; it may indeed outlast it, since, as on the Swiss
lakes, the record of settlement is continued only by the Late Bronze
                                       6
Age occupation of Fort Harrouard III. For all we can tell, the pastoral
  1
    L'Anthr., XLVI, 270-1.                         L'Anthr., XLVI, 559.
  1
    L'Anthr., XLVI, 604.                           L'Anthr., XLVI, 541 f.
  *
    L'Anthr. XII (1901), 359 and 354; LVII, 441-2.
            t


    But besides Late Bronze Age pins the crutch-head type occurs, as in the Copper
Age lake-dwellings, Philippe, "Cinq Annies," pis. XI, u. and XVIII, 19.
                                        305
                  DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 communities of Northern France preserved their neolithic economy
 unaffected by the cultural impulses that crossed South- Western France.
   So even Fort Harrouard I may begin relatively late; Grand Pressigny
flintin Switzerland is Middle Neolithic, so are arc-pendants in both
the Swiss and the Ligurian sequences. In other words, Fort Harrouard I
is not demonstrably pre-megalithic or anterior to the earlier SOM

tombs. Even the ceramic evidence for a pre-megalithic Western colon-
ization is no more explicit at Fort Harrouard than at Michelsberg. An
acculturation of Forest hunters    by Danubians in North France,
parallel to that  suggested as a possible explanation of Michelsberg,
cannot be ruled out. Indeed, if Michelsberg represent a south-western
extension of First Northern, Fort Harrouard I could be*claimed as an
outpost still farther west (p. 291 ff.). Still, in 1956 the best authori-
ties consider   the neolithic elements of North French culture Western.
   Brittany,   too, may have been reached in pre-megalithic times by
Western neolithic herdsmen-cultivators who would have joined forces
with survivors of the Teviec strand-loopers. The stone-walled "camps"
of Croh Colte and Lizo have indeed yielded pottery of the channelled
and later Chassey styles common in the peninsula's megalithic tombs.
But leathery vases, generally plain, rarely decorated with scratched
patterns and sometimes provided with trumpet lugs, found in small
cist graves, 1 conform to the standard Western neolithic types. The
cists recall the mesolithic sepulchres of Teviec, but contain cremated
human bones. Some groups of cists, e.g. at Manio, were covered by
elongated mounds of earth and stones which in plan offer the closest
West European analogy to the British long barrow. 2

                  THE MEGALITHIC CULTURE OF SOUTH FRANCE
If the megalithic religion were implanted round the Gulf of Lions by
colonists    from the East Mediterranean, a cemetery of monumental
collective tombs on an island in the Rhone delta near Aries might well

belong to a bridgehead station comparable to Los Millares. The tombs,
cut in the rock but roofed with lintels and covered by round barrows,
are in plan long galleries8 and might have provided the models for the
built gallery graves which constitute the majority of the megalithic
tombs in South-West France and, south of the Pyrenees, in Catalonia
and the Basque Provinces. 4 Segmented cists occur in Catalonia (Puig
            r.,   XUV (1934). 486-9.
    Antiquity, XI (1937). 44-5*.
  * Casalis de
                Fondouce, L*$ AUto* couverUs d* la Provence (1878), describes the
"grottes" de Bounias, Castellet, and des F6es; cf. Hemp., Arch., LXXVI, 150.
  4
    Pericot, Stpulcros mtgaliticos (1950), Rives a comprehensive survey of tombs and
grave goods from South France as weU as from Spain.
                                       306
        MEGALITH BUILDERS IN ATLANTIC EUROPE
                                                      1
Rode), in the Basque Provinces and at La Halliade near Tarbes; that
at La Halliade was 14*2 m. long, divided by septal slabs into seven
compartments with a lateral compartment added at one and and
covered with a cairn of stones. Others like St Eugenie near Carcassonne
are subdivided by internal portals. 1
   On the other hand, passage graves in the area might be inspired from
Spain. A group of corbelled passage graves in Provence and Gard might
                                                        8

be connected directly with Los Millares. A series of rectangular ortho-
static chambers entered by dry-stone walled passages is strung out

significantly along a line from the coast to the copper and lead deposits
near Durfort, 4 Gard. Architecturally these resemble Puglisi's Tuscan
"dolmens" (p. 240), and their builders seem to have been pastoralists.
Finally, many caves in the area were still used as collective ossuaries in
megalithic, as in Early Neolithic, times. If burial in megalithic tombs
were the prerogative of aristocratic clans, commoners may have been
interred in caves.
  The furniture of these various sepulchres is the principal source for
any picture of the cultures of North Spain and South France during a
long period, traditionally termed Chalcolithic, but certainly capable of
subdivision. Two phases stand out clearly: during the first (Pericot's
Bronze I) Bell-beakers were generally current; they had gone out of
fashion by the second (Pericot's Bronze II and III), which might last
down   to the advent of Urnfield invaders with an equipment of
Danubian VI types. Near Narbonne, Helfena6 claimed to distinguish a
pre-Beaker megalithic phase (Chalcolithic I), two phases with Beakers
(II and III), and two later. Other authorities, however, do not accept
                                               6

his separation of Chalcolithic I from II. It is therefore a disputed issue
whether the transformation of the neolithic cultures, described in the
last chapter, into a "Chalcolithic" one were due to the simultaneous
arrival of megalith-builders and Beaker-folk or whether the latter
arrived only after the former and in either alternative precisely what is
to be attributed to the newcomers and what to the earlier neolithic and
mesolithic groups.
   In any case the subsistence economy of the Chalcolithic as thus dis-
closed appears        more pastoral and less sedentary than the previous
  1
      Mat. (1881), 522.
  1
    BSPF., XXVII (1930), 536-9; the tomb contained "300" skeletons, at least 7
beakers, 12 palettes, gold beads, tanged arrow-heads.
  9
  4
    Goby "Lea Dolmens de Provence", Rodania: Congrts de Cannes-Grass* (1929).
    Arnal, Ampurias, XI (1949), 29-44.
  f
    Les Origines de Narbonne (1937). * Bernabo Brea (A.C. II, 232)
                                                                   only some aherda
from the Aries tombs might be (Upper) Neolithic; the pottery from all other tombs
should be Chalcolithic in the Ligunan sequence.
  9
    Bailloud and Mieg (1955). T 63-79; Pericot, Sepulcros megal.; Piggott, L'Antkr.,
LVIII (1954), 7-22.
                                       307
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
"Western NeoEthie". Apart from inhabited caves, only two settlements
are known    Fontboulsse in Card1 a disorderly cluster of round and
rectangular huts on stone foundations and La Couronne a fortified
site near the Rhone delta that might be comparable to Los Millares or
Vila Nova de San Pedro.
   But food-production was now certainly combined with some secondary
                                                                     2
industry and trade. Local ores of copper, lead, and perhaps even tin
were probably worked. They do not seem to have formed the basis for a




       FIG. 143. Late ChalcoUthic types from Cevennian cists: a-e, Liquisae;
            H  Grotte d'en Quisse, Gird; j-o, "dolmens" of Aveyron (f).


metal industry capable of satisfying local demand such as arose in the
Alpine valleys (p. 298), and only elementary techniques of casting are
illustrated by local finds. West European daggers8 were no doubt manu-
factured for the Beaker-folk, and several notched daggers with a mid-
rib on one face only (cast in an open-hearth mould) were found in a
                1
                  Louis, Peyrolle, Arnal, Gallia,V  (1947), 235-57.
                  I/4fHftr./XXII (19x1). 413.
                * Listed
                         by  Sandars,       Arch., AR., VI (1950), 44 ff.
                                       308
        MEGALITH BUILDERS IN ATLANTIC EUROPE
curious crematorium near Freyssinel in Loz&re. 1 Otherwise metal was
used mainly for ornaments. Metal daggers were replaced by bifacially
flaked flint copies some polished on one face to enhance the siaularity.*
Only in the postrBeaker phase, Helena's Chalcolithic IV, do a few
Bronze Age types appear, and these daggers, trefoil, 8 bulb-head, 4 and
racket pins8 are imports from Central Europe or Switzerland, not East
Mediterranean (Fig. 143).
   Gold was obtained in Beaker times and used to cover wrist-guards
(like Fig. 113, 4), and for other purposes. Callals
                                                    was imported at the
same time, but earlier in Catalonia. Amber arrived still later, in Chalco-
                                                                8
lithic HI according to Helena, only in Bronze II on Pericot's division.
The sole recognizable Mediterranean import found in any context is a
segmented fayence bead from the sepulchral Grotte du Ruisseau,
Aude. 7 To this may be added a Middle Cycladic jug8 (Fig. 41, 3) dredged
up from Marseilles harbour and two contemporary Cypriote daggers
found stray in Provence. 9 All three could, with the bead from Almeria,
be accounted for by coastwise traffic with the West as well as by a trans-
peninsular tin-trade with Cornwall. Yet in the first millennium the
Greek and Sicilian manufactures that should mark archaeologically that
historic route are sparse enough. 10 If the Cycladic jug be accepted as a

counterpart of the Classical vases, it means that the route was open
before 1600 B.C.
  Most Chalcolithic pottery is based on older native traditions, but
bell-beakers are of course intrusive; those of Pan-European type are
                                                                           11
presumably the oldest, but several local variants grew up. With the
latter are associated 12 polypod bowls with grooved shoulders (Fig. 144),

inspired by wooden models, but at least indirectly related
                                                                to British
food-vessels (p. 337) on the    one hand,  to the Central  European and
Sardinian associates of beakers (pp. 224, 258)  on  the other. Well-made
bell-beakers, decorated by wrapping     a cord spirally round   the vase18

        Morel, "Sepultures tumulaires de la Region de Freyssinel", Bui. Soc, des Lettres,
  1

Sci.,    Art. du Lozere (1936), 17-23.
        L'Anthr., LVIII, 7 and 27.
        Rev. 6l. Anc., XIII, 435.
        Helena, Origines, fig. 64.
        Mat. (1869), 328.
        Sepulcros megal., 122, 131.
    Helena, Les Grottes sepulchrales de Monges (Toulouse, 1925), pi. V, 49; wrongly
termed "stone"; a segmented bone bead from the "dolmen" of Cabut, Gironde, may be
a copy, Bailloud and Mieg, 190.
        Cuadtmos, III, 37-42; Prehistoire, II (i933)   37-
        Ibid.
  " Ibid.} ct. Hawkes, Ampurias, XIV, 90 ff.
    Bailloud and Mieg, 190; BSPJP. XLIX (1952), 158; (i953) So.
                                       t
  " At La Halliade  and other sites in Acquitaine, Fabre, t*s dviHsaiions protokistonauts
de I' Acquitaine (Paris, 1952); a similar bowl was found in a Hallstatt grave in Cdte d Or.
      Act. y Mem. t XXI (1946), 196; UAntto., LVIII, 6.

                                              309
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
may reflect a reaction from the corded ware of Central Europe; a few
stone battle-axes1 might be connected therewith. Vases decorated with
                                                               of Los
incised and              patterns should be related to those
                  punctured
Millares and the later Chassey style. But channelled ware, adorned with




                       FIG. 144. Polypod bowl, La Halliade (}).



concentric circles, might be of Early Minoan ancestry (p. 32) and
parallel to the Portuguese. It would on Helena's view be associated with
the first megaliths in Chalcolithic I, but at Fontboulsse it is said to be
later than Beakers and so Bronze II. 2
  In this latter period emerged flat-bottomed vases, sometimes
decorated with applied ribs and presumably related to Horgen ware.
To much the same phase might be attributed carinated cups with axe-
handles, ancestral to, or derived from, those of the South Italian
dolmens8 (Fig. 116, 3). A few specimens, decorated with excised
                                               4
patterns identical with those on Apennine ware, may be actual imports
from Italy.
  If they created no novel industrial types, the Pyrenaean and Provencal
societies did develop distinctive toilet articles and ornaments that were

exported to or copied by other groups. For fastening their garments
Beaker-folk, as elsewhere, used V-perforated buttons, but local
variants 6 were devised and exported. Thus an elongated prismatic type
was preferred round the Eastern Pyrenees, particularly in Bronze II,
while Aude may have been the cradle of tortoise beads which were

  1
      Pericot, Sepulcros, 190.
    L'Anthr., XLVIII. 8-10; BSPF., XLVIII, 557.
  1 Riv. St.
             Lig.,  XV(1949), 42-4; Pericot, Sepulcros meg. t 125-6, and map 84.
  4                                                                     E
    Maluquer de Motes, "Yacimientos postpaleoliticos", Monografias de la station de
Estudios Pyrcnaicos, I (Zaragoza, 1948), 22 and n. i.
    BSPF., LI (1954). 355-66-
                                          310
          MEGALITH BUILDERS IN ATLANTIC EUROPE
 diffused thence to Sardinia and Portugal. Winged beads of East
 Mediterranean ancestry found a secondary centre of manufacture in
 South France, while some bone tubes from the cave of Treille, Aude, 1
 and the dolmen of Cabut, Gironde, are vaguely like the Early ^Egean
 type of Fig. 27, I.
   The main creative impulses of Pyrenaeic-Provenal societies were
 diverted to ideological ends. The overwhelming importance attached to
 the funerary cult is patently displayed in the innumerable megalithic
tombs and cave ossuaries. But no rigid orthodoxy prevailed. Some
clans adopted cremation at an uncertain date; a sort of collective
cremation is reported from some caves, 2 while under a cairn near
            3
Freyssinel (Lozfere) fifty corpses had been burned on the spot.
   South France was certainly one, and perhaps the primary, centre of
the practice of ritual trepanation, though the superstition was potent
also round the Tagus estuary4 and in the SOM culture. Certainly an

astonishingly large number of the skulls from the Cevennian megaliths
and from the caves5 had been trephined, some while their owners were
still alive! As the cranian amulets produced by this operation were

found in Cortaillod sites in Switzerland, the practice presumably goes
back to premegalithic times in South France, though it persisted like
so much else. In Aveyron, Gard, H6rault, and Tarn monoliths were
carved with representations of a female divinity armed with an axe 6                            ;



one such statue-menhir was used as a lintel in a corbelled megalithic
                                                                            11
tomb at Collorgues, Gard (Fig. I45a). 7 Clearly this is no "portrait statue
but represents the same deity as the citizens of Troy I carved also on a
monolithic stele. We shall meet her again in the Maine valley. Pre-
sumably these statue-menhirs mark her route northward, unless her
journey should be reversed; with a change of sex the deity was carried
eastward to Upper Italy (p. 250), presumably by immigrants from
South France. The latter, though recognizable in pottery too, are not
likely to have made contributions, such as ploughs and halberds, to
the material culture of the Apennine peninsula. Sculpture and surgery
in South France developed outside the frame of urban life and with-
out relation to practical ends, as we understand them, in a society
whose material culture remained    fossilized for perhaps a thousand

years.

      Ampurias, XI (1949), 29.
  1                                    '                                *   See p. 309, n. i.
                                           Helena, Origines, 80.
  4
      MacWhite (Cuadernos, I (1946), 61-9) enumerates 15 trepanned skulls from this
region.
  *  In Lozere 52 cases come from "dolmens", 105 from caves, D6chelette, Manuel, I,
474 f.; cf. AsAg., XI (1945), 56; E. Guiard, La trepanation cranienne chez les ntolithiques
et chez les primitifs modernes (Paris), 1930.
     Rev. Anthr., XLI (1931), 300 ff.
   7
     Afas., 1890, 629; Rev. Anthr., XLI, 362; the usual plans are wrong.
                                             3"
                   DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                       THE SEINE-QISE-MARNE (SOM) CULTURE
The adoption of themegalithic faith by a Forest population on the chalk
downs of Champagne and round the Paris basin produced a remarkable
culture, known almost exclusively from collective tombs and termed
the Seine-Oise-Marne culture (abbreviated SOM). 1 The burial-places
may be natural caves, 8 artificial caves hewn in the chalk, 8 or "Paris
cists", a specialized type of gallery grave.In the Marne4 the rock-cut
tombs form regular cemeteries; there are some fifty in the valley of
Petit Morin alone. All are rectangular chambers entered
                                                        by a descending
ramp  like the dromos   of a Mycenaean  tomb. A  few are more carefully




                   a                                 b                                    c
    FIG. 145. Statue-menhirs from Card and
                                                    sculptured tomb (b), Petit Morin (Marne).

excavated than the rest and are provided with an antecella on the walls
of which may be carved or sketched in charcoal
                                                        representations of the
same funerary goddess, bearing an axe, 5 as appears on the statue-
menhirs of the Midi (Fig. 145). While the smaller tombs contain
                                                                              forty
or more corpses
                   (including some cremated bones), not more than eight
bodies were deposited in the more elaborate chambers, but the
                                                                          funerary
furniture in them is much richer.
                                       They accordingly belong to "chiefs",
while poorer common-folk were crammed into
                                                        family ossuaries. The
gallery graves in the valleys of the Aisne, Seine, Oise, and Eure 6 (Paris
cists) are generally built of slabs erected in a long trench, a
                                                                         compart-
  1
    General review Childe and Sandars, UAnthr., LIV
                                                    (1950), i ff., and Bailloud and
Mieg, 190-9.
    1
        E.g. Vaucelles, Namur, Loe, La Belgique ancienne, I, 144.
        In Marne and also Oise, Mem. Soc. acadtmique d'Archtol. du                                   IV
_

                                                                                   Dtp. de I'Oise
(Beauvais, 1860),
                ), 465.
                       L                            ( Pari8   '   I88 4)i ct also BSPF. f VIII
                                                                                                 (1911),


                                 *   397 *; R*>. Arch., XXVII (1928), 1-13; Forde, Am. Anthr..
           ,   63-6; A$A.,   XL
                              T
                                (1938), 1-14.
    MEGALITH BUILDERS IN ATLANTIC EUROPE
ment at one end, divided from the rest by a porthole slab, serving as the
                                             1
entrance (cf. Fig. 100). The funerary goddess reappears in the entrance,
                                                       so that only her
generally more conventionalized than on the Marne,
breasts are recognizable.
  The grave goods disclose a warlike population living by stock-breed-




      FIG. 146. Horgen pot from Paris cist (Mureaux) (t), and channelled vase
                           from Conguel, Morbihan (J).

                                           also tilling the soil. Its r61e in
ing and hunting, but almost certainly
flint-mining is uncertain, but Grand   Pressigny flint was obtainable, and
the chieftains of the Marne    secured  even beads of amber, callais and
rock-crystal and small copper
                                  trinkets.  Even flanged axes of bronze
have been reported from    SOM                  2
                                gallery graves. The grave gear consisted,
however, of polished flint axes, normally mounted in perforated
                                                                                  antler




                                       FIG. 147.

                               Arc-pendant of stone ().

sleeves, antler axes with square-cut shaft-holes, very numerous
                                                                                  trans-

verse arrow-heads together with a very few leaf-shaped ones, daggers of
Grand Pressigny flint and characteristic splay-footed vases of rather
                          8
coarse ware (Fig. 146, i). The ornaments include shells, bracelets, rings,
                                                                   4
and arc-pendants (Fig. 147) of stone, a leg amulet of antler, axe-
      *                                          * Breuil in
          Rev. Antto., XLI, 371-3.                           Afas. (1899), 590.
          See also BSPF. (1934). *S*-5I (WO- 558; L'Antkr., LVIII, 18-20.
          GaUi*, I (1943), *4-
                                         313
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                                                               was
amulets, and cranian amulets. Nearly a third of the population
                                                                a large
round-headed, less than a quarter really dolichocranial. Quite
number of individuals  had             ritual trepanation as in  South
                                  undergone
France.
      The tomb plans and sculptures and the trepanned skulls suggest that
the megalithic religion had reached the Seine-Marne basins from the
lower Rhone. Paris cists, as slab-lined trenches, reproduce .most faith-
fully the plan of the rock-cut tombs
                                       near Aries, and the chalk-hewn
tombs of the Marne   are the most Mediterranean   chamber tombs north
of the Pyrenees and the Alps. The missionaries who introduced the faith
must have travelled fast and        it fresh. But the
                                    kept                       SOM
                                                          culture pre-
serves so many        mesolithic traits that the bulk of their converts must
have been descendants of native Forest-folk. The transformation of
these "savages" into farmers may be attributed not so much to the
"missionaries" as to Danubian peasants who had established colonial
                                                        1
outposts on the Somme, the Marne, and the Seine, or to
                                                                 less well-

documented Westerners (p. 304).
  The composite warlike population thus unified by the megalithic
faith soon embarked on a crusade of conquest and colonization, in the
course of which some items of the faith, or at least their durable ex-
pressions, were lost or distorted. Westward the whole complex with its
specialized gallery graves, porthole slabs, and splay-footed vases
                                                                   reached
          2
Brittany, Normandy, and Jersey but not Guernsey while Beakers
were still current there. Even the funerary goddess, albeit degraded to
a mere pair of breasts, was thus carried to the Atlantic coasts. To the
north-east the culture is classically represented in Belgian caves, 8 while
Paris cists were built in Belgium, Westfalia, and Hesse. Finally the
long cists of South Sweden (p. 198) not only reproduce the Paris plan
but also contain splay-footed pots of SOM form. To the south-east
the Horgen culture (p. 295) must be attributed to a similar colonization,
though relatively few tombs were built for its spiritual leaders. Even to
the south the grave goods from Bougon (Deux Sfevres) unmistakably
mark the site of a SOM colony, while a couple of "porthole dolmens"
in the Cevennes and the pottery already mentioned from South France
and the Baleares might denote a return of the faith in a barbarized
version towards its assumed starting-point. 4
   From this expansion chronological limits for the rise of the SOM
  1
       Bailloud and Mieg, 48.
    E.g. Tregastel, BSPF., XLIII (1946), 305.
  *
    Marien, Oud-Belgie, 142-5; 152 ff.
                megalithic religion were introduced into the Seine-Marne basins from
  4 But if the

the Loire, from the coasts of Normandy (Piggott, L'Anthr., LVIII, 20), or from the
Caucasus via Hesse, the Paris cists and the Marne carvings must represent the germs
from which evolved the rock-cut tombs and statue-menhirs of South France!
                                        314
       MEGALITH BUILDERS                     IN ATLANTIC             EUROPE
culture can be more precisely deduced.     Not only have Beaker sherds
been found in three tombs in the Paris basin, 1 but also in those of its
colonial outposts in Brittany. Thus in the French sequence the culture
goes back at least to Chalcolithic II or Pericot's Bronze I. So its arrival
in Switzerland initiates Middle Neolithic there. Collared flasks appro-

priate to Northern Neolithic II occur in the Paris cists of Westfalia
and of Brittany, 2 while, judging from a couple of tiny Rossen sherds
from their counterparts in Hesse (p. 190), the culture should have
arrived there near the beginning of Danubian III if not in Danubian II.
The SOM culture must then be among the earliest manifestations of
the megalithic religion in temperate Europe. Yet it lasted a long time
with no recognizable progress or change. It reached Scandinavia only
in Northern Neolithic IV i.e. Danubian IV, the Early Bronze Age.
In its homeland there are no other burials save those in Paris cists and
SOM caves to represent the Early and Middle Bronze Ages in the
funerary record, while types of these periods are inordinately scarce.
The region remained isolated from the great currents of Bronze Age
trade, and its population, absorbed in cult practices, was content to
subsist in. a neolithic stage.



                    THE ARMORICAN MEGALITHIC CULTURE
In megalithic times the Armorican Peninsula with its extension to the
Channel Islands became a goal of pilgrimage so that a bizarre assort-
ment of cultures was superimposed on the primary Western neolithic
described on p. 306. Brittany offers the first land-fall on the northward
voyage from the Iberian Peninsula to Cornish tin-lodes and Irish gold-
fields and sets the limit to terrestrial wanderings in search of isles of the
blest beneath the setting sun. Moreover, its old rocks contain gold,
perhaps also tin and callais. The densest and most varied concentration
                              8
                                                                            4
of collective tombs in Europe is to be found round the Gulf of Morbihan,
but from this centre the tombs spread coastwise to the mouth of the
Loire and to Jersey (still perhaps joined to the Continent in megalithic
times) and Guernsey. The diverse tomb plans
                                                   and the heterogeneous
articles constituting the furniture of every sepulchre indicate the
varied traditions that went to make up the Armorican culture and the
complexity of their interweaving.

      Sievekng, Inst. Arch. AR., IX (1953). 60-7; L'Antkr., LVIII, 20.
  i
  *
      BSPF., XLIII, 307.
  8
      Forde, Am. Anthr., XXXII, 85.
  *
    Typed summarized by le Rouzic, L'Antkr., XLIII (i933). *33-48; for Guernsey,
T. D. Kendrick, Archaology of the Channel Islands, I (1928), lor Jersey, J. Hawkes,
Archeology of the Channel Islands, II (1939)-
                                          315
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  Corbelled passage graves are concentrated on the coasts and Islands
and are obviously inspired by Iberian, immediately by Portuguese,
models. Their counterparts in the orthostatic architecture, more suited
to the local rocks, are megalithic passage graves, often P-shaped in
plan (Fig. 148), rarely with a lateral cell, as the standard type for




                     FIG. 148. Passage grave, Kercado, Morbihan,


Morbihan, while undifferentiated passage graves, like the South
Spanish, are commoner in the Channel Islands. The gallery grave, 1 on
the other hand, exhibits a more inland distribution and does not cross
the sea to Guernsey. Accordingly the idea was
                                                   brought by land from
the Paris basin by migrant pastoralist families.
                                                    Divergent variations
on the exotic models were devised locally. Undifferentiated
                                                                 passage
graves with one or two pairs of lateral chambers, arranged like tran-
septs on either side of the principal gallery, may be derived from tholoi
with lateral cells, as at Los Millares, and are common to the           2
                                                                          peninsula
and the Islands (La Houge Bie,                       8
                                    Jersey, and D6hus, Guernsey*).
Passage graves  with   a bent  corridor and gallery graves similarly
"angled" are peculiar to Armorica.
   1
       Forde, Man, XXIX, 80; Am.    Anthr., XXXII, 74,

   *
       UAnthr.. XLIII, 242; Antiquity, XI, 455.
       Soctete Jersiaise, Bulletin (St. Helier, 1925).
   4
       V. C. C. Collum, "Re-excavation of Dennis", Trans. Soc. Guernesiaise
                                                                              (1933)
                                         316
          MEGALITH BUILDERS                          IN ATLANTIC          EUROPE
  Most tombs were covered by a cairn or barrow, generally round and
carefully constructed, but sometimes    two or even three tombs are
covered by a single mound which may then be oblong. Elaborate
carvings, including representations of hafted axes and human feet, are
a feature of the megaliths of Morbihan. 1 And in Brittany the tombs
often contain remains of cremated skeletons. The same heretical rite
is associated with other equally novel manifestations of the
                                                                                megalithic
cult that are peculiar to the extreme west, but common to Brittany
and Britain. Oval or horseshoe settings of megalithic uprights on the
islet ofEr Lannic, 2 now half submerged, were associated with vase
supports decorated with punctured patterns in late Chassey style. But
at the feet of the orthostats were little stone cists containing cremated
bones almost certainly human; these must be compared to the
cremations in pits within British "henge monuments" (p. 325). So, too,
alignments of huge upright stones, one of which runs across one of the
long barrows described on p. 306, might be Armorican equivalents
of the English cursfis which too are associated with long barrows.
   Most tombs have been violated in Roman times and further dis-
turbed in the nineteenth century, so that the grave goods do not
contribute as much help as might be expected to unravelling the com-
ponents of the megalithic complex and establishing the sequence of
events. Tombs of most types contain Beaker ware, proving that the
Paris galleries had arrived and the local variants been elaborated
during the Beaker phase. But the number and variety of the beakers
                                                    8
prove that this period was a long one. Z. le Rouzic and Jacquetta
        4
Hawkes assign    to a pre-Beaker phase the corbelled  passage graves
of Morbihan and Jersey; they certainly contain no Beaker ware. That
some megaliths are really pre-Beaker is established by the succession
of burials in the passage grave (one wall of which was formed of natural
                  6
rock) at Conguel, Quiberon. There the later interments only were
accompanied by beakers, the earlier by vases bearing channelled
semicircle patterns as in Portugal and South France (Fig. 146, 2).
This fabric is found in other tombs too, and in the fortified settlement
at Croh Coll6. 6 It links the Pyrenees or Portugal with the Beacharra
culture in Scotland.
     Chassey pottery, chiefly in the form of vase-supports, is represented
in    many tombs on the Mainland and in Jersey (Fig. 142). In that
         Pecquart et le Rouzic, Corpus des signes graves, Paris, 1927; Prehistoire, VI (1938),
     1



    Z. le Rouzic, Les Cromlechs de Er Lannic (Vannes, 1930).
     1
     8
    UAnthr.. XLIII, 233-5; XLIV, 490-2, so Breuil, Prihistoire, VI, 47.
  4
    CISPP. (Oslo, 1936); Archaol. Channel Islands, II, 90, 248.
  1
         BSA. (Paris, 1892), 41.
         L'Anthr.   t   XLIV (1934), 496, fig. 9, numbers 8, and 12-16.
                                                  317
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 island it was found below the Beaker layer in the stratified settlement
 at le Pinnacle. 1 It was            introduced by land from Central
                                presumably
 France, and the first connections with Grand Pressigny were probably
 established at the same time. Neither Chassey ware nor Grand Pressigny
 flint   reach Guernsey.
      The Beaker-folk seem to have come by sea, like the first megalith-
 builders from Portugal; they reached even Guernsey, but on land have
 leftonly one grave between the Garonne and the Loire, and^that not
 far from the coast. 8 Besides the classic rouletted style, cord ornament
 iscommon on Breton beakers, while specifically South French variants
 are missing. Wrist-guards8 are represented by a gold strip from Man6
 Lud, like the South French ones, and a few doubtfjil stone specimens
 which may really be whetstones. Two West European daggers have
 been found in Brittany4 and one on Guernsey. 6
      From the Paris basin came the SOM gallery grave, the porthole
                                                                                           6
slab, carvings of a funerary goddess, characteristic splay-footed vases
and arc-pendants. Finally, from the North came an amber bead and
                        7

a boat axe. 8 But "collared flasks" 9 may be local SOM pots rather than
First Northern vessels.
  The culture which blended all these foreign elements preserved a
rigidly neolithic aspect in Morbihan. Axes with pointed butts were
made of fibrolith and greenstone. Large, thin and superbly polished
                                                                 10
specimens, obviously ceremonial and perhaps late,   are surprisingly
common and were exported to Portugal and England. Celts with a
knob at the butt end found stray in Morbihan seem to copy Egyptian
      11                         12
adzes, while double-axes of stone imitated the Minoan metal form or
the "ingot axes" from Vogtland. 18 For arrows, transverse and tanged-
and-barbed heads were preferred; leaf-shaped forms are exceptional. 14
In addition to the foreign pottery absorbed, carinated bowls adorned
     CISPP. (London, 1932), 140; Hawkes, Channel Islands, 7, 162.
     In a "small dolmen" near Trizay, Charente Inferieure, with a West European
dagger, tanged-and-barbed arrow-heads and gold ribbon; BSPF., XXXVIII  (1041),
                                                                         **  ' AS:
cf. VAnthr., LVIII, 26.
      L'Anthr., XLIV, fig. 19,   ; Rev. Arch. (1883), pi. XIV.
      Inst. Arch., AR. VI (1950), 49-
                       "
      V. C. C. Collum, Re-excavation of Delius", Trans. Soc. Guernesiaise   (1933).
      Kendrick, Axe Age, 34.
      Jersey, Kendrick, Channel Islands, 94.
      L'Anthr., XLIV, 504, figs. 14, 5 and 15.
      From an angled passage grave at Lann Blaen (Morb.) and a SOM *gallery at TreVastel
                                                                            y       iregaswi
(C6tes du Nord); BSPFTXLIII (1946). 306.
 lf Some have
                expanded blades imitating copper axes, Am. Anthr., XXXII 87'"
    Petrie, Tools and Weapons, Z., pi. XVII.
 " L'Anthr., XLIV, figs 14,    n
                               and 16, i; Ant. /., VII. 17.
 " Copper double-axes with a hole too small to take a shaft  occur in Central France
Switzerland, and Southern Germany, ZfE., XXXVII, 525; Childe, Danube 177 ' lov  ' 93       '

BSA., XXXVII, 152-6.
 " L'Anthr., XLIV, 500.
                                          318
        MEGALITH BUILDERS IN ATLANTIC EUROPE
with pairs of vertical ribs are a
                                    distinctively Breton variant on the
West European tradition, replaced in Jersey by similar shapes decor-
ated with horizontal lines and punctuations.
   As charms were worn rather simple beads of talc, callals, rock-
crystal, or gold, axe-amulets and bracelets of hammered gold. The
callals and gold may have been obtained
                                            locally, but Grand Pressigny
flint was
          certaihly imported. Unless   the Portuguese and South French
callals be of Armorican origin, the
                                     peninsula's exports must have been
immaterial goods. Whatever they were, they were employed to obtain
magical rather than practical materials. The whole society was so
obsessed with funerary cult that material advancement was
                                                              neglected.
   The chronological criteria applicable to more materialistic societies
cannot then be used for dating the megalithic culture in Brittany.
Despite its neolithic exterior it may have lasted well into the Bronze
Age elsewhere. In fact, in Guernsey some megalithic tombs do contain
"incense cups" and cinerary urns of types appropriate to the mature
Bronze Age of England. In Morbihan closed megalithic chambers under
gigantic barrows at Tumiac, Mont St Michel and Man6 er Hroek are
assigned to the Bronze Age by le Rouzic on typological grounds. 1 But
they contained ceremonial axes of greenstone, greenstone bracelets
and beads of callals and rock-crystal that can be matched in more
normal megalithic tombs.


                        THE ARMORICAN BRONZE AGE
Throughout the Atlantic megalithic province, desire for a good burial
stimulated production of surplus wealth; the erection of gigantic
tombs and the importation of magic substances kept accumulated
wealth in circulation. But it was not used to support professional smiths
nor to purchase ores. In France, graves furnished with bronze tools
and weapons and hoards of bronzes begin in general only during the
Middle Bronze Age when Tumulus-builders from Central Europe spread
                                                                                    8
along the Massif Central. Only in Armorica is there a group of graves
richly furnished with weapons of Early Bronze Age type.
  The tombs in question are closed chambers of dry masonry, some-
times roofed by corbelling and always surmounted by a cairn. The dead
were buried in them, generally but not always after cremation, on
wooden planks (remains of coffins ?), with arms and ornaments. The
armament consisted typically of one or two flat or hammer-flanged
  1
    V Anthr. t XLIII, 251-3; Forde, Am. Anthr., XXXII, 76-9, notes that the supports
are sculptured like those of normal collective tombs.
    V                                                                XXXIV
      Anthr. t XI, 159; XLIV, 511; LV, 425-43; Bui. Soc. Arch. Finistire,     (1907),
125; Ant. J. VII, 18; Les Trtsors arcUologiques de I'Armorique occidental*.
           t




                                        319
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
axes, several daggers and superb arrow-heads with squared barbs and
tangs. The daggers are either round-heeled and strengthened with a
midrib or triangular with grooves parallel to the edge and sometimes
                  a rudimentary tang. In eight cases the wooden hilts
                  (or scabbards) had been adorned with tiny gold nails

                  forming a pointill pattern. Ornaments include a
                  ring-head pin and some spiral rings of silver, beads
                                 1


                  of amber, and one segmented fayence bead, 2 Pottery
                  is represented by biconical urns with two to four

                  handles joining rim and shoulder (Fig. 149).
      *** I49<

Breton Bronze Age    Evidently^ these graves belong to rich and war-
                         .      _,                    ,
                                                        8           ft
                                                                         .

       vase,      like chiefs.  They are concentrated in the north
                  and interior of the peninsula and in general avoid
the principal megalithic centres, where the old family vaults were
presumably still in use. The Bronze Age war-lords can therefore
hardly be descendants of the old megalithic chiefs or Beaker-folk, and
owe nothing of their equipment to these. Their silver probably came
from Almeria or Sardinia. The ring-head pin is a Central European
type.  The grooved daggers seem related most closely to those of the
Saale-Warta culture (p. 200). But the chief source of metal and the
dominant inspiration in metal-work must have been in the British
Isles, where for instance gold-studded dagger hilts also occur. Relations
with Britain were indeed so close that for a while Armorica and Wessex
became a continuous cultural province.
          4
   Piggott explained this continuity by an invasion of Southern
                                            6
England from Brittany. Cagn6 and Giot would reverse the process
or postulate parallel occupations of both regions by seafarers, coming
like the Vikings from farther North. Actually the last-named view
is the most likely and the Saale-Warta area the ultimate
                                                           starting-point.
To link the Armorican with the West German Tumulus culture,
                                                     11
Hawkes* can cite only two isolated "Bronze Age barrows between
the Rhine and the Atlantic. 7 Relations with the Saale-Warta culture,
on the contrary, are clear but direct. While these give a limiting date
    Bui. Soc. Arch. Fin., XXXIV.
    From the tholos of Pare Guerin which had been converted into a single grave of
Bronze Age type, L'Anthr., LV (1952), 427.
    See maps in PPS., IV (1938), 65, and L'Anthr., LV, 428.
     PPS., IV (1938), 64 ff.
     L'Antkr., LV (1952), 44*'3-
     Foundations, 312-14.
     Apart from these barrow graves in AUier and Dordogne (Dechelette, II, 142, 147),
the poor non-megalithic cists in Vienne, Charente, and Lozere (de Mortiilet, Origine du
culte d*s marts (Paris, 1921), 79 f.) might be "Bronze Age" though only one contained
any metal. East of the Sadne, of course, there are Early Bronze Age graves, related to
the Swiss though several contained polished flint or greenstone axes (Dechelette ' II '
136 ff.).
                                         320
      MEGALITH BUILDERS IN ATLANTIC EUROPE
for the rise of the Armorican Bronze Culture, its strict parallelism with
the Wessex culture equates it with Early Bronze Age 2         Danubian
IVb   which, judging by the fayence beads, should last down to 1400
B.C. The conquering aristocrats may have freed the local population
from excessive devotion to megalithic rites, but the metal industry
that flourished under their patronage failed to develop. The leaders
sailed away or were absorbed. No graves in Brittany are furnished with

types of my period V, and it is not till the Late Bronze Age or perhaps
even Iron Age I that large hoards reveal the inclusion of Brittany
in a commercial system guaranteeing regular supplies of metal gear.




                                  321
                                  CHAPTER XVIII

                              THE BRITISH ISLES
Aix routes from the South hitherto considered converge on Britain.
It is the northern terminus of the "megalithic" seaway along the
Atlantic coasts from Portugal; the land route across France is con-
tinued beyond the Channel by the South Downs; the Danube thorough-
fare and the wide corridor formed by the North European plain con-

verge on the North Sea coasts to be continued in Keftt and East Anglia.
And the British Isles offers to voyagers, migrants, and prospectors
inducements to settlement        downs and moors swept bare of trees,
excellent flint, copper, and gold, and above all tin. But islands they were
already in neolithic times. Would-be colonists embarking in frail craft
must discard unessential equipment and relax the rigid bonds of tribal
custom. Any culture brought to* Britain must be insularized by the
very conditions of transportation. Many streams contributed to the
formation of British culture, but the blending of components already
insularized inevitably yielded a highly individualized resultant.
  Nor is Britain a unity. The Highland Zone of mountains and ancient
rocks to the West and North is contrasted with a "Lowland Zone" of
more recent formation in the South-East. 1 And beyond the Highland
Zone lies Ireland. It is the Highland Zone with Ireland that yields tin,
copper, and gold. But'the megalithic route alone leads thither directly.
Cultures and peoples, desiring "short sea crossings", must land in the
Lowlands and reach the Highland Zone only after crossing them and
absorbing their already insular cultures.
  Cultures arriving from the Continent often preserve their ancestors'
lineaments recognizably in the Lowland Zone; in the Highlands they
assume a mask of stubborn insularity.
   Great Britain and Ireland were relatively well populated with meso-
lithic hunters and fishers. But a neolithic culture 2 of distinctive Western

type was first introduced by peasants who crossed to Southern England
from North France or Belgium and did not mingle with the pre-existing
food-gatherers. In Sussex the latter occupied the greensands, the
neolithic peasants colonized the chalk. 8 The neolithic farmers owed
  1
      Fox, The Personality of Britain (Cardiff, 1938).
  1
    For Neolithic Britain sec Piggott, The Neolithic Cultures of the British Isles (1954),
unless other reference is given. But on relations with Northern Europe see now PPS.,
XXI (i955) 96-101.                                  Clark, Mesolithic Britain, 90.
                                            322
                                  THE BRITISH ISLES
hardly an item in their equipment to their mesolithic forerunners and
competitors.

                                  WINDMILL HILL CULTURE
The oldest neolithic culture is best known from a series of hilltop
encampments strung out all along the downs and uplands of Southern
England from Eastern Sussex at least to Devon and probably to
Cornwall. The classic site where this culture was first really defined
as recently as 1925! Windmill Hill, near Avebury, Wilts, must serve
hereafter as the patent station. The hilltops are girt with a system of
three or four flat-bottomed ditches, interrupted at frequent intervals
by causeways, as in Michelsberg camps, and supplemented by palisades.
The areas thus enclosed are often small: the diameters of the inner
ring lie between 250 ft. at Windmill Hill and 400 ft. at the Trundle,
though there is room for settlement beyond it, and Maiden Castle
covered 12 acres. It is not yet clear how far the "camps" should be
regarded as permanent villages. Piggott regards them rather as en-
closures where cattle were rounded up in the autumn. No houses have
been identified inside them, but in Devon, Wales, and Ireland a few
isolated neolithic houses are known                       most rectangular in plan. 1
  The camps' occupants lived principally by breeding cattle of a
robust breed, perhaps a cross between imported short-horns and native
oxen of Bos primigenius stock. But they kept a few sheep, goats, and
pigs, and cultivated crops  principally wheat (emmer with
proportion of one-corn), but also a little barley. And naturally
                                                  2

hunted deer and collected nuts and shell-fish. The huntsman used leaf-
shaped arrow-heads, Fig. 150, 3. Axes were made of flint where this




                              I                                  2                      3
   FIG. 150. i, lop-sided, 2, Tanged-and-barbed, 3, leaf-shaped, and arrow-heads
                                   from Britain (J).


   4. AKKVSVf v*^. vrr.j
   Piggot,              "***. .*PRIA.
              op. cit.;cf.       **.*.**., M~I
                                   "
                                       t
                                          "
                                            LVIT M.
                                                    (195^),
                                                    y*^jwj,
                                                    "    '
                                                            3-6, TT
                                                            jw~wjI447'7;
                                                                       / **"
                                                                         Arch. Canto.,
                                                                            ~* virrv.j CII,
                                                                                       V^~A, V(1953),
                                                                                                7%/J/'  T
                                                                                                       24-9-
                                                                                                          "if*
   lessenlen and I" Helbaek, Del kong. danske Videns. Selskab, Bio I. Skrifter, III, 2; PPS.,
XVIII   194-200.
                                                   323
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
material   is   abundant and then include archaic "picks" as well as
polished implements. Elsewhere, in Devon for instance, polished celts
of fine-grained stone competed with flint axes. In Southern England
and Norfolk flint was systematically mined by specialized groups of
highly skilled miners, who must have lived largely by exporting the
products of their industry. But while flint-mining began early in
Neolithic times, it flourished more in the subsequent Beaker period.
And in Norfolk and even Wiltshire "Peterborough folk" (p. 331, below)




                  FIG. 151. Windmill Hill pot-forms. After
                                                             Hggott.

were associated with its exploitation. A textile industry is not
                                                                 clearly
attested but flint scrapers and bunched combs of antler
                                                              emphasize
the importance of leather-dressing.
  The earliest Windmill Hill vases (Fig. 151) are
                                                    leathery round-
bottomed pots with simple rims and sometimes vertically
                                                                       pierced lugs.
Thickening of the rims by pressing down or rolling over the wet clay
is thought by Kggott to mark a later
                                     phase in Southern England and
is more prominent in the Highland Zone. To an
                                                  equally late phase
should belong incised and channelled decoration and shallow
                                                                            flutings
produced by drawing the finger-tips over the moist clay. Trumpet
lugs, confined to Dorset and Devon, denote specially close relations
with Brittany (p. 306).
                                       324
                          THE BRITISH ISLES
  A few figurines and phalli, carved in chalk so rudely as to be almost
dubious, are all that survives of ritual paraphernalia. Windmill Hill
ideology found more durable expression in funerary monuments. Most
                                                                                  11
authorities believe that Windmill Hill fanners or their "chiefs                        were
buried under "unchambered long barrows". These are pear-shaped
mounds reaching the extravagant length of 300 feet though the inter-
ments occupy only a small space near the wide end. The corpses, from
one to twenty-five in number, had been interred disarticulated or
cremated on chalk platforms or in crematorium-trenches. In two cases
a timber revetment at the wide end looks like an attempt to reproduce
the forecourt of the chambered long barrows of Highland Britain
(p. 326). So it has been suggested that unchambered long
                                                          barrows are
just  substitutes for the megalithic tombs  of the Atlantic  coasts in
stoneless regions. However, the extravagantly long mounds seem alien
to the general megalithic tradition while the plans and the arrangement
of the interments within them find surprisingly close parallels in the
long dolmens and Kuyavish graves of the German and West Polish
tracts of the North European plain of which Lowland England is just
the westernmost section.
  If such monumental sepulchres were reserved to families of special
rank or sanctity, commoners perhaps were buried, after cremation,
in pits, arranged in a ring in a cemetery surrounded by a penannular
bank and internal ditch. For a few of these so-called "class I henges"
have yielded pure Windmill Hill relics though most contain also
                      11
                               1
"Secondary Neolithic types. But even these henges may not have
been primarily constructed as cemeteries and to the same periods
belong certain non-funerary but ceremonial monuments, traditionally
known as "cursfis", 2 enclosures varying from one to six miles in length
and defined by banks and ditches. Association with long barrows
justifies their attribution to the Windmill
                                            Hill culture.
   No causewayed camps have been identified north of the Thames.
But judging from pottery finds and long barrows, Windmill Hill
farmers colonized East Anglia and the Yorkshire Wolds and spread
over Northern England and Eastern Scotland as far as the Moray
Firth. In the Highland Zone their culture is known only from mega-
lithic tombs.


                       MEGALITHIC TOMBS IN BRITAIN

Apostles of the megalithic faith presumably arrived by the Atlantic
seaway; for the tombs they should have introduced fan out from land-
         1
             Atkinson et at., Excavations at Dorchester, Ox on. (Oxford, 1951).
         1
             Atkinson in Antiquity. XXIX (i955), 4' 10  -




                                          325
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
falls on the west coasts and round the Irish Sea. More or less close
parallels can be found in Western Europe to the plans of these tombs,
but their furniture and the long cairns that cover them seem distinc-
tively British. So in Britain the megalith-builders do not appear so
much as fresh contingents of neolithic farmers as a spiritual aristo-
cracy who may have led Windmill Hill farmers to the colonization of
the rugged coasts of Scotland and Ulster and the adjacent islands.
Peculiarities of sepulchral architecture allow of the recognition of at
least three groups of missionaries in Great Britain.
  The Bristol Channel would have been the entry for the designers of
the Cotswold-Severn tombs. All are covered by long cairns with a
cuspidal, rather than semicircular, forecourt. Typologically the oldest
chambers are long galleries with one or more pairs of transepts or
lateral cells opening off them and roofed by corbelling. Cairns, termin-

ating in a dummy portal in the wide end but with small chambers
opening on to their sides, twice through porthole slabs, should be later
degenerations. Tombs of this family occur on both sides of the Bristol
Channel and spread across the Cotswolds to the chalk downs of North
Wiltshire and Berkshire.   The finest of them all was built under a
typically English long  barrow    at West Rennet near. Avebury and
Windmill Hill, and the first interments were accompanied by Windmill
Hill vases though the tomb remained open till Beaker and Peterborough
wares had come into fashion.
   Segmented cists characterize the Clyde-Carlingford group of tombs
that spread inland from these sea-inlets in South- West Scotland and
Northern Ireland but occur also in Man, in Wales, and on the limestone
plateau of Derbyshire. Two tombs of this group in Man and Stafford-
shire   were entered through porthole slabs. The tombs contain up to
sixteen corpses, normally inhumed but occasionally cremated. In
addition to classical Windmill Hill pottery and arrow-heads, the
grave goods comprise vases of Beacharra ware, decorated with semi-
circles arranged in panels and executed by channelling or cord-

impression as at Conguel in Brittany (Fig. 146, 2), but also types to
be classed as "Secondary Neolithic"; Beakers accompanied the latest
interments in three cases. The sepulchral architecture of the tombs
and the semicircular forecourts on to which they open (Fig. no), but
not the long cairns that cover them, seem to be inspired by Pyrenaeic
or even Sardinian traditions. Beacharra ware too might have been
introduced from the same quarter, but since its decorative technique
was used also in the non-megalithic province of Southern England,
only the magic semicircle motive need be regarded as a fresh contribu-
tion from the south-west.
                                  326
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Neolithic types. Here, too, cases of cremation have been reported, but
inhumation was the normal practice.
  Judging from the dispersal of the tombs, each, if it were a communal
ossuary, might correspond to a single homestead. But such a unit and
the number of burials would be too small to provide the manpower
for the erection of such monuments. They should rather be, like un-
chambered long barrows, the family vaults of the leaders of small
local groups. These remained simple farmers. The multitude of bones
of calves, sheep, and game animals including horses even in the
Cotswolds1 imply an economy based primarily on stock-breeding and
hunting. But barley (not, however, wheat) was demonstrably culti-
vated in Orkney and one-corn wheat in Ulster. 8 Metal is totally absent
from the grave goods. A few beads of soft stone Can be paralleled in
the causewayed camps of Southern England. The only imports are
products of axe-factories not far away. Chronologically these mega-
Uthic tombs had demonstrably been built before the arrival in the
province of Beaker-folk and no fresh ones were built thereafter. These
round-headed invaders replaced the megalithic aristocracy. If, then,
the latter came from the Armorican or Iberian peninsulas, they must
have set out before the rise of Beaker-folk there. On the other hand,
the secondary neolithic types, so prominent in the Clyde-Carlingford
and Pentland tombs, may be little, if at all, older than the Beaker
invasion of Southern England; some indeed occur in graves of Early
Bronze Age II.
  On Ireland a direct impact of megalithic culture from the south-west
can be detected only after the island had been colonized from Britain
by neolithic fanners of the Clyde-Carlingford and other groups, and
hardly before bands of Beaker-folk had established themselves in
Limerick and Sligo. The recognizable result of that impact was the
erection of passage graves under round cairns that constitute the sole
monuments of a Boyne culture.
  The standard and most widespread type of Boyne tomb is cruciform
in plan a corbelled chamber entered through a long passage with
three cells grouped symmetrically round the remaining sides. Such
tombs, generally located on conspicuous heights, form scattered
cemeteries, notably on Carrowkeel and other limestone mountains
in Sligo, along the Boyne, and on the Lough Crew hills. The stones
walling the tomb and supporting the cairn are often adorned with
elaborate incised or pecked patterns, including stylized boats, spirals,
and distorted conventionalizations of the funerary goddess of Los
 1
     Crawford, Long Borrows of the Cotswolds (Gloucester, 1925), 26; AntJ., XV, 435.
 1
     Janet! and Helbaek. see p. 323, n. 2.
                                         328
                            THE BRITISH ISLES
Millares and Palmella. Most tombs had been plundered. In the finest,
large stone basins alone survive of the original furniture. At Carrowkeel,
cremated bones, resting on stone slabs but originally enclosed in hide
bags fastened with skewer pins of bone or antler, shpuld represent
primary interments while cremations in food-vessels may be intrusive.
Of the furniture survive stone balls, V-perforated buttons and beads,
including hammer beads, of hard stone, small scraps of ill-fired pottery,
but not a scrap of metal.
   It is assumed that these magnificent sepulchres were built for aristo-
cratic lineages. A few decorated tombs in Anglesey and Antrim indicate
an extension of their sway to the coasts of Wales and the shores of
the North Channel. A spread thence may be denoted by some simpler
tombs in Galloway and round the Moray Firth. Most authorities agree
that the founders of the Boyne culture came by sea from Portugal and
  with less unanimity that they started after, rather than before,
the Beaker phase there. 1 In their wake should have come prospectors
and metallurgists who initiated the exploitation of Irish copper and
gold and introduced Hispanic types and techniques. In Britain their
products decorated axes and basket-shaped gold earrings were
purchased first by Beaker-folk, while the most significant British
parallels to the furniture of the Boyne tombs are hammer-beads from
Wessex graves of the succeeding period, but British B Beaker sherds
were found in an atypical Boyne tomb at Moytirra, Sligo. Such are the
rather slender grounds for believing that the Boyne culture began as
early as the Beaker period of England. Raftery has found evidence
that at least one decorated tomb at Lough Crew was built as late as
Iron Age II!



  THE EARLIEST BRONZE AGE AND SECONDARY NEOLITHIC PHASE
The Bronze Age of the British Isles is traditionally considered to begin
with the arrival in England and Eastern Scotland of bands of round-
headed invaders who buried their dead individually in single graves,
generally under round barrows and accompanied by some kind of
Beaker. Variations of the latter and of the associated grave goods
allow us to distinguish three or even five main groups of invaders. The
earliest arrivals used Bi Beakers, decorated with simple zones of
rouletted patterns and preserving the profile of Pan-European beakers.
They used West European daggers, tanged-and-barbed arrow-heads
  1
      The sole probable Hispanic import found in a Boyne tomb is matched in a Spanish
sepulchral cave, JSEA. (1929), pi. VII, 11-12; Rev. Guim. (1948), 12.
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
and stone wrist-guards, as on the Continent, and wore as ornaments
basket-shaped earrings (Fig. 154) and sun discs bearing a cruciform
                   1
pattern of gold. 63 Beakers, of the same shape but decorated with
                     a spiral cord impression, have close analogies in
                     Western Europe (p. 224) and the Rhineland, and may
                     denote a distinct invasion from the latter quarter
                     unless they spread from Britain. 8 A second major
                     group of invaders, coming this time from Holland
                     and landing on the coasts of Northern England and
                     Scotland, introduced the same arrow-heads and
    FIG. 154.        wrist-guards, but coarser and more angular Beakers,
 Gold earring (f).   labelled C. But perhaps the most prominent group
                  of Beaker-folk are characterized by A Beakers, gen-
erally decorated with metopic patterns and in profile more like corded
than bell-beakers. These vases have no Continental counterparts and
are associated with stone battle-axes and flint, or rarely round-heeled
bronze daggers. So the A-Beaker culture is believed to be due to a
local fusion of intrusive North European Battle-axe with established
C       and perhaps also B
                        Beaker traditions.
  From their landing-places on the south and east coasts Beaker-folk
must have spread rapidly across Britain and even sent out contingents
to Ireland. 8 The latter are just as likely as the Boyne megalith-builders
to have organized the exploitation and export of Irish copper and gold,
but must have been quickly absorbed in the native populations; for
they are scarcely represented in the funerary record in which in Britain
the Beaker-folk figure so conspicuously. But even in Britain Beaker-
folk must have formed a small ruling class, or a succession of ruling
classes,          the already heterogeneous Neolithic population,
               among
replacing the  "Megalithic aristocracy". Their advent accelerated a
general trend towards pastoralism and promoted the cultivation of
                              4
barley in preference to wheat. But no pure Beaker settlements are
known; Beaker pottery is always mixed with Late Neolithic pottery
and flints whether in secondary occupation levels of South English
causewayed camps, in coastal encampments in the Highland zone, or
in hut-villages in Western Ireland. 6
    The surplus they appropriated enabled them to become the first
    1
        Childe, PCBI., 92-4; add Arch. Aeliana (1936), 210, and Oxoniensia, XIII (1948),
1-9;     the earrings are associated with 83 rather than Bi beakers.
    1
        Childe, Act. y Mem., XXI     (1946), 196; Kggott, L'Anthr., LVIII, 6; Fox, Arch.,
LXXXIX (1943). 100-4.
        To Co. Limerick from the Bristol Channel (PRIA., XLVTII (1942), 260-9); LIV.
(rQS?). 5<>-9
    4
                7~2 to Ulster from Southern Scotland (UJA., II, 264; III, 79).
                    ;


        PPS., XVIII, 204.
        PRIA., LVI (1954), 343. 379; PPS., XVII, 53.
                                            330
                          THE BRITISH ISLES
purchasers of metal gear in Britain. But metal is found in only 5 per
cent of the known Beaker graves, and their bronze axes came from
Ireland while the round-heeled daggers should be of Central European
manufacture. In addition to the metal trade, Beaker-folk may have
organized the distribution of axes from flint-mines and from factories
at Langdale in the Lake District, Penmaenmawr in North-West Wales,
and Tievebulliagh in Antrim, 1 and elsewhere; these factory products
were distributed all over England and Scotland, but always turn up
in a Secondary Neolithic context.

  By displacing the spiritual aristocracy, the invaders liberated
farmers and herdsmen in Britain but not in Ireland from the Mega-
lithic superstition,but they patronized native cults or gave them a
new celestial, rather than chthonic, orientation. Circles of great stones
were set up, sometimes in old class I henges or in those of the new
class II, with two entrances, 2 that the Beaker-folk had begun to con-
struct. From the Presely Mountains in South- West Wales huge blocks
of spotted dolerite (Bluestone) were transported to Salisbury Plain

                                            henge to become Stone-
for erection in a Secondary Neolithic class I
          8
henge II. This fantastic feat, like the construction of the huge class II
                                                           4
henge (diameter 1400 feet!) at Avebury (North Wilts ), must illustrate
a degree of political unification or a sacred peace guaranteed by the
Beaker aristocracy or by the spiritual leaders of the Cotswold-Severn
culture before them, and reflects the resources at their disposal but
produced by the neolithic farmers of the Wiltshire Downs.
   The round-headed invaders did not exterminate the native neolithic
population or replace their culture by a new one, brought ready made
from the Continent. Yet, while they were establishing themselves as a
ruling class, the old Windmill Hill culture changed into, or was replaced
by, what Piggott terms "Secondary Neolithic" cultures. In all these,
animal husbandry plays a more prominent part in the subsistence
economy than even in the older "Western" Neolithic, and in sympathy
therewith ceramic technique declines. Types of mesolithic ancestry,
such as lopsided arrow-heads (Fig. 150, i), derivatives of the petit
tranchet (cf. Fig. 3, 6-7), re-appear as if the traditions of autochthonous
hunter-fishers were being incorporated in those of neolithic societies.
Novel types narrow flint knives with polished edges, antler mace-
heads and cushion or pestle-shaped mace-heads of stone, bone pins,
some with a lateral loop or bulb, boars'-tusk pendants came into
use. These, though missing from primary Windmill Hill sites in Southern
         1
             PPS., XVII, 1951, 100-59; UJA. XV, 1952, 3*-48.
                                               t
         1
             Atkinson, Excavations at DorChester, I, 84 ff.
         1
             Atkinson, Stonekenge (London, 1956), 63 ff.
             Childe, PCBI., 102-4.
                                         331
                     DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
England, are found in long barrows in Northern England, in Clyde-
Carlingford and Pentland tombs, and in class I henges, but also alone
in single graves under round barrows or at the centre of a
                                                           ring ditch.
Yet none are regular components of the Beaker culture nor of any
other assemblage outside Britain. So all may be accepted as insular
                                   1
products of native genius.
   Even the new pottery styles were not introduced ready made from
the Continent. With Peterborough ware 2 no assemblage of distinctive
types is exclusively associated. Three consecutive styles can now be
recognized under this head. In the earliest, Ebbsfleet, style the rather
ovoid pots have distinct necks but simple rims; they are decorated
with a row of pits below the rim supplemented at times with an incised
lattice band above the pits or vertical cord impressions. In the deriv-
ative Mortlake style the rims are thickened and the pits are
                                                                 supple-
mented by a lavish decoration of "maggot" imprints or the impressions
of a "comb" or a bird's leg bone that covers the whole vase surface
(Fig. 155). Vases of the still later Fengate style are the immediate
forerunners of the Overhanging Rim Urns of the "Middle Bronze Age".
Ebbsfleet pottery is found, alone or associated with normal Windmill
Hill ware, in two causewayed camps in Sussex, in one Cotswold-Severn
tomb, and with normal Windmill Hill pottery and arrow-heads in a
barrow on the Chilterns. 8 Mortlake pottery recurs repeatedly together
with Windmill Hill, and usually also Beaker, wares in causewayed
camps, megalithic tombs and around long barrows, but always in
strata later than the primary occupational or burial deposits. Hence,
despite the really surprising similarity of Peterborough pottery to
that of the Swedish "dwelling-places" and to pit-comb ware                       beyond
the Baltic, no invasion from the Baltic need be postulated to explain it.
It       may more economically be regarded as the product of the established
Windmill   Hill farmers, now mixed with descendants of mesolithic
stocks and, in the Mortlake stage, subject to the Beaker
                                                                           aristocracy.
  Rinyo-Clacton pottery, found in East Anglia in pits submerged
by the subsequent "Lyonesse transgression" and in henge monuments
in Wiltshire   sometimes with, never demonstrably before, Beaker
ware does characterize conveniently a distinctive culture, 4 best
known from the Orkney Islands, 6 created by a tribe of sheep- and
cattle-breeders who had reached Orkney before the first Beaker-folk
  1
    Bone
       ie pins with lateral loops occur in a boat-axe
                 i
                                                       grave in Sweden and in another in
Estonia (Fv. (1956), 196-207); all may be copies of rare metal UnStician
                                                                               pins of like
             i




form.
  1
    Piggott, op. cit., 315, must be revised in the light of Isobel Smith's researches.
  *
    Smith, PPS.,       XX(1954),  7>
  *
         Piggott, op. cit., 321-40.
     *
         Childe, Skara Brae (London, 1931); PSAS., LXXIII, 6-31 (Rinyo).

                                            332
                        THE BRITISH ISLES
arrived there. On those wind-swept islands they found ideal pasture
for their flocks and herds, but were forced to translate into stone,

dwellings and furniture elsewhere made of wood. Their huts, grouped
in hamlets of seven or eight, and several times rebuilt on the old site,
were some 15 ft. square. On either side of the central hearth were




    FIG. 155. Peterborough bowl from Thames (}), and sherds from West Kennet
             Long Barrow. By permission of Trustees of British Museum.

fixed beds framed with stone slabs on the edge and covered with
canopies of hide. A dresser stood against the back wall, there were
cupboards above the beds and tanks let into the floor. As clothing,
skins were worn, for the dressing of which innumerable scrapers of
flint and awls and other bone tools were made. Adzes, of polished stone,
were mounted in perforated antler sleeves. The pots, though badly
fired, were flat-bottomed and decorated with grooved 01 applied ribs
and knobs forming lozenges, wavy lines, and even spirals.
                                      333
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  Personal ornaments, ingeniously made entirely from local materials,
include beads of bone, cows' teeth, and walrus ivory, arc-pendants of
boars' tusk laminae and bone pins with lateral loops.
  The Rinyo-Clacton culture was an insular British creation, but
doubtless incorporates fresh Continental traditions. So Rinyo houses
are stone versions of the Horgen huts (p. 296), and antler sleeves and
arc-pendants again point to Horgen. The patterns adorning the vases
can be paralleled in late Cave pottery from Catalonia, 1 in the Late
Chassey ware of Brittany, and its Wessex derivatives and in the
carvings on Boyne tombs. But in the earliest habitation level at Rinyo
"Western" Unstan pottery was still current side by side with the local
ware as if the latter had grown up out of the former. Though in Essex
Rinyo-Clacton ware is older than the Lyonesse transgression and in
Orkney than the oldest local Beaker, the similarity of its decoration
to that of Wessex incense cups has convinced Scott 2 and others that
the Rinyo-Clacton culture need be no older than the Wessex culture
in Southern England, i.e. Early Bronze Age II. In any case, its tradi-
tions live on in the Encrusted and Cordoned Urns of our Middle and
Late Bronze Ages.


            THE WESSEX CULTURE AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE
If   the Beaker culture represent the first phase of our Early Bronze
Age (E.B.A.I), that phase ended with the emergence of a new warrior
aristocracy in Wessex and Cornwall and of more isolated warrior
chieftains in East Anglia, Yorkshire, and Scotland, known exclusively
from burials under elaborate barrows. The Wessex chieftains8 dominated
the chalk downs from Sussex to Dorset, but established outposts on
both sides of the Bristol Channel. Their bones or ashes were buried,
sometimes in coffins hollowed out of a tree-trunk, 4 with extravagantly
rich furniture handled cups of gold, amber or shale, grooved triangular
           5
or, later,   ogival daggers (some with gold-studded hilts or amber
pommels), tanged spear-heads (Fig. 156, 2), flat or low-flanged axes,
but also superb flint arrow-heads tanged and barbed in the Breton
manner, arrow-shaft straighteners, and stone battle-axes (derivable
from the A Beaker type, but absurdly like the Northern Middle Neo-
lithic type of Fig. 95, 4). Their ladies wore gold-bound discs and
crescentic necklaces with pattern-bored spacers of amber, halberd

     1
         PSAS., LXIII (1929), 273.
         PS^S..LXXXII (1950), 44 ff.
     1
         Piggott, PPS., IV (1938), 52-106; cf. ibid.. 107-21; Inst. Arch. AR., X, 107-21.
         PJPS.. XV  (1949), 101-6.
         Ap Simon, Inst. Arch. AR., X (1954), 107-10.
                                          334
                          THE BRITISH ISLES
pendants of amber, gold, and bronze, double-axe, hammer and other
beads of jet and amber and of fayence imported from the Mediterranean.
  The vases distinctive of the Wessex graves (domestic pottery is
unknown) are "incense cups" decorated with punctured ribbons or
knobs admittedly inspired by the Late Chassey tradition of Brittany,
but contemporary Cinerary Urns reflect the Secondary Neolithic




       FIG. 156. Evolution of a socketed spear-head in Britain after Greenwell:
       i, Hintelsham, Suffolk; 2, Snowshill, Glos.; 3, Arreton Down,*, o W. (J).




traditions of the subject population. Though they are not found in the
aristocratic Bronze Age barrows there, the Armorican parallels to
Wessex funerary pottery are the strongest arguments for regarding
the Wessex chiefs as immigrants from Brittany (p. 320); the rest of
their equipment cannot be derived thence, but, in so far as it is not
of British origin, is based on UnStician (Saale-Warta) models. 1 If the
Wessex rulers be not just aggrandized A-Beaker-Battle-axe folk, they
are most likely to have come immediately from the Saale valley.
  Wherever the chiefs themselves came from, their wealth was prim-
  1
    For instance, the earlier Wessex daggers seem derivable from tfce Elbe-Oder type;
the halberd pendants reproduce the Saale-Warta bronze-shafted type.
                                         335
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
arily based  on the produce of flocks and herds grazed on the chalk
downs. But it was greatly augmented by the profits of trade. For the
chieftains controlled trade in Irish gold and copper and Cornish tin
with the Baltic, Central Europe, and even the ^Egean. In return they
secured lumps of amber and late Ungtician pins like Fig. 71, 6, 8, and 9.
Their wealth enabled them to enlist the services of highly skilled
craftsmen who devised original British products. Smiths, who had
learned core-casting in Bohemia, developed for instance a distinctively
British type of socketed spear-heads (Fig. 156). Jewellers translated
Highland crescentic necklaces into amber and bound
                                                         with Irish gold
amber discs. Such products  found  a market even in the civilized ^Egean;
the amber disc from   Knossos  (p. 33) and the necklaces   from   Mycenae
and Kakovatos            must rank as "made in England". In return,
                      (p. 80)
the Wessex chieftains were of course given segmented fayence beads,
                              for barbarians. But surely they acquired
(Fig. 157), trinkets suitable




     FIG. 157. Segmented fayence beads, Wilts (i). By permission of the Trustees
                            of the British Museum.



more enticing rewards. A dagger, carved on a trilithon in Stonehenge
III, may represent an imported Mycenaean dirk.
                                                The hilt of an actual
imported Mycenaean   L.H.IIIb sword (like Fig. 15, i) was in fact
recovered from a barrow at Pelynt near the south coast of Cornwall
                                       1
though not from a typical Wessex grave          .



  At the same time the Wessex chieftains devoted part of their wealth
to sanctifying their power by transforming and enriching the grandest
sanctuary of their predecessors. Stonehenge
                                                HI 8 combines a new
                                          the trilithon horseshoe and
arrangement of the holy Bluestones with
circle of sarsen blocks, dragged some twenty-five miles from Marl-
                                                            and dated
borough Downs; the well-dressed uprights are consecrated
by  carved                of the axes found in Wessex graves and of a
               representations
dagger, possibly imported from Greece.
  Meanwhile in the Highland Zone of Britain the absorption of the
Beaker aristocracy is symbolized by the gradual replacement of their
lordly drinking-cups by
                          humble Food Vessels as the appropriate
funerary vessels. For these can be derived from Secondary Neolithic
vases though sometimes hybridized with Beaker or Battle-axe types.
At the same time individual interment finally replaces collective burial
in megalithic tombs. But the single graves are often grouped in little
                                                    f
     i
         Childe, PPS., XVII (1951). 95-                 Atkinson, Stonektnge, 68-77.
                                          336
                               THE BRITISH ISLES
cemeteries, as in class I henges, and inhumation slowly gives place to
cremation, a change that once more documents a revival of Neolithic
rites   and ideas. Food Vessels           of the Yorkshire vase         form with a
sharp, generally grooved shoulder (Fig. 158, 2) were introduced into
Ireland, presumably by a fresh wave of immigrants from Great Britain.
As a result, there too collective burial gradually gave way to individual




                           I                                   2
        FIG. 158. Food Vessels, Argyll and East Lothian (J): i, Bowl; 2, Vase.


interment; in several Boyne tombs Food Vessels accompanied intrusive
secondary cremations. But in Ireland and Western Scotland developed
                                                          1

a bowl type of Food Vessel (Fig. 158, i) as a substitute for wooden
bowls, the form and decoration of which may also be inferred from the
Pyrenaean polypod bowls like Fig. 144 and Beaker associates like
Fig. in, 2.
  The predominantly pastoral economy favoured by the Beaker-folk
was maintained by Food Vessel societies. Though the latter are less
obviously stratified than that of Wessex, industry and trade flourished
among* them too. Halberds and decorated axes made in Ireland were
                                                                 2

         1
             Childe, PCBI., 119-34; SBS., 8-10, 51-62, 105-18.
         1
             PPS., IV, 272-82; Arch., LXXXVI, 305 ff.; Childe, PCBI. t 115-17.
                                          337
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
                                      for shipment to Northern Europe
transported across North Britain
without paying    tribute  to the chieftains  of Wessex. Direct maritime
intercourse  with   the Atlantic  coastlands  as far as Portugal may be
deduced   from    a  cylinder-headed pin,   like Fig. 131, found with a
Yorkshire  Food   Vessel in a grave in Galway,   from  the exact agreement
of the cup-and-ring marks,    carved on  the slabs  of such graves with the
              of Galicia  and Northern   Portugal
                                                  1
                                                     and from  the distribu-
petroglyphs
                  and                            the  imitation in Portugal,
tion in Brittany       Normandy (and perhaps




       FIG. 159. Gold lunula, Ireland. By permission of Trustees of British Museum.



p. 285) of gold lunulae like Fig. 159.
                                       For the latter, if inspired in the
last resort by gold collars worn by Egyptian nobles, are immediately
 Irishtranslations into sheet gold of the crescentic jet necklaces,
                                                     2        were
repeatedly associated with Food vessels in Scotland, which
 copied in amber in Wessex.
                         8
   Finally cremationists, of Secondary Neolithic stock, using as Ciner-
 ary Urns derivatives of Peterborough vases, were spreading
                                                                  from
 South-East England into the Highland Zone. They had reached Ireland

   1
       MacWhite, Estudios,     42-3;   Sobrino Buhigas,   Corpus Petroglyphorum Gallacia
 (Compostella, iQ45)>
   i
     Childe, PCBI., 123-4. Note that the 8old lunute found in Northern Europe are not
 of Irish manufacture.
      Childe, PCBI., 145-59-
                                              338
                            THE BRITISH ISLES
while segmented fayence beads were still current, 1 while another
party, crossing the North Sea, colonized the Low Countries. Burials
                                                             2


in Cinerary Urns, like the urns themselves, preserve even more clearly
than those with Food Vessels the native neolithic traditions. For they
cluster in small cemeteries or urnfields, some enclosed in a penannular
bank and ditch like a class I henge. 8 They are still poorer and less
aristocratic. Nevertheless, contemporary hoards of Middle Bronze Age
II show that, though the Wessex chieftains had been expelled or
absorbed, the established bronze industry continued to flourish,
creating novel types distinctively British spear-heads with a loop at
the base of the blade, palstaves, and rapiers, while goldsmiths devised
a variety of splendid ornaments, culminating in the superb tippet of
                                                                                 4
sheet gold richly embossed, found in a grave at Mold in Flintshire.
  The widespread diffusion of Britannico-Hibernian metal-work, and
the variety of products that reached the British Isles in exchange,
not only illustrate the leading role of these islands at the dawn of the
Continental Bronze Age and the diverse influences that fertilized
insular culture; they also provide a unique opportunity for corre-
lating several local sequences and assigning to
                                                  them historical dates.
The crescentic amber   necklaces from the Shaft  Graves of Mycenae and
from Kakovatos (p. 79) give   a terminus ante quern not later than 1600
B.C. for the rise of the Wessex culture, though the imported segmented

fayence beads probably indicate that it lasted till 1400. Danubian and
North European chronologies can be checked against this dating.
  The pins of late Ungtician form from Wessex graves (p. 336) on the
one hand. Irish axes, halberds, and even a gold ornament of the bar-style
from the UnStician hoards on the other5 prove that our Early Bronze
Age 2 falls within period IV of the Danubian sequence. The Early
Bronze Age I round-heeled daggers, associated here with A Beakers,
are typologically parallel to the earliest UnStician forms and can
in fact be matched in late Bell-beaker graves in Bohemia and the
Rhineland. The earlier Bi beakers should then be contemporary with
their Central European counterparts and go back to late Danubian HI.
A synchronism   with Northern Neolithic IHa-b (M.N. Ill) can in fact
be established by J. J. Butler with the aid of the sun-disc mentioned
on p. 330. Northern Neolithic IV is substantially parallel to our Wessex
culture. But it is itself equivalent to Montelius' Northern Bronze

  1 Such a bead was discovered in a
                                    secondary grave in the Mound of the Hostages at
Tara by Prof. O'Riordain in 1955.
  *
    Glasbergen, "Excavations in the Eight Beatitudes" (Pal&ohistoria, II-III),
                                                                               Gron-
ingen, 1954, esP- PP- I2 7-3*> 168-70.
    Childe, PCBI., 151-3.
                                                    Germania, XXII (1938). ?-"
                                                *
  4
    PPS., XIX (1953), 161 ff-
                                         339
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Age I, though metal was locally too rare to be buried in its characteristic
Long Cist tombs. But one of the earliest Northern graves, furnished
with metal gear and so representative of Montelius Bronze Age Ha
                                                                  1




                                1
at Liesbiittel in Schleswig         contained an imported British spear-head
of the type distinctive of our Middle         Bronze Age 2. In the opposite
direction a synchronism between Northern Neolithic II (E.N.C.) and
some phase of our Clyde-Carlingford (Megalithic) culture may be
deduced from the adoption of the Western semicircle motive, prom-
inent on Beacharra vases, on C funnel-beakers in Denmark and Sweden,
and the application of the Northern device of cord impression to the
                                    2
decoration of some Beacharra vases.
  Correlations with the Iberian Peninsula are not quite so conclusive.
Segmented fayence    beads no doubt prove an <?Verlap between the
Wessex culture and the El Argar culture of South-Eastern Spain
                                                          a Food
Spanish Bronze II. But the cylinder-headed pin found with
Vessel in Ireland should belong there to Bronze I while the incense
cups from Wessex graves and associated with Cinerary Urns
                                                                     have
significantparallels in the incised pots and stone vessels of Los Millares
and contemporary sites. So, too, daggers with a midrib on one face only,
as at Los Millares and Alcali, have been found with Cinerary Urns
                                     8
in Scotland and Southern Ireland. This phase of the Los Millares
culture should then on the British evidence be assigned to Bronze Ib
(Los Millares II) and later than the popularity of at least Pan-European
Beakers in the Peninsula. These would have to be assigned to Bronze la
(Los Millares I as Leisner put it), which would be roughly parallel
                                                                    to
the Beaker period in England. Even so, the neolithic passage graves
of Portugal maybe at least as early as the Northern ones of Neolithic III.

  1
    Kersten, Zur alteren nordischen Bronxezeit (Neumiinster, n.d.), 65; cf. also Broholm,
Danmarks Bronzealder, I (Copenhagen, 1944), 223.
    Childe in Corolla archcsologica in honorem C. A. Nordmann (Helsinki, IQ5 2 ). 8 -




    Childe, APL., IV (1953), 182-4.




                                          340
