                                 CHAPTER VI
            FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS
THE rugged peninsula between the Black Sea and the Adriatic, despite
the severity of the winters and the retardation of spring, enjoys, owing
to its latitude and the prolongation of autumnal warmth, a climate
intermediate between the Mediterranean and the Temperate. So the
adaptation of an Asiatic rural economy would be less difficult there
than in the rest of the European woodland zone. And incidentally the
ancestors of one-corn wheat (Triticum monococcum) and several fruit-
trees grew wild there.       So the fertile valleys intersecting the Balkan
ranges are, like Thessaly and South-West Asia, studded with tells
representing the sites of permanent, though formally neolithic, villages.
Their stratification should provide a reliable record of the process of
adaptation. But in Bulgaria the latest accounts of the culture-sequence
at Banyata1 and Karanovo 2 are in flat contradiction with earlier
accounts of the succession at Kyrollovo, 8 Veselinovo, 4 and Karanovo
itself.
        5 So too at Vinia on the Middle Danube the divisions of the

material excavated by Vassits6 from the 10 m. deep deposit proposed
                         7
respectively by Holste, Miloj6i<5,
                                     8
                                         and Garaanin9 are equally discrepant.
   In the peninsula and along the Lower Danube a mesolithic popula-
tion, allied to the Northern Forest-folk, might be postulated to explain
peculiarities in the local neolithic culture, but is not documented by
any certified finds. In the caves so far explored no occupation layers
intervene between strata containing Upper Palaeolithic (Aurignacian)
implements and a pleistocene fauna and those yielding remains of
developed neolithic cultures. The continuous record recommences
with farmers whose cultures in general for all their local divergences
are not only based on the same cereals and domestic stock as those
of peninsular Greece and Hither Asia, but also reproduce the latters'
rural economy and ideology expressed in female figurines and even
their preferences for adzes and slings.
           GodohUk Plovdiv, II (1950), 4-20.
           SA., XXTV. (1955). "Si cf. IxbBAI., XVII (1950), 210-12.
           Jtob. d. Inst., LVIII, A A. (1943). 74-92.
           IxbBAI., XIII (1939), 195-227-
           Antiquity,
                       XIII (1939), 345-9; Gaul, BASPR., XVI (1948), 43-5.
           Preistonjskaya Vinca (Belgrad, 1930-36), 4 volumes, cited P.V.
           WPZ., XXVI (i939) * ft
           Chronologic, 71-81; BSA., XLIV (1949), 258-82.
           Hronologija Vintanske Gtuppe (Ljubljana, 1951).
                                         84
           FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS

                        THE STARCEVO-K6R6S CULTURE1
Throughout the Balkan peninsula and on both sides of the Carpathians,
north of the Danube, the continuous record of food-production begins
in settlements of the Starievo culture. This assemblage, only in the
last ten years clearly distinguished from its successors, extends from
the    gean coasts in Thessaly and Gallipoli across the main Balkan
range and the Danube to the K6ros and the headwaters of the Pruth
(Map I, crosses). In such a vast and diversified region the material
remains of the culture are surprisingly uniform, though local divergences
are of course recognizable, especially in pottery; we could easily
distinguish a Maritza or Thracian, a Drave-Morava, and a Maros-K6r6s
aspect.
  Though occurring at the base of several tells both in Bulgaria and
in Yugoslavia, the Starfievo layers seem to represent rather temporary
settlements, and similar material has been collected from caves and
from unstratified camp sites along streams and lake shores. On the
Maros and K6ros the latter consisted of groups of trapeze-shaped huts
of wattle-and-daub with lean-to walls that formed also the roof, 2 but
on the Maritza more commodious houses were built in the later phase
of the culture. In the economy, hunting played a prominent role;
bones of game animals are common in all settlements. But the hunters
did not use flint-tipped arrows, but relied on traps and slings. 8 Fishing
may be deduced from the location of the encampments along the banks
of streams and lakes and from clay net-sinkers which in the KSros
aspect assume the ornate form of Fig. 45. But Starfievo folk were
always farmers even though their rural economy may have been
incompatible with durable settlement in one place.
   Actual cereals so far only one-corn wheat in Bulgaria; millet in
Yugoslavia! have been identified; they were stored in clay-lined pits;
                                                                         4
sickle flints were found mounted in a curved horn-handle at Karanovo                      ;


saddle querns   and  rubbers are found everywhere.  Beside the  querns  in

Bulgaria are regularly found bone spatula (Fig. 45) that must have
been used to scoop up the flour. Such spatulse recur on practically every
StarCevo site throughout the province, but in no other context, so that
they can be used as a diagnostic type of the culture as confidently as
pots. Bread was probably already baked in low clay ovens. Finally,
cattle, goats, sheep, and pigs were bred for food. But in general the

  1
    Kutzian, I., The Kdrds Culture (Dissertations Pannonica, s. II, no. 23) (Buda-Pest,
1944-47); GaraSanin, Arandeljovil-, Starbvalka Kultura (Univerz v. Ljubljani, 1954):
Gaul, "West    BulgarianPainted", ASPRB., XVI (1948); "Banyata", God. Phv., II
(1950), 4-12; St. s. Cere., II (1951), 57-64.            Banner, TMK., 17; Dolg., IX-X. 75.
                                                     *
    Garafianin, Stattevat. KuU. t 134.                   Antiquity, XIII, 345-
                                                85
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
rural economy must have been one of shifting agriculture and pastoral-
ism combined with hunting and collecting. That will account for the
relatively rapid spread of such a homogeneous
                                               culture over so vast a

province.
  In industry carpenters used exclusively adzes (like Fig. 29, B and D)
and chisels mounted in antler sleeves. In the Koros aspect at least
celts were sometimes drilled with a hollow-borer and antler beams
were perforated and sometimes armed with stone blades to serve
as adzes or mattocks. Textiles may be inferred from spindle-whorls,
spools, and loom- weights of baked clay.




     FIG. 45. Clayiloom-weights or net-sinkers (J) and bone spatula of Starve vo
                                 K6r5s culture, (J).

   The potters, though not full-time specialists, had complete mastery
over their material. The universal and perhaps earliest Startevo ware
is indeed coarse and chaff-tempered. But the shapes are highly sophisti-

cated. The vases, some 21 inches high, are all provided with flat bases
or even stand-rings though not with true handles. North of the Balkan
range the stand-rings may be quatrefoil or cruciform (Fig. 46) or
replaced by four nipples that farther south have grown into four solid
legs. These vessels were elaborately decorated by
                                                      rustication (often
called barbotine), which in the Koros aspect is combined with con-
ventional figures of goats, stags, or men in relief. This coarse ware,
save perhaps in the Koros aspect, was generally accompanied by finer
fabrics, also chaff-tempered, with a well-smoothed or even burnished
surface, grey, buff, or red in colour. The fine grey wares may be decor-
ated with narrow flutings or channellings that both at Starevo and
on the Maritza may formj spiraliform patterns. Finally, small vases,
especially goblets on a low foot, may be painted in white or black on a
red ground or     in Yugoslavia       in dark brown on buff, in fact just like
                                         86
          FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS
Dimini ware (p. 64). The lines of paint form simple designs among
which spirals occur only rarely and, according to Milojid, late. Neither
the rusticated nor the painted designs were blended into harmonious
compositions as in Thessaly. At Karanovo fluted ware seems to appear
later than painted; both appear later than rusticated ware at Starfcevo
                                2                   8            4
according to Fewkes, Milojtid, and Mrs GaraSanin, but Ehrich denies
                     1




   FIG. 46. Cruciform-footed bowl in fine StarSevo ware and jar ot rusticated K6r6s
                                      style (^).



this.   Both Miloj&c and Mrs Garaganin agree that the rusticated KSros
ware represents a still later phase of the culture.
  Trade brought obsidian to the encampments on the Pruth and along
the Tisza and Koros, and Spondylus shells to the latter region from the
Mediterranean.
                                             are common                on the Koros
   Clay stamps, as in neolithic Byblos,
sites, at Starievo itself and along  the  Pruth, but have not yet been
                                                       well-modelled and
reported south of the Balkans. Similarly figurines,
markedly steatopygous, are common      in  the K6ros  group but rare and
rude at Starfcevo and on the Maritza. Burials  were unceremonious, being
represented by  skeletons without grave goods, interred contracted in pits
in the encampments. The expansion of the StarCevo culture must have
occupied a considerable time, and in
                                        each area, though not at any
single site, its life may well
                               have been long. Earlier and later phases

          1
              Fewkes, ASPRB., IX (i933). 44--
          *
              BSA., XLIV (1949). 261-6.
              Startevatka Kultura (Ljubljana, 1954). 62-80, 134.
          4
              Relative Chronologies in Old World Archeology (Chicago, 1954),
                                            87
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
should then be distinguishable. Now in Thessaly Starfcevo rusticated
ware is Early Neolithic, being stratified below Sesklo wares (p. 58).
In Macedonia, on the contrary, the painted pottery of Olynthus is
                                              1
indistinguishable from painted Starfievo ware. but is Late Neolithic.
On the Pruth in Northern Romania Starfcevo wares (painted and rusti-
cated) are stratified below Danubian I. At Vina too Starievo culture
appears pure in the deepest level, though K6r6s sherds at least are
mixed in the immediately overlying deposit of the Vinfca culture. But
north of the Danube the KSros culture is said, sometimes at least,
to be later than the Vinfca culture. 2 So the clay stamps that are com-
monest on Koros sites are Danubian II on the Middle and Upper
Danube. Hence the Koros aspect is probably a late ptoase of the
Starfcevo culture as GaraSanin and Miloji<5 contend, and painting may
be a secondary feature in the pottery.
  If this be correct, antler sleeves and mattocks and the spiral motive

may be accretions developed or borrowed by Starfievo fanners from
hypothetical hunter-fishers of Forest traditions along the Danube.
Similarly vase painting, the manufacture of the more realistic figurines
and of the stamps, that look most like Asiatic seals, and perhaps the
improvement in rural economy, suggested by the more permanent
settlements on the Maritsa, may be additions to the original culture
inspired by fresh immigrants from Hither Asia. The hypothetical "pure
Starfcevo culture", left by the abstraction of the foregoing accretions,
could quite well have arisen in the Balkans, since the only directly
attested cereals cultivated and animals8 bred may be native there. It
may, on the other hand, be due to immigrants from South-Western
Asia related to the farmers who made unpainted pots in North Syria
and Cilicia, or, if rusticated Starfcevo ware seems too unlike the recog-
nized incised fabrics of the area, to farmers who made no pots at all. 4
  The relatively homogeneous StarCevo culture was in the sequel
replaced by or by divergent adjustments to the environment grew
into distinct local cultures in the several natural subdivisions of the
province. Divergent development would be quite natural if a sparse
population of herdsmen and shifting cultivators that had maintained
communication between dispersed bands as a consequence of trans-
humance, hunting expeditions, and the search for fresh soil to till,
settled down in permanent villages; for owing to their neolithic self-
sufficiency these could remain isolated.
  1
      Heurtiey, PM.. 116.
      AE. (n.s.), VTI-IX (1946-48), 19-41.
  *
      But probably no sheep or goats, BRGK., XXXVI (1955), 21-5.
  4   The "nnfired pottery reported by Grbic from Subotica is really the clay lining
to bottle-shaped silos on a sandy site. Normal Starevo pottery was found in the silos.
                                         88
           FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS

              THE VARDAR-MORAVA OR VIN^A CULTURE
In Western Macedonia, along the Vardar and Morava, on the Danube
above the Iron Gates, and thence across the Banat and up the Maros,
permanent villages growing into tells begin with the Vinta culture.
  In the great tell of Vinfca itself above the Starievo levels appear
fabrics and ceramic forms that are not found in pure sites of the
StarCevo culture but do occur at sites where StarCevo types are totally
absent. These ceramic features Miloj&d1 and GaraSanin 2 have isolated
from the Starfievo assemblage and used to define a distinct Vinfia
culture to which other traits may be attributed by association. As thus
defined, the culture is represented at a series of sites from the Vardar-
Morava watershed down the latter river, along the Save8 and the
Danube, and then beyond that river4 as far as Tordos on the Maros5 in
Transylvania. The stratification at Vina allows of the definition of
phases in the development of those data susceptible of statistical
treatment, but not of the determination of the relative age of isolated
objects. Miloj5i<5 distinguishes five main phases,         but GaraSanin can
recognize only two. He will be followed here.
  The basis of life was still mixed farming combined with hunting,
       and collecting. But the rural economy had been adjusted to
fishing,




     FIG. 47. Bone combs and ring-pendant, Tordos, and "harpoon", Vinfia (J).


maintain permanent villages on one site. To catch the large fish of the
Danube, the Tisza, and the Maros, antler harpoons or leister-prongs
(Fig. 47) were employed as well as nets and hook-and-line (by Vinfia II
the hooks were barbed), Flint arrow-heads were only exceptionally
used, but no clay sling-bolts have been found either. The houses of
wattle and daub were rectilinear but rather irregular in plan, divided
into two or three rooms and furnished with low-vaulted ovens. Adzes

            BSA.. XLIV (1949). 258-306.
            Hronologia Vintansha Gruppe (1951).
            Sfertnor (n.s.), III-IV (2953), 107-26.
            4J&, VIX-IX, 19-41.
            Roik*, M., Die Stmmbmg Zsofia Torma (Cluj-Koloszvar, 1941).
                                          89
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
were still preferred to axes. Perforated stone hammer-axes appeared
first in Vinta II, but antlers were perforated for mattocks as in the

StarSevo culture.
  The pottery was of high quality. The commonest fabric at all levels
and sites was black burnished ware. A red-surfaced version (erroneously
termed "red-slipped") was also made. Black and red part-coloured
vases, as described on p. 65, are confined to the first phase/ To the
same   phase belongs what Miloj&d calls         and compares to the
                                          urfirnis
Late Neolithic ware of Greece (p. 65). Vases were flat-based. Handles
were foreign to the pure Vinia tradition, but at Plofinik1 and other late
sites in the Morava valley appear handled tankards and mugs resembling




                             1    2   3    4     5    I   7   I   9   10




                  FIG. 48. "Face urn" lid from Vinda. After Vassits.


the Early Macednic. Instead, vases were provided with lugs that even
in phase I may be hornlike and are provided with button-like pro-

jections in phase II. Tubular spouts may go
                                            back to phase I, but are
commoner in II. Carinated bowls and dishes with flaring or vertical
rims were popular throughout. Chalices on tall solid feet occur already
in the first phase, tripod vases only in the second. Curious bottles,
designed for carrying on the back, flat on one side and provided with
looped lugs on the other, are assigned to Vinfca I. The same type occurs
in the Kttros and Romanian variants of the StarCevo culture, but in
Bulgaria is also post-Starevo. Distinctive of both phases of the Vinfia
culture and found equally on the Save, the Morava, and the Maros are
anthropomorphic       lids       (Fig.    48),       traditionally     compared to Trojan
              1
                  Grbic, Plotnik (Beograd, Narodni Muzeum, 1929).
                                                 90
          FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS
face-urns and really like some from Troy III. Anthropomorphic and
zoomorphic vases were likewise manufactured, presumably for ritual use.
   Decoration was effected by stroke-burnishing, narrow flutings or
corrugations, and incisions combined with punctuations; rouletting was
introduced in phase II. White, red, or yellow colours were applied after
firing to decorate altars and figurines in phase I, but crusted on the
vase surface mainly in phase II. The motives in phase I include triangles,
filled with punctuations, and punctured ribbons or corrugations, form-

ing simple rectilinear patterns. Maeanders, spirals, and repetition
patterns,, derived therefrom, are reputedly confined to phase II.
  In addition to pots, white limestone dishes were used at Vinfia.
Toilet articles include a comb from Tordos (Fig. 47), resembling that
from Late Neolithic Macedonia, and ring pendants.
  Ritual equipment was as rich in the Vinfca culture as in other Balkan,
Greek, and South-West Asiatic cultures and implies a similar ideology.
The earliest figurines are more schematic than those from KSr6s sites,
but some were already seated on thrones. Later details of the visage
were more carefully modelled; the face became pentagonal instead of
triangular, the hands rest on the stomach, clasp the breasts or carry a
suckling, but the legs fuse into pedestals. Mortuary ceremonial, on the
other hand, is not well attested and must have played a minor part in
ideological activity. Some dubious cases of cremation have indeed been
                           1
mentioned, and at VinCa nine skeletons were buried in a "pit cave"
cut in the I6ss. but at VuSedol similar "chamber tombs" contained
Slavonian pottery.
  The site of Vinta, close to the junction of the Morava with the
Danube above the perilous rapids of the Iron Gates, was well-adapted
for   trade.  Indeed, Vassits attributed the settlement to a colony
of  ^Egean   merchants  whom he eventually identified as lonians of
the seventh century. Actually the adjacent cinnabar deposits of
Suplja Stena were exploited by Vinta people. Unambiguous imports
are Spondylus bracelets, found at all levels, and obsidian commonest
in Milojfiid, phase B. The volcanic glass presumably came from North-
East Hungary down the Tisza. With it came pots such as were being
made along that river, first Koros types of Starievo pottery, then
numerous complete Tisza vases. Smail scraps of copper are reported
from all levels at Vina, but the abundance of stone adzes and other
tools at all levels and all sites implies that no regular supplies were

organized. But at PloCnik in phase II was found a hoard of thirteen
copper adzes and a hammer-axe like Fig. 64, i, together with five stone
adzes.   Many similar Hungarian-Transylvanian types are scattered
                        1
                            Vassits, PK., II, 9, pis. 8-17.
                                         9*
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
about throughout the Vina province, all presumably imports from
                                                 1
beyond the Danube. At Kladova on the Save a typical Hungarian
axe-adze was found with thirty-nine long flint blades such as are proper
to the Bodrogkeresztur culture of Danubian III.
   Such imports establish good synchronisms with the Danubian
sequence: Vinia I overlaps with the Koros phase of Starfievo, but its
later subdivisions (Miloji<5' B and C) are frankly contemporary with
the Tisza culture. The latter should be Danubian II though direct links
with the Lengyel culture, typical of that period, are lacking at Vinfia.*
The succeeding Vinfia II phase is in turn contemporary with, or replaced
locally by, the Baden and Bodrogkeresztur cultures of Danubian
                                                                    III.

Correlations with the East Balkan sequence are equally explicit. On
the Romanian bank of the Lower Danube, Vinfca I remains at Verbi-
coara are stratified below those of the Salcufa culture while Boian
pottery is found at Tordos, presumably with the Vina I material
                            8

from the site. Conversely the Vinia II relics from the upper Morava
valley are hardly distinguishable from those proper to the Salcufa
culture. In other words, Vina I and II are respectively homotaxial
with Boian and Salcufa. 4
   Chronological relations with the ^Egean are much harder to deter-
mine. Relations are plain enough, but not in the form of direct imports
across the Balkans or local reproductions of ephemeral types. The
Vina I culture on the Danube is so nearly identical with that of Late
Neolithic Servia in Macedonia that we may say that this culture, like
that of Starievo, crossed the frontier between the Mediterranean and
the Temperate zones intact. Most Vinfca I pot-fabrics and forms recur
also in Late Neolithic Central Greece, some even at Kum Tepe in the
Troad. All that does not prove contemporaneity. Indeed, the priority
of one region over the other would decide several crucial issues in Euro-
pean and Indo-European prehistory. Now Miloji<5 has indeed claimed
                                                   6

a pedestalled pyxis from his VinCa 62 as an Early Cycladic import,
and it might well be a copy of an imported marble vase. An unstratified
fragment from VinCa may again imitate an Early Helladic askoid
jug,* while a vase from Bubanj II (i.e. Vinfia II) may imitate a meta
  1
    Arh. Vest., Ljubljana, V (1954), 229-32.
  *
    The few sherds of crusted ware reported from Vinda (Vassits, PV. II, p. 134)
                                                                            t

come mostly from late Vinda II levels.
  9                                                St. s. fere., V (1954), 6l P 1 V.
  4
    Rpska, Tortna-Sammlung, pi. CXV, 12-21; cf.                                 -



    Miloj&ic*, Chron., p. 64, writing before the Romanian data were available, equated
Gumelnifa as well as Boian with Vinca I.
  *
      Chron., 77.
  *
    Fragmentary "Minyan" and "Early Helladic" vases from Humska Cuka, quoted
by Garaianin (Arch. Jugoslav., I (1954). *9 f.) and Miloji6 (Chron., 55-6), are not really
much help. Their ,gean provenance is not at all likely and their relation to the Vinca
sequence debated.
                                           92
          FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS
sauce-boat like those from Troy and the Peloponnese. The Vinia II
handled jugs and tankards from the Morava sites must be related to
the corresponding Early   gean forms, but might be earlier as well as
later.

  Yugoslavian prehistorians are agreed that the Vinfca culture did
not develop out of the local Starievo culture, but must be attributed
to fresh colonists from the south-east. It would be these, then, who
introduced into temperate Europe the form of sedentary village life,
the rural economy that supported it, and the ideology that held society
together as they had been developed in South-Western Asia. On the
other hand, as pointed out on p. 66, there may be archaeological and
other grounds for believing that the Late Neolithic culture of Western
Macedonia and Central Greece, now identified as the Vinia I culture,
was introduced by an incursion from beyond the Balkans. If no
development of the Starfcevo culture in that direction can be observed
on the Morava, it may conceivably be traceable on the Maritza when
the varied material from Karanovo I and Banyata I have been
exhaustively studied and published.
  During phase I, the Vina culture exhibited remarkable uniformity
from Servia on the Haliakmon, or at least from Pavlovce on the Vardar-
Morava divide, to Tordos on the Maros, from Ostrul Corbului below
the Iron Gates westward to Sarvas on the Drave. In phase II this
unity dissolved, as had that of the Starievo.
  North of the Danube the permanent villages of Vina type give
place to more temporary hamlets, probably based on shifting culti-
vation. In the Balkans, however, many tells were still occupied and the
ideology appropriate to settled agriculture everywhere continued to
find expression in the production of female figurines. But in the NiS
basin on the upper Morava the culture of Bubanj II is a sort of hybrid
between Vin6a and Salcufa. About the same time arose on the Bosna
the remarkable Butmir1 culture. At the eponymous site, a low tell,
adzes, figurines, and much of the pottery carry on the Vinfca tradition.
But the exuberant development of spiral ribbons and mouldings,
sometimes forming a net pattern as on Early Cydadic vases, and the
multiplication of tanged flint arrow-heads is quite novel. Finally, at
Vinfca itself the old culture persists. But in the levels between 4*5 and
2 '5 below Vassits' datum obsidian is rare, and Miloj&d sees Baden
influence in the pottery. Between the last two occupation levels were
found vases belonging to the Middle Bronze Age of the Lower Maros,
assignable to period V of the Danubian sequence. So unless an inter-

    Benac, A., Prthistorijsko naselje Nebo       problem Butmirske Kulture (Univerzav
  1                                          i

Ljubljana), 1952.
                                        93
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
ruption of habitation has produced an hiatus, Danubian III, IV, and
                                                                                         V
should be contemporary with later phases of the VinCa culture!
  It seems as if, having established a workable adjustment to the
local environment, the self-sufficing Balkan villagers made no effort
or at least failed to obtain regular supplies of metal. The widespread
bronze types that define periods IV and V in the Danubian province
are missing in the Balkans; a formally neolithic culture persisted.


             THE VESELINOVO CULTURE OF SOUTHERN THRACE
According to the latest reports of Mikov and Detev, the Starfievo
                                                                     8
culture at Karanovo, 1 Banyata, and Ginova mogila negr Celopec
                                2


in the Maritza valley was immediately succeeded by one of very
                                                                   4
different aspect that may be named after another tell, Veselinovo.
  The permanent villages were composed of spacious houses comprising
several rooms. The frame was constructed of upright wooden posts,
but the walls consisted of clay mixed with straw. Their inhabitants
were settled farmers who now cultivated emmer in addition to one-
corn wheat. Perhaps, too, they bred, or at least hunted, horses whose
bones are reported from Veselinovo. 6 Huntsmen still relied mainly on
slings, but stone battle-axes may have been made for war. The pottery,
even more than the architecture, reveals a thorough mastery of wood-
work. For this adzes were still preferred, but axe-heads were made and
perforated for mounting. The pottery marks a complete break with the
Starievo traditions. The normal ware is self-coloured, usually black
and sometimes burnished. Ornament, employed so profusely before,
has been abandoned save for applied strips that may terminate in
spirals. During building some pots were stood on rush mats, the impres-
sions of which are common on bases. Pithoi, over 50 cm. high, were
manufactured, but the most distinctive form is a straight-sided or
pear-shaped mug (Fig. 49) provided with a stout handle prolonged
upwards to a little pillar. The form is obviously inspired by a wooden
model. So are bowls or lamps on four stout round legs and triangular
ones on short flat legs. The latter are often decorated with excised
chequer patterns, inspired by chip-carving (Fig. 49), and recur,
similarly decorated, in the homotaxial Boian culture farther north
and in the Chalcolithic of Ali$ar in Central Anatolia. Lop-sided bottles
  1
    Information from the excavator.
    Goditnik Plovdiv, II (1950), 4-30.
  * God.                                                                    Naroden Muzei,
         Plovdiv, I (1948), 160-4; Raxkopki     i   Proutvaniya   (Sofia,
1948). 75-8i.
  *
      IxbBAI., XIII (1939).
  1   The stratigrapnical position of the horses' bones   and of the battle-axes    is still
uncertain. Neither have been yet found in situ at Karanovo.

                                           94
            FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS
for carrying on the back were made in the Veselinovo level at Banyata
as at Vina (p. 90).
  A few very conventional figurines come from Karanovo II, but in
general the Veselinovo levels are conspicuously poor in those ritual
objects of clay that illustrate the ideology of the Sesklo culture in
Greece and of later Balkan cultures. Indeed, the Veselinovo culture
seems to interrupt the Balkan tradition and can hardly be regarded
as an autochthonous development of the Starfievo complex. Its plain




     FIG. 49. Mug, tripod bowl, and "altar" decorated by excision, Banyata II.



self-coloured pots with thrust handles in particular look Anatolian.
If Mikhalic (p. 66) really be parallel to Macedonian Late Neolithic and

belong to Balkan period II, the Veselinovo culture could be regarded
as a result of the same movement, more closely adapted to the Balkan
environment. But none of the distinctive Troadic forms, so conspicuous
at Mikhalic, has yet been found in situ in a Veselinovo layer. There are
indeed analogies to Veselinovo handles and to the "chip-carved" lamps
in Anatolia, but these are confined to Alaca Hoyiik, Biiyiik Giillucek, 1
and Ali$ar, 2 all on the plateau. Moreover, these are imitations of wooden
models such as are common all along the southern slopes of the Balkans
and the Alps, even to Italy and South France.
  Now, at the eponymous site Mikov traced the development of the
Veselinovo culture into one of Bronze Age type characterized by a
copper shaft-hole axe, stone battle-axes, bowls with short trumpet
lugs growing from the inturned rims, side-spouted bowls and jugs,
and even something like a Minoan teapot. Similar material comes from
               8                        4
Razkopanitsa, Ezero, and Yunatsite, where it certainly overlies
Gumelnija deposits  and so belongs to Balkan IV. Of course, the strati-
fication at Banyata and Karanovo may have been misinterpreted, and

            Belleten, XII (1948)* 475
        i
                                        .
        1
          von der Osten, Alishar HUyUk, 1930-32, OIP., XXIX, fig. 93, 2393.
        8
          IzvBAL, XVII (1950), 171 ff.
        4   Godihtik Plovdiv, 1927-9 (1940), 55 ff.

                                            95
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Veselinovo there may have followed Gumelni^a, as Mikov reported in
1939. Alternatively it could be assumed that the Veselinovo culture,
like the Macednic Bronze Age cultures, developed at some sites parallel

to, but unaffected by, the intrusive Gumelni^a settlements, and that
then in Balkan IV the Veselinovo tradition triumphed over the intru-
sions from the north. In either case some ceramic forms of the

developed Veselinovo culture from Ezero trumpet lugs and cord-
ornament, though belonging to Balkan IV are more reminiscent of
Mikhalic than anything yet observed in Karanovo II!


                            THE BOIAN CULTURE
North of the main Balkan range, on both sides of the Lower Danube
and in Transylvania on the Upper Olt, Balkan period II is occupied
by an assemblage termed, after an island in the Danube, the Boian
culture. 1 Comsa2 has recently claimed to distinguish two preparatory

phases during which settlements were not yet quite stable villages,
when only one-corn wheat and millet were cultivated, when arrows
were armed with trapezes and lunates, and when pottery was tempered
with chaff and decorated only with channelled or incised lines that
might form spirals and maeanders. His stages, if reliable, would give
hints at the acculturation of mesolithic survivors, already postulated
(p. 88), or at their absorption by immigrant farmers.
  But, as found at the base of the tells of Vidra and Tangaru, 4 and at
                                                        3

the eponymous site, Boian denotes a regular village culture based on
the cultivation of one-corn and emmer wheats and millet combined
with stock-breeding, hunting, and fishing. The villages were made up of
substantial rectangular houses, walled with split tree-trunks and wattle
and daub and equipped with central fire-places and a very shallow
                                                 5
porch, thus approximating to the megaron plan. These are said to
have been preceded by less substantial huts at Tangaru. Weaving is
attested by clay loom-weights and cruciform whorls, like those used
on the Koros. The carpenter used adzes of shoe-last form or bevelled
as in the Sesklo culture of Thessaly. But they might be mounted in
perforated antler sleeves as at Maglemose.
  The home-made pots are obviously influenced both in form and
decoration by wooden models. Characteristic are cylindrical peg-footed
boxes (Fig. 50), big biconical jars, two-storeyed urns, ladles with solid

       Gaul, ASPRB., XVI (1948), s.v.
       St. s. Cerc. t   V
                      (i954> 395 #
       Rosetti, Publicat. Muzeului Municip. Bucuresti, I (1934).
       Berciu, Bui. Muzeului Judet. Vlasca T. Antonescu, I (Bucurest, 1935).
       Bui. Muxeu, Jud. Vlasca T. Antonescu, II (1937), &g- 3-

                                        96
         FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS
handles, and tiny vases with pointed bases that stood in pairs on
cubical supports. Exceptional are pedestalled bowls of Danubian II
form and others on human feet. For decorating these products the
                                                    of excision, but also
potter employed the wood-carver's technique
incision, fluting, rustication, and, exceptionally, negative painting in
graphite, and crusting with colours after
                                            the firing; spirals, maeanders,




                      FIG. 50. Peg-footed vase, Denev (J).



and cognate repetition patterns form the basis for a rich all-over
decoration.
  The Boian farmers were acquainted with copper, but used it only
for small ornaments and made no attempt to organize regular supplies
for industrial use. The only other indication of rudimentary trade is

provided by bracelets of Spondylus shell which were as popular
                                                                 on the
Lower Danube      as in Thessaly and  Central  Europe.  And   as  there,

triangular and quadrangular altars were made for
                                                    domestic cult, but
figurines, later so common, were very rarely
                                              modelled in clay.
   The Boian culture, as thus defined, eventually spread south across
the Balkans to the Maritsa valley, but has not been isolated sharply
enough there to be attributed to Balkan II rather than Balkan III.
Northward, characteristic pottery is found as far as the mouth of the
Danube and the upper valley of the Oltu, while unmistakable sherds
are included in the collection from Tordos on the Maros. Here its
position in the Balkan sequence is well established.
                                                      Boian underlies
Gumelni^a  in the tells of Tangaru and Vidra. Near Le^i, on the Upper
Oltu, early Boian pottery is stratified above Starievo ware but below
Tripolye B pottery of the Ariud style, while the Boian sherds from
          x
Tordos should denote a synchronism with Vina I.
  The neolithic elements, save perhaps the emmer wheat, can simply
                                       97
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
be derived from the antecedent Starfcevo culture. The antler work
and the carpentry might be a legacy from surviving mesolithic hunter-
fishers, represented by geometric microliths collected on some Romanian
sites. These too might have transmitted the overall system of decora-
tion using the maeander as a repetition pattern; for it was so used in
late pleistocene times by the mammoth-hunters of Mezin on the 16ss
lands of South Russia.


                 THE GUMELNIJA AND SALCUJA CULTURES
   The Boian culture seems to have developed, though not without
enrichment from Anatolia, the ^Egean, and the Middle Danube, into
what Romanian prehistorians term the Gumelnifa culture. 1 This is
represented at a larger number of sites in Wallachia and Bulgaria
than the Boian culture owing to the foundation of new villages by an
expanding population. And it endured a long time; at least three phases
can be distinguished stratigraphically at Vidra and Tangaru, but the
Wallachian divisions are inapplicable in Bulgaria.
   The basis of life remained unchanged save that antler harpoons, like
those of the Vin6a and Tisza sites, were now employed for spearing
fish. But from the first a tendency to industrial specialization was

manifested; in several settlements hoards of flint blades and bone
tools, all fresh as if designed for barter, were uncovered. Later, in
phase III, metal must have been worked by craftsmen in some sites.
   Trade was also organized to some extent. In phase I at Vidra the
material for stone implements was brought from Bulgaria and the
Dobrudja, later from Transylvania and the Banat. Commerce brought
actual manufactures, new ideas and eventually new technical processes.
A binocular vase of the Tripolye A style from Moldavia or farther
north and a vessel ornamented with punctured ribbons, as at Tordos
and Vina, were brought to Vidra in phase I. From the same horizon
and from several Bulgarian sites come clay stamps2 imitating Asiatic
seals though decorated always with spirals. By phase II, ring-pendants,
as at Troy, Dimini, and Tordos, were being manufactured in bone, and
bone -copies of double-spiral headed pins. Actual pins, like Fig. 27,
save that the spirals are ribbons, not wiry, were found in level III at
                                                    8
Vidra, as at many sites and Gaborevo in Bulgaria. Finally, even the
Macedonian-Helladic askoi were copied locally in Vidra III and other
Wallachian and Thracian sites.

             1
                 Gaul, BASPR., XVI (1948).
             *
                 One from Qunesti, Moldavia, Dacia, V-VI (1938), 117.
                 BRGK.. XXII, Taf . 7. Maps in Gaul, lot. cit.
                                        98
           FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS

   By this time metallurgists, attracted perhaps by the copper lodes
of Eastern Bulgaria, 1 were actually working in Bulgaria and WaUachia.
The double-spiral pins they made show the Anatolian models that
inspired these artisans, but they seem to
                                                   have relied on
                                                             hammering,
                                            2
presumably through    ignorance of casting,   and not all their products

were direct copies of Asiatic forms.       A
                                        shaft-hole axe and a shaft-hole
adze were fbund            at Gaborevo (Fig. 51). Combined in a single
                     together




                   FIG. 51. Copper axe and adze from Gaborevo (J).


                                                 and an actual               was
casting, they would yield an axe-adze,                  specimen
found at Vidra. It may mark the starting-point of the Hungarian series
of period III.
  Nevertheless, the Gumelni^a economy was never transformed so
that metal could take the place of stone. Throughout the period tools
were normally made of stone or bone. But in addition to adzes of Boian
style, flint
                         now used; the later specimens have splayed
                adzes were
blades or polished faces in imitation of the rare copper adzes. Hammer-
axes and even simple battle-axes, all hollow-bored as on the Middle
Danube, came into fashion, and antler-axes with square-cut shaft-
holes. Arrows were tipped with double-ended bone points, more rarely
with triangular flint heads. Even a bowman's wrist-guard was found
at Vidra III. Spheroid mace-heads occur sporadically, but the culture
never assumes a bellicose aspect.
  The pottery carries on the old traditions. The peg-footed box went
out of fashion and was replaced by the foot-base type (Fig. 52, 6), in
  i    O. Davis, Man., XXXVI (1936), 1x9. describes prehistoric mines near Burgas;
  .   Gaul, AJA., LXVI, 400.
       PZ., XIX (1928), 131.
                                         99
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
which the foot is open to the body but closed below, and a socketed
ladle of Danubian II type was introduced by phase I at Vinfau Excised
decoration became less popular,    but rusticated designs remained
current,and graphite painting, now positive, became the prevalent
method of decoration. It was rarely supplemented by the use of white




        FIG. 52. Gumelnita pottery: i, Czernavoda (i); 2, Tel Metchkur (J);
                  3-4, Tel Ratchev (j); 5-6, Kodja Dennan (J, i).



paint applied before firing. The impression of a split reed producing
the so-called bracket ornament (Fig. 52, 2) was popular south of the
Danube.
  The relative stagnation in industry is counterbalanced or explained
by an extravagant elaboration of magico-religious equipment. From
phase I on, female figurines of clay were as carefully modelled as those
from the middle strata at Vina (Fig. 53). One from VinCa has shell
                                       100
             FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS

inlays for the eyes, like Early Sumerian statuettes.         vase from   A
Vidra III is a grotesque female figure 42 cm. high; a smaller vae from
Gaborevo represents a male personage. Both products belong to the
same circle of ideas as the anthropomorphic vases from Vinta. Sitting
figures, male or female (Fig. 54, i), were also made. Flat bone figurines




                           FIG. 53. Painted clay head, VinCa (f).



are distinctive in all phases (Fig. 54, 3) (especially II) in Wallachia,
                                                                       1
and also in Bulgaria, where the form was also reproduced in gold leaf.
A much more conventional type is a simple bone prism (Fig. 54, 2);
at Balbunar in Bulgaria prism figures were found in strata deeper than
those containing flat figurines, but at Vidra the order of occurrence was
reversed. 2 Stone idols rather like the Cycladic, were made of local
                   3                                                the
Bulgarian marbles, while a torso from Gumelni^a itself replicates
Thessalian   typeof Fig. 31, 4, save that the inserted head is of clay,
not stone. 4 In addition to female personages, males were being modelled
in      from phase II (as in Thessaly C-D), and clay phalli, like the
      clay
Anatolian and Minoan, were used as fertility symbols (Fig. 54/4)-
Other ritual objects are horns of consecration (phase II), model altars
and thrones, and by phase III models of houses (Fig. 55), as well as
models of animals and doves.
  The dead were not objects of any elaborate cult or even tendence.
At the base of the tell of Balbunar twenty-two contracted skeletons
  *
      Ixv. Bulg. Arch. Inst. t VIII (i934)   209.
  *
      But cf. Miloj&d, Chron., 61-2.
                                                                <
      Izv. Bulg. Ins*., Ill (1925), 91-101; XIX, 1-13.              Daci*, VII-VIII, 97-
                                              101
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 (accompanied in two or three cases only by flint adzes) and two trunk-
 less skullshad been buried under the house floors; four contracted
 burials more richly furnished were found at Ruse. But unburied skulls
 and ribs hacked about have been reported from other stations as




            FIG. 54. Clay and bone figurines (i) and clay phallus (}), Bulgaria.




                          FiG.[55.[Models of houses, Denev


evidences of cannibalism. The skulls from Romania were dolichocranial
and allegedly Mediterranean, but two from Ruse1 are round.
   In addition to the pins already mentioned and bracelets of
                                                              Spondylus
shell, ring-pendants of bone or gold (Vidra II) and conventional bulls'
heads of gold leaf adorned with punctuations (Vidra
                                                        III) were worn
as ornaments or charms.
  The label "Salcufa"        is           to
                                    the version of the
                          applied                      Gumelni|a culture
found in Oltenia (i.e. on the north bank of the Lower Danube between
the confluence with the Oltu and the Iron Gates)* and found also in the

 *
     IxbBAL, II (1924). i7 ff- I* I*bBAl.     t   XIX (1952), 182-9, thirty-six further burials
 at relatively high levels   -are reported.
     Berciu, Arheologia pveistorica a Oltoniei (Craiova, 1939, 50-68).
                                              102
               FARMING VILLAGES IN THE BALKANS
Sofia basin   above Veselinovo remains1 and in Bubanj II on the
                8
Upper   Morava.    It is distinguished chiefly by ceramic peculiarities:

graphite painting and bracket ornament are relatively rare, narrow
flutings and crusting with colours after firing commoner. Among shapes,
askoi and handled cups or mugs were particularly popular. The two-
handled tankards are reminiscent of the Early Macednic, but some are
ridiculously like the Silesian Jordanova type of Fig. 94.*              A
                                                                 distinctive
           form                            a       4
Bulgarian        is a lamp in the shape of   goat.   Most of the Gumelni^a
ritual objects, including even prismatic bone figurines, recur in a
Salcufa context. Finally, a stone "sceptre head" carved to represent
an animal's snout (Fig. 76)* from Salcuja may be an import from the
steppes as another came from an ochre grave (cf. p. 158). So no very
sharp frontiers can be drawn between Gumelni^a and Salcu^a. Even
on the slopes of Rhodope, Banyata III might be classed as Salcufa
rather than Gumelni^a. The Salcufa culture presumably developed
on the same Boian basis as Gumelnifa, but was more strongly influenced
by the Vinfia culture and the Early Macednic.
  It should be easy to fit Balkan III into the Danubian sequence and

assign    it   an absolute date in virtue of the Danubian and ^Bgean
parallels in Gumelni^a and Salcu^a assemblages. Clay stamps are
proper to Danubian II, but battle-axes and axe-adzes belong there to
period III. The double-spiral pins, the askoi, and the Salcuja mugs
are Early ^Egean types, but of course none are actual imports. If taken
as denoting synchronisms, they should date the third phase of Gumel-
nifa and Salcufa not later than 2000 B.C.
  In that case we should have painfully little archaeological material
to fill the next thousand years. The Lower Danube and Eastern Thrace
were incorporated, no more than the Western Balkans, in either the
Danubian or the ^Egean commercial system. The bronze types defining
Danubian IV and V are, if possible, even worse represented here than
on the Morava and the Bosna. Half a dozen local copies of Late
Minoan I horned rapiers have turned up in Bulgaria, but all are strays.
Apart from urnfields of period VI along the Lower Danube, Bronze
Age graves are lacking in Bulgaria. The funerary record begins, richly,
with the Early Iron Age. Material from domestic sites is scarce and
poor, compared with the rich deposits of Gumelntya and earlier cultures
from so many sites, and it still looks "neolithic".

  1
      E.g. at Krivodol, Rax. i Pro. (1948), 26-57.
  1
      MPK. (1940), IV B, 1-2.
      Rax. i Pro. (1948). fig- 43-
  4
      At Yasatepe, Plovdiv (God. Plovdiv. I (1948). 4-. fig* 12), and Banyata III (ibid.,
II (X95<>), fig. 30).
      Dacia, VII-VIII, 90 ff.; St. s. &rc.,   V (1954). 54<>-8.
                                              103
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
   Above the Gumelnif a levels at Vidra is a thin deposit of the Glina
culture, the product of a less sedentary,    more pastoral and warlike
society. Though copper or bronze was worked, metal did not replace
stone in industry or armament. Painted pottery and female figurines
have alike disappeared. Homotaxial assemblages are rather more
substantial in Bulgaria. At Yunatsite, 1 in the middle (II) levels above
a Gumelnifa layer (I), Vesilnovo handled vases with pillar handles are
said to be associated with askoi that would have been expected in
the lower, Gumelnifa, level. Higher up in Yunatsite HI, immediately
below a Thracian settlement of the seventh century B.C., occur cups
and tankards with pointed bases. These are found also in late houses at
             8
Razkopanitsa on the Struma, in Karanovo V, Veselinovo*and a few
other Bulgarian sites, and in Oltenia8 and in the Ni basin of the
Morava. 4 Jugs and cups with oblique mouths, presumably descended
from Anatolian beaked jugs, are found in Karanovo V, Banyata IV,
the earlier houses at Razkopanitsa, the highest levels at Ruse. 5 All
this pottery, self-coloured and rarely decorated, looks at least as
Anatolian as the Veselinovo ware from Karanovo II. It might be
derived therefrom if a long Gumelni^a occupation did not intervene
(cf.   p. 95).
   Hence if we placed even the first two phases of Gumelni^a in the
third millennium, we should get the impression that the large sedentary
population, attested by the numerous Gumelni^a tells, was either
decimated or relapsed into shifting cultivation. Be that as it may, one
conclusion can be drawn. Neolithic societies in the Balkans quite
quickly adapted the South-West Asiatic rural economy to their inter-
mediate environment and elaborated or adopted a similar ideology
appropriate to settled village life. They did not take the next step
towards civilization to adjust their economy to support a bronze
industry nor, as far as our evidence goes, did they help to transmit
northward the technical skills of their neighbours round the ^Egean.
The Late Bronze and Early Iron Ages of the Lower Danube and the
Balkans were based entirely on Central European traditions to which
Greek contributions were superadded only subsequently.
  1
       Godiinik Plovdiv (1940), 55-70; Milojdtt, Chron., 50-2.
  1
       IxvBAI, XVII (1950), 171-87, with list of other sites on 187.
  1
       Berciu, Arheol. preistoricd a Olteniei, figs. 136-8.
  4
       Milojltt, Chron., 55, and fig. 2.
                                                              *
                                                                  IzvBAL, XIX (1952), 121-8.




                                               104
                                CHAPTER VII

                        DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
                                    PERIOD I

IMMEDIATELY north of the Serbian Danube and the Save begin I6ss-
clad plains and slopes which extend, not without formidable interrup-
tions, right up to the edge of the moraines in Poland, Germany, and
Belgium. These Central European I6ss lands had been frequented in
Aurignacian and Solutrean times by mammoth- and reindeer-hunters,
but mesolithic successors of such food-gatherers survived only on
isolated patches of sandy soil        and among the post-glacial forests on
the northern and western fringes. To food-producers, the I6ss lands,
naturally drained, not too heavily wooded and easy to till, offered a
domain where they could practise the simplest conceivable sort of
farming.   With unstinted water           supplies   and seemingly boundless
territories the peasant was free to shift his hut and break fresh ground
as soon as his former fields showed signs of exhaustion. And in fact we
find prevailing throughout Central Europe a system of nomadic culti-
vation that does look really primitive such as the earliest food-
producers, undisciplined by environmental limitations, might be
expected to invent.
  The cultures1 based upon this economy exhibit considerable uni-
formity throughout the loss lands. Though the temporary nature of
the settlements excludes tell formation and the stratigraphical chron-
ology derived therefrom, the cultural sequence is well established.
Throughout the area three main periods can be recognized before the
Early Bronze Age, which coincides with period IV. In period I we can
distinguish three main groups: the K6r6s culture, already described
under StarCevo in Chapter VI, the Biikk culture in North-Eastern
Hungary and Slovakia, and the Danubian I extending from Western
Hungary to the northern confines of the I6ss.

                             DANUBIAN I CULTURE
The I6ss lands west and north of the Danube were first occupied by a
neolithic population whose whole culture down to the finest details

            1
                For points not otherwise documented see Childe, Danube.
                                         105
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
remains identical from the Drave to the Baltic and from the Dniester
to the Meuse. 1 This is the best known culture in Central Europe and
perhaps the most classically neolithic in the ancient world. Hence the
term Danubian I may be legitimately applied to it in preference to the
clumsy and inaccurate terms ''linear pottery" or "spiral-maeander"
culture.
   The Danubian I economy was based on the cultivation of barley,
one-corn, and perhaps also emmer wheats, beans, peas, lentils, and
                                     2


flax, in small plots tilled with stone hoes. Only small herds of stock
were kept; bones of sheep, Bezoar goats, oxen, and pigs turn up in settle-
ments, but animal dung was never incorporated in hut walls, as is
usual where the farmyards are well stocked. To hunting therDanubians
made no resort. Danubian I settlement sites are dotted very densely
all over the loss lands, but none shows evidence of prolonged occupa-
tion. That is a result of the Danubians' crude agricultural technique,
one still illustrated by some hoe-cultivators in Africa to-day. They
cultivated a plot till it would bear no more and then another, and so on
until they had used up all the land round the hamlet; thereupon they
shifted bag and baggage to a new site on fresh virgin soil.
   Yet these shifting cultivators lived in commodious and substantial
                    8
rectangular houses from 10 to 40 m. in length and 6 to 7-5 m. wide;
five rows of posts supported a gabled roof and walls of wattle and daub
or split saplings (Fig. 56). Four hearths in a row were identified on
the floor of a house, 33-5 m. long, at Postoloprty in Bohemia, 4 but at
other sites remains of fireplaces or ovens are curiously missing. Outside
the long houses irregular pits, once termed pit-dwellings, had been
dug to get day and subsequently used as rubbish-pits, silos, pig-sties,
or working-places. Intersections of house plans at many sites prove
intermittent return to settlements that, nevertheless, did not grow
into stratified tells. On the assumption that all contemporary houses
were exactly parallel, Sangmeister infers6 that Koln-Lindental, 6 the
best explored Danubian village, had been occupied seven times and
at its largest comprised twenty-one households.             But of course the

   1
     For the distribution in Hungary, BRGK. t XXIV-XXV, 30-2; AE. XLIV, 30 ff.;
                                                                    t


in Poland and East Germany, Przeg A., VIII (1949). 315-17; for the rest of Germany,
Buttler, Donau; for Bohemia, Stock^, Boh. Prh.; for Belgium, Mari&i, Oud-Belgie,
13-47; *or Austria, Pittioni, Ostcrreich, 125-40.
  1 Emmer is
               reported only from the Rhineland and Belgium, bread wheat from
Poland alone; both might have been borrowed from other populations. Of. BRGK.,
XX (1930), 30.
    BRGK., XXXIII (1943-50), 66-82; AR. II (1950), 208; VII (1955), 5-10.
                                         t

     PA. XLV (1954). 8i-5.
       t

     BRGK., XXXIII, 90-109.
     Buttler and
                 Habery, Das bandkcramische Dorf Kdln-Lindenthal (Rdmisch-Germtni-
sche Forschungen n) (Berlin, 1936).
                                       106
                    DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
"household" must have been more like a clan than a pairing family.
In its latest phase K61n-Lindental was surrounded with a trench and
palisade. Sangmeister suggests that each occupation might last ten




FIG. 56. Small Danubian I house from Saxony; the walls marked by a double row of
                           posts, yftf. After Sangmeister.


years and postulates abandonment for regeneration of scrub for fifty
years.
  The rest of the Danubians' equipment was equally home-made.




                                     I                     '/


                    FIG. 57. "Shoe-last celts."LAfter Seger (f).


Shoe-last celts of stone (Fig. 57) served, if mounted on knee-shafts, as
hoe-blades and adzes, or, if perforated, as axes and hammers. Knives,
sickles,   and scrapers were made on flint blades. No whorls nor loom*
                                         107
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 weights attest a textile industry; the flax found at K6ln-Lindental
 may have been grown for oil. At Statenice in Bohemia, 1 a bone imple-
ment like the spatulae of the Koros was found.
  Two sorts of pots (Fig. 58) were manufactured hemispherical bowls
and globular bottles (some flattened for carrying on the back) pro-




                            FIG. 58. Danubian I pottery ( 78a ).



vided with 3, 6, or 9 lugs and clearly derived from gourd models. The
resemblance is often enhanced by zig-zag incised lines reproducing the
slings in which gourds are carried. But instead of skeuomorphic patterns
the peasants often incised on their vases the continuous spiral and
maeander designs that are regarded as distinctively Danubian. Some
designs, perhaps late, suggest human figures, double-axes, and other
objects. And some coarse vases were just rusticated as on the Koros.
Lugs may be modelled to resemble animals' heads as on the Vardar
and the Morava, while the incised double-axe patterns may be inspired
from Crete or North Syria, 2 but probably belong to Danubian II.
   In principle this economy was essentially self-sufficing. But in
practice materials had to be carefully selected and often transported
over long distances. The green schist, used for adzes at Koln-Lindental,
must have been brought 60 or 70 miles from the Hunsriick or the
Taunus; Niedermendig lava from near Mayen was used for querns
in Belgium. 8 Such partiality for selected materials, without destroying

self-sufficiency, encouraged intercourse between distinct communities.
In fact, a few vases, made from local clays in the Main valley, were
transported to Koln-Lindental, 50 miles away. Moreover, in Moravia,
Bohemia, Thuringia, and even the Rhine valley ornaments made from
 1
     Stock?, Boh. Pr4k., 62.
     IPEK. t XI (1936-37). 16   .;   PA.   t   XL (1934-35), 3-    8
                                                                       Buttler, Donau. t 32.
                                                  108
                     DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
the Mediterranean Spondylus shell were worn as in Thessaly and on
the Middle Danube; they must have been handed on by some sort of
inter-tribal exchange from the ^Egean or the Adriatic! So too African
                                            1   The interchange of goods, thus
ivory reached Flamborn near Worms.
disclosed, developed into something like regular trade. Particularly on
the borders of the Danubian province in Brandenburg, Holstein, and
West Poland, hoards2 of shoe-last adzes turn up. Like the later hoards
of bronzes, these must be the stocks of specialized travelling merchants.
Individuals must already have been at least supplementing their
livelihood by satisfying the Danubians' prejudices in favour of selected
materials and extending their activities to other still mesolithic tribes.
Such were surely the forerunners of the bronze-merchants described
on p. 128. And workshop debris in villages may indicate even industrial
specialization within a community.
  The Danubians were a peaceful folk. The only weapons found in
their settlements are disc-shaped mace-heads, such as had been used

by the predynastic Egyptians, and occasional flint arrow-heads. They
were democratic and perhaps even communistic; there are no hints of
chiefs concentrating the communities' wealth. Nor did deities fulfil
that function. As expressions of ideology clay figurines or schematic
representations of the     human form are rare, confined to peripheral
areas, and probably late enough to be attributed to the south-eastern
influence that is conspicuous in Danubian II. Nothing like the ritual
paraphernalia, distinctive of South- West Asian and Balkan cultures,
has survived. Nor is an elaborate ancestor cult illustrated by many
ceremonial burials. 3 Cemeteries are practically confined to the Rhine
valley. There the dead were generally interred in the contracted posi-
tion, more rarely cremated. The few skulls examined are all dolicho-
cranial and in a general way Mediterranean. One from an Alsatian
         4
cemetery had been trephined.
   The culture just described had reached Germany by 4000 B.C. 6 and
lasted a long time; on Sangmeister's estimate the seven settlements at
Koln-Lindental occupy between them 430 years. It can hardly have
appeared simultaneously at all points within the vast area eventually
colonized. But save in ceramic decoration, no development can be
recognized. In the Rhineland and Belgium, styles in which the spirals
and maeanders have disintegrated and simple lines are combined with
punctuations, comb-imprints, and cord-impressions have been shown
stratigraphically to be late. So too the "music note" style in which
       1
         Buttler, Donau., 36; Marburger Studien, I, 27-9.
         /ST., XXIII (1935), 73; Bl.f. d. Vorg., VII, 51; Buttler, D<mau. 21
       *                                                                t


         Listed in AR.,
                      ., VIII, 697 ff.         Germania, XXVI (1942).
       *
         Radio-carbon date, Schachermeyr, Die Alt. Kulturen Griechenlands, 98.
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
lines are supplemented by pits, like breves, is often regarded as late,
but Soudsky1 has challenged this assumption. The densest concentra-
tion of sites with simple linear decoration still seems to lie on the
Upper Elbe and the Upper Rhine, but these just happen to be the best
explored parts of the loss lands. Only since 1950 has Danubian I
pottery of the music-note style been identified on the Dniestr and
the Sereth, 1 but that is no proof that these outposts were really planted
in the last areas to be colonized!
   But it is significant that the main concentrations do lie north of the
Bakony and the Carpathians, i.e. north of the ecological limit beyond
which gourds will not harden. If First Danubian pots be really substi-
tutes for gourd vessels, they may have been made by "^receramic
farmers, spreading from the southern cradle of cereals, when they had
reached the areas where their traditional receptacles were no longer
available. Such immigrants, bringing the materials and technique
of farming, would then have reached the Danube basin before the
emergence there of the Starfcevo culture. Alternatively, Danubian I
might be a secondary neolithic culture, created by autochthonous
hunter-fishers who would have learned farming and pot-making from
the StarCevo immigrants. As there are at present no evidence for a
mesolithic population on the Danubian loss lands and mesolithic sur-
vivals appear only late in Danubian industry, 8 the former hypothesis
is the more plausible. The Danubian penchant for Spondylus shells is a

positive argument for a southern origin, but the bone spatula from
Statenice is strong evidence for some sort of connection with Starievo.


                                   THE BUKK CULTURE
In Eastern Slovakia and North-East Hungary the Biikk culture4 may
be regarded as a parallel to Danubian I in the latter part of period I,
though it is more nearly contemporary with Vina I than with Starfievo.
In the Biikk economy, in contrast to the First Danubian, hunting and
fishing (with hook-and-line as well as with nets) were as important as
farming. No houses have been identified, but caves were used for
habitations according to Hillebrandt 5 mainly as winter shelters.
Hollow-bored stone axes and perforated antler mattocks were used as
well as the usual Danubian adzes. The Biikkians controlled the obsidian

  >
      PA., XLV. (1954). 81     &
  *
      SA.. XX, 100; KSU. t IV (i955). 142-5 (Nezviska, stratified below Tripolye Bi);
St. s. fere.. II (1951)* 54-
  9
      Anihropotdikum, III (Praha, 1953), 207-222.
  *
      Tompa, Arch. Hi***., V-VT (1929), 9-38; BRGK., XXIV-XXV, 32-9; Slav. Dej. 58.
  *
      AE., XUV   (1930). 301; cf., AE. (1943), 22.
                                                                                 t




                                         HO
                           DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
deposits of the Hegyalya near Tokaj and made from the volcanic glass
knives and scrapers, but no bifacially worked arrow-heads.
  The pottery which defines the culture is of high quality, usually
grey.The commonest form is a hemispherical bowl, like the First
Danubian, and decorated, like the latter, with spirals and maeanders
in an all-over style but enriched with fine embroideries. Besides such
Danubian forms, bowls with tubular spouts and fruit stands were
made. Besides grey ware, a kiln-fired buff fabric was manufactured
and decorated with thin lines of warm black paint forming patterns
in   the       Biikk    style.   In both fabrics the designs include             human
           1
figures, and some fruitstands have human legs as at Thermi. Otherwise
figurines are missing as in Danubian I.
   The inclusion of the Biikk culture in period I may be justified by
a grave at Nagytet&iy (Pest) furnished with early Biikk and late
Danubian I vases and by observations at sites where Biikk pottery
lay in the same stratum as Danubian I or below that yielding Tisza
sherds of period II. 2 But elsewhere Biikk and Tisza remains are con-
           3
temporary and the culture must largely belong to period II. The ritual
anthropomorphic vases and day copies of cylinder seals4 attributed
to the Biikkian may be due to Vinfia I-Tisza influence. The
                                                            technique
of painting could, however, be derived from Starievo,
                                                         though fruit-
stands are normally Danubian II.



                                          PERIOD II
                                      THE TISZA CULTURE
On the loss lands east of the Tisza, occupied in period I by the K6r6s
and Vina or Biikk cultures, the Tisza culture of period II had developed
a rural economy better suited to regular agriculture and directed par-
ticularly to exploiting the fish abounding in the rivers and the game
haunting their banks. The settlements do not form tells, but the houses
were superior to those of the Koros folk. At the village of K6k6ny-
domb, 6 the dwellings  rectangular houses measuring up to 7-2 m. by
3-4 m., entered through the long side and decorated with painted clay
models of bulls' heads were strung out in a single row along the river
bank. The fisherman now employed harpoons of antler (Fig. 47) (as at
Vinfia) and double or triple rings of bone in addition to nets. Stock-
                                                               6

                Arck. Hung.. V-VI, pis. XVIII, 5, XXIV, 13.
                AR., VIII, 637; AE. t XLIX, 86 and 70.
                Folya Arch., Ill (IQ4 1 ). 1-271 VII (1955). 42-4.
                 Ibid., pi. V, 1-3.
                 Banner, MTK., 31-8; Dole., VI (1930). 50-150; AE. (1943), 22.
                 Dolg., VI, pis. Ill, VI; BRGK., XXIV-XXV, 43.
                                             Ill
                  DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 breeding and agriculture still provided the basis of life. Grain was
 stored in large day jars or rectangular vessels, 70 cm. by 50 cm. by
 65 cm. in volume and exactly like the wooden bins used locally to-day.
                                                                                       1


   The general economy remained neolithic. The materials for axes
 were drawn from the Banat, Transylvania, and Northern Hungary,
 but obsidian was no longer imported. Shells were still imported from
 southern seas and typical vases were exported to VinSa and Silesia
 (p. 91),  but clay "stamp seals" were no longer used.
     Pots, including cylindrical jars and large oval bowls, suitable for
cooking fish in, may be provided with indented lugs like the Early
Macednic, or short, tubular spouts, sometimes fitted with strainers.
They are decorated with coarse incisions in a thick slip? sometimes
supplemented by crusting with red or yellow colours after firing. The
designs are grouped in vertical panels in contrast to the Danubian
all-over style and are often derived from basketry. 2 The motives include
concentric circles and mseanders,              conventionalized faces and hut
roofs.

     Clay figurines were no longer manufactured, but a cognate ideology
may be implied by large vases in human form, 8 as at Vinfia, Vidra, and
Tsani. Clay rattles in animal form may have been used in ritual. The
dead were ceremonially buried flexed in small cemeteries. Shell or
marble buttons with shanks were worn as brow-ornaments.
  In the Tisza culture elements from Biikk and Vina have perhaps
been blended. The rural economy could be derived from that of Vina,
although less sedentary. The ideology expressed in anthropomorphic
vases and metopic composition, could likewise be derived from the
south-east. Now Schachermeyr4 has enumerated thirty-five motives,
some of them significantly improbable, common to Tisza and Dimini
ceramic decoration, and a Late Neolithic vase from Olynthus 6 might
pass for an actual Tisza product. If the Dimini culture must be brought
from north of the Balkans into Greece, the Tisza culture has the best
claim to its parentage. But then the relative ages of the Tisza and
Vinia cultures in terms of the JEgean sequence would need revision.

                             THE LENGYEL CULTURES
  On the I6ss lands, colonized in period I by First Danubian peasants,
the remarkable cultural uniformity thus created dissolved in period II
      AE., XLV (1931), 253.
      CsaJog, FA., IIMV (1941), i ff.; VII (1955). 37-4L
      FA. VII, 27-36; Germania, XXIII (i939), 145
          t                                           .;   Dalg. t XIX, 130.
      MAGW. LXXXIII (1953-54), 21-34.
              t


      Mylonas, Excavations at Otynthos (Johns Hopkins University, Studies in Archeology,
6)   (199), fig- 39-
                      DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
to give place to a multiplicity of distinct regional cultures as a result
of extraneous influences as well as mere divergent development. From
the Drave to the Upper Danube, in Austria, the Upper Elbe in
Bohemia, and the Upper Vistula, 1 the period witnessed the spread of
the South-West Asian-Balkan ideology reflected in female figurines,
model houses, clay stamps, and a taste for coloured vases, and of a
rural economy in which cultivation was better balanced by stock-
breeding though it did not yet allow settlement in one spot long enough
for tell formation. The result was not a single culture even in this
limited region, but several related cultural facies. As none exhibits a
well-defined spatial distribution, all may still be grouped together and
designated by the name given to the first one recognized, the Lengyel
culture. 2
  Some settlements at least were fortified. At Hlubok6 MaSovky in
Southern Moravia an area of some 15 acres (60,000 sq. m.) was enclosed
by a flat-bottomed fosse supplemented by a stockade, the gate being
flanked by stout projecting walls as at Troy. 8 So near Zlota on the
Vistula4 two adjacent settlements, possibly of a later stage, were
surrounded by entrenchments. Small rectangular houses, probably
divided into two rooms that are best             known outside the Lengyel
province at Ariu$d in Transylvania           and in Rossen and Michelsberg
settlements round the Alps, replaced the earlier long communal houses.
From within our area we have only clay models.
  Commerce, as in Danubian I, is most clearly attested by the importa-
tion from the south of Spondylus    and Tridacna shells. North Hun-
garian obsidian was distributed all over the Middle Danube basin and
northward to Moravia, Western Galicia, Silesia, and Bohemia, but in
the northern districts it is found only in the earliest settlements, as
if stocks had been brought by the colonists but not subsequently

replenished by trade. Cubical blocks of clay, perforated at the corners,
in which one, or exceptionally two, cups have been hollowed out 5
(Fig. 59) have been claimed as copies of Early Minoan block vases
of stone. Clay imitations of stamp seals are attributed to the later
phase of the period in Moravia, and by that time copper trinkets began
to be distributed in Moravia and Silesia (Fig. 60).

  1
    Buttler, Donau., 38-43; Arch. Hung., XXIII (1939); Slovenskl Dejiny, 58-61;
Obxor, VIII (1929), 1-53; XIV (1950), 163-72; Prx*g.A. VIII (1949), 318-21; B6hm,
                                                      t


Kronika, 136-49; Pittioni, Osterreich, 143-67.
    Tompa'B extension to this of the name "Tisza" (BRGK. t XXIV-XXV, 70) has
  *

caused confusion with the quite different assemblage just described; cf., Milojcic,
Chron., 80, and Csalog, FA. t VII, 24-6.
    AR. II (1950). 5-6; HI, 136-9.
        t

  * WA.
            t   XIX
                (1953), 7-53-
  1
    Schranil, Bdhmtn, 50; cf p. 19 here.
                           .




                                       113
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  Besides shoe-last adzes, triangular greenstone axes (Fig. 60),
hollow-bored axe-hammers and antler axes were employed. A few
spheroid mace-heads and flint arrow-heads and, in Bohemia, stone




                  FIG. 59. Clay block vase, Strelide I, Moravia (f).


                       1
arrow-straighteners,       may point to warlike behaviour. Whorls and
loom-weights attest a textile industry.
   Characteristic pot forms are hollow-pedestalled bowls (Fig. 61, i),
ladles with socketed handles (Fig. 61, 2), biconical jars (Fig. 61, 3),
and variants on the older bottles. Bowls are flat-bottomed and often




    FIG. 60. Copper trinkets (), and triangular axe (f), Jordanova. After Seger.



carinated, but inturned rims do not occur till the end of the period.
Handles remain unknown. The most characteristic and nearly universal
ware is black-polished, as in the Vinca and Larisa cultures. It may
be decorated with crusted patterns in red, white, and yellow colours
applied after firing, that may be supplemented by incised lines or low
round bosses (Fig. 61, 3, 4). Buff and red wares also occur, and in
Moravia 2 characterize a second phase of the culture. There the red
     1
         PA., XXXIX (1933), 50-3.              8
                                                   Vildomec in Obzor, VIII, 1-43.
                                        114
                          DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
ware may be burnished and ornamented with
                                                designs in white paint
or covered with a white slip on which the
                                          design is painted in red, as in
Middle Neolithic Thessalian or Tripolye B wares. In the latest Moravian
phase, coloured decoration was abandoned altogether. While crusted
spirals were everywhere employed and in Hungary composed in the
old Danubian style (Fig. 61, i),                                     the
                                   basketry patterns,                    breaking up
surface into panels as in the Tisza
                                              style, were even more popular.




                   FIG. 61. Danubian II pottery, Lengyel. i, 3,
                                                                  4 (J); 2 (J).

  A South- West Asian ideology found expression in female figurines,
models of animals and doves, and zoomorphic vases. But in
                                                                                  Hungary
regular cemeteries of well-furnished graves containing flexed skeletons
attest already ancestor tendence; at
                                     Zengovarkony near Pecs, seventy-
eight graves (including six double burials of male and female                       ?
                                                                                        sati)
divided between eleven groups (? lineages) had been uncovered
     1
                                                               by
I939. Farther north Danubian II burials are rare; at one Moravian
sitetwelve skeletons were found buried together in a shaft         2
                                                             grave, at
others cremations, or evidence for cannibalism 8 are
                                                     reported.,


  The Lengyel culture could most readily be explained as a result of
the further extension of the south-eastern influence that induced the
Vinca culture on the Danube. But if such influence be denied,
                                                               Lengyel
might claim a parental relation to Vin6a and so to Larisa!
   Comparisons with the ^Egean and Anatolia offer ambiguous possi-
bilities for dating period II. The resemblances of crusted ware to that

       1
           Arch. Hung.. XXIII (1939).                Obzor, XIV (1950), 335.
       8
           AR., VIII, 1956, 773-4.
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
of phase C in Thessaly, of the indented lugs on the Tisza to Early
Macedonian* and of clay stamps and block vases to Early Minoan
forms, suggest a date round about 2500 B.C. for the period's beginning.
On the other hand, pedestalled bowls, very much of Danubian II form,
may go back to the fourth millennium in the chalcolithic of Ali$ar, at
Kum Tepe and in "neolithic" Crete; the red on white painted sherds
from Moravia recall equally ancient Thessalian fabrics. On this evi-
dence 3000-2600 would seem just as plausible as 2500-2200 as the
historical dates of period II.



                 DANUBIAN I SURVIVALS IN THE NORTH                       *

   The expansion of Danubian II farmers, like that of their precursors
in Danubian I, was a slow process. Indeed, it had begun while Danubian
I folk were still spreading down the Oder, the Elbe, and the Rhine
valleys. Since period II begins with the emergence of the Danubian II
and Tisza cultures in the Middle Danube basin, we may say that
Danubian I cultures survived in the north into period II. In fact they
outlasted even that period in remote places. Moreover, the Danubian I
expansion did not take place in vacuo. In the hill countries between the
Danube and the Rhine and in Thuringia, along the rivers of the North
European plain and on the sand-dunes of Silesia and Poland, still
lived scattered groups of Tardenoisian, Maglemosian, and Swiderian
food-gatherers. Some of these were absorbed into Danubian com-
munities or copied the Danubians* way of life. Thus arose various
cultural groups, 1 essentially Danubian in economy and equipment,
but diverging from the norm in details, particularly in ceramic art.
Hence the groups are defined by their pottery. And most flourished
in period III too.
  (i) Stroke-ornamented ware (Stichbandkeramik) (Fig. 62, i) distin-
guishes a group which arose probably in Bohemia and spread thence
back into Moravia, and into Bavaria, Central Germany, and Western
Poland in the wake of the Danubian I groups, and under pressure from
the same economic forces. Economically it differs from Danubian I
only in a tendency to supplement farming by hunting, for which
transverse arrow-heads1 of Tardenoisian ancestry were employed.
The arrow-shafts were straightened on grooved stones, as in the
Danubian II culture and farther east. 8 The pots were still round-
bottomed, but were decorated exclusively with skeuomorphic zig-zag
patterns composed of ribbons executed by a series of distinct jabs

   Battier, Donau., 29, 45; Anthropoirfkum, III, (1953), 207; IV, 411.
   E.g. at Lobec, Bohemia, AR., Ill, 130.                PA., XXXIX (1933). 50-3-
                                        116
                           DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
instead of continuous lines. In Bohemia, Bavaria, and Central Germany
the dead were cremated. 1 In Moravia and Poland stroke-ornamented
ware occurs in late Danubian II settlements, and at Gleinitz in Silesia
an imported Tisza vase was found with stroke-ornamented ware, 2




            FIG. 62. Stroke-ornamented vases, Bohemia (\, J); ROssen vases, Central
                                         Germany (fa).

while at Vochov near Plzen a figurine of Danubian II type turned up
in a similar context. 8 Hence the culture thus defined at least lasts into
period II.
     The Rossen group arose in Western Bohemia and Saxo-Thuringia
      (2)

through the adoption by Forest-folk of a fundamentally Danubian
                       4
equipment and economy. They spread down the Main and then up the
Rhine to Switzerland, and into France through the Belfort gap. 5
Though the Danubian agricultural economy had been taken over
  1
       AR. VIII (1956), 710-18.
            t
  1
       Altschles., Ill (1931), 153; Buttler, Donau., 60.
       Obxor, XIV (1950), 330.
  8

  4*
    The theory of its derivation from "the North-West German Megalith Culture", mice
dominant in Germany, was refuted by Stocktf, Bok. Pr4h., 161, and more conclusively
by Engel, Mannus, XXXII (1940), 57-81.
  6
    See Buttler, Donau., 40 ff., and Kimmig, Bad, Fb. (1948-50). 47-62.
                                                7
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
entire, hunting retained much of the importance that it had enjoyed
in the ancestral Forest culture.         The increased competition for land,
due to the rise of this and other new groups of cultivators, may by
now have led to war. The Rossen people were the first in the Rhine
valley to fortify their settlements, while weapons transverse and
hollow-based arrow-heads, disc-shaped mace-heads and the old per-
forated antler-axes of the Forest-folk were relatively common. The
Rossen folk lived in rectangular houses with vertical walls and gabled
roofs supported by three rows of earth-fast posts, 1 and they also
erected rectangular granaries. But their settlements were no more
permanent than those of the preceding groups. Their pots are hemi-
spherical or globular in profile, but are often provided with stand-rings
and are decorated with rectilinear patterns imitating basketry and
executed in stab-and-drag technique (Fig. 62, 2). Exceptional forms
are quadrilobate dishes with analogues in the Balkans and North Italy
and a small clay barrel with closed ends and an opening in the side,
a form well-represented in Troy I. 1
   As ornaments the Rossen folk wore marble bracelets, disc-beads
of shell, bored tusks and deers' teeth and marble buttons identical
with those from Lengyel. The dead were buried contracted in ceme-
teries. One skull from Alsace had been trepanned. 8
   The buttons of Danubian II type from the graves at Rossen in
Central Germany prove that the group even there belongs to period II,
while on the Isar, in Alsace, and in the Wetterau, Rossen house-
foundations have disturbed the ruins of those left by later Danubian I
peasants. On the other hand, on the Goldberg, in Wurttemburg, the
Rossen village was succeeded by a settlement of the Western Michels-
berg culture that generally belongs to period III. Hence R6ssen
flourished in period II. 4
   The Danubian I peasants themselves persisted, wandering about
during period II and in the Rhine basin even into period III, preserving
their culture intact, but not unaffected by the example of their neigh-
bours and rivals. Plastic suggestions of a human face from K6ln-
Lindental, in the manner of Trojan face-urns, may belong to this
       5
phase. Even in Central Germany the later Danubian I pottery is
associated with the stroke-ornamented ware of period II. Such late
Danubian I people fortified K6ln-Lindental. Pressure on the land was

  1
    Gcrmania,  XX   (1936), 229-34; 8ee Fig. 137 here.
    Battler, Donau., 47, pis. 10, 12; 12, i; cf. Blegen, Troy, I, form D 28. The Rftssen
  1

and Troadic "barrels" could both be derived from geomorphic vases of the Lengyel
culture like Stock?, Boh. Prth., pi. LIX, n, or WPZ. XXVIII (1941), 39.
                                                      t
  1
    Germania, XXVI (1942), 177-81.
  4                                                           *
    Buttler, Donau. t 62.                                       Buttler, Donau. t 31.
                     DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION

becoming serious. In addition to the natural increase of the population
and the competitive groups resulting from the conversion of food-
gatherers into cultivators, new groups were spreading from the south-
east and from the west.


                                     PERIOD III

By period III the natural growth of peasant populations, the con-
version to food-production of food-gathering communities, and immi-
grations of fresh tribes from beyond the loss lands had produced
                                                                    a

pressure upon   the soil that entailed adjustments  in everyday life.

Inferior lands above the loss were exploited; hunting and pastoralism
became more important economically, and in fact in the temperate
zone they would be more productive than hoe-agriculture. Settlements
were often planted on hilltops as well as in the valleys, and were fre-
                  1
quently fortified. Competition for land assumed a bellicose character,
and weapons   such  as battle-axes became specialized for warfare. The
consequent preponderance of the male members in the communities
may account for the general disappearance of female figurines. Part
of the new surplus population may have sought an outlet in industry
and trade; imported substances such as Baltic amber, Galician flint
and copper begin to be distributed more regularly than heretofore.
Warriors would appreciate more readily than cultivators the superiority
of metal, and chiefs may already have been concentrating surplus
wealth to make the demand for metal effective. Its satisfaction was
none the less dependent on the diffusion of the requisite technical
knowledge, whether by immigrant prospectors or captives, from the
south-east.
  A general picture of the period in the loss lands would present a
bewildering variety of small conflicting groups. Some
                                                            of these are
           intruders and   can  be better described elsewhere. From the
admittedly
West, Michelsberg folk (p. 291) spread as far as Upper Austria, Bohemia,
and Central Germany, while Beaker-folk (p. 223) reached the Danube
near Buda-Pest and spread across Germany and Czechoslovakia as far
as the Vistula. From the Pontic-North European plain warriors using
battle-axes  and cord-ornamented pottery spread as far as Bavaria,
Bohemia,   and   Moravia, and even into the Middle Danube basin. In
other groups there is an injection of types (collared flasks, globular
                                         find in Chapter X to be genuinely
amphorae, and so on) which we shall
Northern.  But  these hardly suffice to demonstrate   a large-scale "Nordic"
invasion of the  Danubian  province.    We  shall describe here only certain

      1
          E.g. Homolka in Bohemia,
                                     Proc. Am. Phil. Soc.,   LXXI (1932), 357-92   -



                                          119
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
cultures which remain fundamentally Danubian even though they be
found on fortified hilltops or in caves.
  Bodrogkeresztur designates the culture into which the Lengyel
culture developed through a Tiszapolgdr stage in North-East Hungary
and beyond the Tisza, whence it spread north to Silesia. 1 It is known
almost exclusively from cemeteries larger than those of previous
periods. That at the patent station comprised at least fifty graves, at
                                                 2
Jaszladdny forty, at Pusztaistvdnh&za thirty-two, while at Tiszapolgdr-




                        FIG. 63. Copper battle-axes, Hungary (J).



Basatanya 158 graves have been excavated out of an estimated total
of 225.* The size of the cemeteries may be due as much to prolonged
occupation of the same village as to density of population. At Basatanya,
Kutzian could distinguish two consecutive phases, both transitional,
between Lengyel and mature Bodrogkeresztur. Double graves, in
which one body had been buried with rich furniture, the other with
none, suggest a division of society into classes.
  Trade now brought to the Hungarian plain flint from Galicia, gold
and copper from Transylvania. In the cemeteries copper is represented
by several quadrangular awls, three or four rhomboid knife-daggers
without midribs or rivet holes, a flat adze, five axe-adzes and at least
one battle-axe. 4 Several similar battle-axes (Fig. 63) have been found
  1
    Nbl.f. d. V.,  XV(1939),    4-i7.
    Arch. Hung., IV; AE., XLI (1927), 50-7; BRGK. XXIV-XXV, 53.
                                                      t

  1
    Report by Kutzian to the "Conference Archdologique de I'Acad&nie hongroise des
Sciences" (Buda-Pest, 1955); cf. AE. (1946-48), 42-62.
  4
      PZ., XXII,   m; AE. (1944-45), i *
                                           120
                      DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION

stray and disclose the translation into metal of antler axes that in
turn became the model for stone weapons (p. 159). Adzes and axe-
adzes are very common stray and sometimes occur in hoards. 1 Evi-
dently copper was being systematically extracted in the Carpathian
basin. Roska 2 long ago argued that axe-adzes served as miners' tools.
Driehaus8 has now shown that the simplest types, like Fig. 64, i and
5, are virtually confined to metalliferous Transylvania while the classic

type of Fig. 64, 6, radiates thence to the Balkans, Bavaria, Silesia,




                   FIG. 64. Copper axe-adzes and axes, Hungary (J).



and the Ukraine. They must have been traded; and the hoards, though
rare, suggest an incipient organization on the lines established by
period IV. The metal employed was mainly native copper, of which
there must once have been really large deposits. It was undoubtedly
melted, but none of the products shows unambiguous evidence of
                                           4
having been shaped by casting in a mould, but all traces would be
removed by the necessary hammering.

              Doig. t XIX (1943). 135-9-
          1

              Dacia, III-IV, 352-55; cf. Kfitleminyek, Cluj, II (1942), 15 *
          1

          s
              Arckaologia Geographic*, III (1952), x~5-
              Inst. Arch, AR., VII (1951), 44~5*
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  Copper did not oust stone tools. Graves contain long knives on flint
blades, polished stone adzes, hollow-bored celts and, in a late phase,
triangular flint or obsidian arrow-heads and a
                                               mace embellished with
                  four projecting knobs (Fig. 65).
                    Technically Bodrogkeresztur pottery carries on the
                  lateLengyel tradition and in the Tiszapolgdr phase
                  at least vessels on high hollow pedestals though
                  more often bowls as in Tripolye than fruitstandfc were
                  still popular. But bowls' rims are now inverted, never

                  expanding. Distinctive of mature Bodrogkeresztur are
                  the so-called milk-jugs (Fig. 66, 2.) 1 Handled tankards
    FIG. 65.      and pyxides, very like Early ^Egean ones/occur spo-
Knobbed mace-                                                    ornament
head from Maros   radically. Apart from warts and dimples,
   Decse (J).     is not common. Some vases, however, are decorated

                  with cross-hatched ribbons forming maeander patterns
even more like those of Dimini than the cognate Tisza designs. Late
vases decorated with plastic ribs foreshadow the Bronze Age usage.




                    I                                        2

           FIG. 66. Bodrogkeresztur pyxis and milk- jug. After Tompa (i).



  Girdles of disc-beads of shell together with stray copper or gold
trinkets were worn as ornaments.
  Obviously the Bodrogkeresztur population was descended
                                                                            from the
  1
    What looks like a typical milk-jug was found at Maltepe near Sivas in northern
Anatolia, BelUten, XI (i937) $59 ff.
                                       122
                      DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
Lengyel group. But had mining and metallurgy been initiated by
prospectors from the ^Egean or the Caucasus? No doubt axe-adzes of
different shapes were used by Early ^Egean peoples and were actually
manufactured by casting in clay moulds at Tepe Hissar in Northern
Iran. Prospectors should have introduced the techniques of casting
and smelting, but the Transylvanian products seem made of native
copper. The forms could be regarded as translations into this "superior
stone" of Danubian II adzes, hammer-axes and battle-axes of ordinary
stone or antler. Native copper-working could perfectly well have
originated in such a metalliferous region. Indeed, the ^Egean axe-adzes
could theoretically be derived from Transylvania while Heine-Geldern1
has invoked axe-adzes like Fig. 80, to mark the Aryans' route to
India. In other words the ^Egean and Asiatic parallels to Bodiog-
keresztur metal types might just as well give termini ante, as
termini post, quos.    Still,   independent invention of casting is hard to
admit.
  The Jordanova culture of Bohemia2 and Silesia8 can be regarded as
a parallel local development of the Lengyel tradition. It too is best
known from graves fifty-seven from the eponymous site (once called
Jordansmiihl) in Silesia and thirty-eight at Brze<5 Kujawski on the
middle Vistula. 4 Metal was here used solely for ornaments spectacle
spirals (Fig. 60, i), cylindrical ribbon armlets, and small discs bearing
embossed patterns. Antler axes, deposited in men's graves at Brze<5
Kujawski, illustrate the weapons, copper translations of which were
current south of the Carpathians. The distinctive pot-forms are mugs
with one or two band handles (Fig. 94) and bowls, again with inverted
rims. Bracelets were made of Spondylus shell or of engraved bone,
while disc beads of shell were strung together as girdles or necklaces.
As in the Bodrogkeresztur culture, female figurines are no more in
evidence. The old ideology has been changed. That may reflect a change
from a matrilineal to a patrilineal organization of society.
  The copper spectacle spirals might have been inspired by Early
jEgean gold ones like those of Fig. 22. If so, they would constitute a
substantial argument for Oriental participation in the foundation of
the Danubian III copper industry. Otherwise there are no more indi-
cations of influence from that quarter in Jordanova than in Bodrog-
keresztur. Such can, however, be detected in the largely contemporary
Baden culture.

    /. Indian Oriental Soc., IV (1936), x-3
  1


    Obxor, XIV (1950), 163-257.
  1

  1
    Buttler, Donau., 43.
  4
    WA.  t   XV (1938), 1-105; the graves have disturbed foundations of   Danubian I
long houses.
                                        123
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION

                   THE TRANSITIONAL BADEN-PCEL CULTURE
 West and north of the Danube between Buda-Pest and Vienna emerged
a culture complex variously designated Baden, 1 Ossarn,* or P6cel8
after Austrian and Hungarian sites or "channel" 4 or "radially6 orna-
mented" after ceramic features. Its domain extends northward through
Moravia to the Upper Elbe and the Upper Vistula and eastward across
the Tisza and the Maros. Its regional manifestations in architecture
and burial rites as well as pottery differ so widely as to raise doubts
whether the discrepancies be due to the partial assimilation of distinct
traditions or local divergences of a single tradition. Much of the data
comes from isolated burials or rubbish pits; only Ossarn In Austria,
Vuedol on the Drave, some sites near the Maros, and two large ceme-
teries near Buda-Pest have been systematically explored on an adequate
scale.
   While one-corn and emmer wheats 2 were regularly cultivated (very
likely with the plough), stock-breeding combined with hunting made
major contributions to the food-supply. Ritual burials of cattle and
deer underline the importance of these activities. Experts conclude
that the cattle were bred for milk, not just for flesh. 6 The bones from
Ossarn 2 disclose for the first time on the Middle Danube large flocks
of sheep. The first remains of horses in the province, too, have been

reported from this and other sites. Perhaps they were already domesti-
cated. 7 At least there were vehicles for horses to draw.
  A model waggon, carried on four solid disc wheels, 8 from the ceme-
tery of Buda-Kalasz affords the oldest evidence for such vehicles
north of the Alps, if not in Europe as a whole. But these vehicles were
not drawn by horses. At least paired oxen, buried in two rich graves
at Als6n6medi, 9 must surely have drawn the hearses in which their
masters were conveyed to the grave.
  On the fertile plains and in mountain valleys the farmers lived
on fortified hilltops or in caves. The best-attested house type is a
one-roomed rectangular hut with rounded corners, 10 but at Vuiedol,

      Pittioni, Osterreich., 189-208.
      Bayer, Die Eiszeit,  V  (Vienna, 1928), 60 ff.
      Banner, "Die Peceler Kultur" Arch. Hung.,        XXXV(1956).
      Stocky, Boh. Pr4h. t 115 ff.; Bohm, Kronika, 134-49; cf. Slovcnskt Dejiny, 61-4.
      WA., XII (1933). 140-67.
      AAH., 1 (1951), 49, 75-
      Dolg., XV. (1939), 1 66; the attribution of an antler cheek-piece from a bit to the
Pecel culture is dubious.
    Folya Arch., VI (1952), 29-35; Banner, loc. cit., 127.
      AAH., I (1951), 38-40.
 10
    Measuring 4-5 by 3*4 m. at Palotabazsok (Banner,            "Plceler Kultur",    214),
8-0 by 5-5 m. at Praha-Bubenic (Bohm, Kronika, 198).

                                             124
                       DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
Schmidt 1 reports apsidal houses. Circular pits (? bothroi) are common in
all settlements; at Vuiedol they led into subterranean cellars excavated
in the loss. At least in Hungary the size of the cemeteries        305 graves
at Buda-Kalasz, 4! at Als6n6medi     point to large and stable villages.
But these did not grow into tells, and the huts seem more appropriate
to semi-nomad pastoralists. Their location, like the weapons from
graves, emphasizes the martial aspect of pastoral societies.
  Stone was still the normal material for knives, axes and adzes,
arrow-heads, and battle-axes. But the last-named exhibit an imitation
seam as if copied from a cast metal model, and Pittioni2 assigns copper
weapons, like Fig. 63, from Austria to the Baden culture. Copper
ornaments alone have so far been found in graves; two in Lower
Austria8 were furnished with neck-rings of twisted wire with recoiled
ends, immediate precursors of the cast ingot-torques (Fig. 69, 11-12)
of period IV. Long-distance trade is positively documented by Spon-

dylus and Tridacna shells, imported from the Mediterranean.
  Spools, like the Early Troadic, and whorls attest an active textile
industry. Pottery was self-coloured and generally dark-faced, occasion-
ally mottled. A universal peculiarity is presented by large ribbon
handles rising above the rims of mugs and jugs; at the top they are
often deeply flanged, as in Fig. 96, or fanned out. Subcutaneous
string-holes are not uncommon, and occasionally trumpet lugs (like Fig.
17, column i) grow from the bowls. Bowls have inverted rims and, in
Hungary and Slovakia, are divided into two unequal compartments
and provided with conspicuous button handles. Channelled decoration
is universal, but is often combined with other techniques    punctured
ribbons, incised lattices, exceptionally crusting combined with incision
as in the Tisza culture, or even cord impressions.
   Female figurines have not been recorded, but clay animal figures
and models of waggons and boats may represent a survival of the old
ideological tradition. It was quite overshadowed by funerary
                                                                 ritual.

A few burials of men and women together may    be taken as evidences  of
satl and of a patriarchal family. At Als6n6medi  two centrally situated

graves containing oxen and hearses must belong to chiefs interred in
accordance with the tradition of royal burials that can be traced back
to the Early Dynastic tombs of Kish and Ur and here marking the
oldest royal funerals in Europe, The normal burial rite was interment
in a contracted or flexed position, but in Hungary a small group of
cremation graves has been recently reported. In a couple of Austrian
tombs five or eight corpses had been buried together. Round Buda-
Pest graves were grouped in distinct cemeteries; at some other sites
 1
     Vutedol, 10-15.
                         *
                             Osterreich., 204.
                                                 *
                                                     WPZ., XXIV (1937)   *5-2i-

                                         125
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
they are said to have been dug within the inhabited area. Collective
tombs containing up to twenty corpses were reported from Slovakia. 1
But in western Hungary cemeteries of cremation burials in urns
constitute regular urnfields. 2 At Vufiedol men were laid on the right,
women on the left side.
   In the Danubian sequence Baden is undoubtedly later than Lengyel.
At Kiskoros8 on the Hungarian plain a Bodrogkeresztur grave had
been dug into an abandoned Baden settlement, but east of the Tisza
the relation between the two cultures was reversed. At Fony6d Baden
graves had been disturbed by later Early Bronze Age graves of the
Kisapostag culture, while the copper neck-rings from Austria are
typologically older than the torques of period IV. So the Baden culture
is well fixed within period III; the extent of its overlap with the Bell-

beaker culture remains to be determined. Racially the P6cel population
shows a mixture of round and long heads. 4
   To Menghin, R. R. Schmidt and Pittioni Baden is just a "Nordic"
culture, the result of an invasion from the wooded plain of Northern
Europe. No doubt a few specifically Northern types, like collared
flasks, occur sporadically on Baden sites as at JeviSovice in Moravia.
On the other hand, peculiarities in Northern ceramic decoration have
been ascribed to Baden influence, 6 and there is far more evidence for
southern than for northern influences in the fundamentally Danubian
Baden pottery. The distinctive channelled ornament is prominent in
the VinCa culture; the incised and punctured patterns can be paralleled
there and,       more precisely, in the Macedonian Late Neolithic;
             still

trumpet lugs  are Troadic; flanged handles have been met in Troy
while the Chalcolithic of Mersin 6 provides an exact parallel to the
Baden   variant. Similarly, subcutaneous string-holes recur in the
Rinaldone culture of Central Italy. The wire torques from the Austrian
                                                        1

graves can be exactly matched in "Copper Age' burials at Ahlatlibel
in Anatolia7 and so could be claimed as concrete evidence of the south-
eastern inspiration for the metallurgy at least of the Baden culture.
Finally, wheeled vehicles were invented in Mesopotamia about 3000 B.C.
and employed as hearses in royal funerals there by 2500. They were
surely diffused thence, though the nearest analogues spatially and
chronologically-to the Baden model from South Russia are two-
wheeled carts.

   AR. IV (1952). 244; V, 733-6.
        t

   Banner "Prefer Kultur", 200-4.                     PZ.> XXII (1931), 111-15.
   Arch. Hung., XXXV, 293-309.
   Maier in Germania, XXXIII (1955), 159-73.
   Garstang, LAAA.> XXV, p. XXVIII," 22.
 7
   Turk Tarih Arkeologya ve Etnografya, Dergisi, II (1934), 9-
                                      126
                     DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
  The southern connections just summarized, save the last, do not
                                               "
necessarily mean influences from the south. The torque bearers who
                                                                     1 '




introduced better metallurgical techniques into Syria1 might conceiv-
ably have come from Central Europe, and, if so, the earlier torque
from Ahlatlibel might after all be Danubian. Italian prehistorians
would prefer to derive the Baden features in the Rinaldone culture
from the north. If the Baden analogies in the Balkans, Macedonia, and
Anatolia too could be thus interpreted, the Baden culture does exhibit
all the archaeological characters horses, wheeled vehicles, cattle and
sheep, a dairy economy, patriarchal families, bows and arrows
deduced by linguistic palaeontology for the ancestral Indo-Europeans;
their expansion could be beautifully documented by the connections
just mentioned! Of course, such an interpretation would demand a
literal    inversion of current chronologies both relative    and absolute.
Still,                  mainly but not entirely on undemonstrated
          these are based
postulates. With that reservation on purely archaeological evidence
the Baden culture cannot begin more than a couple of centuries before
2000 B.C. and so could only be influenced by Late Neolithic and Early
Bronze Age cultures of the ^Egean.


                            THE EARLY BRONZE AGE
During period III the growth of population was calling for a new
economy and making labour available for industry and commerce.
War was stimulating a demand for metal, and chiefs were accumulating
capital; the prejudices of immigrant warriors had to be satisfied with
trade-goods from the Baltic and Galicia. The Bell-beaker folk (pp. 222-
227.) established regular communications with the West and North
and opened up new connections with the Mediterranean across the
Brenner Pass. The rise of rich cities on the Levant coasts by 2000 B.C.,
in Crete by 1800, and in peninsular Greece by 1600 had created markets
for metals and other raw materials not too far from Central European
sources of supply and provided capital for their exploitation. Perhaps
prospectors trained in Asiatic traditions had begun working the copper
of Transylvania, Slovakia, and the Eastern Alps, and even the tin
lodes of Bohemia and Saxony. At least as soon as the lords of Mycenae
and Knossos began to demand amber, it became worthwhile to organize
the transport of the magic resin from Denmark and at the same time
the distribution of metal among the peasant societies of the Danube
basin. The appearance of the metal wares thus distributed defines
for archaeologists period IV.

                             i
                                 PPS., XVII (1951). i?8 ff.
                                          127
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
      No actual mines can be dated by direct evidence to period IV, but
there are indications that the copper lodes of the eastern Alps, demon-
strably mined during period VI, may
                                         have been exploited by surface
          as       as        IV                                       of
workings     early    period     (p. 301). Equally early exploitation

copper lodes near Saalfeld and of Vogtland tin has been deduced from
recent analyses. 1 Moulds have been found in several settlements, but
do not necessarily belong to resident smiths.
  The distribution of the industry's products was effected by a regular
class of itinerant merchant-artificers. Their routes are defined by hoards
of finished and half-finished articlesthe merchant's stock in trade-
that had been buried when danger threatened and never ^recovered.
                                                        ancient* Danubian
They show that the merchants were following
traditions (p. 109)  and that they dealt also in amber, gold, and presum-
ably substances such as salt that leave no
                                                         trace in the archaeological
record. The amber routes are particularly well defined: the fossil resin
was   broughtfrom Jutland and Sammland to the Saale valley and
thence passed on through Bohemia and across the Brenner to Upper
Italy and the /Egean, while a little
                                     was diverted across Moravia to the
Hungarian plain and the Maros. A counterpart to this export
                                  2                               trade
is certainly to be seen in segmented and cruciform   beads of Egyptian
                                                                    8                    4
or jEgean fayence common in cemeteries round Szeged and in Slovakia,
                                                          6          7
and found sporadically in Western Hungary/ Lower Austria, Moravia,
and Poland.
   The activities of these merchants linked up the Central European
                                       into a single commercial system
region round the Brenner amber route
with branches to the tin-lodes of Cornwall and the gold-fields of Tran-
sylvania, but completely by-passing
                                      the Balkans. The types of metal
ware thus diffused from the beginning of the Bronze Age produce a
                       of uniformity throughout the Danubian province
superficial appearance
which no longer includes the Save or Drave, the Danube below Buda-
Pest, or the Tisza south of the Maros mouth. At the same
                                                           time Asiatic
                                   metal ornaments                  the source of the
parallels to the arbitrary                 suggest
fresh chemical knowledge, the alloy of copper with tin,                 on which the
new economy was based.
     Cast neck-rings with recoiled ends (Fig. 69, n) were not only worn

      Otto-Witter, Handbuch der Altesten Metallurgie in Mitteleuropa (Leipzig, 1952).
  1
      Only in graves 2 and 211 at Sztaeg and 14 at Deszk; Dolg.,
                                                                 XVII (1941)1 cf MilojCid,
                                                                                -



CISPP. (Zurich. 1950), 268.
   A JA. XLIII (1939), 17; Banner, Dolg., XVII.
           t


      Especially at Vyfcapy-Opatovce near Nitra, unpublished.
      In Kisapostag graves at Dunapenteie, AAH. t    U(1952), 66.

 '
      Germanic XXI (193?) 89.
                            .


      At Nem&ce and Jirikovice, Mus. Brno.

                                           128
                        DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
as ornaments but served also as ingots and therefore are termed "ingot-
torques". Such torques were the insignia of members of a metal-working
clan or guild in North Syria about 2000 B.C. 1 and were deposited as
symbols of abstract wealth in contemporary shrines at Byblos.* Lock-
rings with flattened ends and racket pins have explicitly Sumerian
          8
prototypes knot-headed pins (Fig. 67, o), appearing in predynastic
                ;

      4
Egypt recur later at Troy and in Cyprus: the basket-shaped earrings of
gold wire (Fig. 67, 4, 5) are detached members of the Trojan ornaments




                                        t




                                                  4        5

           FIG. 67. Pins and earrings from UnStician graves. After Schranil (J).



shown in Fig. 22, i. The first bronze-smiths producing for a Central
European market seem to have been trained in Asiatic schools and to
have introduced, together with the secret of bronze, Oriental fashions
in personal adornment. 5 If so, the absence of these types on the Euro-

pean coasts of the ^Egean and in the Balkans requires the admission
      Schaeffer, Ugaritica, II (1949), 49. calls these metallurgists "Torque-Bearers
  1                                                                                    .

  1
      Syria, VI (1925), 18.
    Childe, NLMAE., 161-2.
  4
    Ibid., 53, 63.
                                               ints out that the "Asiatic" types do
    MilojSic, Germania, XXXIII (1955). 45-7> P
  *

not all appear simultaneously at the beginning of period IV, but severally during
phases Ai, A2, and B respectively.
                                            129
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
that they were introduced          up the Adriatic and across the Brenner,
unless they had been introduced through Troy by metallurgists work-
ing for export only till the fall of the "second city" destroyed their
market.
  The novel metal tools and weapons appearing at the same time were
neither so uniform in the Danubian province nor so clearly related to
Oriental models. The flat axe which at Thermi had been provided with
flanges by hammering (p. 38) was translated into a flanged axe, cast
in a two-piece mould (Fig. 69, i). Hence it can be inferred that Central

European bronze axes, like Danubian adzes, were mounted in knee
shafts. Chisels were
                   evenjprovided with cast tubular sockets in Moravia
and Austria. 1 Only in Hungary was a shaft-tube axe of Sumerian
                                        2
ancestry preferred (Fig. 64, 5-6). Shaft-hole axes were, however, used
as weapons elsewhere in the province, while a remarkable weapon from
a Saxon hoard8 of the end of period IV seems a barbaric version of the
crescentic axe represented in the Royal Tombs of Ur and rather later
in North Syria. 4
  The universal weapon was the round-heeled knife-dagger (Fig. 68).
Its bone or wooden hilt was hollowed at the base like the bronze hilt of
the rather later dagger shown in Fig. 70, an old Egyptian trick never
popular in Asia nor Greece, but traceable in Central, as in Western,
Europe, on the flat-tanged daggers of the Bell-beaker folk during
                     5
period III. Halberds were used in Germany and Lower Austria and
occasionally even in Hungary, but not in Bohemia. The type is sup-
posedly West European, and reached the Danubian province from
Ireland or from the Iberian Peninsula.
  The unity created by the metallurgical industry and commerce had
no political counterpart.        It   was imposed on a number of distinct
cultures called after the sites of Perjamos 6 on the Maros, T6szeg, or
                        7
Nagyr6v on the Tisza, Kisapostag west of the Danube, UnStice in
                                                           8


Bohemia,  and  Straubing  in Bavaria, and asserting their independence
not only in peculiarities of pottery and personal ornaments but even
by divergences in burial rites and economic status. Most are presumably
   PA., XLIV (1953), 203; Arch. Aust., VII (1950), 1-8.
    Derived through the Caucasus, or Crete; cf. PZ., XXVII (1936), 150; Folya Arch.,
VIII, 43.
    PZ. t   XXXIV (1949-50), 232-8; JMV.,    XXXV  (1951), 65.
    Iraq. XI (i949)  "*
    P.Z., XXV. 130-42; Arch.,   LXXXVI  (1937), 222-5.
    Banner, Dolgoxatok, VII (1931), I-53J XVII, 70-82; Patay, FrUhbronxexeitliche
Kulturen in Ungarn; Nestor, BRGK., XXII, 84-8; CISPP. (1950),
                                                                     267-77.
  7
    The culture from the lowest levels in the Toszeg tell is termed Nagyrev.; cf. Patay,
FrUhbrontexeiUiche Kulturen in Ungarn (1939); Mozsolic, AAH., if (1952); Banner,
PPS., XXI, 127.
    Mozsolic, Arch. Hung.,   XXVI (1942); Patay, op. cit.; in Slovakia Kisapostag and
Untice types occur with inhumations, AR., VI (1954), 297-300.
                                            130
                  DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
descended from local groups; for everywhere the
                                                      pottery is technically
in the  Lengyel-Baden tradition, but everywhere, save on the Tisza,
influence from Bell-beaker folk is
                                   patent even in the pottery. But the
universally used strap-handled jugs and tankards with the body and
neck modelled separately have nothing to do with the Bell-beakers.




                                                               70
                   FIG. 68. Daggers from UnStician graves
                   FIG. 69. Hoard of Sobochleby (J).
                   FIG. 70. Bronze-hilted dagger (J).
                              All after Schrml.


  In the Middle Danube basin settlements were founded in period IV
on sites chosen primarily with a view to commerce where natural
routes intersect at a ford or pass mouth, 1 And these settlements weie
permanent townships occupied so long that their ruins form tells.
Cemeteries of contracted skeletons no less clearly attest a sedentary
life;that at Szoreg near Szeged comprised 200 graves, 103 attributed
to period IV and 54 to period V. But even these communities were
                          i
                              PZ., XXII (1931), 33-
                                     13*
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
more nearly sell-sufficing villages than industrial cities. Bone and stone
were still used for implements and even battle-axes; metal toilet-
articles such as girdle-clasps were imitated in bone. The pots were
hand-made, but the slipped and polished vases, red, black, or mottled,
recall Anatolian and Iberic fabrics. In the basal or Nagyr6v levels at

T6szeg and in the older SzSreg graves the jugs have only one loop or
strap handle. Later these give place to hour-glass tankards
                                                              which
develop in period V  into metallic-looking cantharoi with quatrefoil
mouths like the Middle Minoan and Hittite vases (p. 33). While the
local smiths made most of the types characteristic of the period, they
did not develop the flanged axe nor the same variety of pins as was
popular farther north. Segmented fayence beads wer^ however,
                                     1
imported and Oriental lunula-pendants were imitated, as were Jgean
"sacred ivy-leaves". 8
  North of the Bakony and Carpathians no tells have been recognized,
but cemeteries in Austria comprising over a hundred graves8 must
belong to permanent villages, occupied even into period V (sixteen
                                                                  4
rectilinear houses have in fact been recognized at Postoloprty). All
the foregoing graves contained contracted skeletons. Only in the
Kisapostag group and the earliest graves near Szeged was cremation
the normal practice. Their cemeteries are indeed urnfields like that of
Troy VI. Of course, cremation had been practised locally by some
Baden communities and also by Bell-beaker folk in Hungary. In South
Bohemia, Poland, and Thuringia Unfitician burials have been found
under barrows (p. 200)
  The UnStician culture proper extends from the Austrian Danube
to Silesia and Saxony, but is most typically developed on the Upper
Elbe in Bohemia and along the Saale and Oder. Here, owing to the
proximity of the Ore Mountains and the amber trade across the
Brenner, the metal industry developed most luxuriantly. By casting
in valve-moulds, the celts were equipped with high flanges and the
knot-headed pin was translated into the distinctive "Bohemian eyelet-
pin" (Fig. 67, 2). Towards the end of period IV core casting allowed
the manufacture of socketed spear-heads and socketed chisels. More-
over, Unfitician smiths could produce not only ornaments of sheet
bronze but also bell helmets if, as Hencken* has shown grounds for
believing, the specimen found a century ago at Beitsch in Saxony was
  *   Cf. e.g. Sdtaefier, Stratigraphie comparte, fig. 183, 36.
  *
      Ettays in JB&a* Arckaology, ed. Casson, pp.        1-4; cf. Petrie,   Ancient Coxa, III,
pL* XIV, a9-33'
    Four hundred at Hainberg-Teichtal (MAGW,, LX (1930), 65 ff.); 255 at Gemein-
lebam (Swmbathy) Flackgrtber bie Gemeinlebam, R.-G. Forsck. & Berlin, 1929.
    AR.,V(*9S3), 308-18.
  *
    "Beitech and Knowos", PPS., XVIII (1952), 36-47, cf. p. 30 above.
                                              132
                       DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION
really associated with Ungtician ingot-torques and a triangular daggei.
Amber, gold, and Mediterranean shells were freely imported, but
fayence beads are rare and the segmented variety (like Fig. 157) is not
found north of Brno.




     FIG. 71. Bulb, disc, trilobate, and crutch-headed pins from later Un&tician
                               graves. After Schranil (J).



  The hand-made pots agree in fabric with those from Perj&mos, but
the most distinctive shapes were at first pouched jugs and mugs some-
times decorated with cord-impressions or incised lines (Fig.

         Formerly attributed to a distinct ''MarschwitE culture'' and period
     1                                                                         III.

                                          133
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
Then in the classical phase of UnStice (IVb) these are transformed by
flattening out the belly into keeled mugs and jugs. Neumann has
                                                               1


analysed the constituents of UnStician pottery into elements derived
from the Bell-beaker and Corded ware groups and a southern com-




          FIG. 72. Marschwitz and early UnStician pottery, Silesia and Bohemia.
                                     After Stock^.



ponent. His analysis summarizes the constitution of the whole culture.
Bell-beaker folk established the requisite commercial connection,
battle-axe warriors made the demand for metal effective, metallurgists
from the south may have provided the technical basis, but the founda-
tion was still Baden and so Danubian.
  The development    of the Central European bronze industry was

undoubtedly correlated with that of the amber trade across the
province; the guaranteed market that alone could make regular trade
among barbarians worth while was in Mycenaean Greece and Crete.
It is undoubtedly assumed that the initiation of the industry was

equally due to prospectors, ultimately relying for a livelihood on the
purchasing power of East Mediterranean cities. On this assumption
the Oriental types reproduced              by Danubian smiths should provide
limiting dates for period IV. The limits thus given prove to be unex-
pectedly wide. Most of the ornaments mentioned on p. 129 had been
current in Egypt or Mesopotamia long before 2000 B.C. Even the ingot-
toiques, introduced into Syria about that date, had earlier wiry pre-
cursors at Ahlatlibel, as in Austria (p. 125). So period IV might begin
before 2000 B.C. But regular trade with the ^Egean is attested first
about 1600 B.C.
  The initial assumption, however intrinsically probable, has not yet
been demonstrated by actual dateable imports; for segmented fayence
beads were current in Hither Asia for a millennium before 1400 B.C.
Now the metal-working clan, who introduced ingot-torques with core
casting    and other advances into Syria, are thought to have been
                               *
                                   PZ. t XX (1929), 70-128.
                            DANUBIAN CIVILIZATION

immigrants. As no other cradle has been found for them, they might
have come from Central Europe. In that case their advent a century
before or after 2000 B.C. would be a terminus ante quern for the beginning
of Danubian IV. So too the amber beads from the Shaft Graves of
Mycenae at least prove that the commerce that enriched the UnStician
culture was fully established before 1550 B.C. Crescentic necklaces with
pattern-bored spacers, like the Mycenaean, in Bavaria and Alsace are
found in graves of period V. So 1550 should be near the end of period IV.
If so, the strikingly close Middle Minoan and contemporary Hittite

analogies to the quatrefoil cantharoi that developed from the Perj&mos
tankards in period V (p. 132) become chronologically significant.
Moreover, by 1200 B.C. fibulae and other Central European or North
Italian types were appearing in Greece, and the types in question are
more proper to period VI than to period V. 1 If, then, period V the
Middle Bronze Age     ended about 1250 B.C., and began in 1550, period IV,
the initial phase of the Continental Bronze Age, might very well have
occupied five centuries and begun before 2000 B.C. On the available
Central European evidence, 2100 is as likely a date as 1700 for the
start of the Early Bronze Age.
   But whether Perjdmos and UnStice are to be compared to Sargonid
cities in Mesopotamia or early Mycenaean townships in Greece, they
must rank several stages lower in the cultural scale. Economically they
have not reached the level of the Early Aegean townships of the
Peloponnese or the Troad. Most of the population must remain peasants.
But one industry at least did absorb a few of the farmers' younger sons;
trade did indirectly secure a share in the Oriental surplus to supple-
ment home-grown supplies. The smiths, the only specialist craftsmen
recognizable in the archaeological record of period IV, displayed far
more originality and inventiveness than their fellows in Asia or Egypt.
And their products were more democratic. Even in period IV they were
making sickles while Egyptian peasants were still reaping with flints.
By period VI their successors would have invented an axe of bronze
that was as efficient and as cheap as an iron one, and an armament
with which European barbarians could challenge the well-equipped
armies of Oriental monarchies.

     1
         Cf. p. 83; even violin-bow fibulae are first reliably attested in urnfields of period VI.
A fragment from an UnStice grave at Polepy in Bohemia (Schrinil, Bohmtn, 101;
 B6hm, CISPP. (London.                    AR., VI (1954)* 533. where the fragment
                                  1932), 242; cf.
is   accepted [as an UnStician fibula)too small for reliable diagnosis; another from
                                            is
 Gemeinlebarn is just as likely to belong to the urnfield at that site as to the late
 Ungtician cemetery.




                                                 135
                                           CHAPTER VIII
                     THE PEASANTS OF THE BLACK EARTH
ON the 16ss-clad flanks of the Carpathians, in the valleys of the upper
Oltu and the Seret, and on the parkland plateau extending north-
eastward across the Prut, the Dniestr, and the Southern Bug to the
Dniepr, there developed, on a Starievo foundation enriched by Dan-
ubian elements, a remarkable farming culture named after Tripolye,
a site near Kiev. 1 Though its authors were throughout farmers and lived
in large villages of substantial houses, they seem, like their kinsmen
farther west, to have practised a sort of shifting cultivation. 2 Hence
the village sites are very numerous twenty-six have been identified
in no sq. miles just south of Kiev but none formed tells. A few sites
  Nezviska8 on the Dniestr, Cucuteni4 and Izvoare 6 on the Prut,
Traian6 on the Seret were occupied more than once. The stratigraphy
there observed justifies a division of the culture into four main stages:
A, Bi, B2, and C It is based primarily on a stylistic analysis of the
                  7
                            .



ceramic decoration in which local divergences may have sometimes
been mistaken for discrepancies in age. Phase A is confined to a few
sites on the upper reaches of the Prut, the Dniestr, and the Bug. The

valleys of the Oltu             and Dniepr would then have been colonized in
phase Bi (AB). Only in phase C does Tripolye pottery occur in settle-
ments of quite different cultures on the steppes and in the forests north
of the Teterev.
  The basis of life was throughout the cultivation of wheats Triticum
monococcum, dicoccum, and vulgar e barley, and millet, and the breed-
                                       8
ing of cattle, goats, sheep, and pigs. Cows were always the most
                                  9
important stock; horses' bones occur in all stages, but perhaps repre-
sent game animals save in the latest stage. Hunting was at all times
important, but the percentage of game bones in the food refuse declines
from 52 in stage A to 20 in stage C. Fishing must also have made
  1
    Passek, Periodixaisiya Tripolskikh Poselenil (MA., X, 1949), though written in
1946, documents facts unless another reference be given.
    Kricevskii, KS., VIII (1940), 53.
     KSU., IV (1955), 142-6.
     Schmidt, H. f Cucuteni in der oberen Moldau (Berlin, 1932).
     Vulpe, ESA,, XI (1937). I34-46.
     St. s. Cere.,   V (i954J. 3^54-
     Passek, La Ctramique tripolienne (GAIMK., Leningrad, 1935).
     Bibflcov, Ranne-tripolshoe poselenie Luka-Vrublevetska, MIA., XXXVIII (1953).
     Hancar, Das Pferd, 65 ff; KS. LI (1953). 53-
                                       t



                                              136
             THE PEASANTS OF THE BLACK EARTH
a substantial contribution; hooks of copper or bone are found even on
phase A sites, while along the Dniestr remains of fish over 1-5 m. long
have been reported. Net-fishing may be inferred from clay sinkers.
Finally, the collection of shell-fish and berries added substantially to
the food-supply.
  The settlements are normally located on spurs of loss, protected on
three sides by ravines. At the time of their occupation the plateaux
were moister than to-day,             liable to
                                     swamping, covered with damp
woods and inhabited by                otters, and water-rats.
                                     tortoises,
                                                              1
                                                                Most
sites were probably defended by ditch and rampart. Those at         8
                                                             Ariu^d
on the Oltu (phase Bi) enclosed ij acres that would accommodate
at most 21 houses arranged in three rows.                          8
                                             Hab$e$ti on the Seret
comprised perhaps 44 dwellings, while as many as 150, mostly 62,
are reported from Vladimirovka. Normal villages of phases B2 and
C consisted of 30 to 42 houses usually arranged radially on the
circumferences of one or more concentric circles 200 m. to 500 m. in
diameter.
  Only alleged pit-dwellings of phase A have been described; the
houses of later phases are represented by the celebrated pkitadki,
areas of baked clay resulting from the burning and collapse of walls
and floors. The walls of wattle and daub heavily plastered with clay
and straw were supported by earth-fast posts at Ariu^d in phase Bi;
their sockets define houses measuring 8-25 by 5-4 m. and divided into
two rooms by a partition. Ovens were found in both rooms, a hearth
in the outer one. In plan and internal arrangements these houses are
identical with those of Rossen and contemporary settlements round
the Alps (Fig. 137), and assumed for period II along the Middle Danube.
In phases 62 and C, posts planted in sleeper beams seem to have served
to support only a skeleton frame and the roof-tree, the walls being
built of compacted earth     kerpitsh. In most villages a few houses
were small and one-roomed, 7 by 4 m. in area and containing only
a single oven. The average house measured about 14 by 5-5 m. and
contained two to four ovens. The largest house recorded measured
27 by 6-5 m. and was divided into five rooms, four furnished with one
oven each, the fifth with two. The most puzzling features in many
houses are the hard-baked and well-smoothed clay floors on which
ovens, querns, and vases stood and on the undersides of which imprints
                                           4
of close-set timbers are preserved.

  1
      Pidopliika in Passek, note i, 146.
  1
    Childe, Danube, 98-104.
   Hdb&fefti, Monografie Arheologica (Acad. Rcpub. Pop. Romine, Bucuresti, 1954).
    Krifcjvsktt, "Tripolskie HoS6adki", SA., VI (1940), argued that the floors were
baked   byfires kindled upon them before the house was roofed over.
                                           137
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  The large ovens, 2 m. or more square, were made of clay on a frame-
work of saplings. In addition, some rooms were furnished with raised
benches of baked clay, and at least in phase B2 on the Bug also




                   FIG. 73. Model hut from Popudnia.


with cruciform pediments ornamented on their surfaces with engraved
lines or with paint.  Russian archaeologists agree that these last were
offering-places. Six or seven fragmentary models illustrate the interior
of a Tripolye house, showing the porch, the oven, the cruciform pedi-
ment, the jars of grain, and the quern just as excavators have found
them (Fig. 73). All these models stand on legs and so suggest that
          THE PEASANTS OF THE BLACK EARTH
Tripolye houses were really raised on piles. That would be quite
reasonable as the sites were liable to swamping; it would at once
explain the burning of the clay floors and of the wooden beams under
them. But there is no excavational evidence for this very plausible
hypothesis. Russian excavators frequently refer also to half-subter-
ranean dwellings or zemlianki, but the plans look almost as dubious
as those of Danubian "pit-dwellings".
  Krifcevskil believed that the large houses with three or more rooms
resulted from the enlargement of one-roomed houses to accommodate
married children of the latters' builders. The enlarged family would
keep together, as in the recent Slav zadruga. If so, the sites in question
must have been occupied for at least two generations.
   Tripolye farmers were generally content to use local materials for
their equipment which consequently looks purely neolithic. Adzes
were made of local stone, often rather soft, but axe-hammers or even
simple battle-axes were perforated with a hollow borer, and mattocks
or adzes were made from bored antlers (Fig. 75, 15). Weapons are not
common. Triangular flint arrow-heads occur sporadically from phase
Bi at least. A knob bed mace like one from Danubian III is reported
from a 62 site near Kiev, 1 while model battle-axes surely warriors'
weapons were made at Ariud and Habife$ti in phase Bi.
  Trade secured farmers even at Petreny on the middle Dniestr
obsidian from west of the Carpathians by phase B2. Copper too was
similarly obtained from the very first, but in phase A was employed
                                                         2


only  for fish-hooks, rings, bangles, and beads; one  fragment analysed
contained 30 per cent of zinc, so native copper at least is excluded. In
phase Bi copper was used occasionally for making flat adzes, while
a 62 site yielded a copper pick-axe, allied to the Transylvanian axe-
adzes of Danubian III. Phase C is certainly contemporary with the
frankly Bronze Age Usatova culture (p. 145), but even in Bi a knot-
headed pin is reported from Sabatinovka on the Bug. 8 It may be
evidence for Asiatic inspiration of the school of metallurgy that grew
up west of the Black Sea, but it could just as well be derived from the
Perjimos and Ungtician cultures in the Danube valley. In that case
phase Bi of Tripolye would fall already into Danubian IV.
  The products of Tripolye potters have been celebrated in archaeo-
logical literature for nearly a century. In          every village local potters
made vases of sophisticated forms and substantial dimensions and
  1
    F. Vovk in Antropologiya, 1927 (Kiev, 1928)* 20-5, pi. III, 9.
  ? See p. 137, n. 3.
    Arkheohg. Pamat. Ukrain. S.S.R., IV (Kiev, 1952), 78-83; a day copy oi a Scythian
  1

cauldron, allegedly from the same horizon, prompts doubts as to the reliability of the
excavation report.
                                         139
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
fired them in kilns to a hard red or orange ware.A model vertical kiln
                                                                     1
and remains of an actual one stacked with vases were found at Ariujd
                                               2      have served to
(Fig. 74), perforated clay grills from Hab&e?ti may
separate  the firing chamber from the hearth. Yet housewives most
                                                                            instead of
probably made at home the pots required for domestic use
                                                        stocks of pre-
purchasing them from a full-time specialist potter; for




           FIG. 74. Potters' oven and model, Ariud (Er6sd). After Laszl6.


                                                     and instruments for decor-
pared clay were discovered in some houses
       vases   in  many. Actually   two    wares   are  found on most Tripolye
ating
sites   a coarse    ware  tempered  with   shell   and   a finer fabric with chaff
or sand temper.      The  former, not   reported    from   phase A sites, is orna-
mented with       a  comb, impressed into,      or   drawn    over, the wet clay;
                     with the             of               hunter-fisher    societies
its affinities  lie           products        surviving
in the boreal forest     zone of North-Eastern       Europe.
   The finer wares, red or orange in hue, were richly decorated. In all
                                                with deep channelled grooves
phases the patterns might be outlined
supplemented with dots and,       in  phases    A  and Bi, filled with rouletted
                                                  or  shell used to produce such
lines; the curved stamps of antler, bone,
lines have been found on several       sites
                                             8
                                               (Fig, 75, Bi, 12).
                                                                     Broad flutings
were sometimes employed with,          or instead    of, grooves   in  phase A and
                    4
especially in Bi. Exceptionally
                                     these   devices   were  enriched   by incrusta-
tions in ochre or with lines of white paint applied            before  firing to the
red ground in phase A. The most familiar            decoration    in  phases B and
            1
              See p. 137, n. 2.
           1
              Page 157, n. 3, pp. 189 ff., fig. 9.
              At Luka-Vrublevetska (p. 136, n. 8); Ariu$d; Sabatinovka, etc.
            4
              Especially at Traian on the Seret, Dacia,
                                                        IX-X (1941-44), n ff.


                                          140
                      FIG. 75. Tripolye types (after Passek).

B I: Polychrome pottery (fa) and ladle, figurine, clay cone, and stamp (J), comb for
         decorating pottery, stone adze, antler pick.
B II: i (fa), 3, 7 (fa) grooved, 5-6 painted ware (fa), PyaniSkovo; Vladimirovka.
C I: 1-3 Popodnia; 6-8 (fa), Staraya Buda.

                                       141
                  DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
C was, however, painted      in white or red (mainly in Bi), outlined
with black on red, or red outlined in black on a white slip. Warm
black, sometimes supplemented by thin lines in red, on
                                                        buff or orange
was the favourite style in phases 82 and C. In phase A running spirals,
used as a                      formed the basis of the decoration, but
                  repetition pattern,
                                                                  the       these
they gave place to closed S spirals in phase Bi. In        sequel
dissolved into circles and the old all-over composition gave place to a
tectonic arrangement emphasizing the vase's articulation.
  From the first the vase forms are highly sophisticated                 and too
varied even for enumeration. Tubular stands (Fig. 75, Bi, 2) are con-
fined to phases A and Bi. Fruitstands (Fig. 75, Bi, i) were most popular
in phase Bi and in that phase alone are accompanied by jar? on profiled
                                                       1 '

and perforated pedestals. "Binocular vases (Fig. 75, Bn, 7) were char-
acteristic at all periods. Vases in the form of animals, usually bulls,
or anthropomorphic, may rank as ritual vessels, but a ''bird vase" of
phase
        1
         Acould just as well be regarded as an askos.
  In the light of the total excavation of Kolomishchina Tripolye society
would seem to have been as democratic and equalitarian as the Dan-
ubian of Koln-Lindental, since the size of the houses was determined
by the number of families inhabiting them jointly. But
                                                          at Fedele^eni,
a Moldavian village of stage Bi,  Nestor 2
                                           mentions that  one house was
more         furnished  than  the  rest and  contained  a  stone animal
         richly
                                               to a chief. Moreover, the
sceptre-head (Fig. 76) as if it had belonged
mace-head from Veremye might     be interpreted as a symbol of authority.
                                                "
  The ideology of the Tripolye  farmers was as Asiatic" as that of their
Balkan and Danubian II contemporaries. In addition to the cruciform
                houses were littered with clay figurines and models.
          1

"altars'      ,   many
The former, predominantly female, in phases A and Bi were steato-
                                          with incised spirals (Fig.
pygous, and in phase Bi richly ornamented
                                        like Fig. 8, 2 were also common
75, Bi, 10), though fiddle-shaped types
at Hibi?eti. In phase B2 the figurines are flat, often perforated for
              8

                                                 Males are represented
suspension and painted (Fig. 75, BII, 13; C, 8).
                                     4 too in
sporadically even in phase A, phalli           phase Bi. Clay stamps
occur only in phase Bi and are confined to sites between the Oltu
and the Prut Ariud, Cucuteni,                and Ruginoasa; one bears
                                              Hib&^ti,
a filled cross design, the rest spirals (Fig. 76).
  As ornaments, besides copper and very rare gold trinkets, clay beads,
some star-shaped, were worn at all periods. Copper                beads and bored
deers teeth seem confined to phases A and Bi, to which belong also
     1




                            *
                                MIA., XXXVIII, p. 338, tab. 46.
                            *   BRGK. XXII, 45 ;and 51, n. 80.
                                       t


                                Page 137, n. 3, 414.
                            4
                                Page 137, n. 4, 468.
                                              142
               THE PEASANTS OF THE BLACK EARTH
                               1

laminae from boars tusks perforated at the four corners.
                                                         Clay cones,
common in phase Bi (Fig. 75, 8} may have been gamesmen, though
one is surmounted by a rough human head.
      The position of the Tripolye phases in the Balkan sequence is fairly
clear.On the Seret, phase A is preceded by Boian, while a broken
binocular vase was found as an import in the earliest       level       Gumelntya
at Vidra (p. 98). At Verbicoara in Wallachia, polychrome sherds,
attributed to phase Bi, were found in the Salcufa layer, while the




                 FIG. 76. Stone sceptre-head, Fedele?eni and clay stamp, Ariusd.



sceptre-head from Fedele?eni is paralleled at Salcu^a itself. On the
Upper Oltu, remains of the Ariusd, Bi, version of Tripolye are super-
imposed on early Boian strata. On the Dniestr at Nezviska, the
settlement with early Bi pottery overlies the late Danubian I village
(p. no), but at Traian, Danubian I sherds are reported from a Tripolye
A layer. 1 Hence, while phase A may overlap with Boian in Balkan II,
most of phases A and B must be parallel with Gumelnifa and Salcufa
in Balkan III.
  Links with the Danubian sequence are more ambiguous. The day
stamp-seals might be used as a basis for synchronizing phase Bi with
Danubian II, and so might the Ariusd figurines that, as in Moravia,
were modelled in two parts separately and then stuck together. On
the other hand, the relative abundance of metal, the battle-axes, repre-
sented by models, a bossed copper disc from Hb&$e$ti* would all be
  1   St. s.
               fere. (1954),   v 36   -



      Page 136, n. 6, 436; the disc is very like that from the Danubian III grave at Brzdtt
  1

Kujawski, p. 123 above.
           DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
more appropriate to Danubian III. So the jars on high profiled pedestals
of phase Bi have their closest analogies in the transitional Tiszapolgdr
pottery that is likewise Danubian III, while at Marosvasarhely poly-
chrome Bi and decorated Bodrogkeresztur pottery seem to have been
associated. An even lower limit in terms of the Danubian sequence
would be given by the one possible import found in a Tripolye settle-
ment: the knot-headed pin from Sabatinovka, if imported from
Bohemia or Hungary, would mean that Tripolye Bi did not end
before Danubian IV began. But of course the pin might have come
from Asia. That Tripolye C lasts into and perhaps beyond Danubian IV
is nearly certain. 1 Here Tripolye has been assigned to periods II, III,

and IV, but perhaps its several phases should each be set a^>eriod later.
   In its economy, as in its art, the Tripolye culture is so fundamentally
Danubian that one might speak of a Dniestro-Danubian cycle of
cultures. The Danubian element can be most economically derived
from the colonists established at Nezviska and elsewhere in pre-
Tripolian times. But they had been preceded by earlier Starevo
settlers, if not by the hypothetical hunter-fishers who might have
remained in occupation of the region since the Ice Age (p. 88). Indeed,
the latter now become almost tangible in the coarse ware found on all
Tripolye sites and related to that of the more boreal hunter-fisher
tribes of the Eurasiatic taiga. It is now no longer necessary to look
to Central Asia to account for the painted Tripolye vases, since the
Starievo pioneers painted their vases and must have possessed the
vertical kilns requisite for producing light-faced wares.
  The Tripolye ideology and the elaborate ritual paraphernalia that
expressed it were of course shared by the Tripolye farmers with their
cultural antecedents in South- West Asia, but equally with neighbour-
ing Gumelnifa, Vinfca, and Danubian II societies; it could have reached
the Tripolye province thence, if not earlier with the StarCevo colonists.


 THE BEGINNINGS OF METALLURGY ON THE WEST PONTIC COASTS
By Tripolye phase C, and probably earlier, there had arisen pn the
steppes bordering the Black Sea a local metal industry serving stratified
                                                     2
societies, best represented in the Usatova culture, so named after a
village and cemeteries near Odessa. Warlike chiefs, leaders of a pastoral
aristocracy, were enabled to exercise an effective demand for metal
armaments by concentrating the surplus wealth produced by their
pastoral followers and by their Tripolye subjects.

                   Sulimirski, PPS., XVI (1950), 45-52.
               1

               1
                   Full summary by Passek in MIA., X, 190-200.

                                      144
            THE PEASANTS OF THE BLACK EARTH
  The new pastoral aspect of the economy is disclosed by the very
numerous animal bones from the village and the prominence among
them of sheep and horses, now surely domesticated; the percentages
are   37-8 sheep, 31 cows, 15-5 horses, only 2-2 pigs. Game accounts for
       :


                                 1
only 28-4 per cent of the total.
  The rulers were buried under barrows which form two cemeteries
near the village. A chief2 was interred contracted on one side or on
his back in a central shaft grave encircled by a ring of slabs on edge.
Under one barrow a slab in the kerb had been engraved with very
                                                                8
rough representations of a man, a stag, and perhaps a horse. Before
the barrow was heaped, one or two slaves or dependents would be
slain and interred in accessory graves. Bones of animals and statuettes,
too, were buried in separate pits.
   Contrasted with these almost royal tombs are the flat graves belong-
ing presumably to the cultivators. These are shallow pits, each covered
by a flat slab and containing a single contracted skeleton. That these
cultivators were an off-shoot from Tripolye communities may be
inferred from survivals of the Tripolye ideology and ceramic art.
Figurines were still made in clay though stylized almost beyond
recognition (Fig. 77, 6-8).
   In the village and both under the barrows and in flat graves well-
fired vases, painted and fashioned in the Tripolye technique, occur
side by side with coarser vessels                 ornamented with cord impressions.
The designs on the painted pots can be regarded as degenerations of
the good spiral ornament of Tripolye A and Bi, and some old Tripolye
forms are reproduced. The cord-ornamented pottery must represent
the new pastoral element; some of the jars could be regarded as degen-
erations of Thuringian amphorae (Fig. 77, 1,3), but the impressed cord
designs are more elaborate than any from North or Central Europe
and include the imprints of crocheted necklaces, maggot patterns, and
horse-shoe loops. 4
   Trade brought amber, presumably from the Baltic, antimonite
                                                  of copper. The metal
allegedly from Turkey, and substantial supplies
was cast into characteristic local types. The most distinctive is a kite-
                                                                     but
shaped riveted dagger with a midrib on one face only (Fig. 77, 4),
flat axes and quadrangular awls were also made. The shaft-hole axe
from Cucuteni may also be a product of Usatova industry, since a
typical dagger comes from the site.
                                        Small spiral rings of copper or

  1
       SA., V, 258; Naukove Zapiski IIMK., II (Ukrain. Akad. Nauk, Kiev, 193?)*
116.
  1
       For these barrows see also SA.   t   V (1940). 240-56.
    Figured in Mongalt, Arhheologiya v SSSR. (Moskva, 1955), 109.
  1
  4
    Rosenberg, Kulturstrdmungen in Ewopa xur
                                               SUinxnt (Copenhagen).
                                                 145
              DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
silver were worn as well as necklaces of bored deers' teeth. The stone

industry is comparatively poor. A perforated antler axe had been
buried with one of the chiefs and so must rank as a battle-axe, as in
the Danubian III graves of Brze6-Kujawski.




                                 FIG. 77. Usatova types.

(Top) Usatova Barrows: 1-2, cord-ornamented and painted vases (i); 3-5, copper objects
    (() barrow I; 6-10, figurine (J), painted pot (J), copper spirals, bored wolfs teeth (J)
    barrow II.
(Below) 3-7, cord-ornamented and painted pots (i), day figurine () from other barrows;
    8 figurine from Usatova settlement (after Passek).
                                           146
            THE PEASANTS OF THE BLACK EARTH
  Ustatova ceramic and metal types occur in a number of barrow
graves on the steppes between the Tripolye province and the Black
Sea and in a few marginal Tripolye villages. 1 The first two villages at
the fortified site of Mikhaflovka2 on a tributary of the Lower Dniepr
may well have been occupied by a kindred society, again predomin-
antly pastoral. Metal was certainly worked here too, but no distinctively
Usatova types have been published in 1956.
  Krifievskil8 and Passek treated the Usatova culture as the final
result    of the conversion of the Tripolye                 economy to   pastoralism.
            4
Briusov,   however, could easily show that Usatova represented a
distinct culture not later than Tripolye B2 or at least C. A Tripolye

component is indeed obvious enough. The origin of the pastoral
element will be considered in Chapter IX. What of the metal industry?
  The distribution of the distinctive metal types leaves little doubt
that the raw material reached the Black Sea coasts by sea. If that
means that the knowledge of metal-working was introduced by pro-
spectors from the ^Egean or Asia Minor, it cannot be claimed that their
local products reproduced any specific southern models. The technique
of casting midrib daggers in a one-piece mould is a barbarism quite

foreign to any of the advanced schools of metallurgy and paralleled
only in the Iberian peninsula and South France. Usatova metal types
give no clue as to the origin of their makers nor as to the absolute
date of the Usatova culture. Relatively it might be assigned to period
IV or a late phase of period III in the Balkan sequence. In the Danubian
sequence it should occupy a similar position. Usatova must surely
be earlier than period V, since Hungarian bronzes of that phase are
quite common in the province. A little support for
                                  6                     an equation with
Danubian IV might be derived from         the kite-shaped daggers of the
                                                             6
East Polish and Slovakian Tomasz6w culture at least in plan they ;



recall the Usatova type and they are associated with segmented fayence
beads. Still the latter might be correlated with the amber beads from
Troy II and Usatova as indicative of a trade in metals and Sammland
amber in the IHrd., millennium.

         Passek. loc. cit.\ Arkheologiya, VIII (Kiev, 1953). 95-i7-
         KSU., IV (1955). 119-23; V, 13-17-
         MIA., II (1941), 251-3-
         Oterki, 240 ff. Note distribution map on p. 234.
         Ta11trr/n Jf^jl   TT
                                                                   8      LXII. 18.
         Kostrzewski, /.'. Prehistoria Ziem PolsMch (Krakdw, I939-4 ). P
                                                                        1-




                                            147
                                      CHAPTER IX
 CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER THE EURASIAN PLAIN?
LAST century anthropologists regarded the Eurasiatic plain as a
corridor through which Asiatic hordes, precursors of the Huns and the
Tartars, swept neolithic culture to Western Europe. Their guess is
hardly confirmed by the evidence of the spade. But of course con-
firmatory evidence would be hard to obtain; predominantly pastoral
and ex hypothcsi mobile communities need leave no durable equipment
that archaeologists could            recognize,    and   certainly would leave            no
stratified tells in their wake. Stock-breeding is indeed not attested
earlier near the eastern than near the western extremities of the plain,
but only in the sense that no geological nor pollen dates are available
in the former area while the culture sequence as distinguished in 1956
seems less varied, and therefore shorter, than farther west. No doubt
in the wide chilly forest zone a "palaeolithic" economy based on collect-
ing, hunting, and fishing along the shores of meres and rivers persisted
long, albeit made increasingly sedentary by the emphasis on fishing.
Farther south, in the wide belt of parkland and the steppe zone border-
ing the Black Sea, collections of flint tools may indicate a continuity
of settlement from late pleistocene times.               Chopping tools, sharpened
by a tranchet blow (p. 9), are reported from the parklands of Vol-
                                 1
hynia, Podolia, and the Ukraine. Only in a few stratified caves in
Crimea1 can even the relative antiquity of the aichaic flints be deter-
mined, and even there, though microliths are associated with pots
with pointed bases8 no very high antiquity need be assigned to them
since geometric microliths may survive quite late.
   Still less can such collections be cited as documenting precocious
animal husbandry, since no bones survive on sandhill sites. The flints
collected from dunes between Lake Aral and the Oder may have been
left by ancestors of the herdsmen who reached Denmark in Atlantic

times, but there is not a scrap of evidence that they were.
  On the fringe of the vast 16ss lands, colonized by primary neolithic
Danubian, Starfcevo and Tripolye peasants, there did indeed emerge
communities of herdsmen, known almost exclusively from graves. Do

   1
       Briusov, Obrki, 181-203.
   1
                      II (Kiev, 1928), 190-1.
       Antrofolojiya.
   *
       liCS.,   XXXI (1950)1 110-16; SA. V (1940). 97-100; cf. Gerasimov, Litsa, 263-5.
                                         t


                                             148
 CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
these represent pastoral tribes separated out from the more agricultural
Dniestro-Danubian societies? Or are they local mesolithic communities
                                       1
converted by their neighbours example to food-production? Or,
finally, are they immigrants from the steppes farther south and east?
There, too, are barrow graves of a peculiar kind, the so-called ochre
graves.

          THE OCHRE GRAVE CULTURES OF THE PONTIC STEPPES
The true steppe zone extends from the Dobrudja and the wooded
outpo&ts of the Carpathians round the Black Sea coasts to the Caucasus
and beyond the Volga to the Altai. The steppes are covered with
barrows of all periods down to the late Middle Ages. The prehistoric
ones, generally small, cluster in little cemeteries, presumably marking
some sort of tribal territory, and most cover many successive inter-
ments. On the strength of his excavations between the Donets and the
Don, Gorodtsov defined three main stages on periods distinguished
primarily by tomb types first shaft graves (yamy), next pit-caves
("catacombs") and finally wooden cists (sruby). Hence the archaeo-
logical record in South Russia has been divided into yamno, catacomb,
and srubno periods, and this terminology is retained even though
it isnow established that catacomb graves are confined to the Black
Sea coasts and the valleys of the Donetz, the Don, and the Many,
and define a culture rather than a period of time. On the slopes of the
metalliferous Caucasus, however, some barrows are so rich that a
finer typological division into five periods has been established by
Yessen. 1 His phases I and II correspond roughly to the old Early
Kuban 2 and more roughly to Gorodtsov's yamno stage, 8 while his
group III may equal Middle Kuban and catacomb. But these burials
under round barrows are not the earliest. Just as the funerary record
in Britain begins with collective burial under long barrows, so in South
Russia it begins with multiple burials in long trenches or under long
mounds.
   In all these graves the skeletons lie extended, usually covered with
red ochre and arranged in groups. At Vovnigi4 near Dniepropetrovsk,
                                                            ,



130 skeletons in three layers were lying side by side under a sandhill.
At Mariupol on the Sea of Azov6 120 adults and six children had been
  1
      5.4.,   XII (1950). 157-85.                    *
                                                         ESA., IV, 1-19.
  1
    Degen-Kovalevskii (KS., II (1939), 14-16) and Artamonov (SA. t     X (1948), 161-81)
proposed much later dates for the Early Kuban barrows.
  4
    KSU., IV (1955), *47-9; cf. Arkheologiya,    V
                                              (Kiev, 1951), 163, for a similar burial
farther down the Dniepr, and Gerasimov, Litsa, 260-80, for others; the skulls are
"Cromagnonoid"
  5
                     .


    Makarenko, Mariupilski Mogilnik (Kiev, Vse-Ukrainska Akad. Nauk,              1933);
Stolyar (SA. XXIII, 16) distributes the burials over four successive phases.
                 t




                                           149
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
buried in groups across one long trench filled with red earth. At Nal&k1
a low irregular mound covered 130 contracted skeletons, again buried
in groups and covered with red pigment. Such numbers exceed those
recorded from any mesolithic cemetery of food-gatherers so that the
denial of neolithic status may be unjustified. Actually flint celts with
polished blades were found at Mariupol together with stone beads and
                                                                                    1
bracelets and a variety of ornaments carved out of wild beasts teeth
and boars' tusks. Two skeletons were accompanied by knobbed mace-
heads (cf. Fig. 65), interpreted as emblems of chieftainship. A female
figurine of stone lay in one grave at Nal&k, and pottery in others.
However these communities got their food, they were not economically
isolated. A pendant of porphyry imported from the Urals occurred at

Mariupol; a copper lock-ring and beads of "vitreous paste" and car-
nelian at Nal&k. The last-named ornaments are explicitly results of
connection with Oriental civilization, and even the knobbed maces
from Mariupol may be thus interpreted, since the type was common
in Mesopotamia from Early Dynastic times.
  The burials just described recall most strikingly those of mesolithic
Natufians in the Wad cave on Mount Carmel, but agree in several
points also with those of neolithic hunter-fishers on Gotland and on
Olenii Island in       Lake Onega. They are not for these reasons neces-
sarily earlier than the single burials, sometimes accompanied by metal
objects, under the commoner round barrows. Indeed, knobbed mace-
heads farther west are Danubian III or Balkan III (pp. 122). On the
other hand, microliths are found in Early Kuban barrows.
  The earliest food-producers detectable on the steppes in South Russia
are those buried under round barrows in the yamno graves. In these,
remains of domestic animals                 only sheep have been recorded                        are
exceptional, while bones of game, flint arrow-heads, and bone harpoons
do attest hunting and fishing. Finds from domestic sites, 2 however,
prove that cows, sheep, goats, and probably horses and pigs were bred
and millet cultivated. The stock-breeders were interred, thickly sprinkled
with red ochre, lying on a bier or bed of rushes on the back with the
legs drawn up or more rarely extended, sometimes in a tent-shaped
                 8
mortuary house, at the bottom of the shaft, which was roofed with birch
                                                                          4
poles resting on ledges in the sides (as in the Shaft Graves of Mycenae).
In the Ukraine, rudely anthropomorphic stelae covered some graves.      6

  1
      MIA., Ill (1940), 69 fi.
      Near Nalttk, MIA., Ill (1940), 192; Mikhaflovka on the Lower Dniepr, KSU. IV           t


(1955), 119-22.
      IGAIMK., 100 (1933), 105.
  4
      Rau, Hockergr&ber for Wolgasteppe (Marxstadt, 1928); SA.   t   IV   (1937),       93       3-1
MIA. XLVT, 12 ff.
       t


      KSU.. I (1952), 21; V (1935), 75-8-
                                            150
CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
  In no grave does much furniture survive             at best a pot, some hunting
or fishing tackle, necklaces of bored teeth and     only in the latest
graves   a hammer-headed pin of bone (Fig. 78, 5-6). 1 The pot, if
present, is an ovoid beaker, often plain, sometimes decorated with
                                                         2
pits below the inturned rim or even with cord impressions (Fig. 79, 4).




        FIG. 78. Copper battle-axe, Vozdvizhenskaya (J), copper beads (f), copper
                   spear-head (J), copper and bone hammer-pins ($).


  A lucky chance has revealed dramatically how unreliable negative
conclusions, based on the inevitable deficiencies of the archaeological
record, may be. Under a large barrow of the period, "Storozhevaya",
near Dnepropetrovsk8 an exceptional conjuncture has preserved
remains of a wooden cart with two solid wheels, 48 cm. in diameter,
that served as a hearse. It demonstrates at once that wheeled vehicles
were used by the steppe folk, that these had not only domesticated
but also harnessed oxen or conceivably horses and that they
recognized chiefs who enjoyed the privileges of Sumerian kings.
  On the slopes of the Caucasus such chiefs secured more substantial
emblems and instruments of authority. A celebrated barrow near
       4
Maikop is representative of the eleven rich "royal burials" that con-
stitute Yessen's group I. The tomb was a tripartite wooden chamber
in a  deep shaft enciicled by a ring of boulders. A prince had been
buried in the main chamber under a canopy adorned with gold and
silver lions and bulls. A male and a female corpse occupied the remain-

    1
        Though found in graves that are typologically "yamno", most common from
"catacombs".
    *
      Found from the Dniepr to as far east as Stalingrad.
    8
      KS., XXXVII (1951), 117; Arkheologiya, V (Kiev, 1951), 183-8.
    4
      Handar, 248.
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
ing compartments, less richly furnished, but all the bodies were covered
with red ochre. The royal weapons (Fig. 80) include a transverse axe,
                                                        1               a
certainly, and a straight axe together with an axe-adze that looks like
combination of the other two, but also rhomboid arrow-heads of flint
and microlithic lunates of mesolithic ancestry. A gold flask with a
silver ring round the neck, jars of silver and of stone, and imitations
in reduced grey pottery are certainly Asiatic. Beads of turquoise and




FIG. 79. Vases: i, from Catacomb grave, Donetz (J); 2-3, from pit-graves, Yatskovice, near
Kiev (J); 4, from yamno grave Donetz basin (J); 5, B funnel beaker from Denmark (J).

                                                                     2
lapis lazuli had been imported from Iran, meerschaum from Anatolia.
Two silver vases are engraved with local mountain scenes and a pro-
cession of animals        two kinds of ox, a mouflon, a tame boar, Prze-
walski's horse, and a panther.
  Yessen's second and rather less homogeneous chronological division
within the Early Kuban period is represented by the furniture of the
tombs in two huge cairns at Novosvobodnaya (generally but incor-
                           8
rectly termed Tsarevskaya). Both were inegalithic cists divided into
two compartments by porthole slabs (Fig. 81, i). Cist II measured
           *   LA A A., xxni (1936), 114-15.
           *
               Yessn, TGATMK.. 120, 81.                        Hantar, 244.
                                          152
CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
internally i-8o m.+ 1-15 m. by 1-60 m. by 1-20 m. t and was surrounded
by a ring of orthostats over a metre high. The princely dead, one
wearing a linen garment, dyed red and purple, a cloak of camel's wool




       FIG. 80, Transverse axe, axe-adze, knife, and gold and silver vases (J),
           carnelian bead and flint arrow-heads (|), from Maikop barrow.




   FIG. 8 1. i, Megalithic cist, Novosvobodnaya; 2, Catacomb grave, Donetz basin.
                                         153
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
covered with a black hide and profusely sprinkled with red ochre,
were provided with shaft-hole axes, bidents, spear-heads, cauldrons,
ladles, wands, and drill bits of copper, together with flint arrow-heads
and globular day vases (Fig. 82). The spear-head is directly derived
from an Early Sumerian type and the bident and gouge have an equally
Early Sumerian pedigree, but exact parallels to them and to the ladles,
                                                        1
perhaps also to the wand, can be cited from Hissar III in Northern
Iran. The pottery, on the contrary, undoubtedly resembles the Central
Russian Fatyanovo ware and the Globular Amphorae of Central
Europe (pp. 170, 194).
  A dozen other burials are assigned to this second phase of the Early
Kuban period and enlarge the repertory of types attributable to it.
They include battle-axes both in copper (Fig. 78, i) and stone and
                        2

                                                   8
probably a clay model of a covered cart the latter, if really Early
                                                       ;



Kuban, demonstrates the use of wheeled vehicles and ox traction on
the slopes of the Caucasus as on the steppes.
   Yessen4 insists that none of the metal ware from any Early Kuban
tomb is a local North Caucasian product; all are imports or loot from
more advanced regions south of the range. By the Middle Kuban
                                                   local types of tools,
period resident or itinerant smiths were producing
weapons, and ornaments, and Oriental imports    have  disappeared.
   The North Caucasian smiths manufactured flat axes, chisels* with
an incomplete socket, made by folding the butt end round a mandril,
                                                           6
flat daggers the tang of which expands for the pommel, shaft-hole

axes with a drooping shaft-hole and long narrow body, and ornaments
including elaborate versions of the hammer-pin (Fig. 78, 4)
                                                              on which
       work has been ingeniously imitated by cire perdue casting.
filigree
Most of these types recur farther north in the catacomb and con-
temporary shaft graves. Their extension suggests that the rich copper
resources of the Urals were now being exploited. Querns, pestles, flint
sickle-teeth, and animal bones attest a regular farming economy to
             7


support the metal-workers and the chiefs.
   On the Caucasian foothills, south of the Kuban and the Terek, the
Middle Kuban graves are more varied and more numerous than the
Early Kuban. None are so obviously "royal" as those described above,
but many must belong to small chiefs. The catacomb graves that define
a contemporary local culture extending from near Odessa to the valleys
           M*3/., XXIII (1933), Pk. CXIX, CXX.
           Vozdvirhcnskaya, Hantar, 253; Letniskoe, Yessen, SA., XII.
           Ulski aul, Hancar, he. cit.
           "Iz Istorii drevnei Metallurgiya Kavkaza", IGAIMK., 120 (1935)-
           IGAIMK., 120, 99-
           SA. , XII. Plate, Col. Ill, 3; Ran, HockergrAber, pi. Ill, 3.
           Hooked metal sickles were being made in Yemen's phase IV.
                                         154
FIG. 82. Pottery (i), weapons and tools (), and pins (i) from tomb at
                         Novosvobodnaya.



                                155
                   DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
of the Donets,   Don, Manyt, and Upper Kuban-Terek and just into
Daghestan (Fig. 8x, 2) are really pit-caves under barrows. Most contain
only a single corpse, but some served as family tombs housing as many
as seven persons. There is explicit evidence of one or even two females
                                               1
having been slain to accompany their lords.      Round-headed persons
now appear and these perhaps practised annular deformation of the
skull.*
  Additions to armaments peculiar to the catacomb graves are heeled
                    8
battle-axes, like Fig. 35, arrow-shaft straighteners, and sling bullets.
The pottery, distinctive of the period, is represented by flat-bottomed
vases profusely decorated with the imprints of cords, whipped or
braided cords, and shells sometimes forming spiral patterns (Fig. 79, i). 4
Peculiar to the Manyt and Kuban-Terek group of catacomb graves are
cruciform-footed lamps shallow saucers, divided into two unequal
compartments and standing on four solid and united feet. They are
richly decorated in the style of the period.
  Other characteristic pots and catacomb types recur in shaft graves
in several regions.   On the Lower Volga, one grave probably of this
period  under  a  very large barrow contained no less than three carts
with tripartite disc wheels, while a clay model of a covered cart lay
                       11
in an "offering place above the shaft mouth. 6
  The catacomb type of tomb and its distribution suggest ^Egean
inspiration. Cranial deformation had been practised in Cyprus from
neolithic times. 6 A few beads of "paste", presumably fayence,
                                                               reported
from catacomb tombs and copper imitations of winged beads (Fig. 78, 2)
might be derived from the same quarter. A hoard of metal objects from
Cetkovo near the mouth of the Dniepr, 7 probably assignable to this
period, comprises double-axes, presumably of Minoan or Helladic
manufacture. Conversely, the unfinished battle-axe from the Early
Macednic site of H. Mamas (p. 68) belongs to a distinctively South
Russian family first appearing in the catacomb phase. On the other
hand, the cross-footed lamps are absurdly like Starfievo forms from
Moldavia and Hungary (Fig. 46) and still more the later Vufcedol type.
Moreover, the "pit-caves" of the VuCedo culture at VuCedol are rather
like catacomb graves.


    Artsikovskil, Osnovy Arkheologi! (4954), 75.
    SA. t IV, 122; XI (1949), 327; KS. t VIII, 86;   cf.   Dingwall, Artificial Cranial De-
formation.
    ESA. VIII. 61; in Cis-Caucasia Yessen attributes these to phase IV.
              t


    Popova, SA,, XXII (1955). 20-60 distinguishes six local varieties, some not repre-
sented    m
         catacomb tombs at all.
    SA.,      X
            (1948), I47-56.
    Angell in Dikaios, Khirokitia (London, 1953).
    ESA.      t   II (1932).

                                         156
CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIU?
  But if the chiefs of the pastoral clans were imitating the fashions of
^Egean colonists on the Black Sea coasts, nothing of precise dating
value has come from their tombs. The battle-axe from H. Mamas
alone could be invoked to justify a partial synchronism between the
Middle Kuban-Catacomb period and the Early            gean.
   The actual Oriental imports in the Early Kuban tombs are not
incompatible with such a dating, but are all too long-lived to confirm
it. The transverse axe from Maikop is a type of undoubtedly Meso-

potamian origin, but was current from 3000 B.C. for nearly two mil-
lennia. 1 The type was being cast in clay moulds at Shah Tepe in Trans-
        8
caspia, while axe-adzes of the Maikop variant were being similarly
manufactured in the contemporary settlement of Hissar III. 8 The
grey ware from Maikop likewise recalls Iranian fabrics of the Hissar III
phase. There too the ladles, bidents, and drill-bit from Novosvobodnaya
can be paralleled, 4 but just as well in the Early Sumerian metal-work
of Ur. Only the hammer-pins are more illuminating, for the type is
comparatively rare. In Anatolia, gold specimens occur in the Royal
Tombs of Alaca, 6 at Ahlatlibel, in Troy Ilf ., and in the Middle Helladic
Greece. Moreover, bone hammer-pins have been found in a Danish
passage grave of Northern IIIc and in Central European graves of
Danubian III or IV. In time the Pontic pins should come at least
between the Anatolian and the Central European examples.
  Now the rare gold pins from the treasures of Anatolian princes may
well be luxury versions of a Pontic type. If so, their absolute date
certainly about 2000 B.C. is a terminus ante quern for the creation
of the type in South Russia. Hammer-pins are not attested before the
Middle Kuban phase in Cis-Caucasia and mark the end of the yamno
period of the steppes. Thus the beginnings of the Ochre Grave culture
should go back well into the third millennium. So too yamno graves in
Eastern Poland had been dug before the dry Sub-Boreal climate had
promoted the formation of black earth.
  Only in the light of these chronological considerations can possible
contributions from the Steppe societies to the development of European
culture farther west be evaluated. That they did really transmit ideas
westward is proved by the hammer-pins just mentioned and by the

      Childe, NLMAE., 159.
  1
  1
      Arne, Excavations at Shah Tepi (Sino-Swedish Expedition, Pub. 27, Stockholm,
1945). 258.
   1
     Schmidt, Excavations at Tepe Hissar, 1931*3 (Philadelphia, 1937), l8 5 Actual
axe-adzes of this precise type are known from Uzbekistan (KS. XXXIII, 1950, 152)
                                                             t


and the Indus valley.
   4
     Schmidt, op. tit.
   *
     Hamit Zubeyr Kosay, Alaca Hoyitk Katisi, 1937-9 {Ankara, 1951), pi. 135, 68-9;
cf. Germania, XXXIII (1955), 240-2* and pp. 44, 183 here.

                                        157
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
animal sceptre-beads from Romania (p. 103); one of these came from
an ochre grave in the Dobrudja1 and there is another from Cis-Caucasia. 2
Yet early Central European metallurgy cannot be proved to owe any-
thing to the Caucasian school. To derive the great family of Transyl-
vanian axe-adzes from the single Maikop specimen seems far-fetched.
Nor are the later Hungarian shaft-tube axes obviously related to the
Maikop-Novosvobodnaya type and its Middle Kuban derivatives.
Even at Usatova no types are distinctively Caucasian, and at Mikhafl-
ovka metal had been worked in the first settlement perhaps before
makers of yamno pots arrived there in the third.
  Wheeled vehicles, horses, and even sheep are in a different category.
Genuine ochre graves under round- barrows in Romania, Eastern
         8                     4
Slovakia, and Eastern Poland do attest infiltrations of herdsmen from
the steppes into the zone of temperate forest. But the position of these
graves in the Danubian sequence is still undetermined. Further west
cord-ornamented pots from barrow-burials5 and globular amphorae
from porthole cists have been claimed at once as indications of a wider
expansion and as proofs that the steppe folk themselves came from
Germany!
   For the moment it will suffice to insist that there is no evidence
for an origin in Central Asia. Relations can indeed be traced right to
the Yenesei. There the earliest steppe culture, termed Afanasievo, 8
is characterized by ovoid vases resembling those from European

yamno graves; but they seem later, being accompanied by catacomb
types; and they accompany skeletons of Europeoid type. At the same
time the ovoid yamno pots are strikingly like those made by the
hunter-fisher folk of the Eurasian taiga from the Baltic to Lake Baikal.
But these hunter-fishers were mostly Lapponoid, the Steppe herdsmen
Europeoid.
                              BATTLE-AXE CULTURES
All the cultures that emerge round the fringe of the territories colonized
by Dniestro-Danubian peasants on the wooded North European plain
from the Middle Dniepr to the Lower Rhine exhibit so many common
features that they may be designated by a single name, Battle-axe
cultures. That does not imply that all are branches of a single culture.

By divergences in burial rites, armament, and pottery we may dis-
      Dttia. VII-VIII (1937-40), 81-91.
  *
      KS., XLVI (195*), 48-33.
  '   SkvtnsM Dtiiny, 64-6.
    Ktiega Pamtetkowa, 141-95; Swiatowit, XVI (i934'35)
  4
                                                           7'34-
  *
    Shaft graves under barrows without pottery may, however, be earlier even in Saxo-
Thuringia. Festchr. d. Rdm-Germ. Zentralmuseums, III (Mainz, 1953). 168.
    Kisetev, Drevnaya Istoriya Yuxhnoi Sibiri (Moskva, 1951)*
                                          158
CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
tinguish a    number of cultures, of which the most important are:
(i)   the Single Grave culture of Jutland with relatives in North-West
Germany and Holland; (2) the Swedish Boat-axe culture with exten-
sions east of the Baltic; (3) the
                                       Saxo-Thuringian or "Classical" Corded
Ware culture; (4) the Oder culture; (5) the Middle Dniepr culture;
and (6) the Fatyanovo groups in Central Russia.
   All these cultures were based primarily on
                                                 stock-breeding and hunt-
ing, but always combined with cereal cultivation. In all groups at
least the earliest paves contain a                     1
                                      single skeleton buried in the con-
tracted position. Timber linings to the grave        have  been observed in
                                                 pit
groups  i, 2, 3, and 6. Save in groups 2, 4, and 6, the  grave was normally
surmounted by a barrow. Grave goods common to all
                                                             groups include
stone battle-axes, necklaces of bored teeth, and a
                                                          pottery drinking-
vessd that may be termed a beaker and that
                                                      may everywhere be
ornamented with cord-imp>ressions. All the battle-axes in this series
are characterized by drooping blades             that is the blade expands
                                                                               only
downwards in contrast to the symmetrical splay of Baden and
                                                                              poly-
gonal battle-axes. Though each group               is   distinguished   by peculiar
local types, in nearly every area are to be found
                                                  specimens of a simple
type, like a stone version of Fig. 63, i, and at least in Jutland these
are stratigraphically, as well as                             1
                                    typologically, the oldest. Finally,
on all early drooping-bladed battle-axes a longitudinal
                                                        ridge imitates
the seam of a casting and reinforces the metallic
                                                  impression given by
the splayed blade though the original model were antler. 8


                 NORTH SEA-BALTIC BATTLE-AXE CULTURES
Towards the western extension of the plain between the Vistula and
the Rhine the pastoral societies represented    barrow cemeteries
                                                             by
were juxtaposed to and contrasted with more
                                                 sedentary farmers.
After such fanners had already reached Denmark, a
                                                      herding group
who sometimes decorated their funnel-breakers (Fig. 79, 5) with cord
imprints had cleared tracts of Denmark and Southern Sweden for
pasture in Late Atlantic times. They do not seem to have settled
permanently, since forests soon returned and smothered the pastures
they had cleared.
                  4
                         A
                      second and more drastic clearance by fire was
made in Jutland, and this time no regeneration of forest followed. 5
A new wave of herdsmen had colonized Jutland, and their                 free-grazing
  1
      Save for occasional sail burials of a male and female.
                         11 ( 933)     GU>b A ** ('944) i* Founder, Boot**., 56.
                                   i2 .
                                         *
                              \
                        (X934) 130-67.
  4
      Troels-Smith, Aarbtgtr (1953), P- 178, below.
  *
      Troels-Smith in Mathiaasen, Dyvholmen (1942),
                                                    175-6.
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
stock ate up the young tree seedlings, Arch&ologkally these graziers
are known only by little cemeteries of barrows, and so they are termed
the Single Grave folk.
  In Jutland the Single Grave folk1 replaced all remnants of the
Gudenaa hunter-fishers and came to occupy the interior of the peninsula
to the exclusion of the Megalith-builders, but never engaged in that
commerce the results of which allow the several phases of Megalithic
culture to be arranged in the general scheme of prehistoric chronology.
Contact between the two groups was, however, sufficiently frequent to
allow the chronology for the Northern Stone Age, set forth on p. 176,
to be applied also to the Battle-axe cultures.                 A reliable chronology of
these cultures' own development can in turn be based upoirsuccessive
interments under the same barrow, as on the Pontic steppes.
   The oldest graves (Bottom Graves or Undergrave), timber-lined
pits* dug in virgin soil and designed to hold a single contracted corpse,
contain the finest battle-axes (often very metallic looking) and beakers
with an S profile decorated with cord imprints round the neck (Fig. 83).
Next, in graves on the ground surface (Ground Graves or Bundgrave),
large enough to hold an extended skeleton, the axes deteriorate and
the beakers are decorated with incised herring-bones. Finally, the
Upper Graves (Overgrave) in the body of the mound contain flower-
pot vases decorated with rouletted zig-zags, degenerate axes, and even
flint daggerssuch as are found in the latest megalithic tombs. They
denote the fusion of the two cultures, with that of the Battle-axe folk
triumphant.
  The furniture of the Upper Graves shows that the latest phase of
the Battle-axe culture in Denmark falls into Northern period IV. The
prior development represented by only two or three interments in the
same barrow cannot cover a vast number of years indeed perhaps
only three generations. But it begins already during Northern Illb or
IIIc.*
  In Sweden4 separate graves containing contracted skeletons, but
not surmounted by barrows, are contrasted to the collective tombs
of the agricultural megalith-builders and to the extended burials of
a native food-gathering population. They are furnished at first with
battle-axes, gouges of flint or greenstone, facetted polishing stones,
and shallow beakers decorated round the neck with cord imprints.
The battle-axes (Fig. 83), termed boat-axes, are always provided with
  1
      Brendsted, Danmarks, I, 215 ft.; Aarfoger (1944).
  1
      Sometimes encircled by an annular ditch, Aarbigcr    \


  9                                          dates the beginning to M.N.IIb (Ilia), Becker,
      Glob. Aarbeger (1944), 207, implicitly
                                          " ""                " "
 rt. Arch.,
          !..   XXV              "7- explicitly to M.N.IH (IIIc).
                            ?I4. *
                    (I934J, "4
                    (1954),
  4
      Forssander, Die schwtdisck* BootaxtkuUur (Lund, 1933).
                                   .




                                            160
  CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
a shaft-tube which gives them a very metallic look. Indeed, a copper
boat-axe was found in East Russia, but the tube might be suggested
by the tine stump through which the shaft-hole of some antler axes

             CANMARK-                                    SVCRIGC

                                                     JQSMiA-SKCOCT




      FIG. 83. Pottery and battle-axes from the Single Graves of Jutland (left)
                      and Sweden (right). After Fv, 1922 (^).


has been bored. Pottery of this type has been found associated with
that in vogue about the middle of the Passage Grave phase (Northern
IIIc), while later graves containing rouletted vases like the bottom
row in Fig. 83 admittedly belong to Northern IV. Very similar graves
with just the same kind of battle-axes are found in Norway1 and on
  1
    Hinsch, "Yngre     steinalders   stridsokskulturer   i
                                                             Norge",   Bergen   Universitets
Arbok (1954), No. i.
                                           161
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
 the opposite coasts of the Baltic in Esthonia and Finland. The dis-
tribution of these graves, confined to South-Western Finland with a
sharp frontier between them and the encampments of the native
                                                                                               1
hunter-fishers, leaves no doubt that the Boat-axe folk were intruders.
   On the heathlands of North-West Germany and Holland many                        2

 barrows (two dated by radio carbon to 2480 and 2240 B.C.) covering
 Single Graves reveal an extension of the Battle-axe cultures to the
 English Channel. Many barrows are demarcated by a ring" of upright
posts; some, that may belong to period IV, cover small mortuary
houses8 and so may rank as chieftains' tombs. The earlier graves are
furnished with battle-axes akin to Jutland types, but less finely worked,
and S beakers, bearing cord or herring-bone ornament, and exceptionally
also with amphorae of Saxo-Thuringian form. But the Battle-axe folk
here came into contact with local Megalith-builders (p. 192) and Bell-
beaker folk from the west and developed hybrid cultures. S beakers are
not seldom found with the later burials in megalithic tombs; from the
Bell-beaker group the Battle-axe folk took over their bow and the
wrist-guards appropriate thereto and even adopted the roulette
technique for ornamenting their beakers and spread the designs in
zones over the whole vase-surface in the style regularly applied on
Bell-beakers. Nevertheless, the Battle-axe component remained
dominant in the resultant fusion.
   Despite their intimate contact with the metal-using westerners, the
Battle-axe folk in North- West Germany and Holland remained con-
tent with a neolithic equipment throughout period IV. They managed
at times to import Danish amber and English jet, but failed to secure
regular supplies of metal. However, a flat axe of copper was found with
an S beaker in a cremation grave at Sande near Hamburg. 4 This grave
incidentally forms part of a regular urnfield which is perhaps the
earliest example of such a cremation cemetery in Northern Europe,

though no earlier than the Bronze Age urnfields of Kisapostag in
Hungary.
  Battle-axe cultures arrive later on the Danish islands where the
Megalith-builders were firmly established, and are represented prin-
cipally by intrusive elements in late Passage
                                              Graves and only rarely by
true separate graves. 5 The battle-axes approximate to the later Jutland

  1
     SM. (1952), 22-5; cf. SM   YA., XXXII, i, 152 ff. For Esthonia, see        Gerasimov,
Litsa, 396-9; the skulls closely resemble those from Pontic yamno graves.
  1
     van Gififen, Die Bauart der Einxelgrfiber; Stampfuss, Jungneol. Kulturen; NNU., II
(1928), 20; Albrecht, "Die Htigelgraber
                                           der jiingeren Steinzeit in Westfalen", Westfalen,
XIX   (1934)."2    &; Glaabergen, PalaoMstona, V, VI.4
     See e.g. Qffa, I (1936), 62-77.                       Kill-Festschrift (1936), 79-
     Aarbtger (1936), 145 ff,, for parallels from Holstein, see Mannus, XXVII (1935), 60;
   *

cf. Brondsted, Danmarhs, I, 269-75, and Acta Arch., XXV, 74-6.
                                           162
CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
or even Swedish types. The funerary pots are squat S beakers, recurving
at the rim and ornamented all over with rouletted zig-zags or wavy
ribbons executed with a comb, dearly inspired by the Bell-beaker
style. Indeed, the Battle-axe folk who reached the islands probably
brought with them the Bell-beaker culture's bows and wrist-guards
and arrow-straighteners.


       SAXO-THURINGIAN CORDED WARE AND ITS CONGENERS

Food-gatherers undoubtedly survived from mesolithic times on the
heaths and boulder clays of Central Germany and on the sandy lands
farther east fringing and interrupting the 16ss. But here Battle-axe




                             '*.    v          /t

                      FIG. 84. Saxo-Thuringian corded ware



cultures represent neither the          first food-producers    those were the
Danubians (pp. 105, 118)           nor yet the sole result of the acculturation
of residual food-gatherers or of the internal development of Danubian
society   itself.   The most important          the Saxo-Thuringian to whose
pottery alone the term Corded Ware was originally applied emerges
in Central Germany and Bohemia as only one among several groups,
all more pastoral and more warlike than any Danubians.

  Its distinctive cemeteries of barrows or flat graves are concentrated
in the Saale basin, but extend south-east into Central Bohemia and
westward to the Rhineland and even Central Switzerland* While
common enough on the Idss, Saxo-Thuringian barrows are still more
                                         163
                 DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
prominent on heaths and uplands, as if hunting and stock-breeding
had been the foundations of the economy, Yet the cemeteries are too
                                                            1
extensive to belong to nomads, and grain imprints on vases prove
some sort of cultivation.
     Characteristic of Saxo-Thuringian corded ware is the conjunction of
amphorae (Fig, 84, 1-3) with the usual beakers which here have an
ovoid body contrasted with a long straight neck (Fig. 84, 4-7). Ornament
is effected, as usual, on the earlier vases by cord impressions which

then later give place to stamped herring-bone patterns (Fig. 84, 3).
Equally distinctive is the faceted battle-axe (Fig. 85, i), though this




      FIG. 85.   i       and 2, Thuringian faceted battle-axe (-J); 3, Silesian battle-axe (J).


is   not often found in graves and then not with the earliest pottery. 2
Its peculiar             form may show some influence from spiked club-heads 8
of mesolithic ancestry (the Vogtland type), but stray copper battle-
axes exhibit much the same form4 and the influence of antler weapons
is admitted. Actual antler axes, asymmetrical stone axes like Danubian

"ploughshares", almond-shaped celts of flint or greenstone mounted
as adzes (one was found thus mounted in an antler haft) and occasional
spheroid mace-heads or rough flint daggers also served as weapons.
  Small rings of copper and even spirals of poor bronze sometimes
served as ornaments. But though these were allegedly made from local

                                                             *
       jsr. xiv, 30; xxrv, 115.
            t                                                    Forasander, Bootoxtkultur, 146.
       M*nnu$ XXV (1933), 271-82.
                     t
                                                             4
                                                                 E.g. Danube, fig. 92.
                                                     164
  CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
        1
ores,       the SaxoThuringians remained content with a neolithic equip-
ment and armoury. The best evidences for trade of any kind are a
carving in Sammland style and a few other amber beads. Discs
made from local shells but ornamented with a cross2 constitute the most
distinctive additions to the usual bored-teeth necklaces. One man,
buried with a herring-bone beaker and a tanged copper spear-head
or dagger, had worn a hammer pin of Pontic type as a head ornament. 8
  Normally the Saxo-Thuringians were interred in simple pit graves,
rarely in wood-lined shafts, by no means always covered by barrows.
North of the Unstrut, modest megalithic cists, measuring up to 3*5 m.
                                                     4
by 2-25 m., were often used as collective sepulchres. The practice was
presumably borrowed from adjacent Northern or Horgen megalith-
builders (p. 190), but might have been inspired from the Kuban* since
some are divided by a porthole slab as in Fig. 81, I, Trephined skulls
occur in both Central German and Bohemian graves. In some tombs,
mostly late and more often in Western than in Central Germany, the
bodies have been burned. Exceptionally the cremated remains lay in
wooden mortuary houses. 6 The latter prove that some Saxo-Thuringian
groups were led by chiefs and that the herdsmen lived in substantial
houses with at least a porch in addition to a living-room.
  The later phases of the Saxo-Thuringian culture admittedly last
into period IV, and grave-groups 7 establish synchronisms with Globular
Amphorae and Walternienburg 2 in period III. A beginning in period II
might be deduced from corded ware sherds in Danubian village-sites
and faceted battle-axes associated in hoards with shoe-last celts, but
the associations are not very reliable.
  Westward, burials under barrows accompanied by corded beakers
and amphorae and faceted battle-axes document an extension of Saxo-
Thuringian culture to the Rhine. Beyond it in Switzerland, in the latest
occupation levels of the neolithic Alpine lake-dwellings, sherds of
corded ware mark the replacement of the Middle Neolithic Horgen
population or the superposition thereon of a pastoral aristocracy such
as we met at Usatova. Eastward, too, barrow-burials if accompanied
by cord-ornamented vases that could be derived from amphorae like
Fig, 84, 1-3, are likewise attributed to colonists from Saxo-Thuringia.

  1
      NbL f. d. V.    t   X (1934), 146: XIV, 73; Witter, Die AUcste Erxgewinnung in nord-
german. Lebenskrris.
    PA.. XL (1934-35). 21.
    Behrens, JMV., XXXVI (1952), 5?-$5-
      Mannus, XXVIII (1936), 363; Nbl.f. d. V., IX (1933). 93-
      Forssander, Bootaxtkultur, 164; ArsberM. (i937'38), 38-
      Germania, VI (1922), no (Haldorf nearCassel); Mannus, VI, Erg.-Bd., 214 (Sarmens-
torf, Switzerland).
  f
      Altschles..   V (1934), 37J Mannus, XXVIII, 376.
                                               165
                DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
So in Sammland 1 are graves furnished with amphorae and beakers, and
in a couple of cases with bone
                               hammer-pins, while at least three faceted
battle-axes are reported from the province. Here corded ware is found
also in the substantial houses of farmers   who combined cultivation
and the breeding of cattle, sheep, and pigs with hunting, fowling, and
                            2
fishing with bone harpoons. But with the supposedly Saxo-Thuringian
pots go other vases that may represent an East Baltic version of the
Erteb0Ue or First Northern culture.




                         FIG. 86. Zlota pottery. After Koztowski.



  On the Polish loss lands within the great elbow of the Vistula,
already intensively colonized by Danubians by period II, corded
beakers and amphorae are associated with Oder flower-pots, handled
cups, funnel-necked beakers, and globular amphorae that elsewhere
denote distinct groups, in the Ztota culture (Fig. 86) 8 Extensive       .


cemeteries of contracted skeletons, generally in flat graves, sometimes

  1
      Killian, Die Haffktistenkultur (Bonn, 1955).                  *
                                                                  Altschles. t V, 62.
      Childe, Danube^ 152; Kozlowski, Mhdsa. 66; WA. t VIII, 98; IX, 34.
 1


                                           166
 CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
in pit-caves, mark the population as sedentary. Ritual burials of cattle,
pigs, and horses demonstrate the economic importance of these domestic
animals. Battle-axes are not very often included among the grave goods,
but such as occur -are typologically early.
  In Eastern Moravia1 one barrow at NSmetice covered a shaft grave
containing an amphora and a beaker, and another barrow one furnished
with a faceted battle-axe. But other graves here, as also at Drevohostice
and Prusinovice, contained battle-axes of Silesian type (Fig. 85, 3) and
keeled mugs with cylindrical necks and strap handles derived from the
Jordanova group; others again Bell-beakers.
  Then in East Galicia1 some barrows, girt with a circular trench and
heaped after the black earth's formation and therefore later than
those mentioned on p. 166 above cover graves containing corded
amphorae and beakers and copper trinkets. So do the flat graves of the
Tomasz6w culture 8 forming large cemeteries and representing a sedent-
ary population extending across the Carpathians into the Nitra valley
of Slovakia. 4 These burials are furnished with segmented fayence
beads like those from the Tisza-Maros region (p. 128) and occasional
round-heeled triangular daggers. The Tomasz6w cemeteries therefore
extend ovfer period IV.
  Still farther east the corded ware from Usatova (p. 145) has been
claimed as evidence that the pastoral aristocracy there superimposed
on Tripolye peasants was of Saxo-Thuringian extraction! Even the
Middle Dniepr culture 5 has been regarded as an offshoot of the Saxo-
                                                                         6
Thuringian. "Amphorae" do no doubt occur in the urnfield of Sofiivka         ;



among the grave goods associated with 141 cremations are also stone
battle-axes, flat axes and daggers of copper, flint celts and sickles, and
vases painted in late Tripolye style (as at Usatova). Barrows of this
culture, however, do not seem to have contained amphorae; the beakers
are sometimes ovoid as inyamno graves (Fig. 79, 3), more often basket-
shaped (Fig. 79, 2).

                 THE ODER AND MARSCHWITZ CULTURES
On the other hand, between these alleged outposts of Saxo-Thuringian
culture and its centre on the Saale-Elbe intervene other groups dis-
tinguished by corded ware and battle-axes of quite different forms.
          V
    Pravek,   (1909), 56-130; Real., s.v. Drevohostice.
    Ksifga Pamietkowa, 141-9; Swiatowit, XVI (i934"35) "7-441 Sulimirski, "Die
schnurkeramischen Kulturen", 3-5.
    Kostrzewski, Prekistoria, 183; Swiatowit, XIX (1946-47), 105 fif.
    Material from 300 graves at Nitra, unpublished.
    Briusov, Oterhi, 215-20; KS. XVI (1947).
                             t


    Arkh. Pam., IV (1952), 112-21; Arkhertogiya, Kiev, VIII (1953). 94' 101
                                                                    *




                                     167
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
The Oder culture in Brandenburg shares with the Saxo-Thuringian the
usual beaker, but is distinguished by the absence of amphorae and
the presence of cylindrical "flower-pot" vases, sometimes with ledge-
handles. 1 Such are found in pit graves, occasionally under barrows and
at least once containing red ochre, but also in slab cists of Central
German type. Other grave goods include small battle-axes, flint adzes
with a pointed-oval cross-section, and Danubian "plough-shares" as
in Saxo-Thuringia. While occasionally associated with Globular
Amphorae or Walternienburg 3-5 pottery (p. 193), a few bronze orna-
ments and Scandinavian flint daggers1 show that the Oder culture
lasted well into period IV.
  In the Marschwitz culture of Silesia and Moravia this persistence is
more amply demonstrated. The graves contain flower-pots of Oder
form, but these are accompanied by pouched jugs, decorated with
cord-impressions, but of early Ungtice shapes (Fig. 72, i). With them
                                            8
go battle-axes made of Sobotka serpentine (Fig. 85, 3), rather like
the Fatyanovo form but also wrist-guards, derived from the Beaker
folk, and even bronze ornaments. The whole group occupies economic-
ally as well as geographically an intermediate position between the
Bronze Age Un&ician culture of Bohemia and the still neolithic culture
of the middle and lower Oder.


                           THE FATYANOVO CULTURE*
In the forest zone of Central Russia the first reliable indications of the
neolithic    economy are afforded by bones of domestic cattle, swine,
sheep, goats, and horses, and grain-rubbers from graves of the Fatya-
novo cycle of cultures. These have been divided into three local
groups which differ in age as well as in spatial distribution, by
Kritsova-Grakova. 6 The earliest is the Moscow group on the Oka and
Kliazma, next the Yaroslav group on the Upper Volga to which the
eponymous cemetery belongs. The Cuva group on the lower Kama
near the confluence of that river and the Oka with the Volga should
begin latest.
  The graves, never surmounted by barrows and normally containing
one contracted skeleton, rarely a male and female together, occasionally
           6
cremations, form cemeteries of half a dozen to a score, and occur both
  1
      Sprockhoff, Mark-Brandenburg, 60 if., 160; Mannus, XXVIII, 374.
  *
      Forssander, Ostskandinav., 60; Btthm, BronMtxcit Mark-Brandenburg, 30.
      PrtegA., VIII (1949), 256.
    Tretyakov, IGAIMK., 106, 126-8; SA., II 32; cf. FM. (1924), i ff. Hftusler,
  4

Wissensckaftliche Zts. d Martin-Luther University, Halle-Wittenberg,  V  (1955-56), H. i
(Arbeiten aus d. Inst.f. Vor- u. FrUhgesckickto, 5) gives a convenient German summary
of the Russian literature.
                                            Problemy GAIMK. (1934)* Noa. 11-12.
  * KS. XVI
        f      (1947), 22-32.
                                         168
CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
in the low-lying basins, long occupied by the hunter-fishera, and also
on the uplands right to the Volga-Oka watershed, where the gatherers
had never settled. This extension is itself a symbol of the new economy
since the uplands are better suited to tillage and grazing than the
             1                                     the polished flint celts
chilly vales, but it was possible only with aid of
                                                 8
that occur alike in men's and women's graves, since the new territory
was densely wooded. At the same time bones of pike and teeth of bear,
wolf, fox, lynx, and reindeer, as well as shells, used for ornaments,
attest a persistence of the old economy of the Forest.
  But now cattle-raising provided a prize for more serious warfare
than the hunter-fishers had indulged in, and so the graves are furnished
with an armoury of weapons strange to the older forest dwelling-places.




                        I                                         2

               FIG. 87. Fatyanovo battle-axe and Finnish boat-axe (J).


Stone battle-axes accompany every male interment. The finest, the
classical Fatyanovo axes (Fig. 87, i) are confined to the Yaroslav
                                                                   8
group; some of the rest can be treated as degenerations of these, but
                       Trusovo                   Moscow 4
at least one, from the          cemetery  in the          group, belongs
to the heeled type proper to the Catacomb culture of the steppes.
Another grave contained a pair of arrow-shaft straighteners, 5 yet
another a Pontic hammer-pin. In chieftains' graves in the Yaroslav
and CuvaS groups copper shaft-hole axes accompany or replace the
stone weapons, but miniature clay battle-axes were buried with
                                 6
children in the Yaroslav group.
  Flint strike-a-lights with tinder too were sometimes 7 buried with the
dead. Perforated day discs, some 5*5 cm. in diameter, 8 are doubtless
model wheels and attest familiafity with wheeled vehicles.
                                             *
  i
      5,4. II, 33-5*
         ,                                     TGIM., XII (1941), 125.
                                             4 SA  IV 3<>2.      *
      As by Ayrapaa, ESA. VIII, 16-23-
                            t                                      SA., XXII, *2o.
      TGIM., VIII, 63. Showing that the models from Mikhalic and Tripolye sites are
not necessarily ritual objects!
  '                                            '
    TGIM., XII, 132.                               SA., VI, 79.
                                         169
            DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  The numerous pots tend to be globular, provided with flat bases,
sometimes ornamented, and distinct necks, but never with handles;
so none could be called an amphora! In the Moscow
                                                   group early vases
are ornamented with cord impressions (Fig. 88,
                                                i); elsewhere combs
or other stamps were used.




      FIG. 88. Fatyanovo pottery of the Moscow, Yaroslav, and divas'
                                                                       groups.

  Peaceful if irregular commerce brought the Fatyanovo warriors
occasional amber beads, 1 silver earrings, disc-pendants,  cuff lock-rings,
armlets, and neck-rings of copper.
  In the Vaulovo cemetery two rich graves, each containing male and
female skeletons buried together and furnished with copper shaft-hole
axes, surely belong to chieftains. Graves in the same cemetery, con-
taining respectively the skeleton of a boar and that of a kid, suggest
to Krafciov* the totems of two clans.
  A  due to the relative position of the Central Russian cultures in
the general sequence is given by the Catacomb types;
                                                      they establish
a partial synchronism between the Moscow group and the Catacomb
phase on the Steppes. Kritsova-Grakqva8 uses the cuff-armlets from
MytiSfcensk to establish a synchronism between the Yaroslav group
and UnStice; though the agreement is not exact, Danubian IV should
be an upper limit for the Yaroslav group.
  The copper axes from the Yaroslav cemeteries approximate closely
to those included in the hoards found at Seima and Galid4
                                                          (Fig. 89).
These presumably represent southern imports intercepted
                                                            by the
Fatyanovo population that must have controlled the fur trade so
important in the first millennium B.C. But both hoards contain types
that would be more appropriate to the srubno
                                                 phase in the Pontic
sequence.  But  by  that  time the  CuvaS  version of the Fatyanovo
culture was developing into the fully metal-using AbaSevo culture.
                         '
                                       '




                                     170
CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?
  Bader and other Russian prehistorians1 in the 'thirties regarded the
Fatyanovo culture as a development of the native culture of local
hunter-fishers to exploit the new sources of food made available by
the introduction of cereals and domestic stock. These were admittedly
introduced from outside into the woodland zone of Central Russia.




                       FIG. 89. The GaliS hoard, 1-4 (J).




Anthropometric studies of the Fatyanovo populations by Trofimova*
have subsequently shown that the cultivators and stock-breeders
themselves must be immigrants; for the skulls, Europeoid or Medi-
terranean, are in sharp contrast to those of the autochthonous hunter-
fishers, which are Lapponoid. Briusov proposes to derive the Moscow
                                         8


group at least from the     Middle   Dniepr culture. But, after all, the
origin of the latter is not at all clear, and Briusov himself admits the

possibility of a more western origin for the Yaroslav group. German
and many other Western prehistorians, emphasizing and perhaps
exaggerating -the similarities of the classic Fatyanovo pots to Saxo-
Thuringian and Globular Amphorae, have thence deduced an invasion
of Central Russia by warriors from Central Germany, Scandinavia, or
Sammland. 4 But of course the Fatyanovo cultures are not mere trans-
plantations of any one of the known western or southern Battle-axe
cultures and "amphorae" are not necessarily derived from Saxo-
                                                                   6
Thuringia. The Fatyanovo battle-axes derive from East Poland.

                 SA.. II, 30 ff.; Ill, 38   ;   IGAIMK., 106, 100 ff.
                 Sovietskaya Etnografiya (194$), 3. 7*1 (i93<>). 3. 37-
                 OUrki, 94.
                E.g. Ayrftpaa. ESA. t VIII, 101-10.
                Sulimirksi, PPS., XXI, 118-22.
                                        171
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
      ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE OF THE BATTLE-AXE CULTURES

The cultures of several peoples that in historical times spoke Indo-
European languages could plausibly be derived from those described
in the preceding pages.      The list could be further enlarged if cord-
ornamented sherds from Greece, Macedonia, and Thrace (pp. 71, 96),
and battle-axgs from Troy and the Caucasus were accepted as evidence
for kindred cultures in the Balkans and Anatolia. Hence, if the several
cultures considered in this chapter be all provincial variants of one
single culture, the latter could be identified with that of the hypothetical
Indo-European parent stock, "Aryans" or "Wiros".
  Many prehistorians have in fact tried to derive all he distinct
cultures from one primary culture whose expansion and local divergence
should account for the emergence of the several distinct cultures that
alone are presented in the archaeological record. By 1910 Kossinna 1 had
argued that the postulated primary culture developed in Jutland
through the acculturation of Maglemosians by Erteb011e immigrants
and megalith-builders, and Aberg elaborated his thesis in igi8. 2 From
Jutland the bearers of the resultant neolithic culture the Single Grave
culture would have spread across Central Europe to the ^Egean and
the Caucasus.
  Danish prehistorians, however, are unanimous in regarding the
Single Grave culture as intrusive in Jutland. Even German pre-
historians, since the "Versailles Diktat" detached South Jutland from
the Reich, have preferred to transfer the cradle of the Single Grave and
other Battle-axe cultures, and so of the Indo-Europeans, to the more
                                                3
thoroughly Germanic soil of Saxo-Thuringia! There should be the
focus from which the warriors radiated not only to the Balkans and
the Ukraine but also to Sweden, Denmark, and Switzerland!
  On the contrary, near fifty years ago J. L. Myres suggested reversing
Kossinna's migrations and deriving the Single Grave, Saxo-Thuringian,
and other Battle-axe cultures from the Pontic steppes. Borkovskij 4
pointed out how well the ovoid beakers from yamno graves could serve
as prototypes for the Central and North European vases. Forssander 5
inclined to think that the makers of Globular Amphorae (infra, p. 195),
coming from the Caucasus and bringing with them the idea of the
porthole cist, affected the development of the Central and North

  1
    "Ursprung und Verbreitung der Urfinnen und Urindogermanen", Mannus, I -I I.
  1
    Das nordische Kulturgebiet (1918).
  *
    Most recently by Killian, Die Haffkiistenkultur (Bonn, 1955), who relies, in addition
to battle-axes, on the skeuomorphic pattern impressed or painted on amphorae.
                             Ukrajine," Obzor IX (1930), cf. PA. (1933).
  4 "Snurova keramika na
  *
    Bootaxtkultur, 174, 213.
                                          172
CULTURE TRANSMISSION OVER EURASIAN PLAIN?

European cultures, which would still have been rooted in the Saxo-
Thuringian. The discovery of Pontic hammer pins in a Danish passage
grave of Northern IIIc and in more or less contemporary Corded Ware
graves in Central Europe and Sammland, has provided some concrete,
if by no means conclusive, evidence in favour of a Pontic origin. Still

the Ochre Grave culture, the oldest concretely recognizable on the
steppes, on the one hand does not exhibit even in germ all the dis-
tinctive traits common to the Battle-axe cultures, and on the other
hand contains elements not replicated in any of them. In a word, the
Pontic steppes can offer a concrete ancestor for all no more than
Jutland or Saxo-Thuringia.
  A satisfactory explanation of the distribution of our battle-axes, of
cord-ornamented vases, and of amphorae decorated like Figs. 42 and
84 in Central Europe, Central Russia, Greece, and the Troad, would
be provided by Sulimirski's postulate of an early herding culture in
the woodlands between the Vistula and the Upper Dniepr. The hypo-
                                          1
thetical cattle-breeders would, Sulimirski suggests, have used wood-
and-leather vessels that, translated into clay, assumed the form and
decoration of the amphorae. They expanded first to Central Russia,
the East Baltic, and the Eastern Balkans, but to Jutland and Saxo-
Thuringia only after adopting the practice of barrow-burial from
Ochre Grave pastoralists who had advanced as far west as the head-
waters of the Vistula, if not farther (p. 158). The main defect of Suli-
mirski's account is that the assumed East Polish-Byelo-russian culture
is still not directly documented archaeologically. But, after all, such

documentation will be hard to find (p. 148), and the presumptive
cradle-land is virtually unexplored.
   Marxist prehistorians in the U.S.S.R. have rejected any explanation
of the agreements between the several Battle-axe cultures in terms of

migration or conquest. They would result from parallel or convergent
developments of local societies in accordance with general laws of
social-economic progress. In temperate Europe, with a neolithic equip-
ment, pastoralism combined with hunting was the most productive
rural economy, and with pastoralism are associated a patriarchal
social organization, differentiation of status, and warfare. The Battle-
axe cultures would represent "pastoral tribes separated out from the
mass of agricultural barbarians". In a remarkable article Kritevskil 1
showed how many of the features of the Battle-axe cultures of Danubian
III  even cord ornament on vases and ochre in graves were explicitly
foreshadowed in Danubian cemeteries and settlements of the preceding
  i
      PPS., XXI (1955), 108 ff.
      ''IndogermanskilvoprosarkheologifieskirazreSennyi", IGAIMK., 100(1933).
                                         173
          DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
period. Some such account has the incomparable advantage of economy;
it makes minimal draughts on undemonstrable assumptions and un-
documented entities. It is not incompatible with the belief that "the
battle-axe" i.e. the copper translation of an antler axe (Fig. 87, 2-3)
and "wheeled vehicles" concretely the idea of making wooden discs
and mounting local sledges upon them were diffused. Only dogmatists
need assume that the battle-axes were brandished by conquering
hordes or that the waggons carried migrating tribes. Yet human agents
were inevitably involved. In neither case do "traders" fit the bill. We
might postulate behind the known Battle-axe and Steppe cultures, a
loose continuum of scattered groups of herdsmen or indeed of hunter-
fishers; for our tangible pastoral groups might have ariseft from the
one-sided acculturation of savages, as well as from specialization
among barbarians. Seasonal shifts of pasture or hunting expeditions
would guarantee sufficient intercourse between the several groups for
the transmission of ideas. Such transmission is established for the
period of the fully differentiated Battle-axe and Steppe cultures.
Perhaps it should be postulated earlier to explain the association of
wheeled vehicles with chieftains' funerals and the spread of plough
cultivation in Central Europe.




                                 174
