                           CHAPTER XIX
RETROSPECT: THE PREHISTORY OF EUROPEAN SOCIETY

WHAT meaning can be extracted from the intricate details compressed
into the foregoing pages? What patterns unify the fragmentary archae-
ological data? To clarify the issue the abstract results have been
schematized into tables and maps. These present the distribution in
time and space of cultures, assemblages of archaeological phenomena
that should reflect the distinctive behaviour patterns of human societies.
  The maps at first sight present a very complicated mosaic of con-
temporary cultures. But historical reality was certainly more compli-
cated still. So many pieces of the mosaic are missing that even the
spatial pattern is blurred. Here it has been deliberately simplified
by the omission of a number of assemblages, some of which have been
mentioned in the text but most of which in 1956 are little more than
pottery styles. This bewildering diversity, though embarrassing to the
student and confusing on a map, is yet a significant feature in the
pattern of European prehistory. Across it another pattern may be
discerned. The first two maps exhibit quite clearly the gradual spread
of neolithic farmers, or at least of farming, from the south-east during
two consecutive periods of uncertain duration. (But even here there is
some doubt as to the right of "Western cultures'* to a place on map II!)
Map III should suggest the groups, the complex relations between
these and the impact upon them of alien or peripheral cultures in a
period not necessarily longer than    I   or   II,   but more crowded with
archaeologically recognizable events. The main cultures distinguishable
at the opening of the period are designated by letters, their boundaries
defined by solid lines. Different hatchings denote cultures that subse-
quently arose from, or were superimposed upon, the foregoing. Finally,
map IV displays the main areas that benefited from the Early Bronze
Age economy, their interrelation and their dependence on Mycenaean
Greece.
  The distribution of entries on the several maps is based on the
chronological discussions included in all the preceding chapters and
summarized in the following tables. In most of the columns the actual
order of the entries, the sequence of cultures, is reasonably well-
established, though here again a reference to the text will disclose
doubts as to the order both in the extreme West and in the East.
                                   341
               DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
  But each column is virtually independent and should be regarded
as a single scroll hanging freely from its own roller. The lower end is
always loose, so that, as far as pure archaeology is concerned, each
scrollcould be rolled up at least to the 1400 notch deduced from
segmented fayence beads. Nuclear physicists have indeed diffidently
offered some provisional radio-carbon dates1 that might act as pins
to keep some scrolls extended. So in column 15 the Windmill Hill
culture (at Ehenside Tarn in the Lake District!) might be pinned about
          2
3000 B.C. and the Secondary Neolithic of Stonehenge I at 1850; in
column 7 Early Cortaillod about 2740,8 and in column 14 the earliest,
A, funnel-beakers at 2650, while in column 2 Danubian I (in Germany!)
might go back before 4000.* But radio-carbon dating proves to be
infected by so many potential sources of error that European pre-
historians accept its results with as much reserve as the physicists
offer them. In any case the available dates do not suffice to decide
between the competing archaeological chronologies of the European
Bronze Age set out on pp. 135. The Stonehenge figure perhaps makes
the extreme dates for the beginning of the Untician culture before
2000 and after 1600 B.C. respectively less likely, but any year between
1950 and 1650 B.C. would still be equally defensible. Fortunately, for
some positive conclusions at least, these uncertainties do not matter.
  Whichever chronology be eventually vindicated, the primacy of
the     Orientremains unchallenged. The Neolithic Revolution was
accomplished in South-Western Asia; its fruits cultivated cereals
and domestic stock were slowly diffused thence through Europe,
reaching Denmark only three centuries or so after the Urban Revolu-
tion has been completed in Egypt and Sumer. Ere then the techniques
of smelting and casting copper had been discovered and were being

intelligently applied in Egypt and Mesopotamia, to be in their turn
diffused round the Mediterranean during the third millennium, but
north of the Alps only at its close, if not already in the second. The
development of industry and commerce in Greece and subsequently
in Temperate Europe was as much dependent on Oriental capital as
the industrialization of India and Japan was on British and American
capital last century.
   On the other hand, European societies were never passive recipients
of Oriental contributions, but displayed more originality and inventive-

  1
      The method is explained by Zeuner, Dating the Past (1952), pp. 341 if.
  1
     Libby, Radio Carbon Dating (Chicago, 1953), 75. British prehistorians unanimously
reject this date.
  1
     See p. 291, n. 3.
   4 These
            figures have frequently been mentioned by archaeologists, but not formally
published by the responsible physicists.
                                           342
      THE PREHISTORY OF EUROPEAN SOCIETY
ness in developing Oriental inventions than had the inventors' more
direct heirs in Egypt and Hither Asia. This is most obvious in the
Bronze Age of Temperate Europe. In the Near East many metal types
                                               in Temperate Europe an
persisted unchanged for two thousand years;
extraordinarily brisk evolution of tools and weapons and multiplication
of types occupied a quarter of that time.
   The startling tempo of progress in European prehistory thus docu-
mented is not to be     explainedracially by some mystic property of
European blood and soil, nor yet by reference to mere material habitat,
but rather in sociological and historical terms. No doubt the Cro-
Magnons of Europe created a unique art in the Upper Palaeolithic
Age while their mesolithic successors devised and bequeathed
                                                                to con-

temporary Europe      much   ingenious equipment   for exploiting their

environment (p. 14). No doubt, too, its deeply indented coastline,
its propitiously situated mountain ranges and navigable streams, and
its resources in tin, copper, and precious metal have conferred on our
continent advantages possessed by no other comparable land mass,
while the Mediterranean was a unique school for navigators. But the
creative utilization of these favours of Nature must be interpreted in
sociological terms.
  The bounteous water-supply and seemingly unlimited land               for

cultivation allowed Early Neolithic fanners an unrestricted dispersion
of population; dense aggregations had to grow up in the arid cradle of
cereal cultivation where settled farming was possible only in a few
oases or in narrow zones along the banks of permanent rivers. Hence
Jericho, the earliest known neolithic
                                      settlement in the Near East,

probably   contained ten times as many inhabitants as any Early
Neolithic village in Europe. But such aggregations require rigid dis-
                            of water enables society to enforce. So from
cipline which the scarcity
the first the Oriental environment put a premium on conformity. In
Europe   it wasalways feasible, however perilous, to escape the restraints
of irksome custom by clearing fresh land for tillage; indeed, such an
                                                 children of a village in
escape was actually imposed on the younger
historical times, at least in Italy, by the Sacred Spring. But such dis-

persion   under neolithic conditions of self-sufficiency encouraged
                                                                 societies.
divergence of traditions and the formation
                                                of   independent
      that is              reflected  during   our period  II in the multi-
Just          imperfectly
                                             area of cultures distinguished
plication within a comparatively small
   differences in ceramic art, burial rites, equipment, and even economy.
by
Thereby   even on our simplified map Europe appears in contrast to
Hither Asia where the Halafian and Ubaid cultures are successively
but uniformly spread over a vast area. Again in the ideological sphere
                                343
             DAWN OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION
the variations in megalithic architecture really far greater than
could be indicated here should be the counterpart of the fission of a
single and presumably Oriental orthodoxy into a myriad
                                                          local sects.
It might then be compared to the disruption of Christianity after the
Reformation and contrasted with the faithful repetition of temple
plans from the Persian Gulf to the Orontes in the third millennium.
In short, a multiplicity of neolithic societies, distinguished by divergent
traditions but never completely isolated one from the other, offered
a European peasant some possibility of comparison and free choice.
  The observed diversity was, of course, due not only to the splitting
of a few immigrant societies and foreign traditions. Divergence was
accelerated and emphasized also on the one hand by the multiplicity of
pre-existing mesolithic groups who absorbed the ^neolithic techniques
or were absorbed in the neolithic societies, on the other by the plurality
of external stimuli that impinged upon them from Africa, the Levant,
Anatolia, and perhaps Central Asia.
  Still, material progress was impossible without an accumulation of

capital,a concentration of the social surplus. This was effected in
Early ^Egean times and during period III of the temperate zone by the
emergence of chieftains or aristocracies, spiritual or temporal; it made
effective a demand for reliable metal weapons promoted by the con-
commitant intensification of warlike behaviour. Yet the small inde-
pendent groups of herdsmen, cultivators, and fishers, owing allegiance
to such rulers, just could not     by themselves accumulate resources
sufficient for the  development of a metallurgical industry and of an
efficient   machinery for the distribution of its products. That had
demanded the Urban Revolution, the concentration of the surplus
produced by thousands of irrigation-farmers in the hands of a tiny
minority of priests, kings, and nobles in the valleys of the Nile, the
Tigris-Euphrates, and the Indus. Fortunately the effective demands
of the masters of this concentrated wealth in Egypt and Mesopotamia
enabled ^Egean farmers and fishermen to secure a share in the surplus
thus accumulated without themselves submitting to the same degree
of political unification and class division. The archaeological picture
of Bronze Age Greece at its most prosperous period corresponds well
with Homer's description of many independent but loosely federated
             smaller but more numerous than even the Temple
principalities,
States of pre-Sargonic Mesopotamia.
  In the sequel, Minoan and Mycenaean demand for tin, gold, and
eventually amber, created a reliable market for the peculiar products
of Temperate Europe. Thus indirectly the barbarian societies of Central
Europe and the British Isles obtained a share in the capital accumu-
                                    344
      THE PREHISTORY OF EUROPEAN SOCIETY
lated through the Urban Revolution for the development of their own
extractive, manufacturing, and distributive industries without sub-
mitting to the repressive discipline of urban civilization or suffering
the irrevocable class division it entailed. Specialist craftsmen were
liberated from the absorbing preoccupation of food production, but
yet were not dependent on a single despot's court, temple, or feudal
estate. They must no doubt sell their products and their skill to patrons,
but whether these were classless societies, as perhaps in Bohemia and
on the Middle Danube, or chieftains, as in the Saale-Warta province
and in Wessex, there was plenty of competition for their services. As
in Homeric Greece, a craftsman was welcome everywhere. So
                                                            they had
every inducement  to display their virtuosity and  inventiveness.  In
the European Bronze Age metal-workers were in fact producing for an
international market.
   In the ancient East the Urban Revolution had finally divided the
societies affected by it into two economically opposed classes and had

irretrievably consigned craftsmen, the pioneers of material progress,
to the lower class. In prehistoric European and Mycenaean societies
the cleavage was never so deep, if only because of their smallness and
poverty. Craftsmen at least were not depressed into a class of slaves
or serfs.




                                  345
oo
IT)




co




CM




M
H
>3



     348
349
350
35i
352
