te


ate
 Setar
 tern
 tay,
         peters
         oes
  D
th |il||il
    53
Catal Huyuk
NEW   ASPECTS   OF    ARCHAEOLOGY

            Edited by Sir Mortimer   Wheeler
ERs
Us




Catal Hiyuk
A Neolithic Town in Anatolia

James Mellaart


15 Color Plates
121 Monochrome Plates
56 line drawings




                                         232°?

McGRAW-HILL                    BOOK         COMPANY                    NEW YORK
                                                           Jn          1
                                   AiM   LIBRAR Y
                                             Iwas o
                                                      »   AG    ees)

                         4
                       siAIC   PAVOCUN   LID
                   A
   © 1967 Thames and Hudson Ltd. All Rights Reserved
    Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 67-14150
Color and Monochrome Illustrations Printed in Switzerland
                             Text Printed in Great Britain
                                         Bound in Holland
                                                    41462
                                                               Contents


     GENERAL EDITOR'S PREFACE

     FOREWORD          AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS               II

     INTRODUCTION
        Mersin
        Haclar

     THE SITE OF CATAL HUYUK
     THE DATING OF CATAL HUYUK

IV   THE ARCHITECTURE OF CATAL HUYUK
       Survivals of Earlier Forms of Architecture
     THE     TOWN      PLAN                               67
     THE     SHRINES        AND     THEIR    RELIEFS      Wg
        Religious Imagery
        Shrines of Level VII
        Shrines of Levels VIB and VIA
     WALL-PAINTINGS                                      ee

     SCULPTURE         IN    THE    ROUND                178

     BURIAL-CUSTOMS               AND      GRAVE-GOODS   204

     CRAFTS      AND    TRADE                            210

     THE    PEOPLE      AND        THEIR    ECONOMY      PA

     BIBLIOGRAPHY                                        228

     LIST   OF ILLUSTRATIONS                             229

     INDEX                                               Tn!



     BRIZONA STATE MUSEUM LIBRARY - TUCSON, AL 85721
Nan *2. by
             cy       -
                  ne te 1)
                                                   General Editor's Preface


     HE PURSUIT OF KNOWLEDGE, like other human activities, is liable
     to proceed in phases, which may sometimes be described loosely
and even cynically as fashions. Archaeology, the objective study of
that human and therefore somewhat temperamental subject, Man-
kind, is not free from this foible. These ‘fashions’, however, are not
merely a matter of whimsy; basically, they are often responses to
advancing techniques and mark the intermittent and sometimes
abruptly rising escalation of understanding. The present book,
viewed in perspective, represents one of these upward steps.
   Away back in the 1870's, Schliemann dramatically elevated the
world remembered by Homer into a subject capable of material
study. Troy, Mycenae, Agamemnon began to live not only in
Homeric verse but in terms of battlements and burials which, in
death and decay, gave a new life to epic tradition. This was
the romantic era of archaeology. The detailed correctness of
the new picture is not here in question; the broad likeness
having been achieved, lesser men have filled in the hands and
feet—it is their job. Later, Sir Arthur Evans in Crete began to
paint in the prehistoric background of Homer and, with
gradually advancing skill, depicted an imaginative dawn of
Mediterranean and European civilization. The wider functions
and capacities of archaeology were becoming plain for all
to see.
  But, unregarded by Evans, in the year (1900) in which the excava-
tion of his Minoan Crete began, there died in Dorset a certain
General Pitt Rivers who for twenty years, amidst the scrubby
vestiges of prehistoric and peripheral Britain, had been quietly and
industriously elaborating archaeological techniques. These, another
twenty years after his death, were to begin the scientific revolution
Catal Hiiyiik
                of his craft and were to lead, whether consciously or subconsciously,
                to the two decades of technical advance which marked the inter-
                war period. Between 1920 and 1940 there was a sudden blossoming
                of understanding. This included but was not confined to a new
                appreciation of ‘stratification’, a phenomenon already recognized a
                century earlier by geologists. It comprised also a general realization
                of the importance of environment in human progress; the recon-
                struction of the natural surroundings which, in great variety, had
                challenged Man and stimulated his advancement. The re-creation,
                for example, of vegetation and climate in various places and periods
                and on various soils was developed by the analysis of ancient
                deposits of pollen. Soil-maps and vegetation-maps began to give an
                enlarged meaning to human distributions, static or mobile.
                  And then, after the Second World War, there was another leap
                forward. New scientific aids of one kind and another came to the
                help of the archaeologist and threatened to turn archaeology itself
                into a science. At least they prepared, in anticipation, to turn the
                postulate of “Two Cultures’—the sciences on the one hand as apart
                from the humanities on the other—into nonsense ten years before
                it was proclaimed at Cambridge in the Rede Lecture of 1959. Above
                all, in 1949 Libby’s announcement of the radiocarbon (C-14) method
                of dating organic materials had given archaeology a powerful new
                scientific instrument for establishing a rough-and-ready chronology
                back to something like 50,000 years before the advent of writing,
                and so opened up a whole series of new horizons in the human
                achievement.
                   This ingenious by-product of nuclear research was promptly
                turned to good if sometimes unskilled use. It was now possible to
                interrelate cultures and civilizations intelligently with one another
                and with the present; ages unknown to history or to viable legend,
                and inadequately related by stratigraphy alone, took on a new mean-
                ing. Archaeology had indeed entered upon a fresh and revealing
                phase for which ‘fashion’ is a wholly inadequate term; to define it
                narrowly, the C-14 phase.
                   And the backward reach of the C-14 technique is happily sufficient
                to cover the most vital over-all period of human endeavour; that in
                                                                     General Editor's Preface
which Man at last learned, in addition to gathering food, to produce
it; thus almost indefinitely enlarging the potential size of the social
unit and providing the essential basis of civilization, the ability to
live in towns and cities.
  In so far as the Eurasian zone is concerned, the focus of this
greatest of all human achievements proclaims its own geographical
terms. The wild prototypes of the principal Eurasian herd-animals
(goats, sheep, cattle) and edible grasses (wheat, barley) occur or have
occurred roughly between the Himalayas and the Mediterranean.
Within that area, therefore, it may be supposed that the earlier
attempts at domestication and cultivation took shape: always with
the proviso that in other parts of the world—in the Western if not
in the Eastern Hemisphere—equivalent advances may, at one time
or another, have been independently achieved. And within that
considerable Near Eastern and Middle Eastern region with which we
are here concerned it is apparent that the earlier advances were
liable to be located in the foothills; those, for example, of northern
Iraq, Palestine, and southern Anatolia. This is altogether natural, since
the circumscribed shelter of the semi-upland valley matched the size
and capacity of the small societies which were still inevitably in the
earlier stages of food-production. Only the confident development
of food-producing techniques could be expected to result in a social
expansion commensurate with the formidable problems presented
by the great riverine plains.
   And here Catal Hityiik comes vividly into the picture. It lies upon
an accessible and fertile landscape at a height of 3,000 feet above
sea-level, and consists of two riverside mounds, the larger of which
is 32 acres in extent. Thus by the seventh millennium, the age to
which the earlier excavated strata are shown by C-14 evidence to
belong, the settlement was of very substantial size, fully worthy of
the urban designation which Mr Mellaart has given to it. As a fully-
fledged town at that early date—three or four millennia before the
famous cities of Mesopotamia—it is of more than professional
interest. After its primary precursor, the eighth-millennium walled
oasis-town ofJericho inJordan, it occupies a sort of midway position
in the emergence of Civilized Man. As such, it may fairly be regarded
Catal Hiiyiik
                as something more than just another archaeological excavation; it
                represents an outstanding human accomplishment in the upward
                grade of social development, and may be expected therefore to be
                of general interest even to a modern age which may have lost
                something of the easy Victorian certainty of Progress.
                   The present moment is opportune for the publication of the
                results of the three seasons of excavation to which the site has been
                submitted. The first stage of the work may now be claimed to have
                ended, and some delay is inevitable before digging is continued.
                Meanwhile a reasonably complete presentation of the remarkable
                and sometimes bizarre results of the excavation to date is desirable
                in a form more congenial to the reader than the technical reports in
                Anatolian Studies can be expected to be. And there is ample material
                for this more general approach. Apart from the important contribu-
                tion which Catal Hiiyiikk has made in the wider context of human
                studies, the idiosyncracies of its inhabitants give it a personality of
                some special local and individual interest. The strange character of
                its closely packed buildings, into which in the absence of doorways
                the visitor presumably ascended or descended by ladder; the
                numerous shrines with their remarkable furnishings; and above all
                the curious and sometimes a trifle macabre artistry which doubtless
                reflects a religious thinking as involved and inscrutable as illiterate
                (if not literate) religions are bound to be—all these and other per-
                sonalia combine to illustrate a community of an entertainingly
                esoteric kind. In one way and another Mr Mellaart’s work is here
                offered as a notable contribution alike to the single-mindedness and
                the diversity of civilization in remote perspective.
                                                                 MortTIMER WHEELER




Io
                                  Foreword and Acknowledgements


Bea EXCAVATIONS conducted by the author at Catal Hiiyiik
  from 1961 to 1963 with the generous support of a number of
learned bodies in Britain, the Commonwealth and America have
revealed a new and unexpected chapter in the history of Anatolia.
   Catal Hiiyiik has proved to be not only a major neolithic site,
yielding rich evidence of a remarkably advanced civilization that
flourished on the Anatolian Plateau in the seventh and early sixth
millennium sc, but it was also the centre of art in a period that
hitherto had been regarded as inartistic. Catal Hiiyiik is remarkable
for its wall-paintings and plaster reliefs, its sculpture in stone and
clay as well as for its advanced technology in the crafts of weaving,
woodwork, metallurgy and obsidian working. Its numerous
sanctuaries testify to an advanced religion, complete with symbolism
and mythology;     its buildings to the birth of architecture and
conscious planning; its economy to advanced practices in agri-
culture and stockbreeding, and its numerous imports to a flourishing
trade in raw materials.
   This book is an account of the first three seasons of work at this
promising site and a summary of what has been learnt about it
through the patient recording by a large team of archaeologists
assisted by natural scientists.
   The excavations were made possible through the generous support
of the following institutions and benefactors:

  The British Academy,
  The University of London, Institute of Archaeology,
  The University of Edinburgh,
  The Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, Canada,
  The Australian Institute of Archaeology,
                                                                         II
Catal Hiiyiik
                  Christchurch University, New Zealand,
                  The British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara,
                  The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research,
                    New York,
                  The Bollingen Foundation, New York,
                  The Ny Carlsberg Foundation, Copenhagen,
                  The late Francis Neilson, Esq.
                  W. J. Beasley, Esq.
                  The Earl of Crawford and Balcarres,
                  W.E. D. Allen, Esq.
                  and a number of anonymous donations.

                Technical aid to the expedition was provided by the German
                Archaeological Institute, Istanbul; Shell, Ankara; BP (Aegean Ltd.)
                Istanbul; and the Conservation Department of the Institute of
                Archaeology, University of London.
                   The expedition has profited much from collaboration with natural
                scientists: Dr Hans Helbaek (National Museum, Copenhagen),
                palaeo-botanist; Dr Dexter Perkins, Jr, zoologist; Mlle Denise
                Ferembach (Institut de Paléontologie Humaine, Paris), physical
                anthropologist; Dr H. Burnham (Royal Ontario Museum), textile
                expert; Professor R. Pittioni and his team of metallurgists at Vienna;
                Mr H. Hodges (Institute of Archaeology, London), conservation and
                Professor A. Berkel (Forestry Dept, University of Istanbul) and
                E. Tellerup, Esq., (Copenhagen) for wood analysis. Other analyses
                have been carried out by Dr S. J. Rees-Jones of the Courtauld
                Institute, London (pigments); Dr G. F. Claringbull (Department of
                Minerology, British Museum, Natural History), Dr I. C. J. Gal-
                braith (Department of Ornithology, British Museum, Natural
                History); the Rev. H. E. J. Biggs (Department of Malacology,
                British Museum, Natural History); the Radiocarbon Laboratories of
                the University of Pennsylvania (Dr E. K. Ralph), and the Centre
                National de Recherches Scientifiques at Gif-sur-Yvette, near Paris.
                Analyses of obsidian were made by Mr Colin Renfrew (Cambridge).
                The flint and obsidian industry was studied by Mr Perry Bialor
                and Mr Peder Mortensen.
I2
                                                   Foreword and Acknowledgements
  During the excavations Mrs M. A. Mellaart and Mr Ian Todd
were the photographers; Mr Peter Winchester, Mr N. Alcock and
Miss P. Quinn the architect-surveyors; Miss Anne Louise Stock-
dale and Mrs Grace Huxtable the artists; and conservation was
entrusted to Dr Hans Helbaek, Miss Fiona Greig, Mrs D. Biernoff
and Miss Viola Pemberton-Piggott. During the summer and autumn
of 1964 Mr H. Hodges, Miss M. White, Miss T. Martin, Miss P.
Pratt and Miss V. Pemberton-Piggott worked on the conservation
of wall-paintings from Catal Hiiyiik in the Archaeological Museum,
Ankara.
   Archaeological field assistants at Catal Hiiyiik included: Miss
Diana Kirkbride (now Mrs Hans Helbaek), Mr Ian Todd, Mr D.
Biernoff, Mr John Farrar, Mr Mark Davie, Miss Birsen Giiloglu,
Mr Refik Duru and Mr J. Yakar. Mr Ali Riza Biiyiiklevent, Mr
Behcet Erdal and Mr Hayrettin Solmaz acted as representatives of
the Turkish Government.
   It is a pleasant duty to express my gratitude to all these institutions,
benefactors, scientists, scholars and assistants, who have thus con-
tributed to the success of the Catal Hiiyiik expedition and without
whose support this book would not have been written.
   We are not less indebted to the Turkish Department of Anti-
quities and Bay Riistem Duyuran, then its Director and to Bay
Mehmet Onder, the present Director, then Director of the Konya
Museums; to Bay Rebii Karatekin, Vali of Konya and Bay Adnan
Kizildagh, Kaymakam of Cumra and numerous other local
Turkish authorities, for their help and assistance, hospitality and
interest.
  And finally, we thank our labour force, veterans of Beycesultan
and Hacilar, or newcomers from Kiiciikkéy, our foreman Veli
Karaaslan and our ustas Rifat Celimli, Mustafa Duman and Bekir
Kalayci, for their skill, experience and devotion.
  Preliminary reports on the Catal Hiiyiik excavations have been
published annually in Anatolian Studies (vols XII, 1962; XIII, 1963;
XIV, 1964) as well as in the following journals: Illustrated London
News, New Scientist, Archaeology, Horizon, Scientific American, Science
et Avenir, and Archaeologische Anzeiger. An exhibition of copies of
                                                                              13
Catal Hiiyiik
                Catal Hiiyiik wall-paintings was held at the Institute of Archaeology
                at London; in the Jewish Museum, New York, and at the Royal
                Ontario Museum, and some of our finds have toured Western
                Europe with the exhibition of treasures from the Ankara Museum,
                where all our finds are kept.
                  Academic response to the Catal Hiiyiik discoveries has been great
                and public lectures were given at Istanbul, Athens, Nicosia, Beirut,
                Amman, Jerusalem, Athens, Vienna, Berlin, Frankfurt, Marburg,
                Ziirich, Geneva, Paris, Lyons, London, Oxford, Cambridge,
                Manchester, Leeds, Newcastle, Bristol, Edinburgh, St Andrews,
                Toronto, New York and Bryn Mawr. The need for a book on
                Catal Hiiyiik is therefore fairly obvious.




14
                                                                         Introduction


©. a. THE RING of professional archaeology, Catal Hiiyiik
      is still a name of little meaning. But the recent excavation of
the site—still far from complete—has in fact given it an importance
of an outstanding kind which it is the purpose of this book, during a
pause in the field-operations, to indicate in a general way to a wider
public. Already, after a mere three seasons’ work (1961-63), the
results may fairly be described as a spectacular addition to our know-
ledge of the earlier phrases of the human achievement in terms of
urban settlement. For already Catal Hiiyiik ranks, with Jericho in
Jordan, as one of man’s first known essays in the development of
town-life. Before 6000 Bc Catal Hiiyiik was a town, or even a city,
of a remarkable and developed kind,
   The site lies 32 miles south-east of Konya in southern Turkey and
will be described on a later page. Here, by way of introduction,
something may be said of the general framework of terminology and
technology which are assumed in the presentation of the results so
far reached, together with a summary of some of these results in the
Near Eastern context.
   First, as to terminology. Traditionally the prehistory of mankind
is divided into a number of periods, based on the typology of his
tools and weapons       in stone or metal: Palaeolithic,   Mesolithic,
Neolithic (Old, Middle and New Stone Age), followed by the
Bronze and Iron Ages. This typology, devised in the nineteenth
century for the prehistoric cultures of Europe, is now in many
respects obsolete, but it is still in common use and has been adapted
by Near Eastern scholars. However, as excavations have progressed
and new evidence has become available, it has been found necessary
to introduce more periods, such as Chalcolithic (a period in which the
first metal tools and weapons came into use on a modest scale side
                                                                                    15
Catal Hiiytik
                by side with others in stone), and further subdivisions, such as a
                Protoneolithic, a Neolithic without pottery (‘Pre-pottery’ or, less
                committally, ‘Aceramic’) to distinguish these phases or cultures from
                others of a more developed Neolithic kind with pottery. Both
                the Chalcolithic and the Early Bronze Age have likewise been
                subdivided into subperiods, and with good reason.
                   Then as to the technology of dating. New methods of dating
                by means of the radioactive isotope of carbon (C-14) is rapidly
                providing a more nearly absolute chronological framework for
                prehistory all over the world, thus supplanting earlier schemes
                based largely upon guesswork.
                   A third factor of great importance is geography, for cultural
                development has been by no means the same all over the world, and
                regional differences can be extremely pronounced. Near Eastern
                archaeology during the last twenty years has disposed of the old
                cherished theories that all civilization developed in the Fertile
                Crescent, or, more simply, in Mesopotamia and Egypt. Botanists
                have shown that agriculture, the basis for the development of any
                civilization, did not start in the river valleys of the Euphrates, the
                Tigris or the Nile, but in the upland valleys, where the wild ancestors
                of the cultivated cereals had their natural habitat.
                   Subsequently to the Palaeolithic, two culture-provinces existed
                south of the Taurus Mountains, an eastern one in the Zagros Moun-
                tains and a western in Syria~-Lebanon and Palestine. Anatolia has
                links with the western, not with the eastern group. This in turn
                suggests that there were a number of foci in the early development of
                civilization, and not a single one. Every year the study of the origins
                of civilization in the Near East becomes more complex and thus more
                human. Natural environment plays a decisive role in these early
                developments: people do not start sowing wheat in areas where
                this plant does not naturally grow, nor is metallurgy invented in
                areas devoid of ores. On the Anatolian plateau obsidian is abundant
                but flint is absent, so flint tools are rare: axes are made of greenstone
                in Anatolia, because this material is abundant, but in Syria and
                Palestine they are made of flint. To polish greenstone is fairly easy,
                but polishing flint is not; Anatolian axes are therefore always
16
                                                                            Introduction
polished, Syro-Palestinian ones only on the cutting edge. Such
differences in technique arise from the material and have nothing
to do with date.
   The mechanics of cultural diffusion are many and varied. There is
a direct trade with one’s neighbours, let us say across the rivers or the
mountains, or that of the nomads whose recurrent and seasonal
travel from one area to another makes them excellent culture
transmitters. Another sort of diffusion comes when settlers move on
to cultivate and colonize new territory, perhaps impelled by drought,
floods, crop-disease, locusts or other pests, by soil-exhaustion, or
population-increase. Whereas in the former instance time-lags are
negligible, they may be pronounced in the latter. The spread of
agriculture and stock-breeding from Anatolia to Europe is evidently
a case of the latter form of culture-diffusion, marked by appreciable
time-lags. A further form of diffusion leading to secondary Neolithic
culture, in which colonizers with agriculture, etc., come into contact
with, and transfer some features to, other people still in an earlier
stage of development appears characteristic of Europe but is not yet
attested in the Near East.
   In Western Asia it would appear that there are at the moment at
least three known centres where early civilizations developed in the
postglacial period; the Zagros Mountain zone, Palestine and Jordan,
and the South Anatolian Plateau. Of the preceding Upper Palaeo-
lithic cultures much less is known in the Near East than in Europe,
partly from inadequacy of exploration and partly perhaps because
in this warmer zone open-air sites may have been more abundant
than the occupation of caves and rock-shelters which help to guide
the modern explorer. Not a single open-air site has been excavated,
not a single Upper Palaeolithic statuette is known; wall-paintings
have not yet been found, and engravings on rocks and. pebbles or
art mobilier are confined to one small area of the Near East, the region
of Antalya on the south coast of Turkey. This is enough, however,
to show that art both in its naturalistic and geometric form, existed
during the Upper Palaeolithic in Anatolia in a region a few days’
travelling from the Konya Plain in which the Catal Hiiyiik civiliza-
tion was to arise. The artistic production of the so-called ‘Early
                                                                                      17
Catal Hiiyiik
                Natufian’    culture of Palestine, immediately post-Palaeolithic, is
                well known and also points to Upper Palaeolithic traditions. Though
                less articulate the engraved pebbles and bone tools of the sites of
                Shanidar and Zawi Chemi, again of ninth millennium date, imply
                the same existence of such a tradition in the Zagros area. (Without
                detailed description or definition, these and other place-names may
                be sufficient to indicate the general shape and extent of the cultural
                problem in the light of present knowledge.)
                  In the tool-kit of the various Protoneolithic cultures (Natufian,
                Shanidar, Beldibi) there are numerous resemblances to the final
                Upper Palacolithic cultures of the same regions (Kebaran, Zarzian
                and Belbasi), but also enough differences to show that neither the
                Natufian, nor the Shanidar culture is descended from the Kebaran
                or the Zarzian. The Beldibi culture, however, looks like a develop-
                ment of its predecessor Belbasi, and both are confined to the south
                coast of Turkey. If so, this is the only instance where a post-Palaeo-
                lithic culture can be derived from an Upper Palaeolithic one in the
                Near East.
                   However, archaeologists are agreed in regarding the Proto-
                neolithic and Neolithic populations of the Near East as descendants
                from earlier Upper Palaeolithic tribes of hunters who during the
                crucial Protoneolithic period (roughly the ninth and eighth mil-
                lennia) invented and developed a new settled economy based on the
                domestication of plants and animals. Where and how this came about
                is still obscure but its importance for human development was such
                that the late Professor Childe named it the “Neolithic Revolution’—
                a phrase which becomes less apt as our knowledge of the uneven and
                complex development of food-production (the process which
                Childe had principally in mind in coining the phrase) becomes a
                little more adequate.
                   Although the earliest domesticated plant-remains found do not
                yet much antedate 7000 Bc (from the aceramic Neolithic at Hacilar,
                Beidha, Alikosh), the standard of domestication reached and the
                variety of crops grown presupposes a long prehistory of earlier
                agriculture which may well go back to the beginning of the
                Protoneolithic, c. 9000 BC.
18
                                                                          Introduction
  Even if actual plant-remains have not yet been found, grinding-
stones and mortars, sickles and storage-pits all suggest the beginnings
of agriculture. Rock-shelters and the mouths of caves were still in
use, but open settlements     are known     in the Natufian (Eynan,
Jericho, Beidha) and in the roughly contemporary Karim Shahirian
of the Zagros zone (Zawi Chemi-Shanidar,          Karim    Shahir, Ali
Kosh). At Zawi Chemi domesticated sheep are attested around
8900 BC, which makes sheep the earliest domesticate. Hunting, of
course, continued to provide the population with most of their meat.
The purpose of animal-domestication was food-conservation and the
production of milk and, in the case of goat and sheep, hair and wool.
Fishing and fowling, the collection of roots and berries, mushrooms,
snails, etc., evidently also added to the variety of foods available,
and food was collected in baskets. Awls and needles of bone suggest
skin-garments, and leather-working in general. Spindle-whorls do
not yet occur.
   The burials in Shanidar cave may belong to the Zawi Chemi
settlement whereas intramural burial is well attested in the Natufian
of Palestine. This difference in burial-habits between the two culture-
areas south of the Taurus continues into the Neolithic: no burials
were found at Karim Shahir or Jarmo, but at Jericho they are very
numerous. In the Natufian of Eynan the use of red ochre with
burials is widespread and there are numerous examples of frag-
mentary or partial burials. Funeral gifts are common; necklaces and
head-dresses of dentalium shells, or perforated gazelles’ phalanges
are characteristic of the Natufian. The Early Natufians belonged to
an Eurafrican race (dolichocephalic) which may be related to the
Upper Palaeolithic population of Europe and is widely distributed
throughout the Near East.
   Already in Early Natufian times a sanctuary was established near
the great spring of Jericho. Somewhat later, still well before 8000 Bc,
people with a Natufian stone industry settled around the spring in
flimsy structures and in time a small mound about four metres
high arose as the nucleus of later Jericho. This period has been called
‘Protoneolithic’ and is still little known. Two important innovations
may be noted in the stone industry: the first appearance of notched
                                                                                    19
Catal Hiiyiik
                arrowheads, which indicates an early use of the bow, and the first
                import of obsidian, a black volcanic glass, used for the manufacture
                of tools and weapons. Recent analysis has established a Central
                Anatolian origin for this obsidian and we thus have evidence for
                trade with Anatolia perhaps as early as 8300 BC.
                   This small settlement grew rapidly in size and importance during
                the eighth millennium, the ‘Pre-Pottery Neolithic A’ period of
                Jericho. The houses were round, like those of Early Natufian Eynan
                but built of brick and domed, and soon the need was felt for forti-
                fications. A huge stone tower with internal staircase, three super-
                imposed city walls and a deep rock-cut ditch outside the wall
                introduce monumental architecture in the Near East. The stone
                industry, virtually unchanged from that of the preceding period and
                still microlithic is now accompanied by a fine bone industry.
                Pottery and stone vessels are unknown and containers must have
                been made of basketry, bast or skins. The obsidian trade with
                Anatolia continues. Burial habits betray Natufian origins, partial
                burials are common, groups of skulls occur, but the use of red ochre
                in burials, found elsewhere before and during this time, is not
                recorded. Anthropological research has established a new racial
                element, also dolichocephalic, but more gracile: the so-called Proto-
                Mediterranean, living side by side with the Eurafrican Natufians
                at Nahal Oren in Palestine in the final Natufian, contemporary with
                Jericho Pre-Pottery Neolithic A. Compared to the Early Natufian,
                these later phases appear to have been artistically uncreative. Towards
                the end of the eighth millennium Jericho was deserted and soon after-
                wards the site was taken over by a different cultural group, possibly
                the one against whom the massive fortifications of Jericho had been
                erected. A complete break in culture follows: the newcomers of this
                ‘Pre-Pottery Neolithic B’ period, which certainly covers the entire
                seventh millennium and may have lasted even longer, still knew no
                pottery, but made vessels of stone. Their houses were no longer
                round, but rectangular. Their bricks were different and larger, their
                plaster floors were covered with red ochre or haematite and polished.
                Circular mats covered some of the floors. A few buildings seem to
                have been shrines; clay figurines of ‘Mother Goddess’ type appear,
20
                                                                             Introduction
but burial-customs differ little if at all from those of previous periods.
A series of human skulls with features modelled in plaster and
painted, and groups of human figures more or less naturalistically or
schematically modelled but of almost natural size, belong to the
later phases of the period and suggest cult-practices and revival of
art. The stone-industry isa new one with fine arrowheads, tanged and
often barbed, large sickle-blades, polished greenstone axes, but little
obsidian. There is evidence for domestic goat, dog (?) and cat (?).
At some stage of the period a wall of large boulders surrounded the
settlement.
   This culture is known throughout the Jordan valley and has links
with the aceramic Neolithic of Ras Shamra in North Syria and
Tell Ramad in South Syria, whence it may well have come. More
remote parallels may be suggested with aceramic Hacilar (c. 7000 Bc)
in south-western Anatolia, where again we find rectangular build-
ings, red plaster floors and human skulls used in certain rites, but
such features may have been widespread throughout these periods
in the Near East.
   The next development from aceramic to ceramic Neolithic is
known south of the Taurus in its early phases only in Syria, at Ras
Shamra and Tell Ramad, but has not yet been published in detail
and its radiocarbon dating is not yet available. At Jericho there is a
lacuna, probably of great length, and the evidence from other
Palestinian sites is equally unsatisfactory.
   At Ras Shamra on the North Syrian coast the aceramic period
(V. 1) comes to an end c. 6436+ 100 Bc, and is followed (in V. 2)
without any other appreciable changes in the culture by the introduc-
tion of a fine monochrome burnished ware, usually red and some-
times brown or black, apparently undecorated. With it are found a
coarse burnished ware, rarely incised and a thick chalky white ware,
crumbly and badly fired, which seems to imitate limestone bowls of
the aceramic period. Another ware is coated with lime-plaster,
perhaps a hangover from vessels in perishable materials, treated that
way to make them impervious to heat. Both these latter wares soon
disappear, but they are found at the beginning of the period at a
number of Syrian sites, as well as at Byblos in the Lebanon. At Tell
                                                                                       21
Catal Hiiytik
                Ramad in the south the sequence is similar, but a good number of
                burnished pots are heavily decorated like the Early Neolithic wares
                of Byblos which in my opinion may have been dated much too late.
                  What is particularly important is the fact that the fine mono-
                chrome wares of Ras Shamra, Amuq A, etc., clearly show their
                South Anatolian ancestry and appear in Syria at a date which is
                not far removed from the first appearance of this same ware on the
                Anatolian Plateau at Catal Hiiyiik around 6500 Bc. Other parallels
                may beestablished between Syria and Byblos and the South Anatolian
                Plateau in the obsidian and flint industry of this period and there is
                evidence for a lively trade in these materials at Catal Hiiyiik.
                   This period of transition from aceramic to ceramic Neolithic, the
                half millennium between 6500 and 6000 Bc in round terms, is
                essential to our understanding of cultural progress in the Near East,
                but it is still obscure in Syria, Palestine, Cyprus and Iraq, where the
                inadequately excavated and still unpublished small village-site of
                Jarmo, in the northern foothills of Iraq, appears to offer an eastern
                variant of this important transition.
                   The excavations at Catal Hiiyiik throw abundant light on the
                civilization of a town of just this period in Anatolia and the great
                depth of the underlying deposits promises to yield evidence for the
                genesis of this remarkable civilization when excavations can be
                resumed. The wealth of material produced by Catal Hiiyiik is
                unrivalled by any other Neolithic site. Moreover, not being a village
                but a town or city, its products have a definitely metropolitan
                air: Catal Hiiyiik could afford luxuries such as obsidian mirrors,
                ceremonial daggers, and trinkets of metal beyond thereach of most of
                its known contemporaries. Copper and lead were smelted and worked
                into beads, tubes and possibly small tools, thus taking the beginnings
                of metallurgy back into the seventh millennium. Its stone industry
                in local obsidian and imported flint is the most elegant of the period;
                its wooden vessels are varied and sophisticated, its woollen textile
                industry fully developed. At Catal Hiiyiik we can actually study the
                transition from an aceramic Neolithic with baskets and wooden vessels
                to a ceramic Neolithic with the first pottery. Abundant carbonized
                food-deposits establish the range of crops grown, collected or
22
                                                                            Introduction
imported from the hills, the standard reached by agriculture c.
6000 BC, and the centre from which these crops reached Europe at
the beginning of its Neolithic colonization. The animal-bones and
the shrines show the importance of a new animal about to be
domesticated: Bos primigenius.
  As the dead were buried in the settlement, hundreds of Neolithic
graves have been found, providing rich evidence for anthropological
study. Funeral gifts, though not rich by later standards, are less
sparing than among other contemporary cultures. Red-ochre burials
are still found, and there is abundant evidence for secondary burial
and excarnation (burial after exposure and the removal of flesh and
sinews). Trade is well established and the main export was probably
obsidian (and greenstone axes).
   And last but certainly not least there is the evidence for Neolithic
religion in the form of numerous shrines, artistically decorated with
reliefs in plaster, either modelled on the walls or cut into the plaster
when in position, or with wall-paintings in one or more colours, and
covering a period securely fixed by numerous radiocarbon dates to
the centuries between 6500 and §700 Bc. In the shrines were found
cult-statues of male and female deities, carved in a variety of stones or
modelled in clay and sometimes painted, predecessors of the series
from Hacilar. Until the discovery of Catal Hiiyiik there was virtually
no evidence from the Near East wherewith to trace any possible
connections between the naturalistic and geometric art of the Upper
Palaeolithic of Europe and the first manifestation of art in the form of
painted pottery and a few figurines of the Early Chalcolithic of the
Near East, at least four or even five thousand years later. The
current interpretation of Upper Palaeolithic art as an expression of
hunting magic, a view borrowed from backward societies like
Australian aborigines, etc., offered little hope of establishing any link
with the later fertility-cults of the Near East which centre around
the figure of a Great Goddess and her son, even if the presence of
such a goddess in the Upper Palaeolithic could hardly be denied,
which it is not.
  The position has radically changed: Catal Hiiyiik and Hacilar
have established a link between these two great schools of art
                                                                                     23
Catal Hiiyiik
                and a continuity inreligion can be demonstrated from Catal Hiiyiik
                to Hacilar and so on till the great ‘Mother-Goddesses’ of archaic
                and classical times, the shadowy figures known as Cybele, Artemis
                and Aphrodite.
                  At the other end of the scale much work remains to be done,
                but the archaeological, anthropological and artistic record of Catal
                Hiiyiik is already strongly suggestive of an important heritage from
                the Upper Palaeolithic. A. Leroi-Gourhan’s brilliant reassessment of
                Upper Palaeolithic religion (Les religions de la préhistoire, Paris, 1964)
                has cleared away many misunderstandings, and the resulting inter-
                pretation of Upper Palaeolithic art centred round the theme of
                complex and female symbolism (in the form of symbols and animals)
                shows strong similarities to the religious imagery of Catal Hiiyiik;
                to such an extent indeed that ancestral Upper Palaeolithic influences
                may still be lingering at Catal Hiiyiik, as they so obviously are in
                numerous cult-practices of which the red-ochre burials, red-stained
                floors, collections of stalactites, fossils, shells, are but a few examples.
                  The importance of the site of Catal Hiiyiik, clearly stratified
                and easily datable as it is, for the study of art, archaeology, religion
                and technology of this vital period, contemporary with the generally
                miserable period of the Mesolithic in Europe, needs, I hope, no
                further emphasis.

Mersin

                   The ancient mound of Mersin, called Yiimiik tepe, lies on the
                east bank of the river SoSuk Su, some 2 miles west of the modern
                town. It was excavated by Professor John Garstang in the winter
                seasons of 1937-39, and 1946-47 (see J. Garstang, Prehistoric Mersin,
                Oxford, 1953).
                  The mound, an oval with a maximum length of 200 metres, covers
                12 acres and rises to a height of 25 metres (over 80 feet) with approxi-
                mately thirty-three building-levels covering a range from the Early
                Neolithic, c. 6250 Bc, to medieval Islamic. Whereas               the later
                sequence, from the Early Bronze Age onwards, is rather incomplete
                and better attested at Tarsus, the reverse is the case for the early
24
                                                                              Introduction
  periods, the Neolithic and Chalcolithic, for which Mersin remains
  the Cilician type-site.
    The first early site to be excavated in Anatolia, Mersin is important
  in that it offers the possibility of establishing links between the
  Neolithic and Chalcolithic of the Anatolian Plateau (Catal Hiiyiik,
  Can Hasan) and that of North Syria (Ras Shamra, Byblos, etc.).
    In the period with which this book is concerned, the Neolithic,
  Mersin was a fair-sized settlement, frequently rebuilt, producing
  pottery very like that of Catal Hiiyiik, but often bearing impressed
  decoration. Its stone industry, in obsidian imported from the plateau,
  offers close parallels to that of Catal Hiiyiik, but is more rustic in
  appearance. Local chert is also used. No substantial buildings were
  encountered in the trenches by which the Mersin Neolithic was
  investigated, and no traces of shrines or art were found.
     Unless the limited excavations in the Neolithic levels offer a mis-
  leading picture, Mersin was a rather rustic village site with good
  craftsmanship in pottery and stonework but little or no sophistica-
  tion. In this respect it greatly resembles the other Neolithic establish-
  ments in Syria, the Lebanon and Palestine, but clearly differentiates
  itself from the artistic people on the Anatolian Plateau.

                                                                               Hacilar

  A small Neolithic and Early Chalcolithic mound lies about one mile
  west of the village of Hacilar, 17 miles west of Burdur, on the
  Anatolian Plateau, roughly north of the Mediterranean port of
  Antalya. The site has a maximum diameter of about 150 metres and
  is 5 metres in height. Excavations were carried out there under the
  auspices of the British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara in the
  years 1957-60 by the author. The final publication has not yet
  appeared, but Anatolian Studies, VIII-XI (1958-61) contain the
  preliminary reports on the excavations.
    The excavations revealed remains of three different periods: the
  aceramic Neolithic village, dating from c. 7000 Bc; then after a long
  gap in occupation a Late Neolithic village (Hacilar [IX-VI), dating
  from about 5750-5600 Bc, followed without any break by Early
                                                                                        25


ARIZONA TATE actin TIRRARY .TUCSON. AZ. 8572
Catal Hiiyiik
                Chalcolithic occupation (Hacilar V-I), the main characteristic of
                which is a sophisticated painted pottery. The settlement came to an
                end about 5000 Bc and the site was not reoccupied.
                   The main characteristics of these three periods are: rectangular
                mud-brick architecture with red-painted plaster floors, no pottery
                or figurines and virtually no finds (of small objects), except grain,
                for the aceramic Neolithic.
                   A highly sophisticated Late Neolithic settlement is Hacilar VI,
                with big houses, monochrome and some simple painted pottery, a
                fine series of statuettes in clay and stone vessels, bone objects, grain,
                etc. There is a rich Early Chalcolithic with monochrome and fine
                painted pottery, less naturalistic figurines, fewer objects but abundant
                food remains. Poor architectural vestiges mark Levels V—III, but
                there is a complete settlement in Level II and part of a great fortress
                in Level I. Considerable changes in painted pottery in Level I suggest
                newcomers with different techniques and traditions.
                   Links with Catal Hiiyiik are particularly notable in the Late
                Neolithic pottery and clay statuettes, but diminish during the Early
                Chalcolithic.




26
                                                                           I

                                                  The Site of Catal Hiiyiik

CG         HUYUK, one of the most ancient sites in Turkey, lies on
  >
     the Anatolian plateau, nearly 3,000 feet above sea-level and
32 miles south-east of Konya. It is situated in the centre of fertile     Fig. 1
wheat lands, watered by the Carsamba Cay which, emerging from
the Lake of Beysehir in the Taurus Mountains, flows into the
Konya Plain near Cumra to lose itself in the salt steppe beyond Catal    Plate II
Hiiyiik. The great double mound of Catal Hiiyiik, which derives its
name from a road-fork at its northern end, was built on an old branch
of the river about a mile south of the village of Kiiciikkéy, the
headquarters of the expedition.
   The vast plain of Konya is rich in ancient sites, but though a few
were recorded by R. O. Arik between Konya and Cumra no
systematic survey of the plain was made until 1951, when the author,
as a scholar of the British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara, began
his Anatolian survey with the Konya Plain. Although the mound of
Catal Hiiyiik was noted in the distance in 1952, dysentery and lack of
transport prevented its more formal discovery till it was possible to
complete the survey of the more distant parts of the Konya Plain.
  On a cold November day in 1958, just before nightfall, the author,
accompanied by Mr Alan Hall and Mr David French, reached the
double mound of Catal Hiiyiik. Much of the eastern (Neolithic)
mound was covered by turf and ruin-weed (peganum harmala)
but where the prevailing south-westerly winds had scoured its
surface bare there were unmistakable traces of mud-brick buildings,
burned red in a conflagration contrasting with patches of grey ash,
broken bones, potsherds and obsidian tools and weapons. To our
surprise these were found not only at the bottom of the mound, but
they continued right up to the top, some 15 metres above the level
of the plain.
                                                                              27
                                             Maritsa

                                         ae




                                        ch

                                       WZ
                                             7,friday

                                                                                     Ck    ato




                                                                                   VE     SNSSEKARA'IN Ps
                                                                                        Oj    GARK "IN “7,




1 Early Neolithic sites
in southern Anatolia
and North Syria and
the sources of raw
materials in the area

                             The importance of our discovery was clear from the beginning,
                          for both the pottery and the obsidian arrowheads found were
                          strikingly like the neolithic material excavated years ago by Professor
                          J. Garstang in the deepest levels of the site of Mersin, some 200 miles
                          away on the southern Turkish (Cilician) coast. It should be remem-
                          bered that in 1958 it was still widely believed that there had been no
28
                ACERAM/IC NEOLITHIC                                                                  al   ALABASTER
                EARLY  NEOLITHIC
                          ott
                                                                                                     ci   CINNABAR
                    GATAL

                    KIZILKAYA
                                HUYUK

                                         TYPE
                                                TYPE
                                                           ==   LIMIT OF
                                                                NEOLITHIC
                                                                             EARLY
                                                                                                     co   COPPER


                    CILICIAN         TYPE                  Wd   CILICIAN    TYPE                     fl

                                                                                                     gr
                                                                                                          FLINT

                                                                                                          GREENSTONE

                LATE
                    AMUQ       A
                           NEOLITHIC
                                    TYPE
                                                           WW   AMUQ    A TYPE
                                                                                                     le   GALENA     (LEAD)

                    HACILAR

                    MENTESE
                                    VI

                                     TYPE
                                           TYPE
                                                           om   LIMIT
                                                                LATE
                                                                         OF HACILAR
                                                                        NEOLITHIC
                                                                                         VI   TYPE   ob

                                                                                                     s
                                                                                                          OBSIDIAN

                                                                                                          SALT,    SULPHUR

           G>Pp
           OfO0eFIKIRTEPE                TYPE
                                                                LIMIT OF
                                                                MARMORA
                                                                             SEA  OF
                                                                             NEOLITHIC




       © ANKARA



Ser
 £ P PE




GREAT           SALT
      LAKE          ¥                              :




                                                           a
[ILICAPINARSS
     s—@
        CES
—————                               ——     @—          b         :                                                                            Fi




                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                                          ‘
                                                                                                                             AAC EEE ES
                                                                                                                         s
                               —Karaca      Dag
                          ==



ee
     CATALS

is




——                       wW
                    o.          4
                      “4
                       ~ Su)
Trt          tery   yAm
                    le




                    Neolithic habitation on the Anatolian Plateau. The mound at Catal
                    Hiiyiik provided eloquent proof to refute this theory, and what was
                    particuarly encouraging was the huge size of the site (a third of a
                    mile in length), the absence of thick layers of later occupation and
                    the presence of a somewhat later mound on the other side of the
                    river, which looked as if it would continue the sequence from
                                                                                                                                                   29
Catal Hiiyiik
                Neolithic to early Chalcolithic, just as at Mersin. Some of the
                painted pottery picked up there could indeed be linked to the latter
                site, but most of it was differently decorated.
                   Here then was a major site demanding excavation, but at the time
                of the discovery we were fully engaged by the excavations of Hacilar,
                a site near the lake of Burdur some 200 miles west of Catal Hiiyiik.
                It was only in 1960 after a fourth season of excavations that virgin
                soil was reached over a large area at Hacilar and excavations ceased.
                   Excavations at Catal Hiiyiik began in 1961 and were continued
                on a larger scale in 1962 and 1963, with ever-increasing success.
                In 1964, however, the excavation was interrupted and, instead,
                conservation-work was undertaken in the Ankara Museum by a team
                of specialists from the Institute of Archaeology of London University.
                The moment was opportune to evaluate the evidence and to summar-
                ize in this volume the result of three years’ work at this site, and its
                bearing on the Neolithic development of Anatolia.
                   One of the main reasons for selecting Catal Hiiyiik for excavation
                was that it seemed to fill the gap in occupation established at Hacilar
                between the desertion of the aceramic (non-pottery) village and the
                first arrival of the Late Neolithic people (c. 5750 Bc) with a different
                and already fully developed culture. Earlier stages of the Neolithic,
                ancestral to those of Late Neolithic Hacilar, evidently existed and
                the site of Catal Hiiyiik offered the best opportunity to explore such
                Early Neolithic cultures. Excavation at this site would also serve to
                fill the geographical gap between Hacilar and Mersin, and in view of
                the evident importance of the great alluvial plain of Konya Catal
                Hiiyiik was expected to produce local peculiarities, different from the
                Neolithic of Mersin.
Plate 1           The main mound of Catal Hiiyiik (the eastern one) forms an oval,
                measuring about 450 metres in length and 275 in width, thus cover-
                ing about 32 acres. This makes it the largest Neolithic site hitherto
                known in the Near East. Its height is about 17-5 metres above the
                present level of the plain, and a small sounding has already estab-
                lished that occupation extends to a minimum of 4 metres below this
                point, without reaching virgin soil. The depth of Neolithic deposits
                at Catal Hiiyiik (19 metres or more) is nearly twice that of Mersin
30
2 Site plan of Catal Hiiyiik showing the
extent ofthe excavations                 od gkSay
                                                    --—    i    Coe

                                        fo                            ae


                                   |         9            100              200 256m
                                             EEE                           ees


and considerably more than that of Jericho (13-7 metres), and the
reason for it lies in the fine preservation of a number of building-
levels, where the walls of houses are preserved to a height of 2
metres or more.
   Erosion has played its part in shaping the contours of the mound
and it is clear that a considerable depth of deposit has been washed
away by the rains and thunderstorms of the last seven thousand years.
Of the topmost building-level (O) only some foundations remain;
the floors have fallen a prey to the elements, and on the western
slope the outermost rows of buildings show the same unmistakable
signs of denudation.
  The mound consists of a great central hump, steep on both long
sides but fading gently towards the south, whereas at the northern
end there is a secondary but lower hump. Along its eastern side lies a                Pigs?
fairly broad ‘skirt’ of occupation now cut by the irrigation-channels
which surround the mound; and from the occupation-debris
                                                                                        31
Catal Hiiyiik
                dug up from these canals it would appear that the ‘skirt’ dates
                from a fairly late phase of the Neolithic period, roughly corre-
                sponding to Levels IV-II on the top. Part of this low-lying area
                is covered by a modern cemetery, but the full extent of the site
                extends a little beyond the line of the irrigation-channels. On the
                western side, the foot of the mound nearest to the old river bed is
                under cultivation and a dust-track still in use prevents exploration
                down to the river-bed.
Plate 2           Excavations have been concentrated so far in an area of about
                an acre on the exposed western slope, where burnt buildings were
                visible even before the start of the excavation. Moreover, one would
                expect the earliest occupation of the site to have started nearest to the
                river. What sort of quarters and buildings lie on the other side of the
                mound or on the flat eastern ‘skirt’ we have not yet ascertained; but
                after three seasons of work it could appear from the gradual slope
                of the buildings towards the north and east that the original centre
                of the mound lies to the north-north east of the area in which we
                have been working. Although much has already been accomplished
                it is clear that this area alone cannot give us a complete picture of the
                structure of the mound as a whole.
                   No remains of buildings of a date later than the Neolithic have
                yet been encountered onthe mound, but the upper levels of the site
                are badly infiltrated by brick-pits of the late Iron Age and the
                Hellenistic period. On top of the mound a pit of the latter date was
                found with bricks stacked for drying still in situ. Some of these
                shapeless pits are up to 4 metres in depth and cut straight through the
                underlying Neolithic houses and shrines. On the western slope,
                however, very few pits were found and the buildings are therefore
                better preserved.
                   It does appear from the area excavated that occupation gradually
                shrank in extent after building-level V, so that we were fortunate in
                obtaining steadily increasing ground-plans for the lower building-
                levels. It is possible that the occupation on the eastern ‘skirts’ dates
                from these later phases and corresponds to an eastward shift in the
Fig. 3          settlement, so that the total area of occupation in Levels V-I need
                not have been smaller than that of earlier levels.
ce)
1 The mounds of Catal Hiiyiik seen from the north. Catal Hiiyiik on the Anatolian plateau, 3,000
feet above sea level, lies 32 miles south-east of Konya. It is a double mound, the eastern neolithic
one rising to a height of about 50 feet, covers 32 acres, whereas the western mound, its successor, is
little smaller, but only 20 feet in height, and still unexcavated, Between the two mounds lies the old
bed of the Carsamba Cay, the source of the rich alluvial soils on which the neolithic people of Catal
Hiiyiik practised intensive agriculture. The now almost treeless plain was once covered with woods
and parkland inhabited by Red Deer and wild cattle
2 Denuded mud-brick walls of building-level V on left and burnt and well-preserved rooms of
building-level VI on right, on the west slope of the neolithic mound, looking south to the plain.
The photograph shows the neat and regular layout of the rooms; one next to the other without


3 House VII.12 seen from the south-west corner. A classic example of the arrangement of platforms
in a house with east-west axis with a single platform and bench against the north wall and further
platforms against the west wall. The hearth is just visible to the right
streets or passages. See plan, Figs. 7-9. Hearths and ovens are easily recognized. When building
remains are so denuded it is almost impossible to distinguish between houses and shrines having the
same plans but different decoration
    4 House A.III.10, the south-east corner with details of the oven in the south wall (bottom left)
    twice renewed, bonded brickwork and the diagonal mark of a wooden ladder set against the plaster
    of the wall. The position of the ladder, the oven and the hearth never changes in the buildings of
    Catal Hiiyiik
5-7 Wall-painting, above, in red on white from house VI.B.65 the subject of which, though uncer-
tain, may include the representation of ladders. Below, superimposed bread ovens of building-levels _
IV and V in a domestic courtyard, open to the sky. They are constructed of mud-bricks set on edge
and their great size suggests a bakery rather than private domestic use. Opposite, above, hand and
foot impressions in red paint on the east wall of house VI.A.63 near the porthole-like doorway lead-
ing to the kitchens. Such open doorways, never provided with doors, are found in most houses
and one could only crawl through them into storerooms or other similar small rooms
8 Polychrome wall-
painting from the
north wall of shrine
VLB.1. This prob-
ably represents          a
mortuary structure,
lightly      built      of
bundles      or      reeds
and       matting,      in
which  the dead
were removed for
the first stage in
the neolithic burial
rites, the process of
excarnation,      as    is
suggested      by the
human skulls and
bones shown below
9 North wall of shrine VI.10,
preserved up to roof-level, 11
feet above the floor of the
building, the lower 2 feet are
part of the original structure.
Both floor levels show clearly
in Plate 10. Note the charac-
teristic overhang of the
panels, the central post sup-
ported by a ram’s head in
plaster and the pillar of the
bucranium on the platform’s
edge




                                  10 North wall of shrine VII.10 below the decayed remains of its successor shrine
                                  VI.10 (see Plate 9), a characteristic example of continuity of cult at Catal Hiiyiik.
                                  Less well-preserved is the central post and ram’s head with a single horn and the
                                  plaster of the walls has been cut into animal shapes
11, 12 Examples of bulls at Catal Hitytik. The fraementary painting of a black bull, above, on the
north wall of shrine IX.8 is seen through the doorway leading into the sanctuary from an ante-
chamber. Only the legs and hoofs of a bull facing east (right) are preserved and to the left its hind-
quarters are partly obliterated by a cut-out figure of a feline head. The cut-out figure of a black
bull, below, on the north wall of shrine VII.8, is two building-levels later, but in the same position
as the figure above, and illustrates a further instance of continuity of cult. It is cut through nearly
a hundred layers of white plaster but fortunately, not through the earlier wall paintings of the
vultures (Plates 48, 49)
13,14 Above, a baked clay model of a boar’s head from a pit in Level VI. It is:.part of a figurine used
in hunting rituals in which the animal was magically killed or disabled in effigy. The head should
be compared to the cut-out in shrine VII.45 (Fig. 27). Below, the north wall.of shrine VIB.8-with a
damaged figure of a huge cut-out bull in the same position as its:predecessor in:shrine, VIL8,
immediately below. There is evidence to’show that this bull, more graceful than its predecessor,
was alternately painted red and. white and was less deeply incised. There were no: wall-paintings
below it and it lasted through both phases of Level VI
15, 16 The corner platform and the bench of shrine VI.61. This impressive building, evidently
dedicated to the cult of the male god, symbolized in the form of a wild bull, bore no wall-paintings
or reliefs. It was decorated with two huge bucrania set on the edge of the north-east corner plat-
form, above, and with an even more impressive row of seven horn cores of Bos primigenius set in the
bench at the southern end of the main platform, below. Six of these were at the same level and the
seventh raised above it, like a serried row of stylized bulls’ heads, one behind the other, in awesome
splendour
17 Plaster relief of a stag
from the north-east corner
of shrine VII.10. Set in a
shallow niche in the north
wall, this relief was pro-
duced partly by model-
ling, partly in cut-out
technique. Nearly three
feet in height it shows a
stag, perched on a rock
turning its head backward,
as if glancing at its pur-
suers, an attitude found
also in the stag hunt in
Plates 54, 55. and in the
Late Neolithic theriomor-
phic vases of Hacilar VI.
The left outline was pro-
duced   by cutting away
the plaster, the rest    is
modelled in low relief
18, 19 The Leopard Shrine (VI.B.44). The main panel on the west wall of this shrine was decorated
with the bold relief of two painted leopards, the decoration of which had been repeated over and
over again, so that finally there were nearly forty layers of painted plaster. One of the finest and
best preserved is illustrated in a copy, above, and a detail of the right-hand leopard, below, shows the
actual state of preservation. The burning of the two wooden posts between which the panel was
set partly destroyed the animals and the hindquarters of the left-hand animal were carried away by
a deep Hellenistic pit
20, 21 The Leopard Shrine (VI.B.44). The entire relief, above, nearly six feet long was set above a
red panel, flanked by painted posts. In its later phases, which may be assigned to Level VI.A, the
painting became less naturalistic and the fine rosettes. of the earlier phases were replaced. by dots
and dashes, executed in black (as before) but on a lemon yellow background, below. The eyes,
mouth and the outline of the claws were still accentuated in red. As layer upon layer of plaster was
added the animals gradually lost their crisp outline




                                                                                                        Leesan
22-24 Bulls’ heads in plaster, incorporating the horn cores of Bos primigenius, often of considerable
size, are a feature of the west walls of many Catal Hiiyiik shrines. Two bulls’ heads of unequal size
with red-painted ears and muzzles protrude from the right-hand body of the Twin Goddess in
shrine VI.14, above left. Two others formed part of the decoration of the west wall of shrine VII.31,
above right, the rest of which is lost. Earlier ones were provided with clay horns, below, and faced
the relief of a goddess, with defaced head, in shrine VII.31
25, 26 Plaster reliefs of goddesses are frequent in the shrines of Catal Hiiyiik VI and VII. Arms and
legs are either outstretched, above, and Plate 24, or turned upwards and the latter indicates a position
of childbirth, below. The lower part of a goddess figure from the north wall of shrine VII.45, above,
resembles that of shrine VII.31 (Plate 24), but the figure on the west wall of shrine VI.8, below, is
shown giving birth to a bull’s head, placed below her legs (cf. Fig. 23). Goddesses giving birth are
unpainted, the others are often ‘dressed’ in a bright colour
27, 28 Contrasting symbols of life and death are a constant feature of Catal Hiiyiik. In the third
phase of the decoration of the east wall of shrine VI.8, two rows of lower jaws of wild boar were
stuck into the wall, to be covered in the next stage by womens’ breasts modelled in clay. On the
corresponding wall of the neighbouring shrine VI.10, below, a pair of woman’s breasts each con-
tained the head of a Griffon vulture (Gyps fulvus), the beak of which protruded from the open
red-painted nipples. Beyond the post there was a horn in plaster; evidently a male symbol; and
beyond the breastsa huge bull’s head surmounted ‘a red-painted niche
                                                                            Il

                                                The Dating of Catal Hiiyiik


     HE FIFTY-FOOT Deposit of Neolithic remains at Catal Hiiyiik,
     so far explored, has yielded the remains of twelve successive          Fig. 3
building-levels. These represent twelve different cities, not phases
or repairs of single buildings. They have been numbered from the
top (O-X) and there are two different building-levels in VI; VI A
and VI B. It is possible that Level VII also consists of two levels, but
this is not yet certain. Not all these were of the same duration and
this is evident not only from the series of radiocarbon dates, but also
from the state of the buildings themselves. Dwellings constructed
of mud-brick are generally assumed to have short lives, but these
vary from region to region and depend as much on the quality of
the mud-brick and the solidity of construction, upkeep, etc., as on
earthquakes, floods and the climatic conditions of the region.
   At Catal Hiiyiik each building had its own walls and was hemmed
in by others, a method of construction which gave greater solidity
to the buildings than they would have had if free-standing. More-
over, the inhabitants were careful to replaster their buildings con-
tinually, both inside and outside, a routine which materially con-
tributes to the longer life of a mud-brick building by keeping out
damp and rain, the main enemy of sun-dried brick. In the Konya
Plain, the average annual rainfall is the lowest in Turkey, less than
16 inches (400 mm.), and most of the rain falls at two distinct
periods, around May and November, in the latter half of the year
often in the form of snow. Only the summer months are hot, dry
and rainless, and to this day replastering is carried out after the rains
of spring, to dry slowly during the summer. Weather-conditions
allow for building and plastering but once during the year, and there
is no reason to assume that conditions were essentially different
during the Neolithic period.
                                                                               49
                                                                                                                                                                why




                                                       >4


                                                       HOE
                                                       ara tal =
                                                       =
                                                                                               ce poner rv SOR Se   SRN   S SS OS SUCCES   SNS SPS SSSR?   SH
                                                       ee
                                                       eee        ene     LINE & FLOOD ; DEPOSIT




3 Plan and section of Catal Hiiyiik showing the shifting pattern of occupation in the excavated
area


                               At Catal Hiiyiik in every room, both large and small, built-in
                            furniture, walls, floors and ceiling, were coated with a fine tenacious
                            white clay (ak toprak), found locally and still in use. The layers of
                            plaster in each building can be counted and, though they are roughly
                            consistent within each building-level, they vary considerably from
                            level to level. This surely is an indication of the age of a building,
                            the more so when one finds that those buildings that have been re-
                            plastered most often (up to 100 plaster layers in Level VI B and up to
                            120 in Level VII) are in a poor state of preservation compared to
                            those with thirty to sixty plaster layers which are well-preserved.
                            In the former cases the buildings had become worn out; the plaster
                            bulged, the walls were leaning at drunken angles, and they had
                            become so dangerous for human habitation that they were con-
                            demned, pulled down and levelled. This was done by removing the
                            flat roof and the beams on which it rested, by pulling out the wooden
                            wall-posts which supported the main roof-beams, and by knocking
                            down the upper parts of the walls until the room was filled with
                            broken brick and plaster. In none of the buildings of the upper levels
                            (VI A-I), where the wall-plaster is well preserved and relatively thin,
                            is there evidence for deliberate demolition, but these levels had been
                             destroyed by fire when the houses were still fit for habitation.
                               It appears then that with annual replastering the age of each
                             house and building-level can be roughly counted and the maximum
 50



       re   VIAL   HIVOLU   IF)                             {        as          =    ft)
                                  ee   aa   ec   i |                        x   aay    |
                                                 ca.        iN.    P —e    mila G, lt
                                                                           Ss
                                                              The Dating of Catal Htiytik
age to which a house was allowed to stand varied from a century to
120 years. Unforeseen circumstances usually shortened this excessive
life-span, and on account of the frequent fires in the upper levels
the rate of building increased considerably. Confirmation for the
length of individual building-levels, as based on the annual rate of
replastering, has come from radiocarbon dates. Counts of plaster
layers then further help as a check on the accuracy of such C-14
dates and between the two systems a fairly reliable absolute dating
can be established.
   Catal Hiiyiik and Hacilar are the only two sites in Anatolia
which have been dated by a consistent series of radiocarbon dates,
and the results shown on p. 52 are on the whole very satisfactory
if one remembers that any of these dates may be a hundred years
too early or too late; but a century is of little importance for the
dating of cultures up to 9,000 years old. Most of the dates obtained
come from charred timber (roof-beams or posts) in burnt buildings
and thus date the cutting of the tree for the construction of the
building in which it was found. Such dates give one the date of
construction, whereas dates obtained from grain in burnt buildings
give the date of the destruction, grain being never much more than a
harvest old before it is consumed. Whereas grain cannot be kept for
ever, timber (mainly oak and juniper at Catal Hiiyiik) can and was
re-used, and much of the wood from the unburnt Levels VII and
VI B was evidently saved for re-use or for fuel. In this way it is
possible to obtain dates which are far too early for the building-
levels in which such old wood was found; e.g. in the case of the C-14
date for Level IV, 6329 Bc+99, which may represent a post taken
from a building in Level IX, or the 6200 Bc+97 date which comes
almost certainly from Level VIL, although it was re-used in a building
of Level VI B.
  The radiocarbon dates from Levels [IX and X, derived from the
ashes of hearths, give only an approximate idea of the dates of those
levels. Although the general sequence of radiocarbon dates is
consistent, individual dates must be used with caution and they
should not be dogmatically accepted if other evidence argues against
their validity. Nevertheless, it remains our only method for dating
                                                                                       ay
Chronological Table

                         HACILAR
          C. SOOOLEC™:     A enna eines
                            Id
                          -Ic
                           Ia   52474119                     Radiocarbon dates in italic type.
          Gece             Ilb                              extreme tolerance.
                           Ila 54344131                     All dates calculated with half-life of
          C. $435 ak               ok                             5730.
                           IV                                Doubtful dates in brackets.
          c. $§00
               600   Te         iE   One Me
          oP               VI 5620+ 79
                           Vil                CatTaL Huyux
                           Vill                              O
                           IX 5614492                        I
                              5706
          ¢. §700 -—————-_                    ¢. $720                            :
                                                                          5797       79
                                              ¢. $750        il

                                                                          5807494
                                              Saree          IV           (6329+ 99)
                                              G.°$830. —- | SUN ween ae ca            ee ee ees ee
                                                             Vi           5920494
                                              6: $880        FS, vane dewalt ste ean eel        eee
                                                             VIA          5781496         destruction
                                                                          5800+ 93
                                                                          5815+92         beginning
                                                                          5850+ 94
                                              faa            VIB          5908+ 93
                                                                          5986494         beginning
                                              c. 6050/6070 VII            6200497 ()
                                              C7200      OU Aas oe nie eins coe ane eae ee
                                                            VI
                                              Fa CABG.   i Nicks aac         ates 3 eee ea
                                                            IX         64864102
                                              COGRIO ES Mie A         On eo kee toates eaenane eeS
                                                            »,4        6385+ 101
                                              CC GSOO Sl AN Redes suse       he aah ates Gaara eect eee
                                                             Pre-X floor levels (not yet dated)
52
                                                              The Dating of Catal Hiiytik
such early cultures and as the method gains in precision so will our
dating gradually improve. The old method of guesswork-dating is
no longer acceptable in scientific archaeology.
  The fourteen radiocarbon dates then place Catal Hiiyiik X-II
between c. 6500 and $700 BC in a space of eight hundred years and
we may perhaps allow another century for Levels I and O. After
5600 Bc the old mound of Catal Hiiyiik was abandoned, for what
reason is not known, and a new site was founded across the river,
Catal Hiiyiik West. This appears to have been occupied for at least
another 700 years until it also was deserted without, however, any
obvious signs of violence or deliberate destruction.




                                                                                       53
1

The Architecture of Catal Hiyiik

               T HAS BEEN the purpose of the excavations to try to establish the
                lay-out of the architectural complex or complexes andso to obtain
            the maximum amount of information about the nature of this
Plate 2     Neolithic city. Horizontal digging was therefore resorted to rather
            than vertical digging by means of trenches, which might give a
            stratigraphic sequence without much delay, but would tell us far too
            little about the nature of the buildings. Moreover, the presence of
            precious wall-paintings would not have allowed vertical excavation,
            and buildings had to be cleared laboriously one after the other. It is
            for this reason that virgin soil has not yet been reached anywhere
            on the site.
               Although we have thus learnt much about the nature of the
            settlement and the ways in which these Neolithic builders planned
            their structures we have not yet succeeded in isolating a complete
            building-unit in the space of an acre, and these units appear to have
            been of considerable size. In building-levels VI A and VI B we
            have come nearest to this goal in locating courtyards and an outer
            wall round three sides of a vast block of buildings, but its eastern
Figs 8, 9   edge remains to be found. Of the later levels (V-II) we have found
            only the western edge and open space beyond, and of building-levels
            I and O little is still known, for their remains are either preserved
            only in limited areas (Level I) or are too badly preserved (Level O)
            to allow any statements to be made about the overall character of the
            buildings concerned.
               In dealing with the architecture of Catal Hiiyiik we are therefore
            obliged to concentrate on those building-levels (II-VI) which have
Figs 4-10   produced a coherent plan. The earlier levels, VII-X, have only been
            tested in a few restricted soundings and they seem to follow the
            general pattern of building seen in Levels VII-VI.
54
                                                          The Architecture of Catal Hiiytik
  Finally, the lower strata were reached at the end of the 1963
season in a test trench below the floor of a house of Level X which
was only a metre wide and 3 metres long. Whereas this clearly shows
that the occupation on the mound prior to Level X was at least 4
metres thick, the nature of the material was such as to suggest that
we were dealing with at least ten successive plaster floors of court-
yards at the western edge of the ancient mound and not with the
remains of superimposed houses, unless these were of an altogether
different nature.
   All buildings at Catal Hiiyiik were constructed of sun-dried
rectangular mud-bricks, reeds and plaster. The bricks were formed in
a wooden mould squared with an adze. Stone is not found in the
alluvial plain in which the site was situated and for foundations up
to six courses of mud-brick were used, well sunk below the level
of the floor. The use of pisé or tauf was apparently unknown. Most
of the brick was made with much straw, but in Level III sandy brick
without any straw is also found and contrary to the well-known
proverb it is of excellent quality. Most of the bricks are greenish
in colour, but the sandy bricks are buff: A black mortar, rich in
ash and broken bones (occupation-debris), was lavishly used, espec-
ially in the lower levels (VI) where the layer of mortar is often
nearly as thick as the bricks (6 cms as against 8 cms). Bonding was
practised.
  Brick sizes varied and more than one size was in use in each level;
the sizes are here tabulated:

  Level II      Standard size:     65/6737 X8 cms
                Large size:        95 X37X 8 cms
  Level II      42X25 x8 cms
                72 X 32 X 8 cms
  Level IV
  Level V       62 X 16 X 8-10 cms
                92 X 16 X IO cms
  Level VI A Standard size:        32168 cms
             Others:               32 X22 X9 cms
                                   38x 12x 8 cms
                                                                                         oD
Catal Hiiyiik
                     Level VIB    Standard size:   32168 cms
                                  Others:          40+? X24 10 cms
                                                  44-50X 31 X 10 cms
                     The flat roofs were made of bundles of reeds with a thick mud
                   cover on top and a mat below to prevent an incessant rain of bits of
                   reeds falling on the floors. Two stout main beams and numerous
                   small beams supported the heavy roofs. There is no direct evidence
                   for the existence of a second storey of light materials or a partial
                   second storey such as a verandah with columns, extending over part
                   of the building, but some houses may have been provided with
                   them. In any case some structure protected the light- and ventilation-
                   shafts and the entrance-hole in the roof along the south wall. This
                   may have taken the form of a hutch of wood provided with a
                   wooden door, or it may have been a verandah or portico. That such
                   protection was indeed provided is clear from the good preservation
                   of the wall-plaster near the entrance-hole; this would not have been
                   the case if the plaster had been exposed to the open sky.
                      Entry through the roof is one of the most characteristic features of
                   all buildings at Catal Hiiyiik; there was no other access to houses and
                   shrines. But secondary rooms, used for storage, entry-passages or
                   light-shafts, are entered from the main room through low open
                   doorways, square, rectangular or oval in shape and up to 72 or 77
                   centimetres in height. None of these openings was provided with a
Plate 7            door, and one could only move through them in a squatting or
                   crawling position. Each house had a wooden ladder made of squared
                   timber (10-12-5 cms thick), one side of which rested along the south
Plate 4            wall, where it has left an easily recognizable diagonal mark in the
                   plaster. This ladder led to a hole in the roof and through this same
                   hole the smoke from hearth, oven and lamps, escaped. For this
                   reason the kitchen end of the house, where hearth and oven are
                   situated, is always placed along the south wall. To retain the maxi-
Plate 4; Fig. 11   mum amount of heat, ovens (there may be more than one) are
                   always set partly into the wall. They are oval in shape and vary in
                   height, but all are provided with flat tops. Near the oven there is
                   usually a deep but low recess in the south wall, which was evidently
                   used for the storage of fuel (wood, brush or straw). The hearths are
56
                                                              S:SHRINE




4-7 Plans of building-level II,
above; III, above right; IV,
centre; V, below




                      .
                     -_-
                                                   .e                          7       .
                    Pe   WBe
                                                   °
                                                                          ave
                                                                         wept      .
                          Weel
                                   .                                      .
                          8    |
                                                                           4
                                       $2 SHRINE


                                       fe)              10m
                                               Limit of excavation




 c: COURT
 S:SHRINE


                                                                     8 Plan of building-
                                                                     level VIA




            rectangular or square in Levels I-VI B, round or square in the lower
            levels, but they are always raised and provided with a curb to
            prevent the spilling of ashes and glowing embers. It is unusual
            to find more than one hearth in each room, and the kitchen part of
            the house occupied one-third of the available space.
Plate 3        Raised platforms were arranged along the walls in the shape of an
            L around the remaining square which was sunk and covered with a
Fig. 11     mat. The usual arrangement of the platforms provides for a small
            square platform in the north-east corner and a much larger platform
            with a higher bench at the south end (nearest to the kitchen) situated
            against the east wall. This was framed between two wooden posts
            which were plastered and frequently painted red. One or more
            subsidiary platforms are found against the north wall and still another
            frequently occupies the south-west corner near the oven. This
            arrangement is the normal one in buildings whose main axis is
58
         °

          C:COURT   S:SHRINE




9 Plan ofbuilding-level VIB




10 Plan of building-level VI
                                 Geese et




                               C:COURT   S:SHRINE




                                                          {\

                                                    .            Suse

                                                        fae      a
                                                                  Toren          a
                                                          a
                                                           Ce.

                                                               B
                                                               a |




                                                           mS
                                                            SS
                                                    SSSESSRSN           pene
                                                                        ee           ;
                                                                             %
Catal Hiiytik
                oriented north to south, but in those buildings that have a west—east
                orientation the small platform is set against the north wall, though
                the larger platform and bench remain constantly set against the
                east wall.
                  These platforms, as carefully plastered as the rest of the house and
                frequently provided with rounded kerbs, are the prototypes of the
                Turkish sofa (and divan) and served for sitting, working and sleep-
                ing. They are often covered with reed or rush matting as a base for
                cushions, textiles and bedding. Below these platforms the dead lay
                buried, and from studying the burial customs it is possible to affirm
                that the small corner platform belonged to the male, the master,
                whereas the much larger and main platform belonged to the mistress
                of the house. The woman’s bed never changed its place, nor did the
                arrangement of the kitchen, but the man’s bed did. The sociological
                implications to be drawn from this are fairly obvious. Children were
                buried either with the women or under the remaining platforms, but
                they never accompany the master of the house.
                   From the bedding space provided by these platforms, which may
                vary from house to house and shrine to shrine, one can possibly
                make some calculations as to the size of a family. The main platform
                easily holds two adults, the corner ones a single adult or two small
                children. No single building provided sleeping space for more than
                eight people and in most cases the family was probably smaller.
                There is one house with but a single platform (A.III.13); there are
                several with two, but none have more than five.
                  The arrangement of sleeping platforms is not confined to houses
                but is also found in buildings which, on account of their interior
                decoration, served as sanctuaries or shrines. Here also the dead were
                buried beneath the platforms and hearths and ovens are found.
                However, for reasons to be explained later it seems unlikely that the
                shrines were continuously inhabited. What section of the population
                was entitled to live and be buried in the sanctuaries is of course
                unknown, but it would be reasonable to assume that it was the
                priestly class and their families,
                   It is evident from the wall-paintings in houses and shrines that there
                was a system of bringing light into the interior of these buildings
                                                                The Architecture of Catal Hiiyiik

    11 Diagrammatic view of a
    typical main room at Catal
    Hiiyiik showing timber frame-
    work, panelling, and platforms,
_   bench, hearth, oven and ladder




    other than that of a few stone lamps put in small niches in the
    wall. As the buildings rose up the slope of the mound in serried ranks,
    lighting would have been difficult but for the fact that each house
    had its own walls and its own roof level different from those of the                  Fig. 12
    surrounding buildings. By stepping the roofs light could be brought
    into the rooms through a series of small windows set high up in two
    of the four walls below the eaves (in the excavated area in the south
    and west wall, so that the light fell on the platforms along the east
    and north walls). It may be surmized that in buildings on the east side
    of the mound the windows were in the east and south wall and the
    position of the platforms was reversed. The position of the platforms
    is probably conditioned by the necessity of bringing light into the
    room and would differ according to the location of the building on
    the mound.
       With the exception of occasional holes filled with sand or gravel
    set near the hearth, there are no arrangements for drainage in these
                                                                                              61
Catal Hiiytik




12 Schematic reconstruction ofa section ofLevel VI with houses and shrines rising in terraces one
above each other



                            buildings. For sanitation and rubbish disposal any open space, either
                            courtyards or ruined buildings, were used and the thick ash deposits
                            in these open spaces were efficient sterilizers. Houses and shrines
                            were kept scrupulously clean; remains of meals such as broken bones
                            are a rarity in any building.
                               Most houses have a storeroom and in some of these grain-bins of
                            dried clay, about a metre high, were found in pairs or in rows. These
                            were filled from the top and emptied through a small hole at the
                            bottom (at floor level) so that the lowermost deposit of grain, most
                            exposed to damp, was always used first. In other storerooms grain
                            was stored in coiled baskets or in skins, but storage in pits lined with
                            straw or matting, though common in later periods, appears to have
62
                                                           The Architecture of Catal Hiiyiik
been almost unknown. One is given the impression that each family
baked its own bread, but in Levels IV and V huge bread-ovens                           Fig. 6
with diameters of 1-5-1-8 metres and built of bricks set on edge
were found in a courtyard which suggests a bakery.
  Other storerooms contained rows of clay boxes filled with
knuckle-bones, stone tools, axes, polishing stones or sling ammuni-
tion, these latter particularly common in Levels II and III. Saddle
querns and mortars are found in most houses and are often sunk into
the ground, in contrast to the later practice at Hacilar where they are
embedded in raised platforms to facilitate grinding.
   A few houses have side by side with the usual oven another with a
separate fire-chamber and a larger domed chamber than most ovens.
These may have been simple pottery kilns. The domed chamber is
always ruined which suggests that it was rebuilt for each firing and
was completely closed during the firing process.

                                Survivals of Earlier Forms of Architecture

A further feature of the Catal Hiiyiik buildings which is particularly
interesting is the use of a timber frame in the mud-brick construc-
tion, which accounts for the characteristic panelling of the walls.
In the earlier building-levels this timber frame is very pronounced
(X-VI A) whereas in the later levels, though still present, it tends to
become less conspicuous.
   By pure chance the conflagration in which the settlement of Level
VIA perished has led to the preservation of the entire north wall and
the adjoining sections of both the west and the east wall of shrine
E.VI.10, thus giving us the entire height of the building (3-3 metres                  Plate 9
interior measurement) and precious details about its constructions.
The wooden framework was burnt out, but the baking of the brick
walls has preserved its skeleton so that an accurate reconstruction can                Fig. 11
be made of the building.
   The most interesting feature of this construction is certainly the
fact that the wooden framework could stand by itself, independent
of the mud-brick walls. The brick filling (32 cms or just 1 foot thick)
is awkward and of little strength and one can hardly escape the
                                                                                           63
Catal Hiiytik
                conclusion that the timber frame incorporates the main elements not
                of a brick, but of a wooden house, where the panels between the
                horizontal and vertical beams were filled with partitions of lathe-
                and-plaster or wooden planks. Peculiar to this wooden structure was
                a sort of corbelling, i.e. above each horizontal beam the walls are
                brought forward up to 23 cms, a feature that is not only decorative
                but originally devised to decrease the width of the room so that
                shorter timbers could be used for the roof-beams.
                   The origins of such wooden houses must be sought not in the
                almost treeless Konya Plain, but in the forest zone of the Taurus
                Mountains or their foothills on the edge of the plain. In the earliest
                levels of Catal Hiiyiik it would appear that this type of wooden house
                was readapted to local conditions and thin mud-brick walls were
                substituted for the traditional lathe, plaster and wood panels within
                the timber frame. The result of this is that the weight of the over-
                hanging wall sections and the thick layers of plaster weakened the
                structure and when the wood rotted (as in Levels VII or VI B) or was
                destroyed by fire (as in Level VI A) the upper parts of the walls, left
                unsupported, toppled down without fail. The builders of Catal
                Hiiyiik learnt their lessons, and from Level V onward they con-
                structed much thicker walls with larger bricks, greatly reduced the
                overhang and thus created structurally much sounder buildings.
                Gradually the emphasis on the timber framework was reduced and in
                Level II even the wooden posts were replaced by mud-brick pillars
                engaged against the wall. Thus internal buttresses were formed (the
                prototypes for the Early Chalcolithic ones of Hacilar and Can
                Hasan) and the framework retained only a decorative function.
                  The characteristic panelling of the walls at Catal Hiiyiik is thus the
                result of the use of a timber frame, the elements of which are usually
                emphasized by the use of red paint. These panels in three super-
                imposed rows with the middle one at least twice as high as the two
                others, lend themselves admirably to interior decoration, such as
                reliefs or wall-paintings. In houses, as distinct from shrines, ornamen-
                tation was sparingly used and it was on the whole confined to
                the lowermost panel, varying in height from 60 to 80 cms above the
                main platform and the small platform in the north-east corner. The
04
                                                        The Architecture of Catal Hiiyiik
much larger middle panel is but rarely painted and the uppermost
panels are never painted. Painted decoration in houses is found in
several varieties; plain panels in various shades of red are by far the
most common, geometric patterns, or hands or feet are much less                 Plates 5, 7
frequent. More or less naturalistic subjects are mainly found in
shrines, but there are some exceptions: birds decorated a central
panel in house E.VI.B.44 and concentric circles and stars covered the
same panel in E.VI.A.66. The well preserved buildings of the lower
levels show that painting was widely practised and the comparative
rarity of painting in the later levels is probably the result of the poor
state of preservation rather than of a decline in this art.
  Another form of decoration, found both in shrines and in houses
is the use of stylized bucrania which consist of a small pillar of brick
in the upper part of which are incorporated the horn cores and the
frontal of a wild bull (Bos primigenius), set on the edge of the main
platform in a number of houses, to serve probably as a symbol of
protection. In no single house was such a bucranium found intact
and only the scars remain, but in sanctuaries the bucrania occur in
multiples and they are frequently found more or less intact. It would             Plate 15
appear that a single bucranium may be found in a house, whilst
rows of bucranium are confined to shrines, where they may also be
painted.
  Evidence for still another sort of building comes from an intriguing
wall-painting found on the north wall of a shrine in Level VI B                    Plate 8
(VI.B.1). The painting, about a metre long and 71 cms in height
covered the lowermost panel and depicts a series of human skulls
and bones below an architectural facade. A building with four gables
separated by five pillars is represented in red and white paint on a
buff surface, and the grisly remains of human bodies are obviously
meant to be inside this building, which probably represents the
charnel house where the dead were excarnated before burial in the
settlement (see below, p. 204). The representation of the building is
quite clear and it would seem to bear close relation to reed structures
of the type still built in the marshy regions round the Lake of Eber
(north-west of Konya); as also to the representations of reed huts in
predynastic Egyptian art, and to the magnificent reed architecture
                                                                                        65
                                                                               :
Catal Hiiytik
                of the Marsh Arabs in southern Iraq. On the basis of these pa
                our wall-painting would appear to represent a series of §
                rooms constructed of wood and matting with tall bundles of
                forming the corner posts of these presumably rectangular stru
                The binding of the reed columns is clearly indicated and so
                matting which forms the walls of the rooms. The flower-like «
                which crown the gables are probably stylized forms of the ¢
                bundles of reeds where they meet at the top, as in the Iraqi n
                and sarifas. The strange shapes which occupy the “doorways
                the rooms may be interpreted as hangings and both the symb
                top of the tables (the quatrefoil) and the ‘arm’ on the hanging
                right may be intended to ward off evil. Both symbols we
                encounter on many other paintings.
                   If our interpretation of this interesting wall-painting is
                approximately correct, we may assume that such charnel ]
                built of reeds were erected near the site of Catal Hiiyiik for th
                stage in the funerary ritual. But buildings of this nature sugge
                other and simpler forms of building than those on the mound
                still practised by the Neolithic people of Catal Hiiyiik, if only
                service of the dead. As funerary practises tend to preserve a
                customs, we may well ask if buildings of this nature do not bele
                earlier traditions than those we see on the mound of Catal H
                traditions which may well antedate the use of mud-brick |
                which we now know did not start with Level X but were al
                used a millennium or so before. Monumental reed archit
                of the type depicted in our wall-painting may have been chat
                istic of a period when mud-brick was still unknown and
                buildings may have been commonplace at the beginning «
                Protoneolithic period, c. 9000 Bc, if they did not already e:
                the Upper Palaeolithic.
                   Wooden houses and reed structures, vestigial remains of trad:
                architectural forms, have taken us back a long way into th
                unexplored past of the Neolithic traditions of Catal Hiiyiik
                must now return to our mound and see how these early bi
                planned their town.

66
                                                                     The Town   P


INS GLANCE at the plans of the various building-levels at
      Catal Hiiyiik suffices to show that its builders were well aware
of the necessity of planning an orderly settlement, far removed from
the disorderly and random agglomeration of freestanding huts and
hovels characteristic of the Protoneolithic period in Palestine, the
only region where settlements of this period have been explored
in extenso.
   Orderliness and planning prevail everywhere; in the size of bricks,
the standard plan of houses and shrines, the heights of panels, door-
ways, hearths and ovens and to a great extent in the size of rooms.
Hand and foot seem to have been the standards of measurement with
four hands (8 cms) to a foot (c. 32 cms); this is most clearly seen in the
Level VI bricks which are one hand thick, two hands wide and four
hands long (8 x 16 x 32 cms).
  In the size of houses there are of course variations according to the
family’s need: they range from small ones with a floor space of 11-25
square metres to huge ones with areas of 48 square metres, but the
most common size of houses and shrines varies from 25 to 27 square
metres, i.e. rooms of about 6 x 4:5 metres.
   Houses are invariably of rectangular plan and the lines of the walls
are as straight as the eye could make them. Storerooms and subsidiary
chambers are arranged around the main rooms according to in-
dividual needs and their position is of little consequence. Most appear
to have been lower in height than the main rooms.
   Because of the habit of building one structure on top of the other,
using the old walls as foundations a certain homogeneity of plan
was created, but by subdividing rooms or joining others together, by
using the site of one or more rooms for creating a courtyard or open
space, the plans of individual building-levels vary considerably even
Catal Hiiytik
                if the general layout is to a great extent preserved. It will eventually
                be of great interest to trace the plans of the successive building-levels
                down to the original master-plan which the conservative builders of
                Catal Hiiyiik continued to follow through numerous centuries.
                   The Neolithic builders were faced with a number of problems such
                as defence, communications between different quarters, terracing on
                top of an old mound, the arrangement of rectangular buildings to fit
                within the contours of an oval mound and the problems of providing
                enough light for the dense agglomeration of buildings, especially in
                the lower levels. This problem was solved by less congested planning
                which makes its appearance in Level VI A (compare the VI B and
Figs 8, 9       VI A plans) and continued in use until the end of the settlement.
                Access to these new courtyards was gained by narrow passages,
                open to the court, probably carrying a flight of wooden stairs that
                led to the roof. Wooden ladders facilitated access from roof to roof.
                The main use of the large courtyards appears to have been for the
                disposal of rubbish and for sanitation and they also provided more
                air, light and space. They were not used for keeping domestic animals
                in, nor for domestic tasks such as cooking or baking and no burials
                ever took place in the courtyards.
                   The need for defence may be the original reason for the peculiar
                way in which the people of Catal Hiiyiik constructed dwellings
                without doorways, and with sole entry through the roof. Villages
                of this type are still found in central and eastern Anatolia, in the
                Caucasus and in the mountains of western Iran. Defence against
                potential enemies and against floods are the two main reasons for
                such a construction. A solid outer wall built of stone is the alterna-
                tive, but stone was not available in the plain and floodwaters will
                eventually undermine any wall of mud-brick, however substantial.
                Moreover, the city of Catal Hiiyiik was extensive and would need
                considerable man-power to man the entire circuit against enemy
                attack. Once the wall was breached an enemy would have been able
                to break into the city. The solution adopted at Catal Hiiyiik was a
                different one: the planners did not build a solid wall, but surrounded
                the site with an unbroken row of houses and storerooms, accessible
                only from the roof. Even if an enemy succeeded in breaching the
68
                                                                          The Town Plan
wall he found himself in a closed room from which the ladder had
no doubt been removed with the defenders waiting for him on the
roof. To take the settlement would involve close fighting from house
to house in a maze of dwellings which would be enough to dis-
courage the attacker. The efficacy of the defence system is obvious
and, whatever discomfort it involved for the inhabitants of the city,
there is no evidence for any sack or massacre during the 800 years of
the existence of Catal Hiiyiik, so far explored in the excavations.
What any enemy might attempt to achieve was to set fire to the
settlement, and so far no wells have been discovered, but it is also
clear that the people of this city were sufficiently well equipped with
slingshot, bow and arrow, lance and spear to keep any attacker well
away from the foot of the walls. What caused the final abandon-
ment of the settlement is still far from clear, but there is as yet no
evidence for massacre and the new site across the river, where the
inhabitants subsequently settled is nearly as large as the mound they
had left.
   The plan of Level VI B shows two terraces; an upper one with                    Fig. 9
rooms in two rows (nos 47-32 and 52-27) and a lower terrace
bordered by an outer range of rooms (nos 24-39) at the bottom of
the mound. In this plan a great number of house-walls form a con-
tinuous line, evidently the result of planning blocks of houses and
shrines as a single construction. Narrow rows of houses with an
east-west axis alternate with broader rows with a north-south axis,
but this principle has not been carried through to its logical end and
pleasant irregularities break the monotony of row after row of
dwellings and shrines. In Level VI A the complex of four shrines                   Fig. 8
(nos 14 and 7, 10 and 8) is well balanced with courtyards in
between and on either side, and a similar arrangement of shrines on
either side of a courtyard is found on the upper terrace.
  In Level VII rows of shrines alternate with rows of houses; in                  Fig. 10
Level IV a system of courtyards is well developed and in Level Ill                 Fig. 6
the main shrine is again flanked by long narrow rooms. Finally in                  Fig. 5

Level II there are two clearly marked complexes, but these are only                Fig. 4

partly excavated. Between the two is a gate passage, which is better
preserved in the previous building-level, III. The tower-like structure
                                                                                      69
1 Hiiyiik
                 north of the entrance passage was filled with great masses of burnt
                 mud-brick which extended all over the surrounding area, suggesting
                 that it may well have been a tower of greater height than the
                 buildings around it. The original gate passage was narrowed by
                 additional brick walls so that it was easy to block in case of an attack.
                 The strange structure which lies immediately in front of it is not a
                 house and marks a change in the original plan, being constructed at a
                 somewhat later date. It obstructs direct entry into the settlement and
                 may have served as a guard-house and the crooked passage which
                 forms a cul de sac on the left while leading to a series of storerooms
                 may have been devised to mislead intruders. The examples quoted
                 show clearly that the builders of Catal Hiiyiik did not construct at
                 random but according to preconceived plans. So far no wells have
                 been discovered.


     Total no.
el   ofrooms        Houses’      Shrines               Proportion

                       4            I           4 houses to one shrine

                       7            yD          3-4 houses to one shrine

                      II            2           5-6 houses to one shrine

                      II?           a?          inconclusive

                      20           II           2-3 houses to each shrine
eee  ee ee         ee
 31 14     2 houses to each shrine

                      20           II           2 houses to each shrine

                       2            2

                       I            I           Insufficient Evidence

                       I            I
                                                                    The Town Plan
le area excavated which covers about one acre—a mere
1 of the entire surface of the mound—a great number of
and shrines with their storerooms have been found, but no
ops or public buildings. It must be assumed that these were
 in a different part of the mound and the quarter on the west
ras evidently the residential, if not the priestly quarter of the
ne need hardly point out that Catal Hiiyiik was not a village.
proportion of houses and shrines in this quarter can be tabu-
is shown, but in this count the number of storerooms as
from dwellings is not included. From the table it might be
Jed that there were more shrines in the lower building-levels,
0 points should be borne in mind: (a) a much smaller area
cavated of the upper levels (V-II) and the shrines may have
ther back in the unexcavated portion of the mound, and (6),
badly denuded buildings of Levels IV and V the height of
served walls is often insufficient to detect such features as
intings or plaster reliefs by which shrines are recognized.




                                                                               71
Catal Hiiyiik




                I The twin-coned volcano of Hasan Dag (3,253 metres or 10,672 feet) dominates the eastern end
                of the Konya plain and in clear weather is visible from Catal Hiiyiik on the eastern horizon 84 miles
                away. Active until the second millennium sc it is probably this volcano whose eruption is recorded
                in a shrine of Catal Hiiyiik VII, c. 6200 3c (Plates 59, 60). This view is taken from the north,
                along the Aksaray—Nevsehir road, with the Melendiz Daglari, west of Nigde on the left. Hasan
                Dag is one of the probable sources of the black obsidian used at Catal Hiiyiik

                IL View of the plain of Konya from Catal Hiiyiik, looking east towards the isolated mass of
                volcanic rock of Kara Dag (2,271 metres or 7,451 feet) which divides the plain into two halves.
                Though not a volcano, Kara Dag may have supplied Catal Hiiyiik with the volcanic rocks used
                for querns and mortars, pounders and pestles, being only 22 miles away

                III Shrine VI.14 seen from the east with storeroom (left) and shaft (right) entrances in west wall
                on either side of a monumental relief in plaster, a stylized double goddess with upturned legs of
                which the body on the right is giving birth to a large bull’s head, surmounted by a smaller one.
                Arms and heads have fallen down in the destruction of the building, but one arm is shown on
                the floor (left). Cf Plate 22, Fig. 32. Beyond the storeroom and shaft is shrine VI.A.7 (Plate V)

                IV Shrine VI.B.8, showing the north wall with cut-out figure of a bull (top damaged by later
                building) and the east wall with small bulls’ heads over the corner platform and rows of breasts,
                surmounted by scars of fallen bulls’ heads above the main platform along the east wall. On the
                edges of the platforms are the scars of bull-pillars or bucrania. (Cf. Plate 14 and reconstructions,
                Figs 41, 42)

                V East wall of shrine VI.A.7, showing beyond the projecting plastered edge of post the entrance
                to the shrine (in corner). In the centre of the picture is a red-painted niche and in the foreground
                the plaster head of a ram with the imprint of a red-stained hand, supported by a pillar of earth

                VI Plaster relief of a pair of leopards from the north wall of shrine VI.A.44, partly destroyed by
                Hellenistic pits (left) or by animal burrows (centre). Placed above a red-painted panel, a couple of
                leopards is represented with the female on the left and the male on the right

                VII Plaster relief of pregnant goddess from the east wall of shrine VII.23, richly painted in red,
                orange and black on a white ground. The head, hands and feet were deliberately demolished when
                the building was filled in, probably to rob the figure of its magic potency, a practise common at
                Catal Hiiyiik. The goddess was richly dressed and the painting continues on the wall behind, as if
                she were holding an enveloping garment around her, the prototype of the later Near Eastern
                goddesses who show themselves to their worshippers

                 VIM Grooved and painted kilim pattern from the west wall of shrine VII.21. The grooves and
                 the stitching along the top, imitating the sewn edge of the textile are in white, whereas the panels
                 are alternately in black and red
 72




                                                    eri   Car srag =
a         iy
    4st
                                                                         VI

                                          The Shrines and their Reliefs


abe NEOLITHIC city of Catal Hiiyiik has yielded among many
     other splendours a unique sequence of sanctuaries and shrines,
decorated with wall-paintings, reliefs in plaster, animal heads,
stylized bucrania and containing cult statues, which give us a vivid
picture of Neolithic man’s concern with religion and beliefs. We
have already seen Catal Hiiyiik man as a builder, we shall now also
recognize him as an artist of no mean stature, for the arts which he
practised were manifold.
  Out of 139 living rooms excavated at Catal Hiiyiik II-X, not less
than forty and probably more, appear to have served Neolithic
religion. Such cult rooms or shrines are more elaborately decorated
than houses and they are frequently, but not always, the largest
buildings in the quarter. In plan and construction they are no differ-
ent from ordinary dwellings and they include all the familiar built-in
furniture, such as platforms, benches, hearths and ovens which we
have already recognized as an integral part of the Catal Hiiyiik
building-tradition. Burials also are common in shrines, but there are
some notable exceptions; none were found in the shrine of Level II
or in the second shrine of Level III (A.III.8).
   Although the decoration of the sanctuaries strongly suggests that
these buildings were used for cult purposes, there is no provision for
sacrifice. There are no altars and no tables for bleeding a sacrificed
animal such as we find in the Early Bronze Age shrines of Beyce-
sultan. Nor do we find pits for blood or caches of bones of sacrificed
animals, and, with the peculiar construction of the Catal Hiiyiik
buildings, it would be impracticable to bring animals into the
buildings for slaughter. If animal sacrifice was practised at all the
slaughtering must have been done elsewhere and choice pieces
brought down to be roasted on the hearth. Our only direct evidence
                                                                          77
Hiiytik
          for burnt offerings consists of small deposits of charred grain pre-
          served between replasterings in red clay of a ceremonial hearth in
          the shrine of Level II. Offerings of other kinds which did not need
          burning are extremely common, and in all shrines small deposits
          of grain, tools, used and unused, pots and bone utensils, a few
          animal bones (perhaps meat offerings) bulls’ horns, eggshells, gaming
          pieces, stamp-seals, in fact any acceptable gift, were found in situ
          as they had been deposited by the worshippers and preserved by the
          conflagrations in which many of these buildings had perished. The
          gifts varied from shrine to shrine: gifts of grain and legumes as well
          as stamp-seals were peculiar to the shrine in Level II; well over a
          hundred obsidian and flint weapons were found in shrine E.VI.A.14;
          piles of aurochs’ skulls, horns and scapulae filled shrine E.VI.A.7;
          votive clay figures of animals and sometimes human beings were
          stuck into the walls of most of the Level VI A shrines in area E.
          Groups of figurines of animals: boar, leopard (?) stag, and cattle,
          used in a hunting ritual during which the animals were wounded
          or maimed in effigy, were found in pits near shrine E.VI.B.12
          and E.IV.4. together with some intact weapons (lanceheads) and
          numerous clay balls (sling ammunition).
             Such finds allow us to gain some insight into the many rites that
          must have been performed in these Neolithic shrines.
             The main criteria for the recognition of shrines at Catal Hiiyiik
          appear to be the following: the presence of wall-paintings of an
          elaborate nature that have obvious ritual or religious significance;
          plaster reliefs showing deities, animals or animal heads; horns of
          cattle set into benches; rows of bucrania and the presence of groups of
          cult statues found in the main room; ex-voto figures stuck into the
          walls; human skulls set up on platforms, etc. All these features do
          not occur in normal houses and the combination of several of them
          leaves one in little doubt that the building in which they are found
          was used as a cult room or shrine.
            There are, however, a number of cases where the denuded remains
          make it extremely difficult to decide whether a building was a house
          or a shrine, and in most cases where there is doubt these are buildings
          which overlie an earlier shrine, and where a continuity of cult may
                                                         The Shrines and their Reliefs
ected. That continuity of cult is a factor to be seriously con-
1 is clear from a whole series of superimposed shrines often
there is no evidence left to regard a building as a shrine, the
ire above it shows the unmistakable characteristics of being
which strongly suggests that the sanctity of the place was
nbered. There is some further evidence which may help to
sh shrines; that of the eleven ochre burials found (Levels XII),
me from definite shrines, three more from buildings that have
ns of reliefs and probably were shrines, and the two remaining
denuded buildings built over earlier shrines. It is therefore a
ility to be borne in mind that red-ochre burials only took place
ctuaries. No single example has been recorded from a building
un. definitely be described as a house.
the ten burials of women with obsidian mirrors (Levels VIB-
ee come from shrines, two from possible shrines that also
ychre burials, two others from buildings situated above shrines,
hree from buildings denuded to floor level. Although less
tive than the ochre burials of women, the burials with mirrors
how a connection with sanctuaries, and it is possible that
ire associated with priestesses.
t-fasteners, made   of polished bone, only accompany        male
s in shrines and they probably served to fasten leopard skins,
is are shown in the wall-paintings. As it is unlikely that the
  population of Catal Hiiyiik were so dressed, leopard skins
bly denote a ceremonial garment of male priests as in dynastic
. Carbonized remains of fur and skin, probably remains of
d skins, have been found in a number of cases of male burials
er with belt-hooks and eyes, but in others the material has not
ed. Baked clay seals and metal are again far more common
burials in shrines than elsewhere but the evidence is not yet
sive.
number of Level VI shrines the frontal bone and horn cores of
sulls are set in a bench, but none are found in houses, unlike
ylized bucrania which are, on a few occasions, also found in
ry dwellings. Likewise ram’s heads frequently occur at the
n of the post against the north wall, bull’s heads are built into
                                                                                    qo
Catal Hiiyiik
                     walls and a stag’s head with actual antlers occurs once on the north           ae
                                                                                                    -e-=



                     wall of building E.VI.B.5, possibly another shrine.
Fig. 13                 All these features as tabulated mark certain and possible shrines
                     and it is therefore quite likely that our table of shrines and houses
                     on p. 70 is in need of modification, as shown below;

                Definite          Probable or        Total of
                shrines’        possible shrines      shrines       Houses

                    I                 —                 I              4
                    2                     I             3              6
                    2                     3             5              8
                    3                     4             if             7
                   Il                     2            13             18
                   14                     2            16             39
                   II                     z            12             19
                    2                     I             3               I
                     I                    I             2             od
                     I                —                 :               I

                   48                 15               63            103


                        For those building-levels of which a sufficient number of buildings
                        have been excavated (III-VII, excepting V) it would appear that for
                        each two houses there was one shrine. In decoration as well as in size
                        there are considerable differences between these shrines: some are
                        obviously major ones and richly ornamented, and as major shrines I
                        would regard VI:61, 44, 45, 31, 14, 7, 10, 8, 1; all of these have a
                        north-south axis; whereas others have but a single wall-painting or
                        animal head, and one cannot help wondering whether these lesser
                        shrines were either subsidiary to the main ones, or the dwellings of a
                        lesser order of cult personnel. Needless to say nothing is known
                         about the Neolithic hierarchy, but the three groups of buildings in
                         this quarter: greater shrines, lesser shrines and ordinary houses may
                         all have been inhabited by various ranks in the Neolithic priesthood.
                         It is not impossible that only the major shrines served the public cult,
                         or were inhabited only periodically at the time of the great feasts,
                         whereas the lesser shrines were the normal residence of the upper
80
             JoT]Ied SOULIYS          UOHISOg
                                           J2AO
                                                 IND)
    BURIALS

                                s2739N3¥3S    Tew
                             som3y    sig TPL Arp
a. i < ” = uii 4 rr= = re”



                                                                                                                S   SEEEEEEE       EERE
                                                                                                                     “a             |
PAINTINGS
WALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Spe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rs}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          StS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          died
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          eed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SlS[S15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ei
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <

                                                                        4            Slo                            nH       g        O}+] 4
                                                                        >            asd<|<]<]    5}5
                                                                                               =)Fed
                                                                                          oyBy ey                   alFan
                                                                                                    ic]rdfyFan]fana as)    ElPa
                                                                                                                        ealfa     SIS)3/518
                                                                                                                                    Salsa                                                                                               ‘feo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4} 09
                                                                  2                           53                         5                     ms
                                                                                                                                                    13 Table of shrines and houses   with their decoration and associated




                                     SEEM PPO Prd Cane
                                              ;                 5 GES       On
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            features
                                                                                                     Cok   al
                                                        4
                                                                            aq
                                                                            H                      GyIa adPedIs
                                                            ;               2                        oon ies)
                                                                                cl
     14, 15 Reconstructions of the Second Vulture Shrine (VII.21) with human skulls as fo

     priesthood, the houses those of the lower. All this is mere conjectt
     but some such system would not be incompatible with the archa
     logical record. Only more extensive excavations can possibly sl
     light on the social structure of Neolithic Catal Hiiyiik. In this ¢
     nection it is worth noting that there is no relation between the :
     of a building or the abundance of its decoration and the poverty
     richness of the burial gifts of the dead below its platforms. The o
     correlation that can be made is that burials in shrines are more ric
     equipped than burials in houses.
        That wall-paintings and plaster reliefs of goddesses and anit
     heads had a ritual significance and were not purely decorative
     in the case of animal-heads substitutes for hunters’ trophies
     shown very clearly by the fact that wall-paintings were covered
     layers of whitewash after they had served their ritual function :
     that plaster-reliefs were made ritually harmless by the obliterat
     of the face, hands and feet when a shrine was abandoned. Many of
     animal heads were similarly defaced or broken off and frequel
     only the outline survives or their original position is marked t
     broad scar on the wall. Some of these heads were built into new w
     evidently to bring protection to the building. Only in shr
     destroyed by a sudden fire have many plaster reliefs survived mor
82
Left, west and north walls, right, north and east walls. See Plates 30, 47, VIII


less intact, but here the destruction has again obliterated the faces of
the goddess reliefs. Thick layers of unburnt plaster cover the burnt
hunting scene in shrine A.III.1 and the paintings of abandoned shrine
A.IIL8 were similarly treated. A further indication of the sacredness
of the plaster reliefs is the small child’s hand-imprint on the body of the
goddess in shrine E.VII.23 and larger hands on the bull’s and ram’s
heads in shrine E.VI.A.7. It seems that worshippers dipped a hand in
red paint and left an imprint on the sacred image. The numerous
panels with human hands in shrines (and sometimes houses) bear
witness to similar practices on a large scale. Sometimes hands are
found not on the bull’s head, but around it (shrine E.VI.B.10.),
and in one case there is an imprint of a child’s foot (house.E.VI.63).
  If any further proof is needed of the sacred character of the Catal
Hiiyiik shrines, the unusual disposal of the body of a prematurely
born child may here conveniently be mentioned. In shrine E.VI.A.14
was found a brick which broke and displayed the imprint of a bag.
In it and carefully wrapped in very fine cloth were the ochre stained
bones of a baby accompanied by two funeral gifts: a tiny bit of
bright shell and a small chip of obsidian. This parcel evidently
represents some hapless woman’s offering to the Shrine of the Twin
Goddess; more normal is the burial of a small child below the floor.
Catal Hiiytik
                   Even stranger is the collection of four skulls found on the floor of
Figs 14, 15     shrine E.VII.a1. One of these lay in a basket below the bull’s head on
                the west wall; a second lay below the bull’s head in the centre of
                the east wall and two others were perched on the corner platform
                below the vulture painting. One gains the impression that these
                skulls were used in a funerary ritual, but as the graves in this shrine
                have not yet been excavated one cannot tell whether the skulls
                belonged to any of the burials in the shrine. In only one other build-
                ing (E.V.6) was a single human skull found, in this case on the north-
                west platform. The presence of skulls in these buildings reminds one
                of the two skulls found propped up on stones on virgin soil in the
                aceramic village of Hacilar. Two others were found near hearths
                in later layers of the same village where no burials of the dead have
                been found. Some ancestor cult may perhaps have been practised at
                aceramic Hacilar, where it is considerably earlier than at Catal
                Hiiyiik.


Religious Imagery
                Shrines at Catal Hiiyiik were decorated with wall-paintings or
                plaster reliefs, or both. Wall-painting was practised even before
                Level X, for a painted fragment of a doorway was found in debris
                on which a house of Level X was erected. Aceramic Hacilar also
                knew the art of painting floors and walls around 7000 sc. The
                custom remained in use at Catal Hiiyiik at least as late as Level II,
                destroyed c. $700 Bc, but from this latest phase only the lower panels
                with plain red paint survive.
                  Plaster reliefs are just as ancient at the site and appear in the simple
                form of animal heads in a shrine of Level X, c. 6500 Bc. Cut-out
                figures in sunk relief are first found in Level IX (in the form of heads)
                and entire animals cut out of the thick wall-plaster appear in Levels
                VI, VI B and VI A, sometimes combined with partial modelling of
                horns and eyes. Animals in low relief are found in Level VI B,
                breasts and horns from Level VII onwards and goddesses also make
                their first appearance in this level. Plaster reliefs were still in use in
                Level V, judging by a number of fragments in situ on the walls, but
84.
29, 30 Among wall-paintings at Catal Hiiyiik those imitating kilims, i.e. woven woollen rugs, are
particularly common and are easily recognized by their intricate geometric ornament, their stitched
borders and many colours. One of the most splendid examples, from the east wall of shrine VI.B.1,
above, is painted in orange red, light buff, white, grey and black and contains numerous flower
symbols. Another, below, in red and black from the north wall of shrine VII.21, combines painting
with grooves and dots, left white, a style of decoration peculiar to Levels VII and VIII
31, 32 Of the two shrines of building-level III, one (A.III.8) is entirely decorated with patterns
derived from kilims and textiles. A section of the latest kilim pattern in red, white and grey cover-
ing part of the north wall is shown in the copy, above, with fragments of earlier paintings showing
underneath to the right. The continuation of this kilim pattern around the north-east corner of the
shrine with only the triangles finished is shown in the original, below
    ie
33, 34 On the west wall of this same shrine (A.III.8) there were two main panels of decoration of
which the northern formed the continuation of that shown in Plate 31. The southern, shown in the
copy, above, and in the original, below, contained not less than four superimposed phases of painting :
from top to bottom; the unfinished kilim pattern with triangles; the bold rows of quatrefoils; the
finer quartrefoils and the step patterns. Each was separated from the other by a layer of white
plaster
'
i




    35, 36 Besides patterns that are obviously bor-
    rowed from textiles there are others, above, that
    appear to derive from leopard skins with the
    familiar spots (cf. Plate 18). Such paintings were
    only found on the south wall of shrine VI.B.1. A
    different pattern, below, from the edge of the
    doorway in the north wall of shrine VIL.8 (see
    Plate 48) has a row of orange flowers and.a mauve
    pattern reminiscent of fine basketry or matting
37, 38 Shrine VI.A.s50 was decorated with another very fine kilim pattern, delicately executed in
red, black and white on buff. Even its border is preserved. It shows close resemblances to the kilim
pattern of Plate 29, which is a little earlier in date. Symbols include horns, flowers and even a small
hand. Above is a detail of the burnt painting, with a copy, below




   ss
  aS gee
39, 40 The east wall of shrine VI.A.66, the smallest found, had a large bull’s head with red mouth,
ears and hair, but no actual horns, set above the bench. North of it was a panel of painting with
elaborate symbols, painted in orange, white and mauve and a group of small red figures, including a
woman, an archer and several goddesses in the posture of childbirth with raised arms and legs. A
detail of the upper right portion of this panel in its original state is shown above, and a copy of the
entire panel below
41, 42 Two superimposed paintings, of which the later, above, is only partly preserved, but the
lower, below, more or less complete, rose above a lower panel with white hands left in reserve on a
red ground above the central platform of shrine VI.B.8. Two rows of four-fingered black and red,
grey and pink hands, the upper row encased in ovals, the lower alternately vertical or horizontal,
frame a red honeycomb pattern. On this pattern is depicted, in both paintings, insects and grubs on
a field of stylized flowers, above. In the lower painting the cells are closed on the left and open up
in the centre; the painting might depict the life cycle of the bee
43-45 Around the north-west corner of shrine VII.8 there is an earlier panel of red and black hands
above, (a copy above), and red hands below, (original below), framing a set of patterns that probably
represent nets painted in red. Opposite is a gruesome scene of an enormous vulture attacking two
small headless human figures, one of which is outstretched, the other crouched, like the dead, on its
left side. This scene, from the central panel of the east wall, is part of a vast painting that formed the
principle decoration of the earliest phase of shrine VII.8. Other scenes are shown in Plates 48, 49
46, 47 Shrine VIIL8, the predecessor of the Vul-
ture Shrine, VII.8, similarly contained a painting
of black vultures, unfortunately badly damaged,
above. Here the scene is different for though a
headless body lies between the two birds of prey,
a man armed with a sling is actually warding off
their attacks. Yet a third building, the Second
Vulture Shrine, VII.21, contained scenes of this
sort on its north wall. Between two of these
creatures, provided with human legs, and perhaps
priestesses or priests in disguise, lies another head-
less corpse, below, but in a position different from
the others
48, 49 Although somewhat smaller in size, not less than five vultures pecking at headless corpses
graced the north wall of shrine VII.8, where they were later covered by the cut-out figure of the
black bull (Plate 12). These scenes probably indicate that the people of Catal Hityiik exposed their
dead to the vultures for the purpose of excarnation. A detail is shown above and a copy of the whole
scene below
        50, 51 Detail of a dead man’s
        head, above, from the painting of
        funeral rite (?) below, on the
        south end of the east wall of
        shrine E.IV.1., the worst pre-
        served of all shrines. The black-
        haired and bearded head with
        closed eyes, red smeared brow
        and gaping mouth may have
        been carried by a figure of which
        only the torso is preserved




4an,y
ott"
 8
§2,   53 Detail   of a small    white
‘Goddess’, below, from the contin-
uation of the wall-painting (Plate
51) on the east wall of shrine
E.IV.1. Above, a fragmentary paint-
ing with long-headed, running
figures and a bull (?) partly obscured
by remains of overpainting from the
central post on the north wall of
building A.IV.1
$4, 55 Monochrome red painting of a deer hunt, above, from the truncated south wall of the ante-
chamber to shrine A.III.1. Six male figures pursue a herd of Red Deer (Cervus elaphus), one of
which has been brought to its knees by two men, below, and turns its head towards its attackers,
while the others attempt to escape
$6, 57 Monochrome red painting of a deer hunt from the north wall of room A.III.13. A stag and
its young are pursued by an archer accompanied by his dog, one of the earliest representations of
this domestic animal. The archer has just released his arrow
            $8 Tentative reconstruction of a stag’s head, painted in red, black and white on the north side of
            the niche in the east wall of shrine A.III.1



ARIZONA STATE MUSCUM LIBRARY . TUCSON,
                                                 AZ. 85727
                                                            The Shrines and their Reliefs
none have been found in Levels IV-I and it may be assumed that this
method of decoration had gone out of use.
   Benches decorated with horns, which may be interpreted as a
stylized form of a row of bulls’ heads placed one behind the other
are confined to Levels VI B and VI A, but the simpler form, the
bucranium, first found in Level VI, continued in use till the end of
Level II.
  In plaster reliefs goddesses appear solely in anthropomorphic form
and the place of the male is taken by bulls and rams, a more im-
pressive exponent of male fertility. Only the bull, the stag and the
leopard occur in full outline as well as in the form of heads, whereas
the ram is never fully shown, and is simply represented by ram’s
heads. Stags, boar and leopards are rare and may be regarded as
attributes of the deities, rather than as symbols of the god and
goddess themselves. In the earlier animal heads the horns are
usually modelled in clay and plaster, but from Level VII onwards the
use of the actual horn cores and frontal bones of dead animals is
found on a great scale in Levels VI B and VI A. So far other
animals, such as vultures, other birds or dogs are only found in the
wall-paintings or carved in stone. Snake and goat are conspicuous
by their absence.
   Plaster reliefs are frequently painted and the two techniques are
evidently complementary. Whereas the animal heads are solid and
moulded in clay covered with plaster, the large figures of goddesses
were made of plaster moulded on bundles of reeds, the imprint of
which is frequently preserved, or on wooden posts, preserved by
carbonization. Many animal-heads were likewise set in super-
imposed rows on posts (especially in Level VII) or they were fixed
on to the lower end of a post. In other cases single horns were used
to attach the animal head to the wall. Whereas animal bones, horns,
etc., were used for attachment and horn cores were used to enhance
a naturalistic representation of the animal, the lower jaws of gigantic
wild boar were stuck in rows into the walls of certain shrines, and
these as well as the skulls of vultures, foxes and weasels, found in the
representations of breasts, evidently have a ritual and symbolic
meaning of their own. They serve no technical function.
                                                                                     IOI
Catal Hiiyiik
                             WEST     WALL         * NORTH   WALL              EAST         WALL      SOUTH   WALL



                                        ttt                               dele ects
                                                                                                     eng
                                                                                   DESTROYED         yz                  VI-44
16 Schematic table of
the arrangement of the
decoration
    :      in the main \     SCREEN
shrines ofLevels X-VIA                                        Dreee        Sores     Rea:    |aPZ
                                                                                                i                    SY




                             ee               ce                      islSees sa IA                                  oe

                             SCREEN                                                          baba tye.               VIB.x
                             SCREEN           al                                                                     Vitep



                         Cet ee               ee


                                                                                                                     a    B




                                             DESTROYED                |                                              VIB.7

                                                                                                                      VI.14




                                                                           DESTROYED         Re




                                                                                                                     VIL2r




                         LEGEND                                        vw                   Ram’s head

                           ‘ew Bucranium (Bull Pillar)                 99                   Breasts

                           SF   Bench with inserted           horns       ‘ad               Horn

                            iy Bull’s head                                tee               Niches
102
                                                        The Shrines and their Reliefs
   WEST WALL ___ NORTH WALL   EAST WALL           SOUTH WALL
  DESTROYED                               t                   VIB.z



                                                               VILt




          ace 7
                                                              VIA.8




       Ps   eae
__sme __ VEN
        ime: We
         hae [ES[6 7                                          gt




                                                             VI A.1o




                                                                X.1




pile     Doorway              SEE   ==Red panel
 to      Goddess relief       —       Wall-painting
         Cutout figure                Ladder
                                                                                 103
Catal Hiiyiik
Fig. 16                        The diagrammatic table on pages 102-3 shows the arrangement of
                            the decoration in the best preserved twenty-eight shrines of Levels
                            X-VIA. It appears that the decoration of shrines followed certain
                            rules; scenes dealing with death are always placed on the east and
                            north walls, below which the dead were buried. Scenes dealing with
                            birth occupy the opposite west wall and bulls are found only on the
                            north wall facing the Taurus Mountains, perhaps not a coincidence.
                            Animal heads associated with red painted niches are always on the
                            east wall but goddesses and bull and ram heads have no special place
                            and may occur on any wall. It is, however, rare for the south wall
                            (the kitchen end of the shrine) to be decorated, although there are a
                            few cases where this happened.
Lge 49                         In the earliest shrine decorated with plaster reliefs (X.1), two large
                            bull’s heads with enormous but clumsily moulded horns are placed
                            on the north and east wall. The first is fixed on a wooden post and
                            flanked by a doorway and a shallow niche whereas the second has its
                            face painted red. Immediately above it are two small (rams’?) heads
                            and towards the north-east corner there are two smaller bulls’ heads
                            without prominent horns. On the southernmost panel of the east
                            wall there is another bull’s head with shorter horns and a small head,
                            possibly a ram’s with a niche above it. Although this earliest shrine
                            already foreshadows the much more monumental ones of Levels

17 Reconstruction ofthe earliest shrine in Level X (X.1)
VII and VI, the execution of the work is still somewhat clumsy and
the system of panelling is still undeveloped. This single shrine
should not be taken as typical of the period, for even in Level VII,
we have another (VII.35) which closely resembles it in workman-                Fig. 21
ship. Shrine IX.8, next in chronological order shows the earliest              Fig. 18
example of animal heads, a feline, probably a leopard and a bull,
which has lost one horn, cut deep into the plaster of the north wall,
thus partly destroying the earlier painting of a large black bull.            Plate 11
There are no traces of paint on either of these two animal-heads. A
second shrine ([X.1) had a panel on the west wall with a large bull’s
head on the right and a smaller (ram’s?) head on the left as well as
wall-paintings. This building shows well developed panelling and
was one of the few that had a red painted platform and a small hearth
sunk in it.


                                                              Shrines of Level VII

In the restricted area in which the buildings of Level VIII were
excavated no shrines with plaster reliefs were found, but painting
was well established. In Level VII, however, plaster reliefs were
found in not less than ten shrines. A small shrine (VII.9) had both its    Figs 19, 20
long walls covered with animal heads, fixed to wooden posts or to
the wall in between. Three bulls’ heads were placed on the east wall
                                                                                  105
19 East wall of shrine VIL.9, restored


                            along the line of a horizontal wooden beam whilst a fine bull’s head
                            with upturned horns graced the central panel of the west wall
                            between two vertical posts. On the northern wall a single head with
                            two pairs of wavy horns was fixed and the southern posts bore
                            three superimposed heads, each with a pair of curling horns. It seems
                            most likely that these are bulls’ heads in spite of the curving horns
                            which might at first sight suggest the horns of rams. Parallels with
                            later representations of bull’s heads on other west walls, the excessive
                            length of the horns and the small curving horns of the actual rams
                            found at Catal Hiiyiik favour this view.
Fig, 21                       Much smaller bulls’ heads are found in shrine VII.35. As in the
                            buildings previously described, the horns are modelled in clay, but
                            actual ram’s horns are introduced into a small head on the east wall.
                            One large bull’s head spans the main panel of the north wall; two
                            small ones are found beside it on the same wall and a larger bull’s
                            head appears below a red painted niche on the east wall. Next to this
                            niche a pair of woman’s breasts appear above the animal’s right horn
                            and a second pair, placed vertically, appear above the ram’s head.
                            From the open nipples protruded the teeth of a fox and a weasel’s
                            skull respectively which were incorporated in this pair of breasts.
Fig. 15                     The east wall of shrine VII.21 combines the same symbolism, but on
                            a much grander scale. A large ram’s head with actual horns and
                            painted with a fine meander pattern is placed beneath a bold clay
106
20 West wall of shrine VII.9, restored


horn from which a single breast protrudes. Out of the open breast
springs the lower jaw of a gigantic boar with formidable tusks and its
position is similar to that in shrine VII.35. The central panel of this
shrine isdominated by alarge bull’s head with actual horns surmount-
ing a red-painted niche and a row of six stylized breasts. Asymmetric-
ally surrounding the bull’s head are three small ram’s heads with
actual horns. A further breast, but with open nipple, occurs on the
northernmost panel of the east wall and another is found on the

21 North and east walls of shrine VII.35, restored




                                                     _

                                                     Mg
                                                          ~
Catal Hiiyiik
Fig. 14                     opposite wall. The main feature of the west wall, however, is a
                            huge bull’s head with moulded nostrils and mouth set in a red-
                            painted muzzle. A geometric pattern is painted on the head, the ears
                            are red and red bands surround the horns, which are of gigantic size.
                            Though fallen and crushed by crumbling masonry, one of the horn
                            cores could still be measured and was over a metre in length. A
                            niche for libations, semi-circular in shape, was set into the west wall
                            and was matched to the right by a grooved and painted panel (in
                            white, black and red) representing a kilim (a thin woven rug).
                            The north wall of this building was decorated with a similar panel
                            and with wall-paintings of vultures attacking headless corpses.
                            A doorway, placed well above the level of the floor interrupted
                            the wall-paintings and there may have been some short wooden               =~
                                                                                                        —


                            steps. It was in this building that the series of human skulls, already
                            referred to (p. 84), were found, and, with its splendid and impressive
                            decoration, it is evidently one of the major shrines of Level VII.
                               Hardly less remarkable is a series of three shrines (VII.10.8 and 1)
Fig. 22                     that lie in a row a little farther south. The first of these (VII.10) is
                           decorated only with plaster reliefs, and, unlike the other two, had no
                           wall-paintings. At the bottom of the central post along the north

22 North and east walls of shrine VII.10, restored. See Plates 10, 17
                                                                                        The Shrines and their Reliefs




23 Reconstruction ofthe west and south walls ofshrine VII.1 with plaster reliefs of twin goddesses
and bulls’ heads

wall was placed a large animal head with a single and rather short                                            Plate 10
plaster horn. The plaster to the right was well preserved, so that it
could be established that an animal with only one horn was por-
trayed. The face was demolished, but a comparison with the build-
ing immediately above (in Level VI B) where the post ended in a
well preserved ram’s head with two pairs of horns, may suggest that
here also a ram was represented. To the left (west) of this ram’s head
the plaster was cut into an animal silhouette to which a little model-
ling of the head was added. Unfortunately the upper part was broken,
but what remains suggests the outline of a stag’s head. In the north-
east corner a much better preserved representation of a stag on a
rock was found. Here also touches of modelling were added to the
cut-out silhouette of the animal, which is extremely lively and
naturalistically observed. The motif of a stag turning its head appears                                      Plate 17
here for the first time, but is again found in the paintings of deer-
hunts in the shrine of Level III and in the pottery figure of a doe from                                 Plates 55, 61
                                                                                                                  109
Catal Hiiyiik
                a house in Hacilar VI. Stags are comparatively rare in the art of
                Catal Hiiyiik, but a fine antler of Red Deer (Cervus elaphus) in-
                corporated into a plaster animal head decorated the north wall of a
                probable shrine (VI.B.>5).
                  The east wall of shrine VII.10 showed another cut-out relief;
                a vast bull’s head, seen like most of the animals in this building, in
                profile. In front of the head is a shallow niche and the boldly curving
                horn, the eye and a few other features are enhanced by modelling in
                plaster. The reconstruction drawing shows these animals as they
                probably were originally, but as the result of a rough brick fill and
                the superimposed weight of another burnt shrine (VI.10) they have
                been somewhat flattened out.
                   Very similar to the large bull’s head in shrine VII.10 is a huge bull
Fig. 23         on the west and south wall of shrine VII.1. The entire outline of the
                animal’s back and head is carved in the plaster, but the feet and
                belly are not indicated. The silhouette of the head is again obtained
                by cutting a shallow niche in front of it and the eye and horn are
                modelled in plaster. The head of the animal has been pressed down
                considerably so that the figure looks disjointed, for the entire south
                wall has been compressed by the weight of later buildings. The bull
                turns its back to another smaller horned animal, possibly a cow,
                which occupies the other side of the west wall and was made in the
                same technique. It too has no legs and seems to stand on ared-painted
                pedestal. When first found the figure still bore traces of an overall
                blue paint, and this is the only case of the use of blue paint on walls
                so far. Between these two animals a battered bull’s head was
                placed below the remains of a small goddess figure, of which only
                the right arm, leg and breast were preserved, but the outline of the
                remainder of the body could still be partly traced on the plaster. The
                asymmetrical position of this figure was puzzling at first until it was
                realized that two such figures would make a balanced composition.
                At the point where the second figure should have been the plaster
                had been stripped off the wall, probably at the time when the
                building was condemned and filled in. Had there been only a single
                figure, then there is no reason for the plain plaster not to have sur-
                vived, as it has done in every other building. Twin goddess figures
IIO
24 Reconstruction ofthe north and east walls ofshrine VII.1 with wall-paintings oftextiles



are by no means rare and in at least two other neighbouring shrines
(VIL.8 and VI.B.12) the existence of such a group is either certain or
highly probable. The east and north wall of this shrine were orna-
mented with textile patterns but on either side of the main post                              Fig. 24
plaster reliefs of breast and horn were found.
   Between the two shrines just described there lay another (VII.8).                         Plate 12
Its earliest decoration consisted of one enormous panel of vultures
‘8 metres high and extending over the greater part of the north and
the entire east wall. At the end of its existence, after a hundred layers
of white plaster had almost obliterated the existence of the vulture
painting, a fine bull was cut into the thick plaster of the north wall,
and painted black. As found its head was unfortunately missing, but                           Fig. 25
it is seen advancing towards the doorway leading to the entrance
corridor. Red-painted panels are found below the bull over two
platforms on the edge of which once stood a big bucranium, the
earliest of its type. More red panels continued beyond the doorway
the jambs of which at one stage were gaily painted with rosettes.
                                                                                                 III
Catal Hiiyiik
                           Above the red panels there were paintings with hands and in the
                           middle of the west wall there lay again as in shrines VII.1 and VI.B.8
                           (immediately above it) a stylized bull’s head. What particularly
                           attracted our attention was the strange way in which the plaster of
                           the wall had been cut, late in the life-span of the shrine. Symmetric-
                           ally placed above the bull’s head were the rough outlines of two
                           felines, presumably leopards, face to face. Like the cow in shrine
                           VIL1 next door, these stood on pedestals and directly above them all
                           the plaster had been broken off the wall, as if something had been
                           removed when the shrine was abandoned and filled in. That a rela-
                           tionship existed between the plaster reliefs in shrine VII.1 and the
                           potentially domesticable bull and cow and the wild leopards in its
                           neighbour soon became evident. Moreover, something had been
                           removed from the west wall in both buildings and a comparison
                           with a group of old and broken statuettes in blue and brown lime-
                           stone,    found      in shrine VI.A.10,   which   showed   two   goddesses
                           standing behind leopards and a boy riding a leopard displayed the

25 North and east walls ofshrine VII.8 as found. See Plates 12, 36
26 Restoration ofthe north and east walls ofshrine VII.8 See Plates 12, 36


same outline of the wild animals as found in the shrine. It is therefore
quite probable that twin goddesses, like those found in shrine VII.1,
were originally placed on this west wall, as is shown in the reconstruc-       Fig. 26
tion drawing. It is moreover likely that the stone statuettes were
originally part of the cult images of this shrine, from which they,
like the plaster reliefs, were removed when the building was
abandoned.
   The next shrine of Level VII (VII.23) was relatively simple, but
contained a very fine painted plaster relief of a pregnant goddess,          Plate VII
placed on the east wall. In the later phases the goddess was painted
white, but on one of the numerous white layers the small red hand
of a child was painted on the goddess’s breast. In her original form
she had been clothed in a gaudily painted dress with patterns in red,
black and orange and the dress extended like a veil behind her
between the upturned arms and legs. She was shown as clearly
pregnant and her condition was emphasized by the use of concentric
                                                                                  113
Catal Hiiyiik
                    red circles. Face, hands and feet had been broken when the shrine
                    was deserted and filled in. No other plaster reliefs or wall-paintings
                    other than red panels marred the simple serenity of this shrine
                    dedicated to the goddess.
                      Shrine VII.29 had two bulls’ heads, with red-painted ears on the
                    east wall and a red-painted niche next to the larger lower head.
                       Shrine VII.45 was abandoned and filled in with broken brick and
                    plaster after its west wall had collapsed. In the middle of the north
                    wall, set between two red-painted posts and above a red panel, sat the
Plate 25; Fig. 27   large figure of a goddess of which only the lower portion had sur-
                    vived. Below many layers of white plaster there were red vertical
                    stripes on the legs, which show that this figure also once had a
                    painted dress. The position of the goddess, framed by posts, gives her
                    the appearance of coming through a door to show herself to the
                    worshippers. The large panel on her left was plain and no traces of
                    decoration survive on the greater part of the east wall, which, fairly
                    late in the occupation of the shrine, was cut into the silhouette of
Plate 13            a gigantic boar’s head. This is very similar to the boar figures of
                    clay which have been found in Level VI B. A scar on the plaster
                    nearest the central post may suggest a plastically rendered horn;
                    another, surrounded by a circle of red paint, the presence of a small
                    animal head. This is one of the shrines where the bench was painted
                    red.
Plate 24               Shrine VII.31 was one of the best preserved buildings on the
                    site even though it had lost the plaster of its entire north and more
                    than half of the east wall. It had been abandoned and filled in
                    after its reliefs had been defaced. Nevertheless it stood to a height
                    of 2 metres, with one of the capitals of the wooden posts preserved
Fig. 28             intact. On entering the shrine through a doorway in the north wall
                    one faced not less than four panels decorated with reliefs; two on the
                    west wall, one on the south wall (the second panel was occupied by
                    the wooden ladder) and one more on the southernmost panel of the
                    east wall. The central panel on this wall, which frequently bears
                    important reliefs, was destroyed down to the lowermost red panel.
                    The first composition consisted of the familiar goddess-figure
                    modelled in bold relief; the hands and feet of which appear to have
114
                                                                         ee




27 Restoration ofthe north and east walls ofshrine VII.45 with reliefs




been made separately and inserted into now empty sockets. As is               Fig. 28
normal at Catal Hiiyiik, there is no indication of sex, but the navel
was always shown. Above the head two holes in the plaster on either
side of a slight knob indicate perhaps the former existence of a head-
dress or, equally possible, they were used to fix a hanging over the
sacred figure of the divinity. Above her left hand a small bull’s head
is shown, the ears of which had been painted red. The head also was
defaced. Near her right hand the horn of a bull modelled in clay is
seen and this is matched by a second on the other side of the central
post, which had been removed. Evidently these belong to a bull’s
head modelled on the post, as in so many shrines of Level VII.
The second panel was filled with five bull’s heads of varying sizes,          Fig. 28
all smashed when the building was deserted, but easily recognizable
from horns and scars. Beyond the corner post another figure of a
goddess was placed next to a horizontal bar and below her is a shallow
                                                                                 115
28 West and south-west
walls of shrine VII.31
with the animal heads
restored. See Plate 24




                             niche. She also had lost her head, but the entire outline is preserved
                             which suggests a hair-style with two small horns, very like that
                             fashionable in the fourteenth century ap. There were faded traces of
                             paint on this figure, especially round the neck, which suggests a
                             painted garment, but too little plaster survived to reconstruct its
                             pattern. No traces of paint were found on the first figure, nor on the
Fig. 29                      third and most remarkable one on the east wall. This goddess is

29 East wall ofshrine VII.31. The decoration ofthe central panel is lost but the panel to the right
shows the goddess, her hair streaming out behind her in the wind, obviously in rapid motion




                                         fe                2S
                                         i “tm iLa
                                                          NOMIC 7 .
                                                         The Shrines and their Reliefs
shown with her head and body in profile, her long locks floating
behind her in the wind. Arms and legs are outstretched and fore-
shortened, thus strengthening the impression of swift motion. The
goddess appears to be running, dancing or whirling and above her
right arm there originally was something, now broken, outlined in
orange red paint. The destruction of the central panel may have
deprived us of the object or figure to which she is seen advancing.
Perhaps the clue to this lies in the building underneath. This will be
explored when the excavations are resumed.


                                                Shrines of Levels VIB and VIA

The traditional use of plaster reliefs in shrines, already fully developed
in Level VII, reached its climax in Levels VI B and VI A, when we
find truly monumental compositions up to 4 metres in height (shrine             Fig. 38
VI.B.10).
   A number of shrines of Level VIB are very simple in their decora-
tion. Shrine VI.B.12 bore reliefs of the twin goddess on its north
wall and a third (animal head?) above the main platform. Shrine
VI.B.15 had two bull’s heads on the south wall, one set in a recess,
the other in a side room, whilst wall-paintings decorated the space
above the main platform. Shrine VI.B.20 had a goddess on the south
wall, but only the scar of attachment was preserved. A stag’s head
and a wall-painting of textile design formed the only decoration of
shrine VI.B.5; a horn and breast (?) and numerous superimposed
wall-paintings that of shrine VI.B.1, unless the destroyed west wall
had been originally decorated with one or more goddesses like all its
neighbours. Shrine VI.B.7, which has also lost its west wall, had a
large goddess with horizontal arms and no legs, but from the lower
part of her body projected a huge red painted bull’s head similar to
the Twin Goddess in shrine VI.B.14 with which it was connected
through a single entrance-shaft, thus forming a double shrine.
Goddess and bull’s head suffered severe damage in a fire at the end of
Level VI B and were covered by a new wall in Level VI A.
  In the northern part of the excavated area there were two splendid
shrines VI B and A.61; and VI B and A.44. The first is one of
                                                                                   117
30 East and south walls ofshrine V1.61 with bucrania and horn cores set in a bench



Plates 15, 16; Fig. 30      the largest found and presented a terrific spectacle of bucrania;
                            two placed on the male corner-platform and a third beyond a care-
                            fully modelled bench from which six sets of aurochs horn-cores
                            projected with a seventh raised at the end like a bucranium. The
                            impression left by these remains is still that of tremendous male
                            power and it may be surmised that this was a shrine devoted to the
                            cult of the male deity. The east wall was preserved only up to a red
                            painted groove, which marks the line of a horizontal wooden beam.
                            It seems unlikely that the central panels would have been left plain
                            and one would expect at least one large bull’s head there (as in shrines
                            VI.B.10 and 14). The other walls are much better preserved but
                            bore no reliefs or wall-paintings. Like many other shrines of Level
                            VIB it remained in use during the next period at the end of which it
                            was burnt.
                               Near to this shrine was another (VI.44), built in Level VI B and
                            occupied throughout this level and the next. Whereas in many
                            buildings the goddess is shown in person, her presence is here ex-
Plates 18, 20; Fig. 31      pressed in a life-size plaster relief of her attributes, a pair of
                            leopards. These decorate the main panel on the north wall framed by
                            two wooden plastered posts with numerous phases of painting,
                            plain red or white or with a textile design in grey, cream and red.
                            The leopards are placed on the middle panel above a plain red panel
118
31 North and east walls of the
Leopard Shrine (VI.B.44) with
a screen to the left, and a venti-
lation shaft and doorway to a
storeroom on the right. See
Plates 18-21



and they are each about a metre long. They face each other with
raised tails; a short fat female on the left, a more slender male on the
right. In the latest phases these were whitewashed and bore no
designs and they were rather clumsy in shape as the result of repeated
replastering. When the layers of white plaster were stripped off one
by one the animals regained their original shape and painted decora-
tion began to appear, which had been repeated over and over again.
The later phases of painting showed lemon-coloured animals                     Plates 20, 21
covered with black spots, and the line of the claws and the end of the
tail, as well as the mouth, were accentuated by pink stripes. The
animals were outlined by black dashes. There were a great many
layers of this sort of decoration, all more or less partially preserved
and affected by the fire which had consumed this building. On one of
the tails, broken by a deep Hellenistic pit, an earlier form of painting
could be seen and the leopards were cleaned down to the best
preserved layer. They changed their spots into what looked like black
rosettes placed in rows on the white bodies, legs and tails, and two
rosettes formed their eyes. The mouth was red, claws and the tip of
the tail being outlined in bright red paint. This form of decoration
was also repeated at least twenty times and the fine three- or four-
petalled rosettes are indeed a very close rendering of actual spots on     Plates 18, 19, VI
leopards. The left-hand leopard, badly cracked and weakened by the
                                                                                        119
Catal Hiiyiik
                water that had seeped into the Hellenistic pit, broke upon removal
                and we were thus able to remove some more layers of paint. This
                showed that the earliest leopards were considerably smaller and
                had black claws and their rosettes were much larger and fewer than
                in the later paintings. There appear to have been about forty layers
                of painting on them.
                  The leopards have now been reconstituted in the Ankara Archaeo-
                logical Museum. On the edge of the platform in front of the leopards
                a red-painted bull’s head was found crushed in its fall. It cannot
                have fallen from the south wall which was preserved and showed no
                scars of attachment, nor is it likely that it had been fixed on the screen
                of sticks and plaster which divided the kitchen end of the shrine from
                the main room. One can only surmize that it could have been placed
                in the middle of the north wall, well above the leopards, but this is
                by no means certain. There were also the remains of a bucranium,
                but again in the absence of any mark of attachment on the platform,




                                                                      32 Restoration of the
                                                                      west wall ofshrine VI.14
                                                                      with a monumental relief
                                                                      a Twin Goddess. The
                                                                      left doorway leads to a
                                                                      granary, the right to a
                                                                      lightshaft.. See Plates
                                                                      220i
                                                                                           bif|mi)VyeaAi(




33 Restoration of the east and south walls ofshrine VI.14 with bucrania, horn cores on a bench
and bulls’ and rams’ heads modelled in relief. A ladder, the normal means ofentry, is on the right


its original position is uncertain, and may only appear when the
platform is stripped of its plaster. A rich collection of stone statuettes,
grain offerings and stalactites was found in this room (see pp. 202-3).
   The well preserved shrine VIB and A.14, the eastern member of                                     Figs 32, 33
a twin shrine (14 and 7), offers certain analogies to shrine VI.61                                     Plate III
in having three bucrania and a bench with three sets of horn cores,
the easternmost of which is likewise raised above the others. Three
animal heads with actual horns were found on the east wall; a large
bull’s head above the horizontal beam and two rams’ heads set at
different heights on the flanking panels. Another was set within a
frame on the south wall beyond the ladder and above a deep recess,
with a sinuous outline reminiscent of the horns of bulls in plaster
reliefs of Level VII. It is, however, the west wall which bore a                                     Figs 22, 23
strange and monumental relief, 2-2 metres in height and therefore
among the largest yet found at Catal Hiiyiik. Although damaged by
fire and partly collapsed it can be restored on paper as a stylized twin
                                                                                                            I21I
Catal Hiiyiik
                         figure of a goddess with two heads and bodies, but with a single pair
                         of arms and upturned legs. The bodies were modelled on two vertical
                         wooden posts and the plaster edges were painted red. From the
                         abdomen of the right-hand body an enormous bull’s head, nearly
                         61 cms in width, with powerful horns protruded. On top of it a
Plate 22                 smaller head was modelled. Not less than a hundred layers of plaster
                         covered the heads, out of which at least six or seven were painted.        ©
                                                                                                        ae
                                                                                                        i
                         In the latest phase (VI.A) the muzzles have lost their nostrils and
                         mouth and the painting is confined to a red muzzle, red ears and
                         rings round the horns. In the earlier layers a hand placed over the
                         mouth is painted with the fingers spread out over the animal’s nose.
                         In these twin shrines the same subject is represented; the birth of the
                         bull god from the body of the goddess, but whereas in shrine VI.B.7
                         there is only one goddess, here are two of which only one is giving
                         birth. The shoulder and part of one head were found crushed in the
                         debris of the shrine (the other shoulder had lost the second head),
                         but it appears that the head was flat and if any features were shown
                         they must have been executed in paint. The heads may have been
                         very similar to those of the contemporary white marble statuette of
Plate 70                 a twin goddess found in shrine VI.A.10.
                           A row of three bull’s heads, separated by small knobs (stylized
Plate IV; Figs 34, 35    breasts?) and one ram’s head, all richly painted, decorated the central
                         and south panels of the east wall of shrine VI.B.8. Many of the
Fig. 36                  patterns found on these heads (thirteen layers of paint were recorded)
                         ate identical with those on the bulls’ heads in shrine VI.14. Here
                         also three sets of horn cores were set into the bench, with the eastern-
                         most raised above the others. The main decoration of the east wall
                         consisted of several layers of fine wall-paintings (see p. 162) but the
Plate 14                 most striking feature of the room was a great bull sunk in the plaster
                         of the north wall. This was replastered over and over again and was
                        sometimes red, sometimes white. It occupied exactly the same
                        position as its predecessor, the black bull in shrine VII.8, which
                        lies immediately below this building. The continuity in cult, so
                        characteristic of Catal Hiiyiik, could hardly be illustrated better. A
                        black bull occurred on the north wall in Level IX, vultures in Levels
                        VIII and early VII; a black bull in late VII and in VI B and A; and
I22
34 Earliest phase of the
decoration of shrine VI.
B.8, north and east walls




35 Second phase of the
decoration of shrine VI.
B.8, north and east walls




36 Successive    painted
patterns on the bulls’
heads from the east wall
of shrine VI.B.8. See
Plates 41, 42, IV
Catal Hiiyiik
                          panels of hands in VII and VI B, always in the same building. The
                          people who made the red bull, 2-4 metres in length, may have seen
                          the somewhat smaller black one and copied the design. The west
Plate 26; Fig. 37         wall of the shrine bore the familiar representation of a goddess,
                          originally about 1-2 metres in height, with raised arms and up-
                          turned feet, a position indicative of childbirth. Immediately below
                          her a large bull’s head with spreading horns, modelled in clay and
                          plaster, is shown. The representation is clear and shows the goddess
                          having given birth to a bull. One of the many layers of plaster was
                          painted yellow, but without any traces of patterns. A second bull’s
                          head, originally painted and with aurochs horns lay crushed at the
                          foot of the wall from which it must have fallen.
                             One more shrine (VI.B.10) of this building-level remains to be
                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                 —
                          described. Of this the north wall was still standing to its original

37 West wall of shrine VI.B.8
                     i                        38 North and west walls of
                     iiis
                        ‘i                    shrine VI.B.10 restored



height of 3-35 metres. It continued in use during Level VI A, during
which the floor-level rose 60 cms, but even this height was in-
sufficient to take the monumental plaster panel on the west wall,
about 30 cms higher than the ceiling, so that the central part of the
building must have been raised, probably in the form of a berceau                    Fig. 38
made of reeds and plaster or constructed in wood as in the Lycian
houses.
  A large figure of a goddess, of which only the legs and part of the
body remained in situ, was shown in the position of giving birth to a
ram (shown as a ram’s head in the customary manner). The scene is
supported by a frame which contains three superimposed heads of
bulls with aurochs horns. In one of the many phases of decoration,
the figure of the goddess was painted yellow, as the one in shrine
VI.8. On either side of the frame there were deep niches in the wall;
between the two at the left hand side of the goddess a lower jaw of a
boar was inserted into the wall and the frame round the niches was
painted with checkerboard patterns. The high deep niche on the
other side was subdivided by a vertical partition on which was fixed
a ram’s head, and a small bull’s head surmounted this in a shallow
recess. A large ram’s head with two pairs of actual horns was placed
on the central post along the north wall, and a large bull’s head          Plate 28; Fig. 39
appeared from the east wall above a deep, red-painted niche. In
                                                                                        125


                                        SON, AL b2/4\
   SHONA STATE MUSEUM LIBRARY - TUC
Catal Hiiyiik
                           Level VI B poorly preserved wall-paintings surrounded this head,
                           which may also have been painted, but as the result of the con-
                           flagration it was far too difficult to clean. Between the bull’s head
                           and the post a pair of pendulous woman’s breasts appeared, open at
                           the nipple end and painted red like the muzzle of the bull. From each
                           of them the beak of a Griffon Vulture (Gyps vulvus) protruded,
                           as each breast contained a complete skull. Beyond the post a horn
                           was moulded in plaster and, as in shrine VII.23, the only entrance
                           into the building lay through a doorway set high up in the wall. The
                           panel below it was painted in the VI B period.
                               During its occupation in Level VI A, the floor level of the shrine
                           rose by 60 cms and the animal heads gradually sank to floor-level;
                           a bucranium was erected on the corner platform and the wall-
                           paintings on the east and west walls were covered with white
                           plaster. A new facade was built in front of the niches on either side
                           of the main plaster panel on the west wall, which remained un-
Fig. 40                    altered until it was destroyed by fire at the end of Level VI A.
39 North and east walls ofshrine VI.B.10 with entrance on the right
                                                                              ts.A
                                                                              ‘
                                                                              1
                                                                              1
                                                                              '
                                                                              1
                                                                              ‘
                                                                              1
                                                                      pense   1
                                                                              ’
                                                                              1
                                                                              1
                                                                              1
                                                                              '
                                                                              ‘
                                                                              '
                                                                              1
I   il; :|!   1                                                               1   led
                                                                                  el
                                                                                  Se


    sles
    i iia i
                                                                 The Shrines and their Reliefs




                                                     0       1   2
                                                     SA _ ea
                                                     ae)             METRES



40 North and west walls of shrine VI.A.10 restored


The destruction of this building preserved a fine collection of stone
statuettes in situ on the floor, for with the stone tools at their dis-
posal the inhabitants of Catal Hiiyiik were unable to dig them out
from under the thick layers of burnt brick fused together by the
tremendous heat of the fire.
  As in this shrine, the wall-paintings of shrine VI.B.8 were covered
with plaster during the new period (VI.A) and two plaster beams, an
upper red one, and a lower white one, were laid over the old paint-
ings. In these ‘beams’ the lower jaws of boar were inserted, nine in
the upper and four in the lower. The bulls’ and the single ram’s head
remained in use and were repainted and two additional small bulls’
heads were placed on the northernmost panel of the east wall. Four
bucrania were erected in a row on the edges of the platforms and the
sunk bull relief was replastered like the entire west wall. The horns         Plate 27; Fig. 41
in the bench were abolished. After a fire in which the tusks of the
                                                                                           127
Catal Hiiyiik




                                                                                  Naf
                                                                                  Ze



                                                                                       f




41, 42 Decoration ofthe north and east walls ofshrine VI.A.8. Above the third phase, and below
the fourth phase. See Plate 27




             bY
                       i
      - ~i




128
                                                        The Shrines and their Reliefs
boars got burnt, the entire building was replastered and each
boar’s jaw was turned into a woman’s breast. In this last phase of the
occupation of this shrine, there were no wall-paintings and when the              Fig. 42
building was deserted its doorway was bricked up and the room
filled with earth and unburnt brick.
   The burnt shrine VI.B.7 was remodelled in VI.A and a new east
wall was inserted in front of the old one. Its new doorway was raised
above floor-level and a red-painted niche was set in the main panel
of the wall. A fine ram’s head and a bull’s head (both with actual
horns) were placed on either side of the southern post, and both
heads were painted with human hands. On the edge of the platform
a ‘bucranium’ was set up, incorporating not the horns of a bull,         Plate V; Fig. 43
but those of a big ram.
   No actual changes seem to have been made during period VI.A
in shrines VI.16, 61 and 44, except continual repaintings. Shrines
VI.B.29 and 31 were built above their Level VII predecessors. The
former building may still have been a shrine and like VI.A.30 may
have had a relief along its west wall, for which there are certain
indications. Shrine VI.B and A.31 was built on top of shrine
VII.31 but except for two fine bulls’ heads, framed by plastered                 Plate 23
posts nothing has survived of the decoration of this room, even the
plaster was stripped off the walls. Other shrines of Level VI.B, such
as 12, I and 5, seem to have been turned into houses and 15 and 29

43 East wall of shrine VI.A.7 with doorway on the left. See Plate V




                                                                                     129
Catal Hiiyiik
                were filled in to form a courtyard. Two bulls’ heads were found
                onthe walls of shrine VI.A.25 as well as afine group of stone statuettes
                and it looks as if this building took the place of shrine VI.B.15
                next door. In the northern area, room VI.A.66, with a fine painted
                bull’s head and a panel of symbols and small human figures, is pro-
                bably a subsidiary shrine. Two others, VI.A.50 and 51 have horns
                set in the benches.
                   After the destruction of Level VI A, a number of shrines may have
                been rebuilt over the main shrines in the southern area (E.V.3, 5,
                6, 8) but their remains are so denuded that one cannot be certain.
                Fragments of reliefs, too scanty to be described here, were found in
                E.V.12, 2 and 4 (bull’s head with paint), buildings which were
                probably shrines and the successors of the Leopard Shrine, shrine
                VI.A.25 and VI.B.15 respectively. The fragments merely show that
                the practice of decorating sanctuaries with plaster reliefs survived
                into Level V, but none of a later date have been found.
                  Before discussing the religion of the people of Catal Hiiyiik,
                the development of wall-painting, the other technique of shrine- and
                house-decoration must claim our attention.




130
                                                                            VI

                                                                    Wall-paintings

|Davee WAS PRACTISED at Catal Hiiyiik throughout the life of
     the settlement; the earliest fragments of wall-painting come
from the building rubbish found below a house of Level X and the
latest covered walls in Level Il, by which period paint was also
applied to light-coloured pots, though not yet on any scale. Painting
was not confined to walls, but was also applied to plaster reliefs,
clay statuettes, skeletons, wood, baskets and finally to pottery. It
may be assumed that textiles were dyed, and paint was certainly
applied to eyes and eyebrows, cheeks and lips of the women, if not
to their bodies. In short, the people of Catal Hiiyiik painted what they
could and when they could. Excavations at aceramic Hacilar,
Mesolithic Beldibi and the Upper Palaeolithic caves of Okiizlii’In
and Kara’In on the subtropical south coast of Anatolia have shown
the earlier phases of a well-established tradition of painting in
Turkey.
   At Catal Hiiyiik a full range of pigments was in use, derived on the
whole from minerals, such as iron oxides (red, brown and yellow
ochres), copper ores (bright blue azurite, green malachite), mercury
oxide (cinnabar for a deep red), red, possibly from haematite,
manganese mauve or purple, galena for lead grey. The plaster back-
ground is cream or dead white and was locally available from the
Pleistocene lake beds. Black was obtained from soot. The colours
were finely ground with pestle and mortar but not perhaps mixed
with animal fat or vegetable oil or white of egg, though all of
which were available, dried in lumps or shaped into crayons and
spread on flat stone palettes. Fine brush strokes imply the use of
brushes, some extremely fine, whereas plain panels of red may have
been painted with the use of a rag dipped in a pot of paint, as is still
done today in the villages around Catal Hiiyiik. Once in Level VI,
                                                                                131
Catal Hiiyiik
                mica, a mineral, finely pounded was added to the mauve paint to
                produce a glittering effect.
                   The paint was applied directly to the wall without previous
                tracing of outlines and the painters were evidently sure enough of
                themselves to dispense with this preliminary procedure. In a series
                of unfinished paintings in shrine A.IIL8 the process of execution
                of an elaborate textile pattern can be followed in detail (see p. 154).
                The recurrence of numerous patterns and the complete repainting
                of complicated scenes, such as a deer hunt, about four times suggests
                the existence of ‘books’ of patterns and scenes, probably on cloth or
                felt.
                  The following colours were in use: all shades of red and brown,
                buff and yellow, pink and orange, mauve, grey and black, and
                blue. All these were used in wall-painting, but blue occurs once
                only, though both blue and green were used for painting parts of
                skeletons in Levels VI, VI B and VI A. Polychrome paintings are as
                common as monochrome ones and are not confined to any period.
                   In shrines and houses, wall-paintings had a ritual function. When
                the painting had served its purpose—we do not know how long this
                took, it may have been a year or the duration of certain festivals—
                it was covered with a layer of white plaster. The same area might be
                repainted at a later date and there may be as many as a dozen paintings
                on one wall, but this is not common and there may be a hundred
                layers of white plaster covering a wall-painting. During the vast
                majority of the years when shrines and houses were in use their
                walls were white.
                   Wall-paintings at Catal Hiiytik may be divided into six groups:
                  1 Plain panels of paint without any motifs, usually red, orange,
                    pinkish red or brownish red. Black panels occur only in shrine
                    VIL.ar.                                                    ;
                  2 Panels of geometric patterns in monochrome or polychrome,
                    simple    or   elaborate   with   repetitive   motifs,   rectilinear   or
                    curvilinear.
                  3 Panels with symbols; solid circles, quatrefoils, crenellations,
                    stylized flowers or stars, etc.
                  4 Human hands, either isolated or grouped into panels or borders
                    of hands framing panels with geometric or naturalistic designs.
132
$9, 60 Copy and original of a landscape painting from north and east walls of shrine VII.14. In the
foreground is a town rising in graded terraces closely packed with rectangular houses. Behind the
town an erupting volcano is shown, its sides covered with incandescent volcanic bombs rolling
down the slope of the mountain. Others are thrown up from the erupting cone above which hovers
a cloud of smoke and ashes. The twin cones suggest that an eruption of Hasan Da§, rising to a
height of 10,672 feet (3,553 metres) and standing at the eastern end of the Konya Plain and visible
from Catal Hiiyiik, is recorded. See Plate I




                                               assent
                                       ON, OEP: pit
61-63 The Hunting Shrine of Catal Hiiyiik Il (A.III.1). The east wall was decorated with a long
scene of dancing hunters, armed with bows and clubs and dressed in skins and bonnets of leopard
skin, and a number of deer. Only the left hand fragment was in situ, above, the rest had slipped down
into a Hellenistic robbers trench (visible above a woman’s skull treated with red ochre, below right),
but could be restored on paper. Among the dancers are some lively naked acrobats, a man striking
a drum and a number of strange figures, painted half red, half white which were possibly headless.
A similar figure from the north wall of the shrine, beyond the big bull shown in Plate 64, is armed
with a mace, below left. Below the floor of the shrine only female burials were found, and there
were no burials below the platform normally occupied by the male of the house, a situation
without parallel at Catal Hiiyiik
64 An enormous red bull occupied the greater part of the north wall of shrine A.III.1, once again
emphasizing the strength of religious tradition at Catal Hiiyiik, where bulls always occupy this
position (Plates 11, 12, 14) facing the Taurus (‘Bull’) Mountains, perhaps not a coincidence. This
great beast, over six feet long, dominates the decoration of the shrine and the awe inspired by
this monster is clearly shown by the small size of the male figures that surround it. The tops of the
horns, tail and the lower part of the legs with the hoofs are lost. Between the horns stands another
figure painted half white, half red and above, in front and behind are male hunters, dressed in
monochrome red skins (and not leopard skins), unfortunately poorly preserved. Though some are
armed and the excited hunters surround the animal, no wounding or killing is shown and it is
doubtful whether the scene represents the hunt
65 This limestone concretion,
from shrine VI.A.10, of which
only the top was carved into a
human head probably embodies
the chthonic aspect of the
Mother Goddess. Semi-aniconic,
it emphasizes the fear and awe
inspired by stalacmitic under-
ground caverns of the Taurus
Mountains, the haunt of the Earth
Goddess and the realm of the
dead
66 Coarsely modelled figurines of animals in baked clay from Level VI. Wild boar and a feline head
are on the left, a horned animal (bull or cow) on the right and a headless figure below. The coarse
bristles of the boar are shown by nail imprints. Nearly all these figures are intentionally maimed or
broken and many bear ‘wounds’ inflicted with obsidian arrows or other offensive weapons. Found
in groups buried in pits, these figures had evidently been used in a hunting ritual in which they had
served as substitutes for the animals the hunters hoped to kill
67, 68 Large clay figure of a
goddess   supported     by   two
felines, giving birth to a child.
An early example of the con-
cept of the goddess as “Mistress
of Animals’, it was found in a
grain bin of shrine A.IL1, where
it may have been placed to
promote the fertility of the crops
by sympathetic magic
69 Semi-aniconic figure of a pregnant (?) goddess in blue limestone from shrine VI.A.10. It consists
of a small boulder with incised eyes and mouth, sufficient to turn the stone into a shape resembling
a woman. Catal Hiiyiik VI has yielded examples of several theoretical stages of sculpture. They
range from the aniconic but highly suggestive concretions and stalactites, purely natural and
unworked by human hand, through semi-aniconic figures in which a likeness was enhanced with a
few lines by the sculptor (Plates 65, 69, 72); a head or arms added to statuettes carved with a mini-
mum of detail (Plates 70, 71, 88, 91), or fully realistic, but schematized human forms (Plates 78-80,
83-87)
70-72 White marble figures from shrine VI.A.10: a double
goddess above, a small schematized figure below. The double
goddess with two heads, two pairs of breasts, but a single
pair of arms is the earliest representation yet of a concept
familiar to Anatolian religion, recurring later at Hacilar I
and Kiiltepe. It probably represents the two aspects, mother
and maiden, of the great goddess, predecessors of the “Two
Ladies’ of the Knossos texts, the famous ivory from
Mycenae and the Demeter and Kore of Classical Greece
73-76 The pair of statues of goddesses
with leopards, in brown and blue lime-
stone, (each shown in front and back
view), were found together with a boy
on a leopard (Plate 86). Evidently made
by the same sculptor, they reflect the
same recurrent idea of mother and
maiden, here amplified by the addition
of a male child. These statues were
found in shrine VI.A.10, but they were
already old and headless and they may
originally have come from shrine VIL8.
Accompanied by their sacred animal,
the leopard, these statues stress the
aspect of the deities as Mistress and
Master of Animals, the connection
with nature and wildlife. The goddesses
stand behind the animals, whereas the
boy god rides on it. Of the pair, the
mature nude figure, left, in brown lime-
stone is evidently the mother, whereas
the young figure with a shawl of skin
round the neck, right, in blue limestone
evidently represents the daughter, or
maiden aspect of the goddess. The
figure of the boy god is in brown lime-
stone, like that of his mother, a subtle
distinction which is typical of neolithic
Catal Hiiyiik
<77 This fine alabaster figure of a stand-
  ing goddess is carved in the more
  naturalistic style characteristic of the
   later building-levels of Catal Hiiyiik.
   It was found in the storeroom of shrine
   E.IV.4. The burning of the building
   has caused the alabaster to blister which
   accounts for the great patch on the body
   of the figure and her left arm. The hole
   in the head is peculiar and may have
   served for the attachment of a cap,
   crown or flower? As with all these
   early statuettes, the figure lacks a mouth




   78, 79 Above, the upper part of a fine
   marble statue with arms worked in the
   round and delicately carved breasts.
   The lower half of the figure was already
   lost when it was deposited in shrine
   VI.A.10. The fine, painted baked clay
   statue, below, was found in the ante-
   room of shrine VI.A.61 and shows a
   delicacy of modelling in hands and
   breasts not often encountered. The
   figure is painted with cross-like flower
   patterns, familiar from the wall-paint-
   ings. To date it is the earliest example
   of a naturalistically modelled figure in
   clay from Anatolia
81 Necklace of blue apatite beads, graded in size, and in
the shape of highly schematized steatopygous goddesses,
with two shell pendants. Found with the red ochre burial
of a young woman (?) below the large building IV.8. The
schematic goddesses have clear links with similar figures
from Peterfels in Baden and representations of women in
French caves of the Upper Palaeolithic
80, 82 Kneeling figure of white marble, partly burnt,
depicting a goddess from shrine VI.A.25, found together
with the figure of a bird of prey, below, probably a vulture,
and the statue of an adolescent male god (Plate 84). It is
likely that the grim owl-faced deity with the vulture repre-
sents yet another aspect of the goddess; the goddess of
death, the crone of later mythology
83 Unique greenish-grey schist plaque from shrine VI.A.30 with four figures in bold relief. On
the left a couple of deities are shown in embrace; on the right a mother holding a child, whose head
is unfortunately lost. It is possible, if not probable, that the two scenes relate a succession of events;
the union of the couple on the left and the intended result on the right. The goddess remains the
same, the male appears either as husband or as son. This may be one of the earliest representations of
the hieros gamos, the ‘sacred marriage’
                                                                            Wall-painting
  5 Naturalistic paintings; goddesses, human figures, bulls, birds,
     vultures, leopards, deer found either by themselves or grouped
     into elaborate scenes like deer hunts, bulls with human figures,
     funerary rites, etc.
  6 Representations of landscape and architecture; volcano and
    town and mortuary structures.

The distribution of these varied subjects is indicated in the table on
p. 81 which indicates the range of such subjects in the various build-
ing-levels so far excavated. Subject to confirmation by later excava-
tions it appears that groups 1 and 2 (plain and geometric panels)
span almost the entire period from Level X to II and III respectively.
Group 3 (symbols) also runs from Level X-II, but human hands
(group 4) have not so far been found after Level VI A and group 6
is represented only in Levels VII and VI. Naturalistic paintings have
a wide range, starting in Level IX with a black bull, but vultures
occur only in VII and VII and human figures are rare in the lower
levels (VIII-VI A). Elaborate and lively scenes of hunting, etc.,
appear to be characteristic only of the end of the period in Levels IV
and III, where they occur in four shrines.
   A preliminary analysis then shows the existence side by side of
geometric and naturalistic painting, as in the earlier Upper Palaeo-
lithic of Europe and Anatolia. In the Early Chalcolithic painted
pottery we find the continuation of both these groups, especially in
the pottery of Hacilar where the geometric designs are accompanied
by the ‘fantastic style’, which includes purely naturalistic forms with
highly schematized elements of the same nature (birds, bulls, rams,
snakes, etc.).
  The use of red paint on panels, posts, niches, doorways and some-
times on benches, platforms or animal-heads in plaster, architectural
or decorative details of houses and shrines is widespread and hardly
a single well-preserved house is without it. It is obviously part of the
building-tradition and it has survived in a number of villages around
Catal Hiiyiik to the present day. It has no structural significance and
its use must therefore be regarded as ritual. It is paralleled by the red
ochre burials or the use of red paint on baskets and boxes and in each
                                                                                       149
Catal Hiiviik
                    case red paint, symbolic of blood and life, has a protective function.
                    It wards off evil spirits and protects the object so decorated, be it the
                    body of the dead, the wall of the house or shrine near which he
                    slept, the bench or platform on which he sat or slept, the posts which
                    support his roof and which might fall down, the boxes in which
                    precious possessions were kept or the baskets in which his food was
                    stored. In a world filled with evil spirits such protection was essential
                    and if we could only discover the colour of garments we might
                    safely assume that red cloth was made for this very purpose. There
                    is one scrap of evidence which proves the use of red cloth; a number
                    of broken beads in Level VI contained red stains of thread and as no
                    red ochre was present in the grave, these can only have come from
                    the thread. Nor is it at all impossible to assume that the red panels
                    over the platforms imitate hangings of red cloth, just as the geometric
                    panels copy patterned textiles. Rows of holes for fixing such hangings
                    occur in a number of shrines (VII.8; VI.A.10) in a position at the
Figs 25, 26         foot of the wall, where such panels with imitation hangings are most
                    often found.
                       It is probably not a coincidence that solid black panels have been
                    found only below the vulture painting in shrine VII.21, where they
                    alternate in time with red ones. In this context black evidently
                    represents death and mourning. How far the inhabitants of Catal
                    Hiiyiik carried this symbolism is difficult to tell, but we have found
                    black vultures and red vultures, red bodies and one faded black body
                    (in room VI.A.27), black bulls and red bulls, and rows of alternate
                    ted hands and black hands. Such contrasts need not be purely
                    decorative and probably have a meaning. It may be argued that red
                    and black are some of the easiest available colours, but the paintings
                    at Catal Hiiyiik, more often polychrome than not, show no lack of
                    pigments available so that such a theory is hardly tenable. Nor
                    should we attach too much importance to a naturalistic rendering of
                    colours in the depiction of humans and animals. The male population
                    of Catal Hiiyiik, though naturally sunburnt, was white skinned, but
                    males are painted red with black hair. Women are painted red or
                    white and, though it may be argued that they were less sun-tanned
                    than the men, they nevertheless worked in the fields or on the roofs
150


      ARIA TATE MUISFIM TIRRARY . THAN      AZ. mer7t
                                                                          Wall-paintings
of the houses where they would be exposed-to the sun. The white
figures of women might indicate a white dress rather than white
bodies and the evidence is quite inconclusive. They are distinguished
from the men in shape rather than in colour. The same applies to the
bulls, and, whereas the male aurochs was probably black in colour,
the huge red figures in shrines VI.8 and III.1 are evidently also bulls
judging by their horns and the only possible figure of a cow (shrine
VII.1) was painted blue! Also vultures in life are neither red nor
black but brown.
   Prima facie acceptance of the colours as naturalistic would create
a naive picture of a polychrome society of red or white women, red
men with red or black hands pursuing blue cows and red and black
bulls, which is anything but convincing.
   Panels with geometric decoration are common and varied and
may also be used for the decoration of plastered posts (as in the
Leopard Shrine VI.B.44 or house A.IIL.10), although these are
usually painted red. Sometimes the patterns consist of groups of
parallel vertical (house VI.B.28) or horizontal lines (house VIII.1);
frequently more elaborate patterns are preferred, such as great
panels of concentric circles in shrine VIII.2 above a dado of black and
red triangles. On the east wall of this shrine these were repeated four
times but on the north wall they only formed a single layer. L-
shaped patterns in red or orange covered the main panel on the
north wall of house VI.B.3 and the panel below the doorway in
shrine VI.B.10. Checkerboard patterns surrounded the niche below
the boar’s jaw in the same building; superimposed triangles, half
red, half white, a post in house A.III.10. Vertical wavy lines in red
surrounded a niche painted orange in shrine III.13, horizontal
ones decorate the bull’s head in shrine VI.A.66; A-shaped patterns,
upright and reversed in black and red, cover a panel on the west wall
of house VI.B.45. Groups of orange dots occupied the lower panel
of the north wall of shrine VI.A.66, the central eastern panel of which
bore a pattern of concentric circles and pointed stars in white and
orange on cream. Many of these are too fragmentary to reconstruct,
but hardly any two are the same. Some, like the orange painting
from the north wall of shrine IX.1, defy interpretation.
                                                                                    151
Catal Hiiyiik
                       Another series, however, starting with a polychrome painting in
                    shrine [X.8 and continuing with a whole group in Levels VIII-VI A,
                    evidently represent textiles and their resemblance to Anatolian
                    ‘kilims’ (i.e. thin woven rugs) is striking. As weaving was widely
                    practised at Catal Hiiyiik and dyeing would present no difficulties,
                    since all the necessary plants for the production of vegetable dyes
                    grow wild around the mound, the probability that kilims were
                    already produced should seriously be considered. In this connection it
                    is particularly interesting to note that two of these wall-paintings
Plates 30, VIII;    from shrine VII.21 imitate a stitched border. On a painting this makes
Figs 14, 15
                    no sense unless a kilim provided its prototype. In two superimposed
Fig. 24             wall-paintings from shrine VIL1 the stitched border, indicated by
                    impression in the previous shrine, is painted as a row of light and
                    dark squares, neatly marking the edge of the kilim. Rather than
                    suggesting that these wall-paintings inspired the later weaving of
                    kilims, these borders indicate the reverse, and it seems now likely
                    that kilims have been woven in Anatolia since the late seventh
                    millennium Bc, or for at least the last eight thousand years.
                       Favourite motifs of these kilim patterns are rectangles filled with
                    Union Jack patterns, alternate rows of red and black triangles with a
Plates 30, VIII     central white dot, or squares filled with concentric lozenges, with
                    or without a border. This may be grooved (as in shrine VII.21)
                    or merely painted (shrines VII.1 and 8, and VI.B.1 or VI.A.50),
                    but in a number of cases it was faint and could not be preserved
                    (e.g. shrines VI.B.15, [X.8 and VIII.8).
                      Whereas the kilim patterns of Levels IX-VII are fairly simple,
Plate 29; Fig. 44   those of Levels VI B and VI A show great sophistication and a new
                    motif is introduced which looks like a string of vertically or diagon-
                    ally arranged lozenges, varying in shape and size and combined with
                    zigzag and wavy lines. Other elements look like the fine mesh of a
                    shawl or a pattern of bricks or openwork reed matting, but their
                    origin is probably to be sought in the sophisticated textiles of this
                    period. About a dozen such paintings covered the two panels of the
                    east wall of shrine VI.B.1, which was repainted over and over again.
                    Continuity in decoration marks this building which was built on top
                    of an earlier shrine in Level VII similarly decorated with numerous
152
44 North and east wall
ofshrine VI.B.1 with the
‘mortuary’ wall-painting
on the north wall, and
textiles and kilim pattern
paintings over the main
platforms. On the wall
beyond    the   bench   are
painted    ‘bones’.     See
Plates 8, 29




kilim-patterns. Many of these paintings were exceedingly frag-
mentary and the conflagration which destroyed this building twice in
Level VI has reduced the fine layers of plaster to the thickness of a
dead leaf as well as changing its colour. The earliest of the textile
paintings is also one of the most complicated; many of the later
paintings on the northern panel resemble each other without being
identical. The finest of all, one of the latest, though only half pre-    Plate 29; Fig. 44
served and measuring nearly 1-8 metres in length, has a pattern as
complicated as many a modern kilim and is painted in red, white,
orange-red and grey on buff. Not only the general effect, but the
colour variations in the vertical bands, without affecting the pattern,
is that of a textile. Within the triangles the fill motif resembles a
stylized flower or, less likely, a four-fingered hand. The central
vertical bands show a simplified design whereas the broader outer
bands are more elaborate. There is some evidence to show that this
kilim pattern was once repainted, but not enough survived to be
certain that the later painting followed exactly the same pattern.
Along the top a border with a wavy line on alternate red and white
background marked the kilim’s edge below a plastered horizontal
beam. Fragments of a similar kilim pattern, also with red and white
mesh bordering a triangle were found in house VI.B.3 next door,
and another version is seen on the posts of the Leopard Shrine.                     Fig. 29

                                                                                       153
Catal Hiiyiik
                         Kilim patterns of the same sort decorated the east and north walls
Plates 37, 38; Fig. 45 of the somewhat later shrine VI.A.50. Of these the one on the main
                       panel of the east wall, was the most interesting and was painted in
                    red, black and white. Against a mesh background three vertical
                    bands of lozenges with rounded triangles on either side stand out.
                    The fill-motifs are more      varied here; stylized flowers,     crosses,
                    horns and even a small hand. The other paintings lack the mesh
                    background, and the semicircles have no fill-motifs.
                       Simpler textile patterns consisting of vertical bands with zigzag
                    or lozenge motifs occurred in shrines VI.B.1 and VI.B.15, and a
                    particularly interesting pattern in red was found in house VI.B.6s.
Plate 35              Panels with ‘leopard spots’, identical with the patterns on the
                    leopard reliefs are less common, but they occurred in the richly
                    painted shrine VI.B.1. It is possible that these paintings replaced
                    actual hangings of leopard skin, in the same way as red panels and
                    kilim paintings replaced actual cloth and textiles.
                       In Levels V and IV only fragments of striped patterns and two
                    triangles painted in black were found on the central post of the east
                    wall of shrine E.IV.1. In Level III, however, an entire shrine (A.III.8)
                    was ornamented with kilim and textile patterns. The latest of these is
                    unfinished, but was meant to cover the entire building except the
                    south wall, as is clear from the red triangles covering all three walls.
Plates 31, 32       In fact, only the painting of the north-west corner was completed.
                    Two rows of vertical panels divided by parallel horizontal lines
                    formed the pattern and each panel contained groups of lines diagon-
                    ally arranged in a zigzag pattern rather like woven mats. The trian-
                    gular interstices were filled with red paint. From the unfinished panels
                    the painter’s method can be followed in detail: first he put down the
                    red triangles, leaving space enough for the white ones; then he put
                    in the grey ground in stripes, leaving white lines round the red
                    triangles and thirdly and finally he repainted the white lines. This
                    final over-painting in white was clearly to be seen in the most
                    perfect areas of the painting. Some pleasant irregularities in the
                    design are similar to deliberate ‘faults’ in Anatolian kilims, the idea
                    being that perfect work can only be made by God. The way in which
                    this kilim was intended to cover the walls—running round the
154
                                                                          Wall-paintings




45 East end of shrine VI.A.50 with
paintings of kilims, a figure of the         ,
goddess and bucrania. See Plates 37,38   #




corners of the room—gives one the sense of a wall-hanging of
enormous size (14°4 metres, or over 45 feet).
   Below this painting on part of the west wall was another con-
sisting of two vertical rows of red crosses or flowers outlined in pink     Plates 33, 34
and associated with crenellations of an even earlier layer with
quatrefoils in orange-red with a pink border. Elements of this earliest
pattern have also survived on the north and east wall, associated
with barbed zigzag lines (honeycombs in section ?) and other motifs.
These may be regarded as textile motifs and at the same time as
symbols, presumably of fertility. A pattern of deep red dots and V’s,
it would seem, immediately preceded the unfinished kilim pattern,
so that there is evidence for not less than four superimposed patterns
on the west wall (orange-red quatrefoils; large red quatrefoils; dots
and V’s and finally the red, white and grey kilim).
   A parallel for the kilim is found in a shrine (A.III.13) where an
identical pattern, but coloured black and white, covered earlier
paintings of a hunting scene on the north wall. Finally no geometric
or figurative paintings have so far been found in building-level II,
from which only red panels survive.
                                                                                     155
Catal Hiiyiik




                IX The enthroned goddess from the shrine in Level II, the latest found at Catal Hiiyiik. Supported
                by two felines, the goddess is Mistress of Animals and is shown giving birth to a probably male
                child. She is made of baked clay and was found in the grain bin of the shrine

                X Group of three statuettes in blue (left) and brown limestone, from shrine VI.A.10, showing the
                double aspect of the goddess, maiden and mother, accompanied by the divine child—all three
                statues in association with a leopard, the sacred animal of the deities of the animal world and of
                nature

                XI Detail of a doe and fawn from the hunting scene in the ante-chamber of shrine A.III.1., the
                latest shrine with pictorial representations found at Catal Hiiyiik

                XII Burial of a woman with funeral gifts in shrine VI.B.20. On the left a round basket imprint
                in white, then a polished obsidian mirror set in lime plaster and just beyond it a small oval basket
                containing rouge

                XIII Fragment from the southern part of the dancers painting on the east wall of shrine A.III.1,
                showing a hunter in white loin-cloth and black-spotted, pink leopard skin. Round the neck he
                wears a pendant and in his right hand he holds a bow

                XIV Ceremonial dagger of flint from male burial in shrine VI.B.29. The dagger which is polished
                on one side and pressure-flaked on the other was provided with a carved bone handle representing
                a snake

                XV Bead necklaces and bracelets of various cut and polished stones, mainly from Levels VI.A and B.
                Blue apatite necklace of beads in the form of stylized goddesses from a shrine IV.8 red ochre
                burial. Eye for fastening belt hooks, of polished bone, from a burnt burial in shrine VI.A.5
156
XII
       XIV




ve >
                                                                           Wall-paintings
   Symbols are frequent in the wall-paintings of Catal Hiiyiik and
we have already had occasion to refer to them in the description of a
number of paintings in Levels VI and III. Most motifs may have
had a symbolic meaning and, among these, human hands and
quatrefoils, probably a stylized flower, are at once the most pro-
minent and the most ancient. The earliest fragment of a wall-painting
from Catal Hiiyiik, that found in the debris below a house of Level X,
shows such a quatrefoil, shaped rather like a Maltese cross; this
probably decorated the jamb of a doorway as do many others in                     Plate 36
Levels VII and VI B. They appear as fill-motifs in kilim paintings of
Levels VI B and VI A, or decorate whole fields in rows in shrine
A.IIL8 described above.
  Far more elaborate is a panel from shrine VI.A.66 where such                    Plate 40
flower-like motifs occur on either side of two others; an object
resembling at first sight a ‘double axe’ and a mauve and orange
wheeled cross with strange projections at the end of each arm. One
of the arms overlies the flower on the right and the flower itself
covers a crenellation pattern like those from the west wall of shrine
A.IIL8. Three small goddesses and two superimposed human figures,
a steatopygous female and a male archer are painted between the
wheeled cross and the flower pattern to the right. Although over-
painting is notable, no layers of white paint intervened between these
layers of paint and additions were therefore made to already existing
paintings in the way of Upper Palaeolithic and many primitive
paintings. At Catal Hiiyiik this procedure is unique. It is impossible
to extract the meaning from this painting as a whole, but we can at
least make some suggestions about the symbols. As double axes are
not found at Catal Hiiyiik, there are no grounds for interpreting
this symbol as a double axe. This strange shape finds its best parallels
in a number of stone beads from the same building-level, and its
association with stylized flowers might possibly suggest that some
sort of insect (bee or butterfly) is meant. The small double triangles
seen between the four petals of the flowers and beyond do not
suggest that these are necessarily part of the flower, they look more
like moths attracted by the flowers. One of the most common moths
round Catal Hiiyiik is the hummingbird moth, which flies by day,
                                                                                      I61
Catal Htiytik —
                  and the ‘double axe’ may represent some bright butterfly, of which
                  there are plenty in spring in the Konya Plain when the plain is
                  studded with flowers.
                     The wheeled cross also presents difficulties and is unique at Catal
                  Hiiyiik. Could it represent four tall standing figures with upraised
                  arms and legs combined into a circle—the four representing the
                  points of the compass or the four regions of the plain—doing homage
Plate 39          like the two human figures one of which covers her face to the thrice
                  repeated mother goddess hovering in the distance? Does this wall-
                  painting symbolize an act of homage to the great goddess on a
                  spring morning in the Konya Plain amids fields of flowers and
                  humming insect life nearly eight thousand years ago, or is this too
                  fanciful an interpretation? It would be rash to deny the existence of
                  agrarian rites in Neolithic religion; they are well attested in Minoan-
                  Mycenaean and later Greek cults which owe so much to Anatolia.
                     There are, moreover, other paintings at Catal Hiiyiik in shrine
                  VIL.B.8 (east wall) that again seem to depict fields of flowers and
                  insect life. Two superimposed paintings depict versions of a single
Plate 42          composition. The earlier, which is also the more complete, shows a
                  cellular structure in red. On the left these cells are not filled with any
                  design; in the central portion of the painting white circles, sometimes
                  with a central dot, fill the cells and most of these on the right are
                  filled with a flower-like pattern, parallel wavy lines, winged or
                  wingless insects. The red cellular structure is part of the painting
                  and not superimposed on it. The interpretation suggested was that
                  of the life-cyle of the bee in a honeycomb with closed cells on the
                  left, from which, in the middle, the bees emerge to fly freely in a
                  field of flowers on the right. Rows of four-fingered human hands in
                  pink and black along the top and in pink (vertical) and white
                  (horizontal) along the bottom provide a frame for this intriguing
                  picture.
                     The later wall-painting, superimposed on the other after a lapse of
Plate 41          time was similar in composition, but only the southern end has
                  survived. There are some differences however, the main one being
Fig. 46           that the cellular pattern is an addition to the original painting which
                  shows a field of flowers and branches from which sway wingless
162
                                                                                              Wall-paintings


                 >. aN
                 WSK                                              Se
                                                                                                   +,
                                      ie                                 x                     y

                  46 Copy of a later painting on the east wall of shrine VI.B.8 with the red net pattern removed
                  showing insects and flowers. See Plates 41, 42



insects or chrysalises, whilst other insects or butterflies hover with
 clearly marked wings around the flowers. That this scene was in-
 spired by nature is clear in spite of stylization and the subject is
evidently spring (there are no flowers in the Konya Plain after the
end of June). The most incongruous element in these paintings is the
four-fingered hands and why are these four-fingered only here?
One cannot help wondering why Neolithic man’s most important
crops—the spiked ears of wheat and barley—alone never appear in
any of these wall-paintings. Could there be a remote symbolism
connecting these hands with the ears of corn? Did neolithic man
perhaps have the notion that the ears were the plant’s hand where we
talk about ‘heads’ or ‘ears’. Why do we find this interest in plant
and animal life in ritual wall-paintings but to man’s interest and
advantage?
   We may perhaps suggest a different explanation for these scenes;
the cycle of the agrarian year with the blank field on the left repre-
senting the fallow field; the circles and dots, the holes in which the
seeds were planted; the flowers and insects, the emergence of the
crops, and the red cellular net pattern with hands on either side a
symbolic representation of the gathering of the fruit, in other words
the harvest. The idea of ‘netting the harvest’ could easily have been
                                                                                                           163
Catal Hiiyiik
                derived from the other occupation of Neolithic man, the hunt in
                which nets were certainly used.
Plates 43, 44      The association of hands and net-like patterns recurs in shrine
                VII.8, which lies directly below the building with the scenes just
                described. In a wall-painting which occupies part of the west and
                north walls we find the same association of red and black hands
                above and red hands below a series of alternate red and black linear
                net-like patterns. Here there are no fields of flowers, but there is a big
                black bull further along the north wall. Whether a connection exists
                between the two actual paintings is impossible to affirm and the bull
                could conceivably be somewhat later in date.
                   Still another shrine (VI.B.10) shows a net-like painting, with some
                hands added in a certain phase around the head of a bull above a
                niche, perhaps another symbolic attempt at capture. If translated to a
                religious sphere (conquest of death’), a parallel for this is found in
                the same building where a checkerboard pattern (another representa-
                tion of a net?) surrounds a similar niche surmounted by the lower
                jaw of a boar, another death-symbol. Parts of red lines suggestive of
                nets or a stockade appear behind a bull on the north wall of shrine
                A.III.1 and two panels of painting on the north wall of shrine VI.B.15
                show a black and red net-pattern, textile-like in precision and more
                regular than that of shrine VII.8. This is partly covered by another
                and larger panel with about three score hands, fifty-seven of which
                have survived. Finally it may not be a coincidence that the bulls’
                heads and the ram’s head above the net and hand patterns on the east
                wall of shrine VI.B.8 are also painted with pictures of nets and hands,
                as if these animals, like the bull and the boar in the neighbouring
                building, were to be captured. Where this idea of net and animal
                occurs in shrines, it is on the east or north wall, traditionally asso-
                ciated with death and above the platforms beneath which the
                dead rested (this specific location also applies to the boar’s jaw and
                niche in shrine VI.B.10).
                   A further panel of human hands left in reserve on a red background
                was found below the later of the two paintings discussed above on
                the east wall of shrine VI.B.8 and may have been associated with it.
                All the hands are those of adults and they look like hands held on the
164
                                                                            Wall-paintings
wall round which paint was applied, whereas most others (except
those in house VI.A.63) were painted on the wall in a positive
technique. Most hands at Catal Hiiyiik are right hands, but there are
a number of left hands. All are, however, complete hands and there
are no signs of mutilation, such as are claimed for a number of
representations in Upper Palaeolithic cave sanctuaries, especially
Gargas in the Pyrenees. The curious empty circle in the palm which
occurs on a large number of the Catal Hiiyiik paintings is easily
explained and is the result of pressing a hand dipped in paint on to
the wall. If care is taken to press all fingers to the wall the centre of
the palm does not touch it thus leaving a circle free of paint. The
fact that so many hands are painted (and not impressed) in this way
shows that the practice of dipping hands in paint was widespread
and used, e.g., on animal heads, goddess-figures, etc.
   The interpretation of paintings or impressions of hands—and to
this we may add one foot imprint—then is varied. There is either the                Plate 7
idea of touching a sacred figure in search of protection, obtaining its
blessing and warding off evil (which is implied in protection) or
association of hands with other scenes suggests something quite
different; it would appear to be an abbreviation for people, just as
bulls’ and rams’ heads apply the same principle of pars pro toto for
bull and ram. “All hands’ still has the same meaning today in many
languages, and some of these paintings may be captioned ‘All
hands to the harvest’ or ‘All hands to the net’ a way of expression
that has survived the eight thousand years that separate us from the
Anatolian Neolithic. There is probably no need to remind any
reader that the harvest, that symbol of Neolithic achievement and
man’s delivery from hunger, still to this very day demands every
available hand. It is man’s hands which differentiate him from the
animal, and this most versatile of instruments has made him what he
is. That Homo sapiens should have realized this and given recognition
and expression to it in his art is no less than we can expect. From
Neolithic times onwards the hand became the symbol of creation,
of effort, both human and divine, and of man himself. It is the hand
which sought blessings in prayer, the hand which caressed and the
hand which warded off evil.
                                                                                       165
Catal Hiiytik
                   Paintings of human figures, goddesses and animals are compara-
                tively rare at Catal Hiiyiik. The goddess is usually represented in
                plaster reliefs, which may or may not have been painted. Three
                small goddesses, each with raised arms and upturned legs were
Plate 39        found on the painting from shrine VI.A.66 already described, but a
                much larger one, about 61 cms in height, was found on the southern-
Fig. 45         most panel of the east wall of shrine VI.A.50 painted in monochrome
                red, showing the same familiar position. So far this is the only figure
                of a large goddess painted on the wall and not modelled in relief.
                   Leopards, attributes of the goddess, were found only in shrine
                VI.44 and these also were modelled in relief and painted; bulls,
                the symbol of the male deity, occur more frequently in relief than
Plate 11        in paint. On the north wall of shrine [X.8 a large black bull was
                painted, only part of which has survived. Below its front hoof is a
                rectangular structure painted in red, the significance of which is not
                clear. The bulls on the north walls of shrines VII.8 and VI.8, cut
                into the plaster and painted, have already been described and the
                only remaining bull, that from shrine A.III.8, will be discussed below.
                Two fragmentary birds come from a broken panel on the east wall
                of house VI.B.34 and they may have been part of a larger scene
                destroyed by a deep Hellenistic pit, the stagnant water of which
                caused the downfall of this panel in antiquity.
                   Wall-paintings of vultures attacking human bodies are found
                only in three shrines of Levels VII and VII and illustrate the pre-
                liminaries of the burial habits of the Neolithic population of Catal
                Hiiyiik, which consisted of secondary burial of skeletons cleaned by
                vultures. These paintings are therefore of the utmost importance as
                they shed light on a practice which may have been far more widely
                practised than is commonly realized.
                   In the earliest painting, which comes from the east wall of shrine
Plate 46        VIIL.8 two large black vultures are shown, painted over the remains
                of an earlier polychrome kilim painting. Between them is a minute
                human figure, shown swinging a sling in vigorous motion, presum-
                ably to ward off the two vultures from the small headless corpse
                which lies on its left side to his right. In his left hand he is holding an
                object which may have been a mace or club. Behind the vulture on
166
                                                                              Wall-paintings
the left there are more black slings and the indistinct remains per-
haps of a further red figure. The lower part of the painting has been
destroyed by damp.
   The second vulture painting decorated the north wall of shrine                   Figs 14, 15
VII.21. One complete group of two vultures, face to face over the
headless body of a human figure, survives, but beyond the post on                     Plate 47
the wall the wings of a further vulture were found which indicates
that the scene was probably repeated, but with only one vulture as
the presence of the doorway leaves no room for a pair. In this shrine
the entire scene was painted in a fine reddish-brown paint on a dead-
white background. The collapse of the wall has obliterated the tops
of the vultures heads, but the crests are clearly shown. With their
enormous wings, these gruesome creatures dwarf the small headless
human figure between them and this differs from all others in being
shown with uplifted arms and widespread legs, as if it were lying on
its back. A further peculiarity of this painting is seen in the legs of the
vultures which, far from being naturalistically drawn as in shrine
VIIL.8, are clearly those of human beings. The question therefore
arises whether these vultures really portray beasts of prey or human
beings disguised in vulture garb performing what is evidently a
funerary rite. For this there is plenty of evidence in the shrine, which
contained four human skulls.
   It is not difficult to imagine the awe and terror which the wall-
paintings of shrine VII.8 must have inspired in Neolithic man, c.
6200 BC, on entering. All around its north and east wall, a great
frieze showed not less than seven vultures with outspread wings                        Fig. 47
making a feast of six small headless human beings. Vultures do
not remove skulls so that it may be assumed that the absence
of heads is a pictorial convention to indicate corpses. The burials
found below this gruesome scene were all anatomically intact
and none had lost their skulls, so there is no immediate connec-
tion between the burial-rites and the wall-painting in this shrine.
The corpses in the painting are shown in positions in which we find           Plates 45, 48, 49
the dead are buried, either contracted on their left side or fully ex-
tended. Five large vultures are shown on the north wall and con-
tinue into the east wall up to the first post, and on the two large
                                                                                           167
Catal Hiiyiik
                panels of that wall even larger vultures are portrayed with wing-
                spans of about 5 feet, i.e. nearly life-size. The bird represented is
                probably the Griffon vulture (Gyps vulvus) of Anatolia, very fre-
                quently seen in the Konya Plain and a most useful bird in countries
                where the law forbids the burying of dead animals. These scenes
                speak for themselves and are evidently connected with the burial
                rite of excarnation for which there is abundant evidence at Catal
                Hiiyiik. The beaks of vultures leave no marks on the bones, they
                only tear off the flesh, and the brain inside the skull is not disturbed.
                   Disarticulated skulls and other elements of bodies occur in two
Plate 8         wall-paintings from shrine VI.B.1. In the first of these, painted on
Fig. 44         the east wall, a jumble of human bones is shown reminiscent of a
                disturbed grave, and in the second a series of what looks like human
                skulls, or rather decomposing heads and some bones are shown
                below a construction of reeds and matting (described above, p. 65),
                which probably represents the mortuary where the rites of ex-
                carnation were practised, presumably well away from the site and
                probably upstream.
                  In only one other building, a shrine (E.IV.1) of Level IV, is a scene
Plates 50, $1   presented which seems to be part of a funerary rite. Below the torso
                of a man (painted red) in.a white loin-cloth (?) the head of a bearded
                man is shown and a little higher up towards the left there are the
                remains of what may have been a second head which, judging by the
                remains of a diadem of round discs, may have been that of a woman.
                This wall-painting is very badly destroyed, but there is certainly no
                room for two complete human figures and it seems far more likely
                that the red man was carrying two or more human heads. The
                carried head of the man is bearded and has a big lock of black hair;
                his grinning mouth and forehead are painted red as if smeared with
                blood and the eyes are closed. Other dabs of red are found on his
                cheeks, but no nose is indicated, and the impression one gets is that
                of a dead man.
                   Of the rest of the scene little can be made out except a small white
Plate 53        figure with short legs, a plump torso and raised arms, another small
                white figure and two groups of white, red and black lines which defy
                interpretation in their present state. Of the paintings along the south
168
                                                                                                  Wall-paintings
                                                                                                              fi)




47 Earliest paintings on the north and east walls ofthe Vulture Shrine, VII.8. See Plates 45-48



wall only the legs of some figures painted in red are preserved, but
they show that figures at least 18 cms in height were once painted on
that wall. The state of preservation of the figures on the main panels
of the east wall is most unsatisfactory, and only the upper part of a
small red male figure now survives among a number of fragments of
white persons or objects. To the right of the northern posts, decor-
ated in one phase with black geometric patterns and later covered
with red and white paint, a small standing figure of a woman in a
leopard-skin dress, red necklace and red anklets is all that survived.
Over the north-east platform remains of a hunting (?) scene fallen
from the north wall on to the floor of the shrine could at least be
drawn in reconstruction. Four male figures, wearing white garments
and animal skins, are shown moving towards an unintelligible scene
on the left, which looks like an animal (bear ?) trapped in a net.
Beyond it another male figure extends a hand towards an animal
head (?) and beyond that is a solid mass of red paint. There is evidence
that the west wall of this shrine had also been ornamented with
paintings, of which only specks survived. The destruction of this
                                                                                                            169
Catal Hiiyiik
                building, which was directly below the surface of the mound is
                most regrettable, for it is one of the very few decorated with a
                series of scenes in which human beings played a prominent part.
                   The only other wall-painting from a building of Level IV (A.IV.1)
                was found on the central post of its north wall. It is only a fragment
Plate 52        but shows two running male figures and the now-headless figure of
                a bull, in front of the bull are the remains of a third human figure
                which is running or has fallen and is the object of the bull’s attack.
                The other traces of indistinct figures belong to an almost obliterated
                later painting, the subject of which is no longer clear. The tall slender
                bodies, the long heads, the line of the hair shown in black are all
                similar to the human figures in shrine E.[V.1 and would seem to be
                characteristic of a style of paintings in building-levels IV and IIL.
                   Remains of a small but lively hunting scene were found on the
                walls of room A.III.13. Here a stag, accompanied by two fawns (one
Plates 56, 57   is lost but for its hind-legs), is pursued by a hunter and his dog. The
                man is shown at the point of releasing an arrow from his bow and the
                schematized rendering of the body has nevertheless captured this
                moment of haste and tension. His legs are bent and his animal-skin is
                floating behind him in the rush of action. The representation of a dog
                is the only proof for domestication of this animal at Catal Hiiyiik.
                This painting was later coated with white plaster and part of it
                covered with a black and white kilim pattern.
                   Next to the small room with the hunting-scene lay the remains of a
Fig. 48         large shrine (A.III.1), which has yielded some of the finest wall-
                paintings yet found at Catal Hiiyiik. These are also the latest, dating
                from about 5800 or a little after; let us say the first quarter of the
                fifty-eighth century Bc. Like many of the buildings found directly
                below the surface of the mound this shrine had suffered much from
                Hellenistic intrusions which had damaged the greater part of the
                east and west wall. Its antechamber, decorated with a large deer-
                hunt, was remodelled after a fire and the wall-painting was cut back
                by an unknown amount. Only the greater part of the north wall with
                its painting of a bull was more or less intact, but this painting had
                suffered from roots and animal holes and had faded more than any
                other in the building.
170
48 Restoration of the main room ofshrine A.III.1. See Plates 61-64



  The south wall of the antechamber bore the scene of a deer-hunt        Plates 54, 55, XI
painted in monochrome red without any additions in other colours.
It measured c. 1-5 metres in its present truncated state and was re-
painted four times with exactly the same pattern. The painting, now
in the Ankara Archaeological Museum, is the second of the four (the                  /
first was badly destroyed and most fragmentary) and as this was the
first wall-painting to be found at Catal Hiiyiik, we are much indebted
to Mr Ernest Hawkins, the Byzantologist, for his help and teaching
us how to remove a wall-painting from a burnt mud-brick wall.
  The scene shows five or six men, of different sizes, some naked and
others dressed in animal-skins which project stiffly from the waist,
armed with bows, slings or maces and a lasso (?), attacking a herd of
Red Deer (Cervus elaphus). The herd consists of three stags, two does
and two young fawns fleeing to the right of the picture. Many of the
animals turn their heads towards their pursuers and in the bottom
                                                                                         171
Catal Hiiyiik
                    register a fine stag has been brought down by two of the men who are
                    apparently preparing to kill it, while the leader of the hunt, drawn to
                    a larger scale, fixes his attention on another large stag, above which
                    a fragmentary small man appears. Two others are shooting arrows
                    at the does. The scene is extremely lively even if the naturalism of the
                    animals is tempered by pictorial stylization. Built into the new south
                    wall of the room was a fragment, probably derived from the same
                    scene, showing the feet of another large deer. It is unfortunately
                    unknown how much of this painting has been lost, for it is conceiv-
                    able that it covered not only the south but also the west wall of the
                    antechamber before the alterations.
                       The south wall of the main room of the shrine had no wall-paint-
                    ings, but a single stag was painted on the southernmost portion of
                    the east wall on the middle panel some 61 cms above the floor.
                    The lower panel was deeply recessed, and on its north wall remains
                    were found of a painting in black, red and white, which, with
Plate 58            some ingenuity, could be restored into a fine stag’s head, but this
                    restoration is by no means certain.
                      The north wall of the building was decorated with a wall painting
Fig. 48             of which a great bull, 2-05 metres in length, occupied the centre. Its
                    feet were painted on the lower panel and have not survived. Sur-
Plates 61, 62, 64   rounding the bull a number of running male figures were drawn,
                    armed with bows and dressed in animal-skins. These were not only
                    fragmentary, but in many cases their colours had faded and there
                    were traces of over-painting. Two of these figures, one between the
                    curving horns of the bull, the other far behind him, are painted half
Plate 62            red, half white. The first figure wears a red animal skin and is armed
                    with a bow, the second wears a pink leopard skin with black spots
                    and is waving a club or mace, and both are headless. The other
                    hunters painted red originally had heads, though some have lost
                    them as the paintings deteriorated.
                       Towards the west end of the north wall a group of hunters,
                    including the headless figure in the leopard skin, are turned towards
                    another animal, smaller than the large bull, that was painted on the
                    west wall. Fragments of two hunters appear near his hind quarters
                    and between them and two others are a number of red lines which
172
                                                                          Wall-paintings
may represent a net or stockade. This originally extended much
further down, but as its fragments were found in a Hellenistic pit
which had cut away the north-west corner (and most of the brick-
work of the west wall) restoration, even on paper, remains somewhat
uncertain. It seems extremely likely that a second and smaller bull
surrounded by hunters once occupied the west wall up to the door-
way. The entire scene of what is almost certainly a bull hunt (and not
a scene of bull-worship) still measures 5-5 metres in its truncated
state and was probably another metre or so in length originally. This
painting was the earliest one on the north and west wall and thus
dates from the earliest occupation of the shrine. Traces of repainting
were found among the figures surrounding the big bull and patches
of solid red paint covered the net and the hindquarters of the
second animal. What they represented can no longer be ascertained.
   The east wall of this shrine was originally decorated with a great
panel 3-4 metres in length and 66 cms in height, set some 61 cms
above the level of the two main platforms, and extending from the
north-east corner to the wooden post. It showed scenes of dancing in             Plate 61
connection with a deer hunt and not less than twenty-four human
figures are wholly or partly preserved out of an unknown number.
Of this exciting wall-painting only a large fragment (about 91 cms
in length) was still in situ at the north end of the wall together with
two other fragments, one along the top edge of the panel with the
antler of one deer and the head of a second and four human figures,
the second along its southern edge (1-2 metres in length) below the
second stag. This piece had slipped into a Hellenistic trench together           Plate 63
with numerous other fragments when the trench became water-
logged. The arrangement of the small fragments in connection with
the larger pieces, though based on the position in which they were
found is therefore reconstruction rather than fact, but the result is
entirely convincing. What we do not know is whether more figures
were originally present in the open spaces left in the reconstruction,
since, if there were originally more, their fragments have perished.
   On the major fragment of the wall-painting three successive layers
of painting were clearly recognizable: first, the earliest and best
preserved, then a middle one with larger figures running towards the
                                                                                     173
Catal Hiiyiik
                right and a third and latest painting with two rather lifeless figures
                depicted in reddish-brown. In style these latest figures resemble some
                of those painted around the great bull, but they do not appear to be
                contemporary, as the bull-hunt is undoubtedly of the same period as
                the earliest deer-hunt. The latest of the three paintings on this wall
                being in monochrome and in a different style, was easy to recognize.
                A man in an animal-skin is shown holding two bows and behind him
                is a second man with a small animal (dog ?) before him. Nowhere
                else on this wall were further fragments of this painting found.
                   The middle painting is in polychrome and shows extremely lively
                figures larger than those of the lowest layer, running at great speed
                towards the right. They‘are dressed in pink leopard-skins with black
                spots and wear bonnets of the same material. Most of them are armed
                with bows or club. The object of their attention are probably the
                deer, which seem to have been repainted once. A number of figures
                of this phase are preserved in patches only over earlier ones, alas not
                enough to complete this scene, but it may be assumed that groups
                of hunters running towards the deer from both sides formed its
                subject.
                   The earliest painting is also the best preserved. The major frag-
Plate 61        ment shows a scene that should probably be interpreted as a dance of
                the hunters. With the exception of two figures in the bottom register,
                a drummer and a bowman with raised sling, all the figures are
                shown proceeding to the left in three superimposed rows. The three
                figures in the middle row (there may have been more originally)
                are larger in size and the first is painted half red, half white, and
                is headless like the third figure which is all white except for a
                leopard-skin on the shoulder. The middle figure wears a white
                loin-cloth as well as a leopard-skin (pink with black spots) in which
                all figures except two naked acrobats are dressed. Similarly all figures
                wear berets of leopard-skin. They are armed with bows and slings
                and one figure in the top row is shown holding a small animal,
                possibly a dog. It appears that the dance takes place around the
                central figure in the middle and its purpose is possibly to insure the
                success of the hunt which is shown in the same panel further to
                the right. Here two stags and a fawn are shown, as well as a number
174
                                                                           Wall-paintings
of hunters all dressed in the same garb, and except one at the very end
of the picture, all moving towards the left. No headless figures are
found here, but one man placed below the stag in the middle of the
scene is differently dressed in a pale yellow skin with white borders
(lion- or deer-skin ?). Towards the far end of the painting a number
of inexplicable objects appear; a skin (?) in front of the man below the        Plate XIII
second deer, deer’s tracks (?) behind him and beyond that a poly-
chrome design and two grinning human (?) heads above. Their
meaning is obscure, but they tend to remind us that the wall-paint-
ings at Catal Hiiyiik were not art for art’s sake, but had a ritual
meaning.
   Two important questions remain to be answered: the relationship
between the bull and the deer-hunt and the identity of the headless
figures found in both paintings. Although it seems unlikely that
bull and deer-hunt were painted by the same person it is probable
that they are of the same date and it is by no means impossible that
the two scenes are meant to be seen as one painting symbolizing the
hunt. They more or less flow into each other and it will not have
escaped notice that in the dancing scene the majority of the partici-              Fig. 48
pants advance towards the left, i.e. towards the bull, who for sheer
size and magnificence dominates the entire composition. In a way the
deer on the right are balanced by the second animal on the far left,
and in both hunts we find the mysterious headless harlequins. When
we compare these with the headless corpses of the vulture paintings,
the interpretation of these figures as dead ancestors may gain some
credence. That great hunters of the past were invoked to partake in
the hunting-rites of the living does not strain one’s credulity and the
only way of indicating their status was to show them headless and
parti-coloured. As it seems extremely unlikely that the entire popula-
tion, or even all the males, were dressed in leopard-skins, we may
assume that the hunters here represented were a small section of the
populace entitled to this ceremonial       dress, in other words     the
priesthood. It seems unlikely that at this period the entire able
manhood of Catal Hiiyiik, which must run into the thousands,
partook in annual hunting-rites and it is far more likely that the
conduct of such rites was entrusted to a select body of priests. That
                                                                                      175
         tes
       BE)   Pye a»|
      &,               Rim,   Cra
Catal Hiiyiik
                this shrine was devoted to the hunt seems beyond reasonable doubt
                and it may be significant that the second shrine nearby was entirely
                decorated with floral symbols and kilims, symbols of agriculture and
                weaving, occupations pre-eminently associated with women. Nor is
                it probably a coincidence that the shrine of Level II was built on top
                of this latter building and that stamp-seals and grain as well as nine
                female statuettes should have been found in the building, which may
                have still been reserved for women. The hunting-shrine of Level III
                soon lost its early decoration and about thirty to thirty-five layers of
                white plaster covered its paintings, which belonged to the first years
                of its use. In Level II the shrine was not rebuilt and with the decline
                in hunting came the decay of the obsidian industry in Level IL.
                Sometime during the fifty-eighth century sc agriculture finally
                triumphed over the age old occupation of hunting and with it the
                power of woman increased: this much is clear from the almost total
                disappearance of male statues in the cult, a process which, beginning
                in Catal Hiiyiik Il, reaches its climax in the somewhat later cultures
                of Hacilar.
                   Wall-painting also came to an end and the painting of pottery
                took its place, but with the greatly reduced space for painting
                animals, deities and figures were broken down and stylized almost
                beyond recognition in the ‘fantastic style’ of Hacilar; only hands and
                textile patterns survived unchanged for another five hundred years.
Plates 59, 60      There remains but a single wall-painting to be described, which
                more than any other illustrates the artistic genius of the people of
                Catal Hiiyiik. Painted on the north and east wall of a shrine (VII.14)
                of Level VII, soon after 6200 Bc according to radiocarbon dating, it
                represents that rarest genre of early painting, a landscape and needless
                to say it is unique. In the foreground is shown a town with rect-
                angular houses of varying sizes with internal structures reminiscent
                of Catal Hiiyiik houses clearly indicated. Each house has its own walls
                and they are placed one next to the other without any open spaces.
                The rows of houses rise in terraces up to the top of the mound (as in
                the section of Level VI B and no doubt VII also).
                  Beyond the town and much smaller as if far away, rises a double
                peaked mountain covered with dots and from its base parallel lines
176
                                                                            Wall-paintings
extend. More lines erupt from its higher peak and more dots are
grouped beyond its right slope and in horizontal rows above its
peak, interspersed with horizontal and vertical lines. A clearer picture
of a volcano in eruption could hardly have been painted: the fire
coming out of the top, lava streams from vents at its base, clouds of
smoke and glowing ash hanging over its peak and raining down on
and beyond the slopes of the volcano are all combined in this paint-
ing. It is not difficult to localize this picture: Hasan Da (10,673 feet)
is the only twin peaked volcano in Central Anatolia and it lies at the
eastern end of the Konya Plain, within view of Catal Hiiyiik.                       Plate I
The Central Anatolian volcanoes became extinct only in the second
millennium Bc. Moreover, these volcanoes and Hasan Daé especially,
were the source of much raw material, in particular that of obsidian,
for Catal Hiiyiik, a source from which the site probably derived
much of its wealth. It may be surmised that it was not only for its
great cutting power, its transparency, reflective power and its jet
black appearance that this material was so highly prized. Its volcanic
and thus chthonic origin would have linked it to the underworld, the
place of the dead, and it was a true gift of mother earth, and therefore
imbued with magical potency. These considerations may help in
explaining why an artist late in the seventh millennium sc recorded
the wonder and awe of a volcanic eruption against the foreground of
the town of Catal Hiiyiik on the wall of one of its shrines. If the
picture is unique so was the occasion and probably only at Catal
Hiiyiik had Neolithic people reached the necessary degree of civil-
ization or possessed the artistic genius to record such an event for
posterity.




                                                                                       177
VIll

Sculpture in the Round


                 ESIDES THE WALL-PAINTINGS and plaster reliefs that decorate the
            Basse of shrines and a number of houses, the people of Catal
            Hiiyiik practised sculpture in the round in the form of stone and clay
            statuettes depicting their deities in anthropomorphic or near-
            anthropomorphic form. None of these is more than 30 cms in
            height and most are considerably smaller, varying from 5 to 20 cms
            on the average. The materials out of which such small cult statues
            were fashioned vary from terracotta to soft calcite, chalk, pumice
            and alabaster and from limestone to volcanic rocks and white marble.
            Bone tools were used for modelling, obsidian and flint tools cut the
            rock. For polishing, sand, crushed volcanic glass (obsidian) and
            perhaps emery were available, but all these raw materials with the
            exception of clay had to be brought from beyond the limits of
            the Konya Plain. The techniques were probably the same as those for
            the preparation of polished axes and adzes, maceheads, stone vessels,
            pendants and beads, and much labour could be saved by carefully
            choosing suitable boulders out of which the statues were to be cut.
              Like many artists from the Upper Palaeolithic to the present, those
            of Catal Hiiyiik appreciated the weird and suggestive shapes of
            natural rock formations, stalactites, stalagmites, limestone concretions
            or strangely weathered stones. It does not require an overdose of
            imagination to imagine a host of deities, humans or petrified animals
            in the grandeur of one of the stalagmitic caves, of which plenty were
            available in the Taurus Mountains. That Neolithic people visited
            such caves is clear from the fact that broken-off stalactites were
            deposited in the shrines together with cult statues on every occasion.
            Many indeed resemble clusters of breasts, udders or even human
            figures and it was obviously because of this resemblance, however
            remote to us, that they were collected and carried back to the shrines.
178
                                                                           Sculpture in the Round
On more than one occasion, a resemblance was enhanced by some
elementary sculpting. A block of limestone resembling a male riding
an animal had a head carved on it; in another case a fearful image was
created by carving a fine head on a knobbly limestone concretion.                         Plate 65
Limestone pebbles and boulders have incised features which turn                           Plate 69
them into shapes strangely resembling modern sculpture.
   Often a little carving suffices to turn a pebble into a schematic                      Plate 72
seated goddess, but far more often naturalistic figures are carved
out of a block of stone that can have had no previous resemblance to
the final product. It would be utterly wrong to assume a line of
typological development from aniconic, semi-aniconic to naturalistic
image at least for this Early Neolithic period at Catal Hiiyiik. All
three forms occur side by side in the same buildings and a typological
approach can only lead to chaos and misunderstanding. What strikes
one most in the stone sculpture of this site is its diversity and the lack
of what might be called a dominant style. A further factor to be
borne in mind is the sacredness of a cult image. Unlike the wall-
paintings which were covered with plaster or the reliefs which were
desecrated when a shrine was filled in, cult-statues were not left in a
shrine when it was abandoned. They were removed and taken to
another shrine and carefully preserved like the cult-statues in our
churches. As the result, it is quite as possible theoretically to find cult-
statues, made let us say in Level VIII, in a shrine of Level VI as it is to
find a Romanesque sculpture of the Crucifixion or a Flemish primi-
tive in a Baroque church. The building in which it is found does not
necessarily date the object. As many of the Catal Hiiyiik statues are
made of very durable stone, it is theoretically possible that many are
much older than the buildings in which they were preserved as heir-
looms, still magically potent, of a more remote past. It is therefore
possible to argue that many of the stalactites, semi-aniconic figures,
schematic figures, etc., need not be contemporary with the fine
naturalistic statues with which they are found, but may be the
remains of much earlier periods. On the other hand, such a procedure
is arbitrary and is based on the preconceived idea of a typological
development for which we have as yet no evidence whatsoever. The
only proper solution to this problem is the location of the workshops
                                                                                              179
Catal Hiiytik
                in which the statues were made and only then will it be possible to
                establish a firm chronological sequence. In the meantime we must
                accept the possibility that stylistically utterly different types of
                statues were produced side by side. In Late Neolithic Hacilar VI we
                again find highly naturalistic clay statues side by side with menhir-
                like slabs of stone. Both show the same treatment of hair, eyes and
                nose and they are evidently contemporary with each other, in spite
                of the primitive crudity of the work in stone. Different functions,
                unfamiliarity with a new material and a quantity of other unknown
                factors may account for such stylistic discrepancies. Such factors are
                more likely to mislead the art-historian than the archaeologist, who
                is less concerned with grouping and stylistic classification than with
                the general cultural context.
                   From the context in which these statues are found it is clear that
                they served as cult-statues in the shrines and embodied the various
                deities, or aspects of deities, worshipped by the Neolithic population.
                With very few exceptions, these statues only occur in shrines in
                contrast to crude clay figurines, mainly of animals but including
                clumsy and highly schematized human figures, that are never found
                inside shrines but are stuck between the bricks or walls of shrines or
                occur in groups in pits near them. The contrast between statuettes
                and crude figurines is not only artistic but functional, and whereas the
                first probably represent cult-statues the second are ex-voto figurines
                left by worshippers or, as in the case of wounded and intentionally
Plate 66        broken animal figurines, substitute representations of game magically
                killed or disabled in a hunting ritual.
                   The cult statuettes found in the shrines are a most valuable source
                for the reconstruction of Neolithic religion at Catal Hiiyiik, and in
                contrast to most other Neolithic sites they do not entirely consist of
                ‘Mother Goddesses’, but also show a male deity. Moreover, many of
                these statuettes occur in groups, carved in the same material and
                sometimes with stylistic affinities, possibly made by the same sculptor.
                They are anything but uniform and one definitely has the impression
                that different aspects of the deities are stressed. Various ages, hieros
                gamos (ritual marriage), pregnancy, birth, command           over wild
                animals, etc., are all clearly defined and many of the statuettes tell a
180
                                                                     Sculpture in the Round
story besides simply representing the goddess or the god; they refer
to a certain episode in the life of the deities or they more clearly
define a well-known association. This explicitness is a characteristic
of both Catal Hiiyiik and Hacilar and may have been typical of
Neolithic Anatolian religion in general.
   To avoid a tedious and lengthy description of the fifty or so
statuettes discovered at Catal Hiiyiik so far, they have been listed
together with information on the material of which they are made,
their height and findspot on pp. 202-3. From the same list it is evi-
dent that statues of a female deity far outnumber those of the male
deity, who moreover, does not appear to be represented at all after
Level VI. Most of the statuettes from the early levels (VII, VI) were
carved in stone, whereas in the later levels ([V-II) the majority are
modelled in clay and baked. The features are generally more natura-
listically rendered and this naturalism is evidently the result of a long
tradition of modelling in clay. Coarser clay figurines already appear
in Level IX, remaining virtually unchanged throughout the period.
   Characteristic of Catal Hiiyiik is the representation of deities in
human form where cult statuettes are concerned, whereas in the
plaster sculpture and wall-painting only the goddess is thus portrayed.
There can be little doubt that the Neolithic people of Catal Hiiyiik
conceived their deities in human form endowed with supernatural
power over their attributes and symbols taken from a familiar animal
world. As a symbol of male fertility an aurochs bull or a large ram
was more impressive than man himself and the power of wild life
and death was suitably symbolized in the leopard, the largest and
fiercest wild animal in the region; in the destructive ferocity of the
boar or in the impressive spectacle of flocks of Griffon vultures.
Nothing suggests that these animals themselves were regarded as
gods. Just as Neolithic man had learned (or was learning) to dominate
nature through animal domestication and agriculture, so the power of
his deities over wild life was clearly expressed in his sculpture.          Plates 67, 68, IX;
Leopards support the goddess in her confinement; leopard-cubs rest                     Fig. 49
on her shoulders and leopard-skins clothe her. Two goddesses                 Plate 87; Fig. 50
of different age stand behind leopards, patting their backs, and the         Plates 73-76, X
boy-god is shown riding another, a convincing picture of the Divine                  Plate 86
                                                                                          I81
Catal Hiiyiik




                                                                    49 Clay statuette of a
                                                                    goddess holding two
                                                                    leopard cubs. From
                                                                    shrine A.III.1

                   Family; mother, daughter and son as Mistresses and Master of wild
Fig. 26            animals. A similar scene decorated the west wall of shrine VII.8
Plates 18-20, VI   and a pair of leopards, male and female, modelled in relief and
                   painted was found in shrine VI.B and A.44. In another case, shrine
Fig. 23            VII.1, a bull and a cow take the place of leopards and the emphasis
                   here may be on a domesticated or domesticable species.
                      The frequency with which the goddess is shown associated with
                   wild animals probably reflects her ancient role as the provider of
                   game for a hunting population, and as patroness of the hunt. Her
                   statuettes alone were found in the hunting shrine of Level IIL.
                   Animal figurines, wounded or maimed in effigy during a hunting
                   ritual, were found in pits near shrines VI.B.12 and IV.4, both of
                   which contained plaster reliefs or statuettes of goddesses. Her
                   association with possibly domesticated animals has been noted and
                   her power over plant life and hence agriculture is clear not only




                                                                    50 Painted clay figure of
                                                                    a goddess. From shrine
                                                                     VI_A.61. See Plate 79
                                                                       Sculpture in the Round




51 Painted clay statuette of a
goddess in a leopard skin dress.
From shrine E.IV.4




from the numerous representations of floral and vegetable patterns,
painted on her figure or in her shrines, but also from the association        Plate 79; Fig. 50
of her statuettes in heaps of grain and crucifers in shrine VI.A.44               Plates 67, 68
(the Leopard Shrine) and the discovery of the birth-giving goddess
in a grain-bin of the Level II shrine. Here again the presence of the
statue suggests a rite of sympathetic magic. The decoration of the
second shrine of Level III, ornamented entirely with floral patterns              Plates 31-34
or textile designs, suggests that she was regarded as much as an
agrarian deity as a patroness of weaving, innovations of supreme
importance for the Neolithic period. Her association with life has
its inevitable counterpart in her association with death. She is shown
                                                                             Plates 67, 68, IX;
giving birth to a son, represented in human form or as a bull or                        Fig. 52
ram in the numerous shrines, and the immediately preceding stage,
pregnancy, is as much in evidence in the statuettes as in the plaster         Plate 77; Fig. 53
reliefs. As a probable goddess of death, she is accompanied by a bird
of prey, possibly a vulture and her grim expression suggests old age,             Plates 80, 82
the crone of later mythology. Her symbols of death, vultures, are
frequently represented in early shrines (see pp. 166f.), and an elaborate
symbolism, foreshadowing the words ‘in the midst of life there is
death’, finds plastic expression in mother’s breasts which incorporate
skulls of vultures, fox and weasel or the lower jaws of boars with
enormous tusks, eminently symbolic of the scavengers which thrive
on death. A firm belief in afterlife is well attested by the burial
customs and amulets of the goddess (highly stylized and graded in
diminishing sizes like the similar Magdalenian figures from Petersfels
                                                                                           183
                                                            52 Clay statuette of a goddess
                                                            supported by leopards giving
                                                            birth. From a grain-bin in shrine
                                                           A.II.1. See Plates 67, 68, IX


Plate 81   in Baden) which covered the neck of a red-ochre burial in Level IV.
           Other amulets show bulls’ heads representing the male deity. So even
           in death the protection of the deities was sought and the care of the
           dead suggests the idea of resurrection, the denial of death, the tenet of
Plate 65   all religion. The stalactite goddess probably also stresses the idea
           of chthonic power and the underworld.
              If the goddess presided over all the various activities of the life and
           death of the Neolithic population of Catal Hiiyiik, so in a way did her
           son. Even if his role is strictly subordinate to hers, the male’s role in
Plate 83   life appears to have been fully realized. A small stone plaque shows a
           couple in embrace on the left and mother with child, the offspring
           of the union on the right. The birth of a god is frequently portrayed




                                                            53 Complete clay statuette of a
                                                            seated goddess. From shrine
                                                            A.II.1
84, 85 Male deities, though not as prominent as their female counterpart, are still a feature of
neolithic Catal Hiiyiik. The proud adolescent figure, above, found with the Death Goddess and
her vulture in shrine VI.A.25, seems characteristic of the confidence, pride and virility of the male at
Catal Hiiyiik, still a figure to be reckoned with and not yet entirely subservient to the wiles of
women, as at Hacilar. The second white marble figure, below, shows a seated male wearing a cap
of leopard skin and multiple bracelets worn above the elbow. Presumably he represents an aspect
of hunting, which alone was responsible for the presence of an independent male deity in the
neolithic of Catal Hiiyiik
86-91 Of the six statuettes illustrated here only one is
definitely female, above right. Made of baked clay it repre-
sents a young woman dressed in a blouse of leopard skin
and a fringed woollen skirt and was found in shrine A.II.1.
Four of the five male gods shown are seated on animals: the
boy god, above left, part of the group in Plates 73-76 has
already been described; a bearded male seated on a bull,
left, from the Leopard Shrine (VI.A.44), and the white
calcite figure on a bull from shrine VII.21, the rear view of
which is shown, above. The blue limestone bearded god ona
bull, right, was found in shrine VI.A.10 together with the
figure, above right, of aperson in a long garment. Two of
male figures are bearded and therefore probably represent
the Goddess’s husband, whereas the younger figures
probably represent her son, the boy god, or her adolescent
lover
92,93 The people of neolithic Catal Hiiyiik buried their dead below the platforms of houses, above,
and shrines, opposite, alike, -but only after the flesh had decomposed or had been removed by
vultures or other natural agents. The bones, still in anatomical context, were wrapped up in cloth,
or matting, and then deposited in earth graves below the platforms of their ancient homes. When
a building was inhabited for a length of time, several burials would take place one on top of the
other (house VI.B.34, above) often leading to the disturbance of earlier skeletons. In other cases,
shrine VI.8, opposite, individual skeletons with their funerary gifts are easily disentangled
94, 95 In one unusual burial
in shrine VI.1, the brains had
been removed from the skull
and a wad of fine cloth sub-
stituted, above. As the build-
ing above was destroyed by
fire the action of the heat was
sufficient to ensure carboniz-
ation of the material. A burial
from shrine VI.7, below, has
as a bracelet, dentalium beads
and a red-painted basket as
grave goods
96, 97 Above, burials
found below the main
(female)   platform   of
house E.IV.1 with the
latest burial semi-intact
on the left and a row of
displaced earlier skulls
beyond.     Below,     a
woman’s skull decor-
ated with a broad band
of cinnabar from shrine
VI.B.20, one of the
relatively few ochre-
burials
98-102 Male and female funeral gifts. Above, a fine collar of boar’s tusk, incised and perforated,
from a female burial in house VII.12. A bone spatula ending in a human hand and a bone bodkin
came from a female burial in house IV.11. Below, finely polished bone belt-hooks and an eye for
fastening a belt were found with male burials in shrines VI.A and B.20. Above right, a two pronged
fork and, below right, two spatulae from houses A.III.2, B.II.1 and shrine E.IV.4, respectively
103, 104 Above, a bracelet of red and
white small stone beads, blue and white
limestone tubular beads and six deer
teeth from the burial of a woman in
house [X.1. Right, a necklace of black
limestone beads and large beads of lead,
from the burial of a young woman in
shrine VI.A.10
105-108 In many instances wooden vessels were extremely well preserved at Catal Hiiyiik VI, not
only in graves, but some even in burnt buildings, below. The most outstanding products are boxes
with closely fitting lids, above, rectangular (from shrine VI.A.1) or oval (from shrine VI.10). These
were carved out of blocks of wood without any joinery or gluing. The lids are usually provided
with a small lug which serves as a handle (below). Handles were also carved on the large oval meat
dish, opposite below, from shrine VI.61, nearly 50 cm. long. Oval bowls were very common, the
oval box above, came from shrine VI.10, and they varied in shape and depth, some were like sauce-
boats, others boat-shaped
109-112 Three examples of pottery and a stone vessel from
Catal Hiiyiik: a straight-sided cream burnished bowl from
Level Il, above left; a dark burnished ware cooking pot with
two ledge handles from house IV.8, centre, and a jar on four
feet from house A.III.14, below, decorated with faint dia-
gonal stripes of paint. Stone vessels were a luxury at Catal
Hiiyiik, a good example is the spouted dish of red sand-
stone, above, from shrine VI.A.8
113-115 Among the many weapons at Catal Hiiyiik, skilfully
chipped in obsidian and flint, a group ofdaggers is outstanding. A
simple flint dagger, above, was found in its leather sheath in the
storeroom of house VI.B.28. Two other daggers in flint are
pressure-flaked on one side, smooth on the other, right, both were
offerings from shrine VI.A.14. A group of long obsidian arrow-
heads, below, lay in a bag next to the legbones of a male skeleton
in shrine VI.B.20 as funerary gifts
116-118 Textile fragments from burials in shrine
VI.A.5. Above, cloth tapes served to tie up the bundles
wrapped in cloth; centre, woollen cloth with tabby
weave covered a long bone of one of the skeletons
in a shrine, but apart from this plain woven cloth
there were other weaves such as the shawl or fish net
weave of the piece shown below
119 Coiled baskets occur in all building-levels of neolithic
Catal Hiiyiik and they served every possible purpose; they
were used for gathering food, for the storage of grain,
contained jewellery and toilet articles or were used for
burials of infants, children and even adults, right, from
shrine VI.B.20




                                                               120 Rushes were in common use as a floor covering,
                                                               but they were usually placed below woven mats,
                                                               made from marsh grass which produced a very fine
                                                               weave. Both are visible in the floor covering of
                                                               shrine VI.A.14, left, with carbonized matting on the
                                                               left and the white decayed reeds on the right
121 Baked clay seals are a prominent feature of the neolithic at Catal Hiiyiik and they occur from
Level VI B to Level II. They have a flat lower surface and bear incised patterns, among which spirals
and especially meanders or meandroids are most common. Most are oval, round or sub-rectangular,
but one exhibits a flower shape, so common from the textile paintings. They could have been used
for stamping patterns on plain cloth rather than for painting the human skin, as is often assumed


ARIZONA STATE MUSEUM LIBRARY . THICSON. AZ. osyey
                                                                      Sculpture in the Round
 in the shrines and once in a statuette. Differences in age distinguish
  between the god as son (the boy god on the leopard, the adolescent             Plates 84, 86
_ god); the hunter in a leopard skin cap or the consort-husband, who is               Plate 85
 shown bearded and seated on his symbol, the bull.                           Plates 88, 89, 91
   This same distinction in age is made a number of times in represent-
 ing the goddess as mother or daughter (the group with the leopards,          Plates 73-76, X
 the pair from the leopard shrine in black volcanic stone) or, occasion-
 ally as a twin figure which finds a parallel in the large twin plaster          Plates 70, 71
 goddess on the west wall of shrine VI.14. Here the idea of pairs is                   Fig. 32
 twice shown; one of the two goddesses gives birth to a large and a
 small bull’s head, son and consort. In other cases age is shown by
 absence of breasts, more mature contours, hood and cloak, etc., all                 Plate 90
  of which would be immediately obvious to Neolithic people.
    The divine family then was patterned on that of man; and the four
  aspects are in order of importance: mother, daughter, son and
 father. The question now arises whether Neolithic people wor-
 shipped these as four divinities or as two, for mother and daughter
 (or perhaps girl and mother) are but two aspects of the concept
 woman; son and father that of man. It would be extremely difficult
_to decide in this matter, but the general feeling one gets from the
 material favours the existence of but two deities: the Great Goddess
 and her son and paramour. Later parallels from Crete and Bronze
 Age Greece would tend to confirm this conception of the Divine
 family (Demeter, Kore or Persephone, and child Ploutos, as in the
 case of the exquisite ivory from the acropolis at Mycenae), the
 reference to the “Two Ladies’ in the Knossos texts and the dual role
 of Cretan Zeus, Phrygian Attis and Phoenician Adonis, associated
 with only one main goddess in the pattern of the dying and reviving
  god. It must be emphasized though, that the idea of a dying god does
 not appear to derive originally from Anatolia, and was probably
  unknown in the Anatolian Neolithic.
    What is particularly noteworthy in the Neolithic religion of
  Anatolia, and this applies to Catal Hiiyiik as much as to Hacilar,
  is the complete absence of sex in any of the figurines, statuettes,
  plaster reliefs or wall-paintings. The reproductive organs are never
  shown, representations of phallus and vulva are unknown, and this
                                                                                           201
    Catal Hiiyiik
                           is the more remarkable as they were frequently portrayed both in the
                           Upper Palaeolithic and in the Neolithic and Post-neolithic cultures
                           outside Anatolia. It seems that there is a very simple answer to this
                           seemingly puzzling question, for emphasis on sex in art is invariably
                           connected with male impulse and desire. If Neolithic woman was
                           the creator of Neolithic religion, its absence is easily explained and a
                           different symbolism was created in which breast, navel and preg-
                           nancy stand for the female principle, horns and horned animal heads
                           for the male. In an early Neolithic society like that of Catal Hiiyiik
                           one might biologically expect a greater proportion of women than
                           men and this is indeed reflected in the burials. Moreover, in the new
                           economy a great number of tasks were undertaken by the women, a
                           pattern that has not changed in Anatolian villages to this day, and this
                           probably accounts for her social pre-eminence. As the only source
                           of life she became associated with the processes of agriculture, with
                           the taming and nourishing of domesticated animals, with the ideas
                            of increase, abundance and fertility. Hence a religion which aimed
                            at exactly that same conservation of life in all its forms, its propaga-
                            tion and the mysteries of its rites connected with life and death,
                           birth and resurrection, were evidently part of her sphere rather than
                           that of man. It seems extremely likely that the cult of the goddess was
                           administered mainly by women, even if the presence of male priests
                           is by no means excluded, and such rare objects as obsidian mirrors,
                           leopard-skins and finely wrought belt-fasteners may have been part
                           of the ritual paraphernalia of female and male priests.

List of Sculptures
li. limestone; ma. marble (white); sc. schist; ba. basalt or volcanic stone; cl. clay; ca. calcite; al. alabaster.
Heights are in centimetres.

Goddess                                                                   Material     cms     shrine     plates
 1. Semi-aniconic concretion with head.        Chthonic, cave or
                                                 mountain aspect             li.       19°6    VIA.10           65
 2. Pebble figures                             Pregnant (?) goddess          li        16-0    VIA.10
                                                                                       117     ~=VIA.10         69
 3. Kneeling goddess with bird (vulture?) Goddess of death                   ma.       17-0" AV LALaS
                                                                                        5°3
Goddess                                                             Material    cms      shrine      plates
4. Broken figure holding something       = Mother and child(?)_—ma.              9°5     VIA.10
5. Twin Goddess                            Mother and daughter   ma.            16°4     VIA.10        70; 71
6. Goddess and god in embrace              Ritual marriage       SC.            II'5     VIA.30            83
 7. Goddess holding child                  Mother and child            Sc,      Lrs$     VIA.30            83
 8. Pair of goddesses                      Mother and daughter         ba.      16°3     VIA.44
                                                                       ba.      120      VIA.44
 9. Pair of goddesses, male child and      Mother, daughter and        li.      II‘o     VIA.10        73-76
      leopards                                son as mistress and      li.      10°5     VIA.10
                                              master of animals        li.        515    VIA.10            86
10. Seated goddess with two leopard cubs   Mistress of animals         cl.       70      AU:          Fig. 49
11. Seated goddess giving birth                                        cl.      16°5     A.IL1     67, 68, IX
12. Seated goddess, dressed in leopard skin (painted)                  cl.        6:0    IV.5         Fig. 50
13. Standing goddess, dressed in skirt and leopard blouse              cl.        5°0    A.IL.1            87
14. Seated goddess, painted with flowers                               eh        4°I     VIA.61            79
15. Cloaked and hooded goddess                                         li.       8-0     VIA.10            90
16. Goddess with mouth and pendant breasts                             li.        78     VIA.10
17. Goddess in flounced robe (?)                                       ca.       lie     VIA.25
18. Goddess seated on something                                        ca.       4°2     VIL.24
19. Squat goddess                                                      al.       SI      VIB.45
20. Crude chalk goddess                                                ch.       6°0     VIA.44
21. Schematic seated goddess (no head)                                 Ti,        4°5    VIA.44
22. Schematic goddess with arms on breast                              ma.        5°70   VIA.10            72

23. Seated goddess with crossed legs                                   ma.        6°5    A.II.1
24. Miniature seated goddess with crossed legs                         ma.        3°0    A.IIL.1
25. Standing pregnant goddess                                          al.       12°7    E.IV.5            77
26. Standing goddess                                                   li.        si     A.IL1
27-33. Group of seven seated goddesses                                 cl      5-8°0     A.IL1        Fig. 53
God
 1. Child god riding leopard               Master of animals           li.        595    VIA.10    73-76, 86
 2. Adolescent god seated on stool         Son of goddess              ma.      21°5     VIA.25           84
3. Seated god with leopard cap             Son and hunter              ma.      12:0     VIA.10           85
4. Seated god, bearded                     Consort                     al.       9°8     VIA.44
5. God on bull                             Consort (?)                 ca.     . 190     VIL21             89
6. Bearded god on bull                     Consort (?)                 al.       10.7    VIA.44            88
                                           Consort (?)                 li.       II‘O    VIA.10            gI
7. Semi-aniconic god on animal             Consort (?)                 li.       10'0    VII.24
8 . Twin (?) god on bull (?) fragment                                  ca                V1I.23
IX

Burial-customs and Grave-goods


                HE NEOLITHIC PEOPLE of Catal Hiiyiik buried their dead below
           a ee: platforms of houses and shrines and only rarely below any
           other part of the floor. No burials have been found in storerooms or
           courtyards and extramural burial, such as was found at aceramic
           Hacilar c. 7000 Bc, was apparently unknown at Catal Hiiyiik.
             It is now clear that secondary burial was practised at this site, i.e.
           the skeletons were stripped of soft tissues before burial inside the
           dwellings, probably not just for simple reasons of hygiene but
           part ofa highly developed pattern of rites of passage. Upon death the
Plate 8    corpse of the deceased was probably removed to a mortuary outside
           the settlement where vultures cleaned the corpses down to the bones
           and dry ligaments. Presumably the dead were exposed on platforms,
           accessible to the birds and insects, but not to dogs and other scaven-
           gers which carry off bones. Evidently care was taken to preserve
           the skeleton intact in anatomical position and a check was kept on
           their identity. Whether this was the duty of the relatives or that of a
           special class of undertakers is of course not known, but the former
           seems more likely. To strip the flesh of the unborn child found in
           shrine VI.14 other methods were evidently used, such as immersion
           in a pot of water for only in this way could the minute bones survive
           intact. In a fair number of skeletons the brain was still in the skulls,
Plate 94   but in one instance it was removed and a ball of fine cloth substituted.
              It seems extremely likely that the burial of the dead coincided with
           the annual spring or early summer redecoration of houses and shrines,
           when the population must have found other quarters for the duration
           of the burial rites, the white-washing and the time required for the
           plaster to dry out thoroughly. This implies that the dead were kept in
           the mortuary until the annual ceremony and it is therefore not
           surprising to find some differences in the state of excarnation of the
204
                                                            Burial-customs and Grave-goods
corpses. Some had lost fingers or toe bones or the head had become
detached whereas others still contained human fat and traces of flesh
at the time when the burials took place. Some skeletons were more
or less disjointed whereas others were still anatomically intact with
not a single bone out of place. From the preservation of perishable
materials, such as cloth, skin, fur, etc., frequently preserved below the
skeletons it is clear that they were buried only when they had reached
a state of complete or near desiccation. Wrapped in cloth or skins
fastened with cloth straps and leather thongs or fibre rope, the
skeletons were buried below the platforms at an average depth of
60 cms, sometimes laid on mats but more often directly in the earth.              Plate 119
The edges of the platforms served as a demarcation line and no burial
protruded beyond them, but where for lack of space the dead were
buried below the floor they were put in oval graves.
  No definite orientation was observed, but the head is usually
turned towards the centre of the building and the feet towards the
wall. Most, but not all the dead lie on their left side in a contracted            Plate 93
position but some are extended on their back with head to the wall
and feet towards the centre of the room (red-ochre burial in E.IV.8
and one burial in VI.B.10). In the shrines and houses of Level VI
(A and B) several layers of burials are not uncommon and later                     Plate 92
burials frequently disturbed the bones of earlier interments. In the
later layers less care seems to have been taken not to disturb earlier
burials and their bones and skulls are frequently rearranged and
funeral gifts scattered. Throughout the Early Neolithic period from                Plate 96
Level X to I no change in burial-customs seems to have occurred.
   Individual graves are rare. Most houses and shrines served as family
burial sites and the longer a building was occupied the greater is the
number of bodies found. The maximum number, thirty-two
individuals, came from shrine VI.B and A.10, occupied throughout
Levels VI B and A, but house VI.B.34 yielded not less than twenty-
eight burials. On the other hand shrine VI.61, also occupied in both
Levels VI B and VI A, yielded only thirteen and shrine VI.A.25
a single woman and child. It proves impossible to correlate the
number of burials, sometimes extending over generations, to the
length of occupation of a building and the very small number of
                                                                                      205
Catal Hiiyiik
                dead found in certain buildings, especially in the lower levels
                (IX-VII) or in Level V, makes one wonder where their occupants
                were buried. It is for instance inconceivable that only six deaths took
                place during the 120 years or so that the great vulture shrine (VII.8)
                was used, and this again suggests that shrines were not continually
                used as burying places, but may have been reserved for special
                individuals only. The same question arises in the case of houses,
                where the number of burials seldom suggests that all their occupants
                had been buried in the building. Only one house, VI.B.34, with
                twenty-eight burials over a period of about a century or four
                generations of seven individuals per generation (including small
                children) approaches what one would expect, but in all other build-
                ings of Level VI the number is much less (three burials per house for
                the entire VI B and A period of about 150 years cannot represent all
                the dead). So where are they buried? Only excavation on a much
                larger scale might eventually settle this intriguing problem, which at
                the moment is insoluble, as a great number of burials in Level VIB
                shrines have not yet been excavated. There remains however one
                possible solution to account for only 229 skeletons of Level VI (A
                and B) in thirteen shrines and eight houses, and that is by assuming
                that the dead buried in the shrines are part of the population of the
                houses (on the assumption that the shrines were occupied only at
                certain times of the year for religious ceremonies). If the 229 burials
                are divided over eight houses, the average of 28 dead occurred per
                house over six generations (or about 150 years, the estimated length
                of Levels VI B and A together). This gives four to five dead per
                generation in each house, which agrees with the size of the building,
                the sleeping space and hence the average size of a family. This would
                mean that more than two-thirds of the population (160 out of 226)
                was buried in the shrines, which confirms our opinion that the entire
                quarter was inhabited by priests and priestesses, who would naturally
                prefer to be buried in hallowed ground. This picture will probably
                need modification when excavations are resumed and more burials
                are found in shrines and houses of this quarter, so no great reliance
                should be placed on the actual numbers of dead here used for calcu-
                lation. It would be extremely interesting to compare these results
206
                                                             Burial-customs and Grave-goods
from the priests quarter with a purely residential area and see if the
number of dead buried below the houses is considerably greater.
Evidence from the upper levels cannot be used for comparison as
there is good reason to show that the area remained a shrine area.
   A further point of considerable interest emerges from a study of the
skeletons and their burial gifts and that is that those dead buried in
shrines or probable shrines are generally better provided for than the
dead buried in the houses. This again suggests that the privileged
dead buried in the shrines had been people who during life had
enjoyed affluence, respect or authority; in fact members of a higher
social order or distinction than their relatives buried in the houses.
These differences marked as they are, should not be exaggerated;
even the burials in a number of shrines were by no means richly
equipped, and bordered on poverty (e.g. shrines VI.14, 15, 25, 12;
VII.r and 8, etc.). The equipment of the dead was subject to a
number of considerations: his status in life, his own wishes, the
respect or covetousness of his relatives, possible religious consider-
ations, the nature of his death, etc.; in other words factors which no
archaeologist can ever hope to distinguish. The greater number of
burials in houses and shrines alike were not provided with any gifts.
   Out of a total of about 400 skeletons (or parts thereof) only eleven
may be singled out as ochre-burials, painted with red ochre or
cinnabar (mercury oxide) on the skull or skull and body. Such
burials are then far from common, but occur from Levels [X to III
almost exclusively in shrines. Moreover, most if not all, appear to
have been of the female sex, but, with some exceptions, their funeral
gifts, the main item of which was a necklace, are not rich ones
by Catal Hiiyiik standards. One was a prematurely born infant
(VI.A.14), another a mother buried with a child on top of her
and accompanied by an adze, a flint dagger with chalk pommel, a
spoon and spatula and some fresh water mussels filled with red
ochre (VIII.1). A third, a girl of about seventeen who suffered
from a broken femur which might have crippled her ([X.1), was
treated with red ochre all over the body and had cinnabar
applied to the skull as well. With her were several necklaces and
some copper and lead beads, the earliest found on the site. Red ochre
                                                                                        207
Catal Hiiyiik
                also covered the skull and entire upper part of the body of a child
                (E.IV.8) accompanied by a fine necklace of apatite beads of graded
                size in the form of highly schematized goddesses, a bone pin and a
Plate 97        fine obsidian blade. The skull of a woman with a necklace of sliced
                dentalium. beads (VI.B.20) bore a broad band of brilliant cinnabar
                paint. Another red ochre burial in shrine E.IV.4 was provided with
                shells and red painted pebbles.
                   Green paint was found on three burials in Levels VI and VII;
                in one case, it covered the bones of a man, in another it had been
                applied to the eyebrows of a female skull (VI.B.20). More common
                than green pigment (malachite ?) was a bright blue azurite paint
                applied to the area around the neck of ten skeletons, male and female
                in Levels VII and VI. Blue and green apatite beads seem to take the
                place of these copper carbonate pigments in Levels V and IV.
                Gifts with the blue- and green-painted burials were rich in compari-
                son to those of the red-ochre ones, but unlike the latter, they were
                found both in shrines and houses, and were applied to both sexes.
                   Two groups of objects, never found in houses but confined to
                burials in shrines, female and male respectively, are mirrors of ob-
                sidian (Levels VI B to IV) and bone belt-fasteners, possibly connected
                with ceremonial leopard-skin dress (Levels VI B, VI A, and III?).
                Presumably these should be regarded as attributes of certain priest-
                esses and priests, which would explain both their rarity and their
                discovery in shrines. Fine flint daggers and spouted stone vessels also
                appear only as gifts in shrines or with male burials beneath shrines.
                   The variety of funerary gifts gives one a fair picture of the range
                of objects and materials used in daily life and it may here be noted
                that no single object seems to have been made exclusively for
                funerary use. Pottery vessels, figurines of humans,        animals   or
                cult-statuettes were never buried with the dead.
                   All the dead were probably buried in their garments, and wooden
                bowls, cups and boxes as well as baskets and food, berries, peas,
                lentils, grain, eggs or a joint of meat are found with the dead irres-
                pective of their sex. Among the other funeral gifts there are marked
                differences between those that accompany men on the one hand and
                women and children on the other. Articles of personal ornament
208
                                                       Burial-customs and Grave-goods
are a prerogative of the women. Cosmetic sets containing a small
spoon, a fork and a palette; shells filled with red ochre, ointment-
sticks of bone, baskets with rouge (red ochre mixed with fat),
obsidian mirrors, are exclusively found with women. Jewellery,               Plate XII
though not confined to the fair sex, takes the form of necklaces,
bracelets, armlets and anklets of beads of a vast variety of stones,          Plate 95
shell, clay, bone, animal teeth and, less common, beads of copper
and lead. Finger-rings may be made of bone or copper, and wooden
pins are sheathed in the same material. Other bracelets are made of
marble, alabaster or grey limestone, and there is a collar carved of
large boar tusk. Bone pins fastened women’s garments near the
shoulder. Amulets and pendants are common. Where a woman is
buried with a child spoons, spatulae and ladles of bone frequently
occur. Tools are less frequent, but include awls for sewing, bodkins
for basketry work, knives and hoes. Children have necklaces,
pendants, and rings, but otherwise no specific burial gifts.
   Male burials show little taste for jewellery. A few beads, pendants,
shells or animal teeth may have been worn on a string round the
neck, as is also shown in the wall-paintings, but no male was adorned
with elaborate necklaces like the women. Instead he was equipped
with his weapons; maces with perforated heads of polished stone,
daggers, knives and firestones for striking fire of flint (often accom-
panied by a piece of sulphur). The firestones are frequently found
together with a knife and a scraper, all showing a ‘pocket sheen’,
derived from frequent handling with greasy hands, and once carried
in a leather bag. On a few occasions a composite tool has been
produced that combined all three functions: knife, scraper and fire-
stone, the predecessor of our pocket-knife. Groups of arrowheads,            Plate 115
single spearheads, a few sickle-blades, knife-blades of obsidian or
flint are very often buried with the male dead. Hooks-and-eyes for
fastening belts, antler toggles for loin-cloths or cloaks were articles
of male dress. Metal, if not altogether absent, with male burials is
extremely rare. Baked clay stamp-seals have been found in two
graves, but the sex of their owners could not be determined. One
male was provided with a ceremonial dagger, a stone bowl, green
paint and ointment-sticks and a bone scoop.
                                                                                  209
x

Crafts and Trade


                  GREAT NUMBER of objects used in everyday life have been
            A recovered at Catal Hiiyiik, abandoned on the floors of houses as
            successive settlements burnt, broken or thrown away with the swept-
            out domestic rubbish, deposited as offerings to the gods in shrines,
            as funeral-gifts with the dead, or safeguarded in hoards below the
            floor. Owing to the many fires from which people fled for their
            lives, the abandoned material is rich and varied, but one specific
            conflagration, that in which the settlement of Level VI A perished
            c. §880 BC, fiercer than most, led to the preservation of a quantity of
            perishable materials, such as cloth, fur, leather, and wood, which
            are not normally preserved. The terrific heat generated by the burn-
            ing town, which must have smouldered for a long time, penetrated
            to a depth of about a metre or more below the level of the floors,
            carbonising the earth, the bones of the dead and their burial-gifts
            and arrested all bacterial decay. The scorching heat was enough to
            destroy most of the cloth in which the dead were wrapped, but it
            has survived intact below the skeletons.
               As a result of this fire much perishable material is available for
            study and as the fire came at a period in the history of Catal Hiiyiik
            which marked the transition from a society still largely relying on
            wood and basketry for its vessels instead of pottery (which becomes
            common only after the fire, in Level V), this unique evidence is
            extremely valuable. Far too often the archaeologist is forced to
            evaluate a culture from a few broken pots, and tools and weapons
            of stone and bone, which may conceivably present a false or in-
            complete picture. At Catal Hiiyiik it is clear that the crafts of the
            weaver and the woodworker were much more highly esteemed than
            those of the potter or the bone-carver, and one may well wonder
            whether these two crafts have not been generally underrated or at
210
                                                                            Crafts and Trade
  least inadequately represented among the achievements of the
  Neolithic period.
     Very few signs of industry have been found in the priestly quarter
  excavated at Catal Hiiyiik, apart from such normal domestic occupa-
  tions as the preparation of food, the baking of bread and slingstones
  in ovens, the cutting of wood for fuel, awls for the mending of
  clothes and bodkins for the repair of mats and basketry; primary
  occupations which did not need skilled labour.
     On the other hand, there is no evidence that any of the more
  specialized crafts were performed in this quarter—such as the
  chipping of obsidian tools and weapons, the polishing of stone tools,
  the drilling and manufacture of beads, the weaving of cloth, etc. The
  objects found in the houses and shrines of the quarter are all finished
  products, and the area of the workshops where these items were
  made, sold or bartered, must lie somewhere else on the mound. The
  amount of technological specialization at Catal Hiiyiik is one of the
  most striking features of this highly developed society which was
  obviously in the vanguard of Neolithic progress. The result of this
  specialization is equally apparent, for the quality and refinement of
  nearly everything made here is without parallel in the contemporary
  Near East. The priests and priestesses evidently did not bother to
  weave their own cloth or chip their own tools, they went to the
  bazaar and utilized the handiwork of others. Nor did they reap their
_ own grain or spin their wool, and the idea of a home-industry was
  evidently frowned upon by these elegant sophisticates. Out of over
  two hundred rooms we have but one sickle and less than a dozen
  cores of obsidian, a single spindle-whorl and not a single loom-
  weight. However, there was evidence for fourteen cultivated food-
  plants, a great deal of cloth and hundreds of finely finished obsidian
 weapons. Consequently one is better informed about the actual
 artefacts which these people used than about the technology of their
 manufacturing processes, many of which remain to be studied.
 How, for example, did they polish a mirror of obsidian, a hard
 volcanic glass, without scratching it and how did they drill holes
 through stone beads (including obsidian), holes so small that no fine
 modern steel needle can penetrate? When and where did they learn
                                                                                        211
Catal Hiiyiik
                to smelt copper and lead, metals attested at Catal Hiiyiik since Level
                IX, c 6400 Bc? Did they use coal as fuel as well as for making beads
                 and pendants? These and a host of other questions may only be
                 answered when the workshops are found, and perhaps not even then.
Fig. 1             One of the most fascinating tasks is the location of the sources
                tapped by Catal Hiiyiik for its raw materials, for with the exception
                of clay, reeds and wood nearly everything used was made from
                materials not locally available. Even timber for building (oak and
                juniper) does not grow in the plain, but was brought from the hills
                and probably floated down the river. Fir, used for carving wooden
                bowls, was brought from the forests in the Taurus Mountains,
                so were numbers of foodstuffs. Greenstone and volcanic rocks could
                be found somewhat nearer, the first on a low ridge between Cumra
Plate II        and Karaman, the latter on the Karadag, the prominent mountain
                which dominates the centre of the Konya Plain. In its foothills lime-
                stone is also available. Farther east lies a set of volcanoes, still active
                during the Neolithic period; Mekke Dag, Karaca Dag, the twin
Plate I         peaked cone of Hasan Dag and, farthest away to the north-east, the
                giant Erciyes Dag. Obsidian was obtained from some of these vol-
                canoes and it is definitely known to occur on the Karaca and Hasan
                Dag, and near the crater lake of Acigél (Topada). A red obsidian with
                black streaks occurs in a deposit on the Nevsehir road. Which of
                these sources provided the obsidian for Catal Hiiyiik has not yet been
                definitely established, but the main source was probably Hasan Dai.
                Calcite and alabaster probably came from the Kayseri region, fine
                white marble from western Anatolia. Stalactites must have been
                derived from limestone caves known to exist in the Taurus
                Mountains south and west of the plain. The western hills behind
                Konya, rich in brightly coloured iron oxides, may have provided
                a great number of pigments and cinnabar was mined near Sizma,
                north-west of Konya. The provenances of the copper ores, (cuprite,
                malachite, azurite), of haematite, limonite, manganese, galena
                and lignite have not yet been determined, but all these metals
                are common in the Taurus Mountains. Trade with regions further
                south is well attested in the form of Mediterranean shells (especially
                dentalium, but with a sprinkling of cardium, cowrie and whelks),
212
                                                                                 Crafts and Trade
and fine tabular flint, the nearest sources of which lie in the region
of Gaziantep, south of the Taurus Mountains. Good flint is un-
known on the south Anatolian plateau, but there is some cream,
brown, yellow and red chert which was, however, little used at
Catal Hiiyiik.
  The common use of all these rocks and minerals clearly shows that
prospecting and trade formed a most important item of the city’s
economy and undoubtedly contributed appreciably to its wealth and
prosperity. The sources of a great number of rocks are still unknown
or can only be guessed and in this category fall apatite, rock crystal,
carnelian, jasper, chalcedony, and several others.
  The stone industries of Catal Hiiyiik mark the climax of neolithic
chipping and polishing and betray an immensely long ancestry.
Certain tools such as the huge scrapers for cleaning hides are ulti-
mately   derived   from   the Middle     Palaeolithic   flake-industries,
whereas the bulk of tools are made in the blade-industry which first        Mmyy
                                                                              euhaess                  es                ,
appeared in the Upper Palaeolithic at the same time as Homo Sapiens.        ah “ne“ie
                                                                                    mh nisCea

For chipping tools and weapons Neolithic man at Catal Hiiyiik                                                      “a
made predominant use of black obsidian, derived from the volcanoes          it
                                                                            eitha
                                                                                     My,         at Mtlls at
                                                                                                 ih itt ie

whose peaks are visible from the site on a clear day. A certain
                                                                                                 Ai.                 A
                                                                            ii msn Vf) U the
                                                                                         he
                                                                                      Weal
                                                                            rityp)
                                                                                iyipMh eq                     Tie
amount of flint, not locally available, was, however, used and its           a
                                                                             UayenTG
                                                                                      yn
                                                                                       (its earee
                                                                                              Wc
                                                                                                       a Gittiouta
                                                                             ee D) Le,
tougher quality was evidently recognized, for it was employed in the         ta) inn
                                                                                   wy ( Mi
                                                                                                  a           ne




manufacture of daggers with serrated edges, scrapers, firestones (for        aoMd
                                                                               yy Dy a(eee
                                                                                       lil)fe
                                                                                       I    (a


striking fire) and a small number of knives. The sharper but more                yn , Haan
brittle obsidian was fashioned into a great number of tools and                  ¥a

                                                                                 wm)
                                                                                             iHhvi

                                                                                                 ihHae"
                                                                                                       (aul
weapons among which the spearheads, up to 18 cms in length, and                  heBiari
                                                                                 a


two sizes of arrowheads, perhaps suited to a long and short bow,                     >iLe MG
                                                                                     SellyMae
                                                                                      v)
are the finest products. Bifacially pressure-flaked, these weapons                    a “0
                                                                                     yeutjes

rival the finest Solutrean specimens. Unifacial pressure-flaking is                    Me NGtA

found only on the flint daggers which were first ground down to the                        By
                                                                                           mH itroy

required thickness and then flaked to produce a serrated cutting edge.                      ae




These daggers had hilts of wood, sometimes with a pommel of                 54 Ceremonial flint dag-
chalk and one particularly fine ceremonial weapon was provided              ger with bone handle.
                                                                            From a male burial in
with a hilt of bone carved in the shape of a snake with beady eyes and      shrine VI.A.29.                                   See
pointillé incision simulating the reptile’s scales. It was fixed to the     Plate XIV
blade with lime, which may have been mixed with resin, and
                                                                                                                             213
Catal Hiiyiik
                 the final fastening
                                  was done by means of fine twine wound round
                 the lower part of the hilt. Scrapers of all sizes, knives, sickle-blades,
                 gouges, chisels and a few burins make up the rest of the industry.
                 Picks and hoes are absent, borers or piercers rare in stone, their place
                 being taken by thousands of bone awls. Cores, roughouts and raw
                 material occur in hoards, showing that fabrication was done on the
                 site, though evidently not in the quarter excavated. In the latest
                 levels (III and Il) there is a marked decline in the chipped stone
                 industry, which had reached its climax in Levels VII-V, and a few
                 atypical microliths appear. The latter are not only rare, but unusual
                 and without parallel yet their presence does not affect the develop-
                 ment of the industry, which is characterized by large tools and is
                 not microlithic. In fact it is already clear that this industry was
                 derived from an earlier one in obsidian, also characterized by large
                 tools as well as by the total absence of microliths.
                    The polished stone industry is no less developed; obsidian mirrors,
                 carved and polished statuettes, finely ground and perforated mace-
                 heads, fitted with shafts of wood c. 63 cms in length, or shorter
Plate 112        shafts of bone;    polished    stone   bowls,   cosmetic   palettes,   and
                 thousands of fine stone beads show a high technological develop-
                 ment. Saddle querns, rubbing stones, mortars and pestles, polishing
                 stones, rings of stone, bracelets, grooved stones for polishing bone,
                 greenstone axes, adzes and chisels (and also miniatures of these)
                 for fine woodwork abound. Flint axes and adzes are quite unknown.
                 There appear to have been few stones that the Neolithic people of
                 Catal Hiiyiik were not able to work by grinding, polishing and
                 perforating.   The notable exceptions      are granite, gneiss, basalt,
                 diorite and other hard igneous rocks which were not used.
                    The same techniques of grinding and polishing were applied to
                 shell and bone, elements of which are frequently combined with
Plates 103, XV   stone beads in necklaces,     armlets, bracelets and anklets, where
                 possible in striking and harmoniously blended colour-schemes.
Plate 98         Boar tusk was less commonly used, but when found it is often
                 perforated or ornamented with incised geometric designs.
                   Bone tools and implements are very common and range from
                 oval cups and scoops to ladles, spatulae, cosmetic tools (spatulae
214
55 Characteristic wooden
vessels from shrines or
burials in Levels VI A
and VI B. See Plates
105-108




ending in little carved hand forks, ointment sticks, etc.), to pins,     Plates 99, 101, 102
bodkins, awls, punches and polishers for leather working. Antler
toggles and finely polished hooks and eyes for fastening belts have                Plate 100
already been mentioned and bone wrist-guards were used by archers.
Small bone handles may have held copper awls. Incised decoration is
rare on bone tools and ornaments, and in general incision was little
practised. Most of the stone tools must have had wooden, rather than
bone handles, which explains their rarity. Antler was also fairly rare
and was used mainly for toggles and once for making a sickle.
  Wood was widely used; trees were cut with polished greenstone
axes. Adzes and chisels in the same material, used for carpentry, are
abundant and all timber at Catal Hiiyiik, oak or juniper, was
squared, not only the roof beams and the posts but also the ladders.
Wooden vessels were cut with stone tools out of fir and possibly
other soft woods. The Neolithic woodworkers created a sophis-
ticated set of wooden vessels: great meat dishes 50 cms in length                    Fig. 55
with carved handles, oval bowls with ledge handles, deep or shallow         Plates 106, 108
round bowls and dishes, boat-shaped vessels, sauceboats and an egg-               Plate 107
cup. Small boxes occur in many varieties, each with a well-fitting
lid. These may be square, oblong or oval and frequently have small                Plate 105
lugs, a knob on the lid and sometimes relief decoration. Others again
were painted red.
                                                                                        ais
Catal Hiiyiik
                  It is clear from the pottery shapes that throughout the Neolithic
                period at Catal Hiiyiik pottery occupied a secondary position and
                was unable to free itself completely from hitherto current shapes in
                wood and basketry. As late as Level II (c. 5750-5700 Bc) a fair number
                of pottery shapes are angular and wooden, imitate wooden boxes,
                or have wooden feet. This shows conclusively that wooden vessels
                continued to be made side by side with the pottery until the end of
                the settlement, and there is d priori no reason why woodworking
                should have declined. Generally the importance of ceramic produc-
                tion in the Neolithic has probably been greatly overrated. It was a
                technological advance like any other and was no doubt useful for
                cooking, but it was easily breakable, hard to transport, in these early
                phases not so easy to fire well and aesthetically not very attractive.
                It is only in the later part of the Neolithic that improved firing
                conditions led to the production of cream coloured wares, which in
                the immediately following period, the Early Chalcolithic, were
                lavishly decorated with painted designs. The few streaks and bands of
                paint on light coloured pots, that make a sporadic appearance since
                Catal Hiiyiik Level III, showed little promise of the spectacular
                painted pottery that was to come.
                   The monochrome Neolithic pottery of Catal Hiiyiik is made
                from a fine grit-tempered clay (usually without any straw). It was
                built up in coils on a flat base and the walls of the vessel were after-
                wards thinned out by paddle and anvil method, which involved
                beating the clay walls with a wooden paddle against a wooden block
                held inside the pot. When leather hard, the pot was burnished with
                apiece of bone or a pebble to reduce porosity and producea fine shine
                when fired. The firing was apparently done in a bread oven or in a
                closed kiln with separate firing chamber of which two were found in
                Level VI. With the exception of a few bowls in Levels IV-II which
                have simple horizontal incised lines (without white fill) along the
                rim, the Catal Hiiyiik pottery is not decorated. Impressed designs,
                roulette impressions or combing with the edge of a cardium shell,
                barbotine pattern, etc., characteristic of a small proportion of the
                contemporary neolithic pottery of Mersin, Tarsus, Ras Shamra, etc.,
                on the coasts of Cilicia and North Syria, is unknown on the Anatolian
216
                                                                          Crafts and Trade
Plateau or on the coast of Pamphylia, where similar Neolithic wares
occur in a number of caves and rock-shelters.
   The colour of this Catal Hiiyiik neolithic pottery varies consider-
ably: most of the hole-mouth cooking-pots, exposed to fire, are              Plates 109, 110
dark grey or brownish black and a number of bowls show the same
colours. Others are red, buff, light grey, beige and orange as early as
Levels X and IX, when this pottery is first found. Some of the coarse
ware is brick red (Levels X-IX), but it is confined to these early
levels. To call this pottery (as has been done) ‘Dark burnished ware’
or ‘Syro-Cicilian’ is inaccurate, for much of it is light in colour and
its distribution is not confined to the north-eastern corner of the
Mediterranean, but includes the entire south Anatolian Plateau.
   It is clear that the beginnings of pottery manufacture have not
yet been reached at Catal Hiiyiik, where it has been found down to
Level XIII in 1965. From Level V onwards pottery is regularly
found in every house and it gradually increases both in quantity
and quality as time goes on. Lighter-coloured wares increase,
often with fine mottled surfaces and more elegant shapes and by
the end of Level II, c. 5700 Bc, cream-coloured bowls are com-
mon, painting begins and tubular vertically placed lugs make their
first appearance. The cooking-pots show little change in shape from
Level X to Level I, but their lugs gradually change to crescentic
ledge handles. Bases are usually flat, but ring and disc bases occur
early and some of the later vessels have four elegant L shaped feet.               Plate 111
    Clay balls, baked in ovens, and clay figurines of human beings
and animals were common and some of these balls bear incised
decoration. Baked clay was also used for the production of beads
and pendants, slingstones, stamp-seals and statuettes at least from
Level VI B onwards, i.e. after 6000 BC.
   Particularly interesting is the use of copper and lead, in the form
 of beads and pendants, tubes and other trinkets, as early as Level IX,             Plate 104
 c. 6400 BC. Finds of copper and lead beads occur in nearly every
 building-level and it would not be surprising if gold and silver were
 also known, even though they have not yet been found or recog-
 nized. A lump of slag from Level VI A has shown upon analysis that
 copper was being extracted from its ore and the presence of lead,
                                                                                         207
Catal Hiiyiik
                which occurs in Anatolia as galena, implies smelting as early as Level
                IX. Other copper beads have been produced from native copper
                which occurs, for example, in quantity at Ergani Maden, north of
                Diyarbakir, and probably elsewhere in Anatolia. The presence of a
                copper awl, 4 cms in length in a stratified position in the lower levels
                of the village site of Suberde, some fifty miles south-west of Catal
                Hiiyiik at a date roughly comparable to Catal Hiiyiik X-VI, throws
                interesting light on the spread of metal-working even to the villages
                surrounding the Konya Plain. The beads were made from thin
                hammered copper sheets rolled up, but it is not yet clear whether
                heat was applied to facilitate this. Further analyses are in progress.
                   The evidence for weaving at Catal Hiiyiik is manifold; clay or
                silica imprints of mats and baskets and carbonized remains of the
                same; wall-paintings showing goddesses in richly coloured and
                patterned garments, and men in white loin-cloths; statuettes wearing
                fringed garments and finally numerous fragments of woven cloth,
                felt, string, thread and rope of plant fibre.
                   Spirally-worked coiled baskets are common in all levels and in a
                deposit of grain some actual fragments of thin plant stems, possibly
                cereal straw, sewn or tied with grass blades, were found in Level IV.
                The basketry technique used here consisted of taking a continuous
                strip or bundle of regular thickness of straw or other plant-stems
                and tying them together in spiral coils by means of bast or other
                flexible material, so that each turn of the bast around the bundle is
                connected with the previous ring and finally the straw is completely
                covered by the bast. In this way it is possible to build up a tight
                container, just as pottery may be built up from a consecutive series of
                strips of clay. The two techniques are, in fact, closely related.
Plate 120          Rush carpets covered numerous floors and most are woven in a
                pattern of quadruple warp and weft of very fine rushes or marsh
                grass. In the carbonized state the stems are no more than a millimetre
                thick. Others were coarser. In a number of cases it could be estab-
                lished that the mats were woven with a pattern ‘placed diagonally
                to the outer edge. It is worth noting that the same patterns are woven
                in mats to this day in the village of the Konya Plain and elsewhere in
                southern Anatolia.
218
                                                                           Crafts and Trade
   Baskets were used for a great variety of purposes; for the collec-
tion and storage of food, as grain bins, for the safe keeping of mirrors
and rouge and as containers for the skeletons of children and even
adults. Some were provided with lids.
   The fragments of fine woven cloth from the burnt burials of
Level VI show great technical skill and have been studied by Mr
Harold Burnham of the Department of Textiles in the Royal
Ontario Museum. His report is not yet available at the time of
writing, so that the notes which follow are of a preliminary nature.
Owing to the carbonization of the material we are unfortunately not
yet certain whether the fibre used was wool or mohair, perhaps both
were used. The possibility that the material was linen, i.e. flax fibre,
can be discarded as flax was not grown at Catal Hiiyiik, nor any-
where else before c. 5000 Bc, which is far too late for a potential
import. The yarn used is two-ply, i.e. two spun threads wound
around each other. No selvage has been preserved, but there is a fine
piece of a twined heading cord on a large fragment of plain tabby
weave, found inside a human skull. Whereas most of the pieces show
a fine plain weave, there are others with a widely spaced weft,                    Plate 118
producing a shawl-like textile. Still others show knotting resembling
a fish-net pattern. Cloth tapes are also found and a young woman                   Plate 116
buried in shrine VI.A.25 wore a string skirt, the ends of which were
encased in small copper tubes for weighting it. Fringes are also                   Plate 117
commonly found and a small statuette from Level II shows a short                    Plate 87
skirt with a fringe above and below. One piece of cloth was mended
and the sewn edge was clearly visible; the stitch was rather coarse.
  All the cloth being carbonized, no traces of colour have survived,
but as several of the goddess reliefs show brightly coloured and
patterned garments, such must have existed. Evidence for red thread
has survived in a number of broken beads, the perforations of which
are still stained red. As there was no red ochre present in the grave,
this colour must have come from the thread. The abundance of
kilim patterns painted on the walls of shrines likewise suggests
that gaudily coloured woven rugs were as common a feature of the
Neolithic period in Anatolia as they are now. All this evidence
suggests that dyeing was well known and some of the commonest
                                                                                        219
Catal Hiiyiik
                           weeds in the neighbourhood of Catal Hiiyiik are madder (Rubia
                           tinctorum), woad (Isatis tinctoria) and weld (Reseda luteola), which
                           yield a deep red, a blue and a strong yellow respectively. Bedstraw,
                           dock and others, also found in the plain, are well known dye-
Plate 121; Fig. 56         producing plants. The numerous stamp-seals of baked clay bearing
                           intricate designs of spirals and meanders on shapes which include
                           quatrefoils or flowers and human hands, may have been used to
                           stamp patterns on cloth and need not have been used solely to paint
                           the human skin. None retain any traces of colour, which is not sur-
                           prising, for a vegetable dye is more subject to decay than the mineral
                           pigments of the wall-paintings. That cloth was indeed stamped with
                           coloured patterns is suggested by some wall-paintings in shrine
                           IIl.8 which includes numerous quatrefoils, or those of Early Chal-
                           colithic Can Hasan decorated with pseudo-meanders like many of
                           our seals. Already appearing in Level VI, the most elaborately
                           decorated ones derive from Levels IV, II and II.
                              Apart from garments of woven cloth, animal-skins and fur were
                           certainly worn as is indicated by numerous wall-paintings, statuettes
                           and fragments in the graves. Leopard-skins were particularly in
56 Stamp seals of baked    favour, a fashion that has lasted to the present day. Bonnets were
clay with decorative
patiens  from Levels       WOLD, raebut we * have no evidence
                                                        id    ree»             Lek
                                                               for footwear, which        babl
                                                                                   was probably
VI-II. See Plate 121      | ™made of leather and much needed on the snow-covered wintry
                           plateau. Belts were probably made of the same material, but no
                           fragments have survived; however, one dagger was still found in its
                           leather sheath. Tanning may have been known for acorns, brought
                           from the hills, are numerous. Slings were probably of leather and
                           bowstrings were probably made from animal gut.
                              The excellent preservation of perishable materials at this site offers
                           great hopes for further interesting finds when the excavations can be
                           continued.
                                                                            XI

                                          The People and their Economy

Gis. BASIS FOR the spectacular development of the Neolithic at
     Catal Hiiyiik was evidently laid by efficiently organized food
production and conservation. That the Neolithic people of this site
had successfully established their ‘Neolithic Revolution’ which
meant freedom from hunger, is proved by abundant evidence. In
fact, few other sites have preserved such an abundance and variety of
foodstuffs and from the sheer size of the as yet uninvestigated
aceramic Neolithic mound it is reasonable to conjecture that the
same sort of conditions which we find from c. 6500 Bc (Level X)
onwards had prevailed for at least a millennium before, if not con-
siderably earlier. We are still ignorant of the ecological factors
involved in the establishment of the first settlement in the plain, in an
area which, as Dr Hans Helbaek has shown, cannot have provided by
any stretch of imagination the wild progenitor of all forms of barley,
the two-row Hordeum spontaneum or the progenitor of emmer,
Triticum dicoccoides. Everything indicates that the plant husbandry of
Catal Hiiyiik must have a long prehistory somewhere else, in a
region where the wild ancestors of these plants were at home,
presumably in hilly country, well away from the man-made en-
vironment of the Konya Plain. If we may theorize for a little, this
statement of the eminent palaeobotanist implies that agriculture was
introduced into the plain, not just before Level X, about the middle
of the seventh millennium, but much earlier at the time when
Catal Hiiyiik was founded. Such agricultural beginnings must have
started long before the moment at which the first carbonized remains
of grains and small legumes make their appearance in the settlements
of the Near East, around 7000 Bc at aceramic Hacilar 5 in Anatolia,
at Beidha VI near Petra and in the Bus Mordeh period of the settle-
ment of Alikosh on the edge of the lowlands of Khuzistan. Even
                                                                             221
Catal Hiiyiik
                those simple patterns of agriculture show a consistent specialization
                with hulled two-row barley as the main crop, emmer (Triticum
                dicoccum) cultivated or wild, coming second, some wild einkorn,
                lentils, pea or vetch as legumes and pistachio and acorns. The
                beginnings must be sought in the Natufian of Palestine, the still
                unknown earlier aceramic of the Anatolian Plateau, and in Khuzistan.
                This will take one into a ‘Protoneolithic’ period which began at the
                end of the Pleistocene, archaeologically speaking just after the end of
                the Upper Palaeolithic.
                   No study has been made of the ecological and climatic conditions
                prevailing at the end of the Upper Palaeolithic on the Anatolian
                Plateau, butJ.Birman informed the author in 1963 that he had found
                definite evidence on the Anatolian Plateau, including the mountain
                ranges of the Taurus which surround the Konya Plain, for a Last
                Glacial relapse and a minor readvance of ice during the Younger
                Dryas of Western Europe (c. 8850-8300 Bc). K. W. Butzer in his
                Environment and archaeology (Chicago, 1964, pp. 425-6), argues that
                this final cold period probably did not pass unnoticed in the Near
                East, producing for example, evidence for moister climate in Palestine
                and Egypt during part or all of the Natufian period. The rather
                modest temperature changes (1-3° C) would not have been significant
                for human habitation, but the depression of the snow line may have
                had its effect on the distribution of wild cereals which may have been
                excluded from certain regions. Modern conditions would not have
                prevailed until c. 8000 Bc, which is very much the same time-range
                that may be indicated for the beginnings of agriculture in Anatolia at
                the end of the Palaeolithic. This period saw not only the first estab-
                lishment of the “Protoneolithic’ village of Jericho, dated by C-14
                before 8000 Bc but also of contact with Anatolia, from which the
                first obsidian was exported to Jericho, a contact that was maintained
                throughout the eighth millennium (Jericho Pre-pottery Neolithic A).
                Perhaps the first agricultural settlements started to appear in Anatolia
                as in Palestine after c. 8300 Bc, perhaps in the eastern hill-zone beyond
                the Konya Plain where lie the sources of obsidian. This is, of course,
                pure speculation, not as yet based on any firmly established facts,
                but the practices of early agriculture, the traditional wooden-house
222
                                                              The People and their Economy
architecture of Catal Hiiyiik, and likewise the commercial and perhaps
ritual importance of obsidian may point to this hilly region.
   The conquest of the plain must, as Helbaek has pointed out, come
later. Its exact date is unknown, but man by then was able to intro-
duce agriculture into a new environment, where seeds were sown in
the flood pools of the Carsamba river which drains from the great
mountain lakes of Beysehir and Sufla into the fertile alluvial plain
around Cumra. As late as 6000 Bc the Konya Plain teemed with wild
life and both the zoologists who have studied our material, Dexter
Perkins Jr and Pierre Ducos regard the plain as a favourable eco-
logical niche which produced maximum size in such species as
aurochs (Bos primigenius), a pig (Sus scrofa) and Red Deer (Cervus
elaphus). Perhaps it was the presence of great herds of these desirable
animals that attracted man to the grasslands of the plain. However
that may be, considerable ecological differences are marked in the
seventh millennium sc between the animals of the plain and those
living round the intramontane lake of Sugla near Seydisehir, as
revealed by the recent excavations of J. Bordaz at the village site of
Suberde. Here 90 per cent of the animal-bones belonged to wild
sheep, pig and Red Deer, the remaining 10 per cent being aurochs,
goat, wolf, fox and tortoise. A small race of pigs, different from the
gigantic species of the Konya Plain, is perhaps the only animal that may
have been domesticated. At Catal Hiiyiik on the other hand domestic
sheep and goat occur even in the lowest layers, but pigs are not
domesticated and the possibility of domestication of the aurochs
cannot yet be proved statistically. In the microlithic obsidian and
flint industry of Suberde the great hunting weapons of Catal Hiiyiik
are conspicuous by their absence and even the arrowheads are differ-
ent. Evidently the hunting of large game was less a feature of Neo-
lithic life in this village than it was at Catal Hiiyiik where the main
quarry was formed by the herds of aurochs, wild pig, and Red Deer.
Two species of wild ass, wild sheep, Roe Deer, Fallow Deer, an
occasional gazelle, fox, wolf, and leopards were also hunted. No
bones of lion have yet been found, but there may be some bear.
A wall-painting is not the only evidence for domestic dog. Birds and
fish were also caught but they were obviously less prized; of snails
                                                                                       223
Catal Hiiyiik
                there is no trace. The people of Catal Hiiyiik then made good use of
                the hunter’s paradise of the Konya Plain and it is of interest to note
                that, as time went on, it became more and more difficult to find large
                horn-cores for ritual purposes. The horns used after Level V are
                very small compared to the enormous ones so common in Levels
                VII and VI. The same rarity of large specimens may have led to a
                reduction in the size of spearheads and arrowheads which is notable
                after Level V and finally to the decline of the stone industry in Levels
                III and II after which incidentally, the wall-paintings disappear.
                   Compared to the simple agricultural products of aceramic Hacilar
                5, enormous progress was made at Catal Hiiyiik during the seventh
                millennium. By Level VI, c. 6000 Bc, not less than fourteen food-
                plants were cultivated. Many more species have been identified, but
                those mentioned here are the economically important ones. The
                principal crops were emmer, einkorn, naked six-row barley and pea,
                all occurring in great quantities from Levels VI-II. Bread-wheat
                (Triticum aestivum) also makes its first appearance in Catal Hiiyiik VI.
                The field pea was more common than the purple pea (Pisum elatius)
                and lentil. A species of vetch (Vicia noena) and cultivated bitter vetch
                (Ervum ervilia) also appear in Level VI. Two cruciferous plants,
                Shepherd’s Purse (Capsella bursapastoris) and the salt-loving Erysimum
                sisymbrioides were grown as sources of plant fat equivalent to the
                gathering and cultivation of linseed in more easterly areas at a later
                date. Among fruit seeds brought from the hills, presumably the
                Taurus Mountains in the south, were almonds, acorns, pistachio
                (Pistacia atlantica), apple, juniper and hackberry (Celtis australis). The
                latter occurring even in the deepest levels of Catal Hiiyiik, was
                apparently used for making wine. Many weeds provide indications of
                the conditions prevailing in the Konya Plain some eight thousand
                years ago and salt-loving species already show that salinity was a
                feature of the Cumra area as it is now.
                   It may be of interest to speculate about other kinds of food. Bever-
                ages such as beer and wine were evidently known, but grapes and
                olives do not appear to have been domesticated till the fourth or
                even third millennium. The acid in the caps of acorns is used today to
                start the process of making yoghurt, and domestic sheep and goats
224
                                                            The People and their Economy
  were evidently kept for their milk and fleece as much as for their
  meat. When     butter and cheese, sour buttermilk or ayran were
  invented we shall probably never know, but they may well be
  Neolithic. Salt, a necessity in the preparation of vegetable foods, was
  easy enough to find in the Konya Plain and the Neolithic station of
  Ilicapmar on a small salt-lake to the south-west of the Tuz Golii
  may have been a trading post specializing in salt export. The paint-
  ings of insects hovering over fields of flowers conceivably suggests
  that honey was known. Other sweetening agents are to this day
  extracted from the bark of trees by nomads in southern Anatolia.
  Resins and birch bark may have been used for fastening tools and
  weapons on to shafts and into handles; bitumen is unknown on the
  Anatolian plateau.
     Of the Neolithic population of Catal Hiiyiik nothing definite can
  be said until the skeletons have been studied by Mlle Denise Ferem-
bach and Professor Lawrence Angel. The following preliminary
  notes are derived from the observations of Mr D. Biernoff. The
  population of Catal Hiiyiik appears to have been of two different
  races (recognized by Mlle Ferembach), dolichocephalic Proto-
  Mediterranean and another brachycephalic element, and of fairly
  tall stature. The average for women being between 5ft and sft gins,
  that for men between sft gins and sft roins with few individuals
  in the extreme brackets. Few people seem to have been more
  than forty years old. There are no individuals among the burials
  that showed signs of violent death, nor is any skull trephined.
  A few individuals show broken limbs, signs of arthritis and caries of
 the teeth. On the whole, however, dentition is excellent. Childbirth,
 fevers, and pneumonia are suggested as the main causes of death, not
 degenerative diseases. Among the skeletons women and children far
 outnumber men. These observations are subject to confirmation.
    Not much can be said about the Neolithic social structure as the
 excavations have revealed only the religious quarter. The position of
 women was obviously an important one in an agricultural society
 with a fertility cult in which a goddess was the principal deity.
 Social inequality is suggested by sizes of buildings, equipment and
 burial gifts, but this is never a glaring one, Full-time specialization
                                                                                    225


       PRIZONA STATE MUSEUM LIBRARY . TUCSON. AZ
Catal Hiiytik
                is fairly obvious and the workshops lay elsewhere on the mound.
                The variety of arts and crafts practised at Catal Hiiyiik is nearly as
                great as that of the developed civilizations of the Early Bronze Age.
                Only the arts of book-keeping or writing and music are not repre-
                sented among the finds. The existence of an ordered pattern of society
                is evident from the stereotyped house plans, from the standard
                features and equipment and a strong conservatism is shown by the
                frequent rebuildings on the same plan, the strict architectural lay-
                out and the very few changes that can be observed in the culture
                over a period of some eight hundred years.
                   In contrast to other contemporary Neolithic cultures, CatalHiiyiik
                preserved a number of traditions that seem archaic in a fully devel-
                oped Neolithic society. The art of wall-painting, the reliefs modelled
                in clay or cut out of the wall-plaster, the naturalistic representa-
                tions of animals, human figures and deities, the occasional use of
                finger-impressed clay designs like ‘macaroni,’ the developed use of
                geometric ornament including spirals and meanders, incised on seals
                or transferred to a new medium of weaving; the modelling of
                animals wounded in hunting-rites, the practice of red-ochre burials,
                the archaic amulets in the form of a bird-like steatopygous goddess,
                and finally certain types of stone tools and the preference for dental-
                ium shells in jewellery, all preserve remains of an Upper Palaeolithic
                heritage. To a greater or lesser extent, such archaic elements are also
                traceable in a number of other post-Palacolithic cultures, such as the
                Natufian of Palestine, but nowhere are they so pronounced as in the
                Neolithic of Catal Hiiyiik. The reason for the continuance of such
                Upper Palaeolithic practices there may be due to a strong conserva-
                tism but one suspects that it had its origin in the very important part
                that hunting continued to play in the economy of the Konya Plain.
                In view of all these survivals one is inclined to believe that this civili-
                zation is descended from an Upper Palaeolithic, probably Anatolian,
                of which hardly anything is known. It would be premature to
                speculate further about the ancestry of Catal Hiiyiik until excavation
                has been carried further, nor would a comparison with contemporary
                cultures in the Near East be of any profit as long as so much inter-
                vening territory remains to be explored, and other key-sites remain
226
                                                         The People and their Economy
unpublished. To describe the impact of this Neolithic civilization
on its neighbours and successors, both in Anatolia and the adjacent
countries of south-eastern Europe would demand another volume.
Dr Hans Helbaek is now in a position to show that it was the agri-
cultural development of Neolithic Anatolia that was responsible for
the spread of agriculture into Europe, preparing the way for the
beginning of European civilization which is our common heritage.
   Seen in this light, the Neolithic civilization of Catal Hiiyiik
represents something unique in the long history of human en-
deavours: a link between the remote hunters of the Upper Palaco-
lithic and the new order of food-production that was the basis of all
our civilization.
   Our task is not yet done; at least a decade of continuing work lies
ahead. It is to be hoped that, with the co-operation of the Turkish
authorities, the excavation of the earliest town of Anatolia and one of
the earliest in the world, may shortly be resumed. Meanwhile,
something of that town’s remarkable quality is here presented as a
foretaste of further discovery.




                                                                                  227
Bibliography


               James Mellaart. Excavations at Catal Hiiyiik, 1961. First preliminary
                 report. In Anatolian Studies, XII, 1962, pp. 41-65; pls II-XVIII.
               — Excavations at Catal Hiiyiik, 1962. Second preliminary report. In
                Anatolian Studies, XIII, 1963, pp. 43-103; pls III-XXIX.
               — Excavations at Catal Hiiyiik, 1963. Third preliminary report. In
                Anatolian Studies, XIV, 1964, pp. 39-119; pls I-XXVI.
               — Excavations at Catal Hiiyiik. 1965. Fourth preliminary report. In
                 Anatolian Studies, XVI, 1966, pp. 165-191; pls XXIX—LXIIL.
               Perry A. Bialor. The chipped stone industry of Catal Hiiyiik. In Anatolian
                 Studies, XII, 1962, pp. 67-110.
               Hans Helbaek. Textiles from Catal Hityiik. In Archaeology, Spring 1963,
                 PPp- 39-46.
               — First impressions of the Catal Hiiyiik plant husbandry. In Anatolian
                 Studies, XIV, 1964, pp. 121-3.
               H. Neuninger, R. Pittioni and W. Sieg]. Friihkeramikzeitliche Kupferge-
                 winnung in Anatolien. In Archaeologia Austriaca, 35, 1964, pp. 98-I10.
               Theodore A. Wertime. Man’s first encounters with metallurgy. In Science,
                 Dec. 4, 1964, vol. 146. no. 3649, pp. 1257-67.
               K. W. Butzer. Environment and archaeology. Aldine Co. Chicago, 1964.
               Jacques Bordaz. Anatolian Research project. Suberde Excavations, First
                 campaign,     Summer   1964.   In New   York   University,   Department   of
              Classics Bulletin 1964-2 (Nov. 12, 1964).
           J. R. Cann and Colin Renfrew. The characterisation of obsidian and its
              application to the Mediterranean region. In Proceedings of the Prehistoric
                 Society, new series XXX, 1964, pp. 111-33; especially pp. 122-3.
               H. Burnham. Catal Hiiyiik-the textiles and twine fabrics. In Anatolian
                 Studies, XV, 1965, pp. 169-74.




228
                                                                                       List of Illustrations
All photographs, unless otherwise acknowledged, are by Mrs M. A. Mellaart. Reconstructions and line drawings are
by Grace Huxtable (G.H.) and Anne-Louise Stockdale (A.-L.S.).
Colour Plates                              16 Bench with horn cores of wild             44 Hands and net pattern on west
AFTER PAGE 72                                 bulls, shrine VI.6r.                         and north walls, shrine VII.8.
I Hasan Dag.                               17 Plaster relief of stag, shrine VII.10.    45 Copy of central panel in Vulture
II Konya plain and Kara Dag. Photo         18 Copy of early phase of leopard               Shrine VII.8. G.H.
   Ian A. Todd.                               reliefs, shrine VI.B.44. G.H.             46 Copy of black vulture panel,
Ill View of west wall shrine VI.14.        19 Twin leopard relief, early phase             Shrine VIII.8. A.-L.S.
IV Bull cut in plaster, north wall            original, shrine VI.B.44.                 47 Detail     headless     human    figure,
   shrine VI.B.8.                          20 Twin leopard relief, late phase              Shrine VII.21.
V Painted ram’s     head,    east   wall      original, shrine VI.A.44.                 48 Detail north          wall   of Vulture
  shrine VI.A.7.                           21 Copy of late phase of leopard                Shrine VIL.8.
VI Twin leopard relief, shrine VI.A.          reliefs. G.H.                             49 Copy of painting from north wall
    44.                                    22 Large and small bulls’ heads,                of Vulture Shrine VII.8. G.H.
VII Relief figure of pregnant god-             shrine VI.14.                            50 Detail copy of dead man’s head,
    dess, east wall shrine VII.23.         23 Two superimposed bulls’ heads,               shrine E.IV.1. A.-L.S.
VII Kilim pattern, west wall shrine            west wall shrine VI.A.31.                51 Copy of funerary rite, east wall
     VIL.21.                               24 Goddess, west wall shrine VII.31.            shrine E.IV.1. A.-L.S.
                                           25 Red-painted goddess figure.               §2 Copy of running men and bull,
AFTER PAGE 156                             26 Goddess, west wall shrine VI.B.8.            north wall shrine A.IV.1. A.-L.S.
IX Clay figure of goddess, shrine          27 Third phase decoration, east wall         $3 Small white figure on east walls
    AJIL1.                                    shrine VI.8.                                 shrine E.IV.1.
X Goddesses and boy god statuettes,        28 East wall, shrine VI.10.                  54 Copy of deer hunt, antechamber
   shrine VI.A.10.                                                                         of shrine A.III.1. A.-L.S.
XI Doe and fawn, antechamber               AFTER PAGE 84                                $5 Detail of fallen stag, shrine A.IIL.r1.
    shrine A.III.1.                        29 Copy of kilim pattern, east wall          56 Archer and dog, north wall room
XII Female burial, shrine VI.B.20.            shrine VI.B.1 A.-L.S.                        A.II.13.
XIII Male dancer, shrine A.III.1.          30 Kilim pattern, north wall shrine          $7 Copy of archer and dog, north
XIV Ceremonial flint dagger, shrine           VIL21.                                       wall room A.III.13. A.-L.S.
      VI.B.29.                             31 Copy of painting, north wall              58 Reconstruction of stag’s head, east
XV Necklaces, Level VI and IV.                shrine A.III.8. G.H.                         wall shrine A.IIL1.
                                           32 Painting on east and north walls,
Monochrome Plates                             shrine A.III.8.                           AFTER PAGE 132
AFTER PAGE 32                              33 Copy of early painting, west wall         59 Copy of erupting volcano paint-
 I Catal Hiiyiik from west.                   shrine A.III.8. G.H.                         ing, shrine VII.14. G.H.
 2 Building-level VI.                      34 Early paintings, west wall shrine         60 Erupting volcano and city, north
 3 House VIL.12.                              A.IIL8.      .                               and east walls shrine VII.14.
 4 South wall, house A.III.10.             35 Leopard spot pattern, south wall          61 Copy of great deer hunt, east wall
 5 Wall-painting,   east    wall house        shrine VI.B.1.                               shrine A.III.1. A.-L.S.
   VI.B.65. G.H.                           36 Pattern framing doorway, north            62 Headless white and red figure,
 6 Bread ovens, Levels IV and V.              wall shrine VII.8. G.H.                      shrine A.III.1.
 7 Hand     and    foot impressions,       37 Kilim pattern, east wall shrine           63 Red ochre skull and paintings,
   entrance house VI.A.63.                     VI.A.50.                                    shrine A.III.1.
 8 ‘Mortuary’ wall-painting, north         38 Copy of kilim pattern, east wall          64 Copy of great red bull, north wall
   wall shrine VI.B.1. A.-L.S.                shrine VI.A.s50. G.H.                        shrine A.III.1. A.-L.S.
 9 North wall, shrine VI.10.               39 Human figure and goddesses from           65 Limestone       concretion    with
to North wall, shrine VIL.10.                 symbol panel, shrine VI.A.66.                sculptured head, shrine VI.A.10.
11 Black bull painting, north wall         40 Copy of symbol panel, east wall           66 Clay animal figurines, Level VI.
   shrine IX.8.                               shrine VI.A.66. G.H.                      67, 68 Clay figure of goddess giving
12 Cut-out figure of bull, north wall      4 Later painting, east wall shrine              birth, shrine A.II.1.
   shrine VII.8.                              VI.B.8. G.H.                              69 Pebble figurine, shrine VI.A.10.
13 Clay head of wild boar. Level VI.       42 Earlier of two painted patterns,          70, 71 White marble twin goddess,
14 Bull cut in plaster, north wall            east wall shrine VI.B.8.                     shrine VI.A.r0.
   shrine VI.B.8.                          43 Copy of hands and net pattern,            72 Schematic seated figure, shrine
1§ Bucrania, shrine VI.61.                    shrine VII.8. G.H.                           VI.A.10.
73, 74 Goddess and leopard, shrine             108 Oval bowl and box with lid,           22 North     and     east   walls,   shrine
    VI.A.10.                                       burial, shrine VI.10.                    VII.10, p. 108.
75, 76 Goddess and leopard, shrine             109 Cream burnished bowl, Level           23 West and south walls,             shrine
    VI.A.10.                                                                                VIL1, p. 109.
77 Alabaster goddess, shrine E.IV.4.           110 Twin-lugged       cooking      pot,   24 North and east walls,             shrine
78 White marble goddess, shrine                    shrine IV.8.                             VIL1, p. 111.
   VI.A.10.                                    111 Four-footed jar, house A.III.14.      25 North and west walls,             shrine
79 Painted clay figure of a goddess,           112 Spouted    stone   dish, shrine          VII.8, as found, p. 112.
   shrine VI.A.6r.                                 VI.A.8.                               26 North and west walls,             shrine
80 White marble kneeling goddess,              113 Flint daggerinsheath, storeroom,         VII.8, restored, p. 113.
   shrine VI.A.25.                                 house VI.B.28.                        27 North and east walls,             shrine
81 Necklace of schematized god-                114 Two      flint daggers,    shrine        NILAS, OV EIS.
   desses, burial in building IV.8.                VI A.14.                              28 West and south-west walls, shrine
   Photo Ian A. Todd.                          11§ Male     burial with      obsidian       VII.31, p. 116.
82 Broken marble figure of a vul-                  arrow heads and flint knife,          29 East wall, shrine VII.31, p. 116.
   ture, shrine VI.A.25.                           shrine VI.B.20.                       30 East and south walls, shrine
83 Schist plaque with four deities,            116 Cloth     tapes,  burial, shrine         VI.61, p. 118.
   shrine VI.A.30.                                 VI.A.5. Photo Ian A. Todd.            31 North and east walls, Leopard
AFTER PAGE 184                                 117 Plain woollen cloth, burial, shrine      Shrine VIB.44, p. 119.
 84 White marble figure of a god on                VI.A.5. Photo Ian A. Todd.            32 West wall, shrine VI.14, p. 120.
    a stool, shrine VI.A.25.                   118 Cloth with shawl-like weave,          33 East and south walls, shrine VI.14,
 85 White limestone seated god ina                 burial, shrine VI.A.5. Photo Ian         Pp. 1372
    leopard-skin cap, shrine VI.A.10.              A. Todd.                              34 North and east walls, shrine
 86 Boy god with leopards, shrine              119 Burial in a_ basket, shrine              VI.B.8. early phase, p. 123.
    VI.A.10.                                       VI.B.20.                              35 North and east walls, shrine
 87 Clay figure of goddess in leopard          120 Rush and mat floor covering,             VI.B.8. second phase, p. 123.
    skin dress, shrine A.II.r1.                    shrine VI.A.14.                       36 Painted patterns on bull’s head,
 88 Alabaster bearded god on a bull,           121 Baked clay seals.                        shrine VI.B.8, p. 123.
    Leopard Shrine VI.A.44.                                                              37 West wall, shrine VI.B.8, p. 125.
 89 Calcite god on a bull, Second              Figures                                   38 West and north walls, shrine
    Vulture Shrine VII.21.                     All shrine drawings and reconstruc-          VI.B.10, restored, p. 125.
 90 Black      limestone    cloaked     and    tions are by Grace Huxtable.              39 North and east walls,             shrine
    hooded goddess, shrine VI.A.10.              1 Map: Catal Hiiyiik and Early             VI.B.10, p. 126.
 91 Black limestone god on a bull,                 Neolithic sites in southern Anato-    40 West and north walls, shrine
    shrine VI.A.10.                                lia and North Syria. Lucinda             VI.A.10, restored, p. 127.
 92 Superimposed      burials, house               Rodd. pp. 28, 29.                     41 North and east walls, shrine
    VI.B.34.                                    2 Site-plan of Catal Hiiyiik, p. 31.        VL.A.8, third phase, p. 128.
 93 Burial in shrine VI.8.                      3 Plan of shifting occupation at         42 North and east walls, shrine
 94 Fine cloth, burial in shrine VI.1.             Catal Hiiyiik, p. so.                    VI.A.8, fourth phase, p. 128.
 95 Female burial, shrine VI.7.                 4 Plan of building-level II, p. 57.      43 East wall, shrine VI.A.7, p. 129.
 96 Scattered burials, house E.IV.1.            5 Plan of building-level III, p. $7.     44 North and east walls, shrine
 97 Female cinnabar-decorated skull,            6 Plan of building-level IV, p. $7.         VI.B.1, p. 153.
    shrine VI.B.20.                             7 Plan of building-Jevel V, p. 57.       45 East end, shrine VI.A.s0, p. 155.
 98 Incised boar’s tusk collar, female          8 Plan of building-level VIA, p. 58.     46 Painting, east wall, shrine VI.B.8,
    burial, house VII.12.                       9 Plan of building-level VIB, p. 59.        p. 163.
 99 Bone spatula and needle, burial            10 Plan of building-level VII, p. so.     47 North     and    east walls, Vulture
    in house IV.11.                            11 Typical main room at Catal                Shrine VIL.8, p. 169.
100 Belt hooks and eyes, male burials             Hiiyiik, p. 61.                        48 Main room, shrine A.III.1, p. 171.
    shrines VI.A.5. and VI.A.20.               12 Schematic reconstruction of Level      49 Clay  goddess    with leopards,
101 Bone two pronged fork, house                  VI, p. 62.                                shrine A.III.1, p. 182.
    NUN eds                                    13 Table of shrine decorations and        50 Painted    clay goddess,     shrine
102 Two       bone spatulae, house B.             associated features, p. 81.               VI.A.61, p. 182.
    II.1. and shrine E.IV.4.                   I4, I5 Reconstructions of Second          §1 Painted clay goddess in leopard
103 Bracelet     of beads     and     teeth,      Vulture Shrine, VII.21, pp. 82, 83.       skin dress, shrine E.IV.4, p. 183.
    female burial, house [X.1.                 16 Arrangement of decoration in           §2 Clay goddess giving birth on
104 Necklace of lead and lime-                    main shrines of Levels X-VIA,             leopards, shrine A.II.1, p. 184.
    stone beads, child burial, shrine             pp. 102, 103.                          53 Clay seated goddess, shrine A.II.1,
    VI.A.10.                                   17 Reconstruction of shrine X.1., p.         p. 184.
105 Wooden box with lid, burial,                  104.                                   $4 Ceremonial       flint dagger, shrine
    shrine VI.A.1.                             18 North wall, shrine [X.8, p. 105.          VIA20. p. 213.
106 Large wooden dish, storeroom,              19 East wall, shrine VIL9, p. 106.        55 Wooden vessels, Levels VIA and
    shrine VI.A.61.                            20 West wall, shrine VII.9, p. 107.          VIB, p. 215.
107 Boat-shaped     wooden     vessel,         21 North and east walls, shrine           $6 Baked     clay stamp      seals, Levels
    burial, shrine VI.A.10.                       VII.35, p. 107.                           VI-II, p. 220.
                                                         Index

Alikosh, 18, 19, 221                       crafts, 210 ff.                               Karim Shahirian, 19
amulets, 183, 184, 200                     cult, 77-9, 82, 83, 84 ff., 108               Kebaran, 18
animal remains, 223; fox, 106;             culture diffusion, 17                         kilim patterns, 108, 111, 118, 152-5,
   weasel, 106                             cut-out plaster, 105, 109, 114                   170
animal representations, 101; bulls,                                                      kilns, 63
   HORRKIOMIL UTA, TES ehT7;,, 118;        defence, 68-9
   I2I, 122, 129, 130; rams, IOI, 121,     disease, 225                                  lead see metal
   122, 125, 127, 129; leopards, ror,      divine family, 182, 201                       libation niche, 108
   II2, I18—20; stags, IOI, 109, IIo,      domestication      of animals,    19, 223;    lighting, 61, 68
   117, 170, 171, 173; boars, 106-8,          sheep, 19; goat, dog (?), cat (?), 21;
   114, 126-8; vultures, 1o1, 108, 111,       cattle, 23                                 materials, perishable, 210; raw, 212-3
   126, 166-8; cow, II2                    drainage, 61                                  Mersin, 24, 25, 28, 29
animal skins, 220; leopard, 79                                                           metal, 22, 79, 209, 212, 217-18
Antalya, 17                                                                              mirrors, 79, 208, 211
                                           engravings, 17
anthropology see skeletons                                                               mortuary, 65, 66
                                           Eynan, 19
architecture, $4 ff.
                                           Europe, links with, 227
art mobilier, 17                                                                         Nahel Oren, 20
                                                                                         Natufian, 18-20
                                           figurines, 78, 180
balls, clay, 217                           firestones, 209
                                                                                         ‘Neolithic Revolution’, 18, 221
bee, 162                                                                                 nets, 163-4
                                           flint, 16, 213
Beidha, 18, 19, 221
                                           food, 223, 225
Belbasi, 18                                                                              oak, 51
Beldibi, 18                                                                              obsidian, 16, 20, 22, 213 ff.
                                           geometric patterns, 151                       ochre burials see burials
belt hooks, 79, 208
                                           goddess, painted, 166, 168; relief,
bonding, $5
                                              TOL, TIO, Lit, 114,114,115, 116,
bone industry, 214                                                                       pigments, 131, 132
                                              117,   I2I-2,   124,   125;   sculpture,   plant remains, 18, 19, 22, 221, 224
bow, 20
                                              180 ff.                                    pottery, 21, 22, 216-17
bread ovens, 63
                                           grainbins, 62, 183                            Pre-pottery neolithic, 20, 21
breasts, IOI, 106, 107, III, 126, 128
                                           graves, 204 ff.                               Protoneolithic, 18, 19
brick sizes, $5, 56
                                           greenstone, 16, 214
bucrania, 65, III, 118
burial customs, 204 ff.; gifts, 208 ff.;                                                 races, Eurafrican, 19; Proto-Mediter-
   red ochre, 19, 207; green and           Hacilar, 18, 25, 26, 30, 84, 110, 180,           ranean, 20, 225; brachycephalic,
   blue, 208; secondary, 204 ff;              221                                          225
   infant, 83                              hands, 83, 112, 164, 165                      Ras Shamra, 21, 22
burials, 19, 20, 23, 60                    Hasan Dag, 177                                reliefs, plaster, 84 ff., 117 ff.
Byblos, 21, 22                             honeycomb, 162                                roofs, 56
                                           horncores, 78, 79                             rosettes, III
                                           hunting ritual, 78
Catal Hiiyiik, discovery      of, 27-9;
   skirt, 31-2; plans, figs. 4-10                                                        sacrifice, 77-8
chronology, 49-53                          insects, 161-3                                sanitation, 61
climate, 222                                                                             sculpture, 178 ff.; materials, 178;
copper see metal                           Jericho, 19, 20, 21                              naturalistic, clay, 181; deities with
courtyards, 68                             juniper, 51                                      animals, 181-2

                                                                                                                             231
                 Mellart,     James

                   Catal    Huyuk:     A Neo-

                 Eola:

                         ISSUED   TO

DEMCO   38-297
$f
     eft
     a
     Hikes
                                                             ips
                                                             i            ss
                                                                              123
                                                                           eerie

 Met                                      =                      SISEE
             seasvere                                                    Sa
                             Seeisk
                            rare

                                                                     es
                                                                          Pesci
                                                                                            Brits:
                                                                            teeteteestsrs




                                                                                                       et.
                                                                                                        terete
                                              eosesteasess                                                           a
                                                                                                                     nt
                                tases
                                poser
                                 seer fet:
                                  siete                                                              33eeearen
                                 EI
                                              fateestes                                                  eroreores
                                     2i                                                                 eastet



                        EeEee
                        Sete
                Sips  perajeserses
              riereyees
