                                          The Shrines and their Reliefs


abe NEOLITHIC city of Catal Hiiyiik has yielded among many
     other splendours a unique sequence of sanctuaries and shrines,
decorated with wall-paintings, reliefs in plaster, animal heads,
stylized bucrania and containing cult statues, which give us a vivid
picture of Neolithic man’s concern with religion and beliefs. We
have already seen Catal Hiiyiik man as a builder, we shall now also
recognize him as an artist of no mean stature, for the arts which he
practised were manifold.
  Out of 139 living rooms excavated at Catal Hiiyiik II-X, not less
than forty and probably more, appear to have served Neolithic
religion. Such cult rooms or shrines are more elaborately decorated
than houses and they are frequently, but not always, the largest
buildings in the quarter. In plan and construction they are no differ-
ent from ordinary dwellings and they include all the familiar built-in
furniture, such as platforms, benches, hearths and ovens which we
have already recognized as an integral part of the Catal Hiiyiik
building-tradition. Burials also are common in shrines, but there are
some notable exceptions; none were found in the shrine of Level II
or in the second shrine of Level III (A.III.8).
   Although the decoration of the sanctuaries strongly suggests that
these buildings were used for cult purposes, there is no provision for
sacrifice. There are no altars and no tables for bleeding a sacrificed
animal such as we find in the Early Bronze Age shrines of Beyce-
sultan. Nor do we find pits for blood or caches of bones of sacrificed
animals, and, with the peculiar construction of the Catal Hiiyiik
buildings, it would be impracticable to bring animals into the
buildings for slaughter. If animal sacrifice was practised at all the
slaughtering must have been done elsewhere and choice pieces
brought down to be roasted on the hearth. Our only direct evidence
                                                                          77
Hiiytik
          for burnt offerings consists of small deposits of charred grain pre-
          served between replasterings in red clay of a ceremonial hearth in
          the shrine of Level II. Offerings of other kinds which did not need
          burning are extremely common, and in all shrines small deposits
          of grain, tools, used and unused, pots and bone utensils, a few
          animal bones (perhaps meat offerings) bulls’ horns, eggshells, gaming
          pieces, stamp-seals, in fact any acceptable gift, were found in situ
          as they had been deposited by the worshippers and preserved by the
          conflagrations in which many of these buildings had perished. The
          gifts varied from shrine to shrine: gifts of grain and legumes as well
          as stamp-seals were peculiar to the shrine in Level II; well over a
          hundred obsidian and flint weapons were found in shrine E.VI.A.14;
          piles of aurochs’ skulls, horns and scapulae filled shrine E.VI.A.7;
          votive clay figures of animals and sometimes human beings were
          stuck into the walls of most of the Level VI A shrines in area E.
          Groups of figurines of animals: boar, leopard (?) stag, and cattle,
          used in a hunting ritual during which the animals were wounded
          or maimed in effigy, were found in pits near shrine E.VI.B.12
          and E.IV.4. together with some intact weapons (lanceheads) and
          numerous clay balls (sling ammunition).
             Such finds allow us to gain some insight into the many rites that
          must have been performed in these Neolithic shrines.
             The main criteria for the recognition of shrines at Catal Hiiyiik
          appear to be the following: the presence of wall-paintings of an
          elaborate nature that have obvious ritual or religious significance;
          plaster reliefs showing deities, animals or animal heads; horns of
          cattle set into benches; rows of bucrania and the presence of groups of
          cult statues found in the main room; ex-voto figures stuck into the
          walls; human skulls set up on platforms, etc. All these features do
          not occur in normal houses and the combination of several of them
          leaves one in little doubt that the building in which they are found
          was used as a cult room or shrine.
            There are, however, a number of cases where the denuded remains
          make it extremely difficult to decide whether a building was a house
          or a shrine, and in most cases where there is doubt these are buildings
          which overlie an earlier shrine, and where a continuity of cult may
                                                         The Shrines and their Reliefs
ected. That continuity of cult is a factor to be seriously con-
1 is clear from a whole series of superimposed shrines often
there is no evidence left to regard a building as a shrine, the
ire above it shows the unmistakable characteristics of being
which strongly suggests that the sanctity of the place was
nbered. There is some further evidence which may help to
sh shrines; that of the eleven ochre burials found (Levels XII),
me from definite shrines, three more from buildings that have
ns of reliefs and probably were shrines, and the two remaining
denuded buildings built over earlier shrines. It is therefore a
ility to be borne in mind that red-ochre burials only took place
ctuaries. No single example has been recorded from a building
un. definitely be described as a house.
the ten burials of women with obsidian mirrors (Levels VIB-
ee come from shrines, two from possible shrines that also
ychre burials, two others from buildings situated above shrines,
hree from buildings denuded to floor level. Although less
tive than the ochre burials of women, the burials with mirrors
how a connection with sanctuaries, and it is possible that
ire associated with priestesses.
t-fasteners, made   of polished bone, only accompany        male
s in shrines and they probably served to fasten leopard skins,
is are shown in the wall-paintings. As it is unlikely that the
  population of Catal Hiiyiik were so dressed, leopard skins
bly denote a ceremonial garment of male priests as in dynastic
. Carbonized remains of fur and skin, probably remains of
d skins, have been found in a number of cases of male burials
er with belt-hooks and eyes, but in others the material has not
ed. Baked clay seals and metal are again far more common
burials in shrines than elsewhere but the evidence is not yet
sive.
number of Level VI shrines the frontal bone and horn cores of
sulls are set in a bench, but none are found in houses, unlike
ylized bucrania which are, on a few occasions, also found in
ry dwellings. Likewise ram’s heads frequently occur at the
n of the post against the north wall, bull’s heads are built into
                                                                                    qo
Catal Hiiyiik
                     walls and a stag’s head with actual antlers occurs once on the north           ae
                                                                                                    -e-=



                     wall of building E.VI.B.5, possibly another shrine.
Fig. 13                 All these features as tabulated mark certain and possible shrines
                     and it is therefore quite likely that our table of shrines and houses
                     on p. 70 is in need of modification, as shown below;

                Definite          Probable or        Total of
                shrines’        possible shrines      shrines       Houses

                    I                 —                 I              4
                    2                     I             3              6
                    2                     3             5              8
                    3                     4             if             7
                   Il                     2            13             18
                   14                     2            16             39
                   II                     z            12             19
                    2                     I             3               I
                     I                    I             2             od
                     I                —                 :               I

                   48                 15               63            103


                        For those building-levels of which a sufficient number of buildings
                        have been excavated (III-VII, excepting V) it would appear that for
                        each two houses there was one shrine. In decoration as well as in size
                        there are considerable differences between these shrines: some are
                        obviously major ones and richly ornamented, and as major shrines I
                        would regard VI:61, 44, 45, 31, 14, 7, 10, 8, 1; all of these have a
                        north-south axis; whereas others have but a single wall-painting or
                        animal head, and one cannot help wondering whether these lesser
                        shrines were either subsidiary to the main ones, or the dwellings of a
                        lesser order of cult personnel. Needless to say nothing is known
                         about the Neolithic hierarchy, but the three groups of buildings in
                         this quarter: greater shrines, lesser shrines and ordinary houses may
                         all have been inhabited by various ranks in the Neolithic priesthood.
                         It is not impossible that only the major shrines served the public cult,
                         or were inhabited only periodically at the time of the great feasts,
                         whereas the lesser shrines were the normal residence of the upper
80
             JoT]Ied SOULIYS          UOHISOg
                                           J2AO
                                                 IND)
    BURIALS

                                s2739N3¥3S    Tew
                             som3y    sig TPL Arp
a. i < ” = uii 4 rr= = re”



                                                                                                                S   SEEEEEEE       EERE
                                                                                                                     “a             |
PAINTINGS
WALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Spe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rs}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          StS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          died
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          eed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SlS[S15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ei
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <

                                                                        4            Slo                            nH       g        O}+] 4
                                                                        >            asd<|<]<]    5}5
                                                                                               =)Fed
                                                                                          oyBy ey                   alFan
                                                                                                    ic]rdfyFan]fana as)    ElPa
                                                                                                                        ealfa     SIS)3/518
                                                                                                                                    Salsa                                                                                               ‘feo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4} 09
                                                                  2                           53                         5                     ms
                                                                                                                                                    13 Table of shrines and houses   with their decoration and associated




                                     SEEM PPO Prd Cane
                                              ;                 5 GES       On
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            features
                                                                                                     Cok   al
                                                        4
                                                                            aq
                                                                            H                      GyIa adPedIs
                                                            ;               2                        oon ies)
                                                                                cl
     14, 15 Reconstructions of the Second Vulture Shrine (VII.21) with human skulls as fo

     priesthood, the houses those of the lower. All this is mere conjectt
     but some such system would not be incompatible with the archa
     logical record. Only more extensive excavations can possibly sl
     light on the social structure of Neolithic Catal Hiiyiik. In this ¢
     nection it is worth noting that there is no relation between the :
     of a building or the abundance of its decoration and the poverty
     richness of the burial gifts of the dead below its platforms. The o
     correlation that can be made is that burials in shrines are more ric
     equipped than burials in houses.
        That wall-paintings and plaster reliefs of goddesses and anit
     heads had a ritual significance and were not purely decorative
     in the case of animal-heads substitutes for hunters’ trophies
     shown very clearly by the fact that wall-paintings were covered
     layers of whitewash after they had served their ritual function :
     that plaster-reliefs were made ritually harmless by the obliterat
     of the face, hands and feet when a shrine was abandoned. Many of
     animal heads were similarly defaced or broken off and frequel
     only the outline survives or their original position is marked t
     broad scar on the wall. Some of these heads were built into new w
     evidently to bring protection to the building. Only in shr
     destroyed by a sudden fire have many plaster reliefs survived mor
82
Left, west and north walls, right, north and east walls. See Plates 30, 47, VIII


less intact, but here the destruction has again obliterated the faces of
the goddess reliefs. Thick layers of unburnt plaster cover the burnt
hunting scene in shrine A.III.1 and the paintings of abandoned shrine
A.IIL8 were similarly treated. A further indication of the sacredness
of the plaster reliefs is the small child’s hand-imprint on the body of the
goddess in shrine E.VII.23 and larger hands on the bull’s and ram’s
heads in shrine E.VI.A.7. It seems that worshippers dipped a hand in
red paint and left an imprint on the sacred image. The numerous
panels with human hands in shrines (and sometimes houses) bear
witness to similar practices on a large scale. Sometimes hands are
found not on the bull’s head, but around it (shrine E.VI.B.10.),
and in one case there is an imprint of a child’s foot (house.E.VI.63).
  If any further proof is needed of the sacred character of the Catal
Hiiyiik shrines, the unusual disposal of the body of a prematurely
born child may here conveniently be mentioned. In shrine E.VI.A.14
was found a brick which broke and displayed the imprint of a bag.
In it and carefully wrapped in very fine cloth were the ochre stained
bones of a baby accompanied by two funeral gifts: a tiny bit of
bright shell and a small chip of obsidian. This parcel evidently
represents some hapless woman’s offering to the Shrine of the Twin
Goddess; more normal is the burial of a small child below the floor.
Catal Hiiytik
                   Even stranger is the collection of four skulls found on the floor of
Figs 14, 15     shrine E.VII.a1. One of these lay in a basket below the bull’s head on
                the west wall; a second lay below the bull’s head in the centre of
                the east wall and two others were perched on the corner platform
                below the vulture painting. One gains the impression that these
                skulls were used in a funerary ritual, but as the graves in this shrine
                have not yet been excavated one cannot tell whether the skulls
                belonged to any of the burials in the shrine. In only one other build-
                ing (E.V.6) was a single human skull found, in this case on the north-
                west platform. The presence of skulls in these buildings reminds one
                of the two skulls found propped up on stones on virgin soil in the
                aceramic village of Hacilar. Two others were found near hearths
                in later layers of the same village where no burials of the dead have
                been found. Some ancestor cult may perhaps have been practised at
                aceramic Hacilar, where it is considerably earlier than at Catal
                Hiiyiik.


Religious Imagery
                Shrines at Catal Hiiyiik were decorated with wall-paintings or
                plaster reliefs, or both. Wall-painting was practised even before
                Level X, for a painted fragment of a doorway was found in debris
                on which a house of Level X was erected. Aceramic Hacilar also
                knew the art of painting floors and walls around 7000 sc. The
                custom remained in use at Catal Hiiyiik at least as late as Level II,
                destroyed c. $700 Bc, but from this latest phase only the lower panels
                with plain red paint survive.
                  Plaster reliefs are just as ancient at the site and appear in the simple
                form of animal heads in a shrine of Level X, c. 6500 Bc. Cut-out
                figures in sunk relief are first found in Level IX (in the form of heads)
                and entire animals cut out of the thick wall-plaster appear in Levels
                VI, VI B and VI A, sometimes combined with partial modelling of
                horns and eyes. Animals in low relief are found in Level VI B,
                breasts and horns from Level VII onwards and goddesses also make
                their first appearance in this level. Plaster reliefs were still in use in
                Level V, judging by a number of fragments in situ on the walls, but
84.
29, 30 Among wall-paintings at Catal Hiiyiik those imitating kilims, i.e. woven woollen rugs, are
particularly common and are easily recognized by their intricate geometric ornament, their stitched
borders and many colours. One of the most splendid examples, from the east wall of shrine VI.B.1,
above, is painted in orange red, light buff, white, grey and black and contains numerous flower
symbols. Another, below, in red and black from the north wall of shrine VII.21, combines painting
with grooves and dots, left white, a style of decoration peculiar to Levels VII and VIII
31, 32 Of the two shrines of building-level III, one (A.III.8) is entirely decorated with patterns
derived from kilims and textiles. A section of the latest kilim pattern in red, white and grey cover-
ing part of the north wall is shown in the copy, above, with fragments of earlier paintings showing
underneath to the right. The continuation of this kilim pattern around the north-east corner of the
shrine with only the triangles finished is shown in the original, below
    ie
33, 34 On the west wall of this same shrine (A.III.8) there were two main panels of decoration of
which the northern formed the continuation of that shown in Plate 31. The southern, shown in the
copy, above, and in the original, below, contained not less than four superimposed phases of painting :
from top to bottom; the unfinished kilim pattern with triangles; the bold rows of quatrefoils; the
finer quartrefoils and the step patterns. Each was separated from the other by a layer of white
plaster
'
i




    35, 36 Besides patterns that are obviously bor-
    rowed from textiles there are others, above, that
    appear to derive from leopard skins with the
    familiar spots (cf. Plate 18). Such paintings were
    only found on the south wall of shrine VI.B.1. A
    different pattern, below, from the edge of the
    doorway in the north wall of shrine VIL.8 (see
    Plate 48) has a row of orange flowers and.a mauve
    pattern reminiscent of fine basketry or matting
37, 38 Shrine VI.A.s50 was decorated with another very fine kilim pattern, delicately executed in
red, black and white on buff. Even its border is preserved. It shows close resemblances to the kilim
pattern of Plate 29, which is a little earlier in date. Symbols include horns, flowers and even a small
hand. Above is a detail of the burnt painting, with a copy, below




   ss
  aS gee
39, 40 The east wall of shrine VI.A.66, the smallest found, had a large bull’s head with red mouth,
ears and hair, but no actual horns, set above the bench. North of it was a panel of painting with
elaborate symbols, painted in orange, white and mauve and a group of small red figures, including a
woman, an archer and several goddesses in the posture of childbirth with raised arms and legs. A
detail of the upper right portion of this panel in its original state is shown above, and a copy of the
entire panel below
41, 42 Two superimposed paintings, of which the later, above, is only partly preserved, but the
lower, below, more or less complete, rose above a lower panel with white hands left in reserve on a
red ground above the central platform of shrine VI.B.8. Two rows of four-fingered black and red,
grey and pink hands, the upper row encased in ovals, the lower alternately vertical or horizontal,
frame a red honeycomb pattern. On this pattern is depicted, in both paintings, insects and grubs on
a field of stylized flowers, above. In the lower painting the cells are closed on the left and open up
in the centre; the painting might depict the life cycle of the bee
43-45 Around the north-west corner of shrine VII.8 there is an earlier panel of red and black hands
above, (a copy above), and red hands below, (original below), framing a set of patterns that probably
represent nets painted in red. Opposite is a gruesome scene of an enormous vulture attacking two
small headless human figures, one of which is outstretched, the other crouched, like the dead, on its
left side. This scene, from the central panel of the east wall, is part of a vast painting that formed the
principle decoration of the earliest phase of shrine VII.8. Other scenes are shown in Plates 48, 49
46, 47 Shrine VIIL8, the predecessor of the Vul-
ture Shrine, VII.8, similarly contained a painting
of black vultures, unfortunately badly damaged,
above. Here the scene is different for though a
headless body lies between the two birds of prey,
a man armed with a sling is actually warding off
their attacks. Yet a third building, the Second
Vulture Shrine, VII.21, contained scenes of this
sort on its north wall. Between two of these
creatures, provided with human legs, and perhaps
priestesses or priests in disguise, lies another head-
less corpse, below, but in a position different from
the others
48, 49 Although somewhat smaller in size, not less than five vultures pecking at headless corpses
graced the north wall of shrine VII.8, where they were later covered by the cut-out figure of the
black bull (Plate 12). These scenes probably indicate that the people of Catal Hityiik exposed their
dead to the vultures for the purpose of excarnation. A detail is shown above and a copy of the whole
scene below
        50, 51 Detail of a dead man’s
        head, above, from the painting of
        funeral rite (?) below, on the
        south end of the east wall of
        shrine E.IV.1., the worst pre-
        served of all shrines. The black-
        haired and bearded head with
        closed eyes, red smeared brow
        and gaping mouth may have
        been carried by a figure of which
        only the torso is preserved




4an,y
ott"
 8
§2,   53 Detail   of a small    white
‘Goddess’, below, from the contin-
uation of the wall-painting (Plate
51) on the east wall of shrine
E.IV.1. Above, a fragmentary paint-
ing with long-headed, running
figures and a bull (?) partly obscured
by remains of overpainting from the
central post on the north wall of
building A.IV.1
$4, 55 Monochrome red painting of a deer hunt, above, from the truncated south wall of the ante-
chamber to shrine A.III.1. Six male figures pursue a herd of Red Deer (Cervus elaphus), one of
which has been brought to its knees by two men, below, and turns its head towards its attackers,
while the others attempt to escape
$6, 57 Monochrome red painting of a deer hunt from the north wall of room A.III.13. A stag and
its young are pursued by an archer accompanied by his dog, one of the earliest representations of
this domestic animal. The archer has just released his arrow
            $8 Tentative reconstruction of a stag’s head, painted in red, black and white on the north side of
            the niche in the east wall of shrine A.III.1



ARIZONA STATE MUSCUM LIBRARY . TUCSON,
                                                 AZ. 85727
                                                            The Shrines and their Reliefs
none have been found in Levels IV-I and it may be assumed that this
method of decoration had gone out of use.
   Benches decorated with horns, which may be interpreted as a
stylized form of a row of bulls’ heads placed one behind the other
are confined to Levels VI B and VI A, but the simpler form, the
bucranium, first found in Level VI, continued in use till the end of
Level II.
  In plaster reliefs goddesses appear solely in anthropomorphic form
and the place of the male is taken by bulls and rams, a more im-
pressive exponent of male fertility. Only the bull, the stag and the
leopard occur in full outline as well as in the form of heads, whereas
the ram is never fully shown, and is simply represented by ram’s
heads. Stags, boar and leopards are rare and may be regarded as
attributes of the deities, rather than as symbols of the god and
goddess themselves. In the earlier animal heads the horns are
usually modelled in clay and plaster, but from Level VII onwards the
use of the actual horn cores and frontal bones of dead animals is
found on a great scale in Levels VI B and VI A. So far other
animals, such as vultures, other birds or dogs are only found in the
wall-paintings or carved in stone. Snake and goat are conspicuous
by their absence.
   Plaster reliefs are frequently painted and the two techniques are
evidently complementary. Whereas the animal heads are solid and
moulded in clay covered with plaster, the large figures of goddesses
were made of plaster moulded on bundles of reeds, the imprint of
which is frequently preserved, or on wooden posts, preserved by
carbonization. Many animal-heads were likewise set in super-
imposed rows on posts (especially in Level VII) or they were fixed
on to the lower end of a post. In other cases single horns were used
to attach the animal head to the wall. Whereas animal bones, horns,
etc., were used for attachment and horn cores were used to enhance
a naturalistic representation of the animal, the lower jaws of gigantic
wild boar were stuck in rows into the walls of certain shrines, and
these as well as the skulls of vultures, foxes and weasels, found in the
representations of breasts, evidently have a ritual and symbolic
meaning of their own. They serve no technical function.
                                                                                     IOI
Catal Hiiyiik
                             WEST     WALL         * NORTH   WALL              EAST         WALL      SOUTH   WALL



                                        ttt                               dele ects
                                                                                                     eng
                                                                                   DESTROYED         yz                  VI-44
16 Schematic table of
the arrangement of the
decoration
    :      in the main \     SCREEN
shrines ofLevels X-VIA                                        Dreee        Sores     Rea:    |aPZ
                                                                                                i                    SY




                             ee               ce                      islSees sa IA                                  oe

                             SCREEN                                                          baba tye.               VIB.x
                             SCREEN           al                                                                     Vitep



                         Cet ee               ee


                                                                                                                     a    B




                                             DESTROYED                |                                              VIB.7

                                                                                                                      VI.14




                                                                           DESTROYED         Re




                                                                                                                     VIL2r




                         LEGEND                                        vw                   Ram’s head

                           ‘ew Bucranium (Bull Pillar)                 99                   Breasts

                           SF   Bench with inserted           horns       ‘ad               Horn

                            iy Bull’s head                                tee               Niches
102
                                                        The Shrines and their Reliefs
   WEST WALL ___ NORTH WALL   EAST WALL           SOUTH WALL
  DESTROYED                               t                   VIB.z



                                                               VILt




          ace 7
                                                              VIA.8




       Ps   eae
__sme __ VEN
        ime: We
         hae [ES[6 7                                          gt




                                                             VI A.1o




                                                                X.1




pile     Doorway              SEE   ==Red panel
 to      Goddess relief       —       Wall-painting
         Cutout figure                Ladder
                                                                                 103
Catal Hiiyiik
Fig. 16                        The diagrammatic table on pages 102-3 shows the arrangement of
                            the decoration in the best preserved twenty-eight shrines of Levels
                            X-VIA. It appears that the decoration of shrines followed certain
                            rules; scenes dealing with death are always placed on the east and
                            north walls, below which the dead were buried. Scenes dealing with
                            birth occupy the opposite west wall and bulls are found only on the
                            north wall facing the Taurus Mountains, perhaps not a coincidence.
                            Animal heads associated with red painted niches are always on the
                            east wall but goddesses and bull and ram heads have no special place
                            and may occur on any wall. It is, however, rare for the south wall
                            (the kitchen end of the shrine) to be decorated, although there are a
                            few cases where this happened.
Lge 49                         In the earliest shrine decorated with plaster reliefs (X.1), two large
                            bull’s heads with enormous but clumsily moulded horns are placed
                            on the north and east wall. The first is fixed on a wooden post and
                            flanked by a doorway and a shallow niche whereas the second has its
                            face painted red. Immediately above it are two small (rams’?) heads
                            and towards the north-east corner there are two smaller bulls’ heads
                            without prominent horns. On the southernmost panel of the east
                            wall there is another bull’s head with shorter horns and a small head,
                            possibly a ram’s with a niche above it. Although this earliest shrine
                            already foreshadows the much more monumental ones of Levels

17 Reconstruction ofthe earliest shrine in Level X (X.1)
VII and VI, the execution of the work is still somewhat clumsy and
the system of panelling is still undeveloped. This single shrine
should not be taken as typical of the period, for even in Level VII,
we have another (VII.35) which closely resembles it in workman-                Fig. 21
ship. Shrine IX.8, next in chronological order shows the earliest              Fig. 18
example of animal heads, a feline, probably a leopard and a bull,
which has lost one horn, cut deep into the plaster of the north wall,
thus partly destroying the earlier painting of a large black bull.            Plate 11
There are no traces of paint on either of these two animal-heads. A
second shrine ([X.1) had a panel on the west wall with a large bull’s
head on the right and a smaller (ram’s?) head on the left as well as
wall-paintings. This building shows well developed panelling and
was one of the few that had a red painted platform and a small hearth
sunk in it.


                                                              Shrines of Level VII

In the restricted area in which the buildings of Level VIII were
excavated no shrines with plaster reliefs were found, but painting
was well established. In Level VII, however, plaster reliefs were
found in not less than ten shrines. A small shrine (VII.9) had both its    Figs 19, 20
long walls covered with animal heads, fixed to wooden posts or to
the wall in between. Three bulls’ heads were placed on the east wall
                                                                                  105
19 East wall of shrine VIL.9, restored


                            along the line of a horizontal wooden beam whilst a fine bull’s head
                            with upturned horns graced the central panel of the west wall
                            between two vertical posts. On the northern wall a single head with
                            two pairs of wavy horns was fixed and the southern posts bore
                            three superimposed heads, each with a pair of curling horns. It seems
                            most likely that these are bulls’ heads in spite of the curving horns
                            which might at first sight suggest the horns of rams. Parallels with
                            later representations of bull’s heads on other west walls, the excessive
                            length of the horns and the small curving horns of the actual rams
                            found at Catal Hiiyiik favour this view.
Fig, 21                       Much smaller bulls’ heads are found in shrine VII.35. As in the
                            buildings previously described, the horns are modelled in clay, but
                            actual ram’s horns are introduced into a small head on the east wall.
                            One large bull’s head spans the main panel of the north wall; two
                            small ones are found beside it on the same wall and a larger bull’s
                            head appears below a red painted niche on the east wall. Next to this
                            niche a pair of woman’s breasts appear above the animal’s right horn
                            and a second pair, placed vertically, appear above the ram’s head.
                            From the open nipples protruded the teeth of a fox and a weasel’s
                            skull respectively which were incorporated in this pair of breasts.
Fig. 15                     The east wall of shrine VII.21 combines the same symbolism, but on
                            a much grander scale. A large ram’s head with actual horns and
                            painted with a fine meander pattern is placed beneath a bold clay
106
20 West wall of shrine VII.9, restored


horn from which a single breast protrudes. Out of the open breast
springs the lower jaw of a gigantic boar with formidable tusks and its
position is similar to that in shrine VII.35. The central panel of this
shrine isdominated by alarge bull’s head with actual horns surmount-
ing a red-painted niche and a row of six stylized breasts. Asymmetric-
ally surrounding the bull’s head are three small ram’s heads with
actual horns. A further breast, but with open nipple, occurs on the
northernmost panel of the east wall and another is found on the

21 North and east walls of shrine VII.35, restored




                                                     _

                                                     Mg
                                                          ~
Catal Hiiyiik
Fig. 14                     opposite wall. The main feature of the west wall, however, is a
                            huge bull’s head with moulded nostrils and mouth set in a red-
                            painted muzzle. A geometric pattern is painted on the head, the ears
                            are red and red bands surround the horns, which are of gigantic size.
                            Though fallen and crushed by crumbling masonry, one of the horn
                            cores could still be measured and was over a metre in length. A
                            niche for libations, semi-circular in shape, was set into the west wall
                            and was matched to the right by a grooved and painted panel (in
                            white, black and red) representing a kilim (a thin woven rug).
                            The north wall of this building was decorated with a similar panel
                            and with wall-paintings of vultures attacking headless corpses.
                            A doorway, placed well above the level of the floor interrupted
                            the wall-paintings and there may have been some short wooden               =~
                                                                                                        —


                            steps. It was in this building that the series of human skulls, already
                            referred to (p. 84), were found, and, with its splendid and impressive
                            decoration, it is evidently one of the major shrines of Level VII.
                               Hardly less remarkable is a series of three shrines (VII.10.8 and 1)
Fig. 22                     that lie in a row a little farther south. The first of these (VII.10) is
                           decorated only with plaster reliefs, and, unlike the other two, had no
                           wall-paintings. At the bottom of the central post along the north

22 North and east walls of shrine VII.10, restored. See Plates 10, 17
                                                                                        The Shrines and their Reliefs




23 Reconstruction ofthe west and south walls ofshrine VII.1 with plaster reliefs of twin goddesses
and bulls’ heads

wall was placed a large animal head with a single and rather short                                            Plate 10
plaster horn. The plaster to the right was well preserved, so that it
could be established that an animal with only one horn was por-
trayed. The face was demolished, but a comparison with the build-
ing immediately above (in Level VI B) where the post ended in a
well preserved ram’s head with two pairs of horns, may suggest that
here also a ram was represented. To the left (west) of this ram’s head
the plaster was cut into an animal silhouette to which a little model-
ling of the head was added. Unfortunately the upper part was broken,
but what remains suggests the outline of a stag’s head. In the north-
east corner a much better preserved representation of a stag on a
rock was found. Here also touches of modelling were added to the
cut-out silhouette of the animal, which is extremely lively and
naturalistically observed. The motif of a stag turning its head appears                                      Plate 17
here for the first time, but is again found in the paintings of deer-
hunts in the shrine of Level III and in the pottery figure of a doe from                                 Plates 55, 61
                                                                                                                  109
Catal Hiiyiik
                a house in Hacilar VI. Stags are comparatively rare in the art of
                Catal Hiiyiik, but a fine antler of Red Deer (Cervus elaphus) in-
                corporated into a plaster animal head decorated the north wall of a
                probable shrine (VI.B.>5).
                  The east wall of shrine VII.10 showed another cut-out relief;
                a vast bull’s head, seen like most of the animals in this building, in
                profile. In front of the head is a shallow niche and the boldly curving
                horn, the eye and a few other features are enhanced by modelling in
                plaster. The reconstruction drawing shows these animals as they
                probably were originally, but as the result of a rough brick fill and
                the superimposed weight of another burnt shrine (VI.10) they have
                been somewhat flattened out.
                   Very similar to the large bull’s head in shrine VII.10 is a huge bull
Fig. 23         on the west and south wall of shrine VII.1. The entire outline of the
                animal’s back and head is carved in the plaster, but the feet and
                belly are not indicated. The silhouette of the head is again obtained
                by cutting a shallow niche in front of it and the eye and horn are
                modelled in plaster. The head of the animal has been pressed down
                considerably so that the figure looks disjointed, for the entire south
                wall has been compressed by the weight of later buildings. The bull
                turns its back to another smaller horned animal, possibly a cow,
                which occupies the other side of the west wall and was made in the
                same technique. It too has no legs and seems to stand on ared-painted
                pedestal. When first found the figure still bore traces of an overall
                blue paint, and this is the only case of the use of blue paint on walls
                so far. Between these two animals a battered bull’s head was
                placed below the remains of a small goddess figure, of which only
                the right arm, leg and breast were preserved, but the outline of the
                remainder of the body could still be partly traced on the plaster. The
                asymmetrical position of this figure was puzzling at first until it was
                realized that two such figures would make a balanced composition.
                At the point where the second figure should have been the plaster
                had been stripped off the wall, probably at the time when the
                building was condemned and filled in. Had there been only a single
                figure, then there is no reason for the plain plaster not to have sur-
                vived, as it has done in every other building. Twin goddess figures
IIO
24 Reconstruction ofthe north and east walls ofshrine VII.1 with wall-paintings oftextiles



are by no means rare and in at least two other neighbouring shrines
(VIL.8 and VI.B.12) the existence of such a group is either certain or
highly probable. The east and north wall of this shrine were orna-
mented with textile patterns but on either side of the main post                              Fig. 24
plaster reliefs of breast and horn were found.
   Between the two shrines just described there lay another (VII.8).                         Plate 12
Its earliest decoration consisted of one enormous panel of vultures
‘8 metres high and extending over the greater part of the north and
the entire east wall. At the end of its existence, after a hundred layers
of white plaster had almost obliterated the existence of the vulture
painting, a fine bull was cut into the thick plaster of the north wall,
and painted black. As found its head was unfortunately missing, but                           Fig. 25
it is seen advancing towards the doorway leading to the entrance
corridor. Red-painted panels are found below the bull over two
platforms on the edge of which once stood a big bucranium, the
earliest of its type. More red panels continued beyond the doorway
the jambs of which at one stage were gaily painted with rosettes.
                                                                                                 III
Catal Hiiyiik
                           Above the red panels there were paintings with hands and in the
                           middle of the west wall there lay again as in shrines VII.1 and VI.B.8
                           (immediately above it) a stylized bull’s head. What particularly
                           attracted our attention was the strange way in which the plaster of
                           the wall had been cut, late in the life-span of the shrine. Symmetric-
                           ally placed above the bull’s head were the rough outlines of two
                           felines, presumably leopards, face to face. Like the cow in shrine
                           VIL1 next door, these stood on pedestals and directly above them all
                           the plaster had been broken off the wall, as if something had been
                           removed when the shrine was abandoned and filled in. That a rela-
                           tionship existed between the plaster reliefs in shrine VII.1 and the
                           potentially domesticable bull and cow and the wild leopards in its
                           neighbour soon became evident. Moreover, something had been
                           removed from the west wall in both buildings and a comparison
                           with a group of old and broken statuettes in blue and brown lime-
                           stone,    found      in shrine VI.A.10,   which   showed   two   goddesses
                           standing behind leopards and a boy riding a leopard displayed the

25 North and east walls ofshrine VII.8 as found. See Plates 12, 36
26 Restoration ofthe north and east walls ofshrine VII.8 See Plates 12, 36


same outline of the wild animals as found in the shrine. It is therefore
quite probable that twin goddesses, like those found in shrine VII.1,
were originally placed on this west wall, as is shown in the reconstruc-       Fig. 26
tion drawing. It is moreover likely that the stone statuettes were
originally part of the cult images of this shrine, from which they,
like the plaster reliefs, were removed when the building was
abandoned.
   The next shrine of Level VII (VII.23) was relatively simple, but
contained a very fine painted plaster relief of a pregnant goddess,          Plate VII
placed on the east wall. In the later phases the goddess was painted
white, but on one of the numerous white layers the small red hand
of a child was painted on the goddess’s breast. In her original form
she had been clothed in a gaudily painted dress with patterns in red,
black and orange and the dress extended like a veil behind her
between the upturned arms and legs. She was shown as clearly
pregnant and her condition was emphasized by the use of concentric
                                                                                  113
Catal Hiiyiik
                    red circles. Face, hands and feet had been broken when the shrine
                    was deserted and filled in. No other plaster reliefs or wall-paintings
                    other than red panels marred the simple serenity of this shrine
                    dedicated to the goddess.
                      Shrine VII.29 had two bulls’ heads, with red-painted ears on the
                    east wall and a red-painted niche next to the larger lower head.
                       Shrine VII.45 was abandoned and filled in with broken brick and
                    plaster after its west wall had collapsed. In the middle of the north
                    wall, set between two red-painted posts and above a red panel, sat the
Plate 25; Fig. 27   large figure of a goddess of which only the lower portion had sur-
                    vived. Below many layers of white plaster there were red vertical
                    stripes on the legs, which show that this figure also once had a
                    painted dress. The position of the goddess, framed by posts, gives her
                    the appearance of coming through a door to show herself to the
                    worshippers. The large panel on her left was plain and no traces of
                    decoration survive on the greater part of the east wall, which, fairly
                    late in the occupation of the shrine, was cut into the silhouette of
Plate 13            a gigantic boar’s head. This is very similar to the boar figures of
                    clay which have been found in Level VI B. A scar on the plaster
                    nearest the central post may suggest a plastically rendered horn;
                    another, surrounded by a circle of red paint, the presence of a small
                    animal head. This is one of the shrines where the bench was painted
                    red.
Plate 24               Shrine VII.31 was one of the best preserved buildings on the
                    site even though it had lost the plaster of its entire north and more
                    than half of the east wall. It had been abandoned and filled in
                    after its reliefs had been defaced. Nevertheless it stood to a height
                    of 2 metres, with one of the capitals of the wooden posts preserved
Fig. 28             intact. On entering the shrine through a doorway in the north wall
                    one faced not less than four panels decorated with reliefs; two on the
                    west wall, one on the south wall (the second panel was occupied by
                    the wooden ladder) and one more on the southernmost panel of the
                    east wall. The central panel on this wall, which frequently bears
                    important reliefs, was destroyed down to the lowermost red panel.
                    The first composition consisted of the familiar goddess-figure
                    modelled in bold relief; the hands and feet of which appear to have
114
                                                                         ee




27 Restoration ofthe north and east walls ofshrine VII.45 with reliefs




been made separately and inserted into now empty sockets. As is               Fig. 28
normal at Catal Hiiyiik, there is no indication of sex, but the navel
was always shown. Above the head two holes in the plaster on either
side of a slight knob indicate perhaps the former existence of a head-
dress or, equally possible, they were used to fix a hanging over the
sacred figure of the divinity. Above her left hand a small bull’s head
is shown, the ears of which had been painted red. The head also was
defaced. Near her right hand the horn of a bull modelled in clay is
seen and this is matched by a second on the other side of the central
post, which had been removed. Evidently these belong to a bull’s
head modelled on the post, as in so many shrines of Level VII.
The second panel was filled with five bull’s heads of varying sizes,          Fig. 28
all smashed when the building was deserted, but easily recognizable
from horns and scars. Beyond the corner post another figure of a
goddess was placed next to a horizontal bar and below her is a shallow
                                                                                 115
28 West and south-west
walls of shrine VII.31
with the animal heads
restored. See Plate 24




                             niche. She also had lost her head, but the entire outline is preserved
                             which suggests a hair-style with two small horns, very like that
                             fashionable in the fourteenth century ap. There were faded traces of
                             paint on this figure, especially round the neck, which suggests a
                             painted garment, but too little plaster survived to reconstruct its
                             pattern. No traces of paint were found on the first figure, nor on the
Fig. 29                      third and most remarkable one on the east wall. This goddess is

29 East wall ofshrine VII.31. The decoration ofthe central panel is lost but the panel to the right
shows the goddess, her hair streaming out behind her in the wind, obviously in rapid motion




                                         fe                2S
                                         i “tm iLa
                                                          NOMIC 7 .
                                                         The Shrines and their Reliefs
shown with her head and body in profile, her long locks floating
behind her in the wind. Arms and legs are outstretched and fore-
shortened, thus strengthening the impression of swift motion. The
goddess appears to be running, dancing or whirling and above her
right arm there originally was something, now broken, outlined in
orange red paint. The destruction of the central panel may have
deprived us of the object or figure to which she is seen advancing.
Perhaps the clue to this lies in the building underneath. This will be
explored when the excavations are resumed.


                                                Shrines of Levels VIB and VIA

The traditional use of plaster reliefs in shrines, already fully developed
in Level VII, reached its climax in Levels VI B and VI A, when we
find truly monumental compositions up to 4 metres in height (shrine             Fig. 38
VI.B.10).
   A number of shrines of Level VIB are very simple in their decora-
tion. Shrine VI.B.12 bore reliefs of the twin goddess on its north
wall and a third (animal head?) above the main platform. Shrine
VI.B.15 had two bull’s heads on the south wall, one set in a recess,
the other in a side room, whilst wall-paintings decorated the space
above the main platform. Shrine VI.B.20 had a goddess on the south
wall, but only the scar of attachment was preserved. A stag’s head
and a wall-painting of textile design formed the only decoration of
shrine VI.B.5; a horn and breast (?) and numerous superimposed
wall-paintings that of shrine VI.B.1, unless the destroyed west wall
had been originally decorated with one or more goddesses like all its
neighbours. Shrine VI.B.7, which has also lost its west wall, had a
large goddess with horizontal arms and no legs, but from the lower
part of her body projected a huge red painted bull’s head similar to
the Twin Goddess in shrine VI.B.14 with which it was connected
through a single entrance-shaft, thus forming a double shrine.
Goddess and bull’s head suffered severe damage in a fire at the end of
Level VI B and were covered by a new wall in Level VI A.
  In the northern part of the excavated area there were two splendid
shrines VI B and A.61; and VI B and A.44. The first is one of
                                                                                   117
30 East and south walls ofshrine V1.61 with bucrania and horn cores set in a bench



Plates 15, 16; Fig. 30      the largest found and presented a terrific spectacle of bucrania;
                            two placed on the male corner-platform and a third beyond a care-
                            fully modelled bench from which six sets of aurochs horn-cores
                            projected with a seventh raised at the end like a bucranium. The
                            impression left by these remains is still that of tremendous male
                            power and it may be surmised that this was a shrine devoted to the
                            cult of the male deity. The east wall was preserved only up to a red
                            painted groove, which marks the line of a horizontal wooden beam.
                            It seems unlikely that the central panels would have been left plain
                            and one would expect at least one large bull’s head there (as in shrines
                            VI.B.10 and 14). The other walls are much better preserved but
                            bore no reliefs or wall-paintings. Like many other shrines of Level
                            VIB it remained in use during the next period at the end of which it
                            was burnt.
                               Near to this shrine was another (VI.44), built in Level VI B and
                            occupied throughout this level and the next. Whereas in many
                            buildings the goddess is shown in person, her presence is here ex-
Plates 18, 20; Fig. 31      pressed in a life-size plaster relief of her attributes, a pair of
                            leopards. These decorate the main panel on the north wall framed by
                            two wooden plastered posts with numerous phases of painting,
                            plain red or white or with a textile design in grey, cream and red.
                            The leopards are placed on the middle panel above a plain red panel
118
31 North and east walls of the
Leopard Shrine (VI.B.44) with
a screen to the left, and a venti-
lation shaft and doorway to a
storeroom on the right. See
Plates 18-21



and they are each about a metre long. They face each other with
raised tails; a short fat female on the left, a more slender male on the
right. In the latest phases these were whitewashed and bore no
designs and they were rather clumsy in shape as the result of repeated
replastering. When the layers of white plaster were stripped off one
by one the animals regained their original shape and painted decora-
tion began to appear, which had been repeated over and over again.
The later phases of painting showed lemon-coloured animals                     Plates 20, 21
covered with black spots, and the line of the claws and the end of the
tail, as well as the mouth, were accentuated by pink stripes. The
animals were outlined by black dashes. There were a great many
layers of this sort of decoration, all more or less partially preserved
and affected by the fire which had consumed this building. On one of
the tails, broken by a deep Hellenistic pit, an earlier form of painting
could be seen and the leopards were cleaned down to the best
preserved layer. They changed their spots into what looked like black
rosettes placed in rows on the white bodies, legs and tails, and two
rosettes formed their eyes. The mouth was red, claws and the tip of
the tail being outlined in bright red paint. This form of decoration
was also repeated at least twenty times and the fine three- or four-
petalled rosettes are indeed a very close rendering of actual spots on     Plates 18, 19, VI
leopards. The left-hand leopard, badly cracked and weakened by the
                                                                                        119
Catal Hiiyiik
                water that had seeped into the Hellenistic pit, broke upon removal
                and we were thus able to remove some more layers of paint. This
                showed that the earliest leopards were considerably smaller and
                had black claws and their rosettes were much larger and fewer than
                in the later paintings. There appear to have been about forty layers
                of painting on them.
                  The leopards have now been reconstituted in the Ankara Archaeo-
                logical Museum. On the edge of the platform in front of the leopards
                a red-painted bull’s head was found crushed in its fall. It cannot
                have fallen from the south wall which was preserved and showed no
                scars of attachment, nor is it likely that it had been fixed on the screen
                of sticks and plaster which divided the kitchen end of the shrine from
                the main room. One can only surmize that it could have been placed
                in the middle of the north wall, well above the leopards, but this is
                by no means certain. There were also the remains of a bucranium,
                but again in the absence of any mark of attachment on the platform,




                                                                      32 Restoration of the
                                                                      west wall ofshrine VI.14
                                                                      with a monumental relief
                                                                      a Twin Goddess. The
                                                                      left doorway leads to a
                                                                      granary, the right to a
                                                                      lightshaft.. See Plates
                                                                      220i
                                                                                           bif|mi)VyeaAi(




33 Restoration of the east and south walls ofshrine VI.14 with bucrania, horn cores on a bench
and bulls’ and rams’ heads modelled in relief. A ladder, the normal means ofentry, is on the right


its original position is uncertain, and may only appear when the
platform is stripped of its plaster. A rich collection of stone statuettes,
grain offerings and stalactites was found in this room (see pp. 202-3).
   The well preserved shrine VIB and A.14, the eastern member of                                     Figs 32, 33
a twin shrine (14 and 7), offers certain analogies to shrine VI.61                                     Plate III
in having three bucrania and a bench with three sets of horn cores,
the easternmost of which is likewise raised above the others. Three
animal heads with actual horns were found on the east wall; a large
bull’s head above the horizontal beam and two rams’ heads set at
different heights on the flanking panels. Another was set within a
frame on the south wall beyond the ladder and above a deep recess,
with a sinuous outline reminiscent of the horns of bulls in plaster
reliefs of Level VII. It is, however, the west wall which bore a                                     Figs 22, 23
strange and monumental relief, 2-2 metres in height and therefore
among the largest yet found at Catal Hiiyiik. Although damaged by
fire and partly collapsed it can be restored on paper as a stylized twin
                                                                                                            I21I
Catal Hiiyiik
                         figure of a goddess with two heads and bodies, but with a single pair
                         of arms and upturned legs. The bodies were modelled on two vertical
                         wooden posts and the plaster edges were painted red. From the
                         abdomen of the right-hand body an enormous bull’s head, nearly
                         61 cms in width, with powerful horns protruded. On top of it a
Plate 22                 smaller head was modelled. Not less than a hundred layers of plaster
                         covered the heads, out of which at least six or seven were painted.        ©
                                                                                                        ae
                                                                                                        i
                         In the latest phase (VI.A) the muzzles have lost their nostrils and
                         mouth and the painting is confined to a red muzzle, red ears and
                         rings round the horns. In the earlier layers a hand placed over the
                         mouth is painted with the fingers spread out over the animal’s nose.
                         In these twin shrines the same subject is represented; the birth of the
                         bull god from the body of the goddess, but whereas in shrine VI.B.7
                         there is only one goddess, here are two of which only one is giving
                         birth. The shoulder and part of one head were found crushed in the
                         debris of the shrine (the other shoulder had lost the second head),
                         but it appears that the head was flat and if any features were shown
                         they must have been executed in paint. The heads may have been
                         very similar to those of the contemporary white marble statuette of
Plate 70                 a twin goddess found in shrine VI.A.10.
                           A row of three bull’s heads, separated by small knobs (stylized
Plate IV; Figs 34, 35    breasts?) and one ram’s head, all richly painted, decorated the central
                         and south panels of the east wall of shrine VI.B.8. Many of the
Fig. 36                  patterns found on these heads (thirteen layers of paint were recorded)
                         ate identical with those on the bulls’ heads in shrine VI.14. Here
                         also three sets of horn cores were set into the bench, with the eastern-
                         most raised above the others. The main decoration of the east wall
                         consisted of several layers of fine wall-paintings (see p. 162) but the
Plate 14                 most striking feature of the room was a great bull sunk in the plaster
                         of the north wall. This was replastered over and over again and was
                        sometimes red, sometimes white. It occupied exactly the same
                        position as its predecessor, the black bull in shrine VII.8, which
                        lies immediately below this building. The continuity in cult, so
                        characteristic of Catal Hiiyiik, could hardly be illustrated better. A
                        black bull occurred on the north wall in Level IX, vultures in Levels
                        VIII and early VII; a black bull in late VII and in VI B and A; and
I22
34 Earliest phase of the
decoration of shrine VI.
B.8, north and east walls




35 Second phase of the
decoration of shrine VI.
B.8, north and east walls




36 Successive    painted
patterns on the bulls’
heads from the east wall
of shrine VI.B.8. See
Plates 41, 42, IV
Catal Hiiyiik
                          panels of hands in VII and VI B, always in the same building. The
                          people who made the red bull, 2-4 metres in length, may have seen
                          the somewhat smaller black one and copied the design. The west
Plate 26; Fig. 37         wall of the shrine bore the familiar representation of a goddess,
                          originally about 1-2 metres in height, with raised arms and up-
                          turned feet, a position indicative of childbirth. Immediately below
                          her a large bull’s head with spreading horns, modelled in clay and
                          plaster, is shown. The representation is clear and shows the goddess
                          having given birth to a bull. One of the many layers of plaster was
                          painted yellow, but without any traces of patterns. A second bull’s
                          head, originally painted and with aurochs horns lay crushed at the
                          foot of the wall from which it must have fallen.
                             One more shrine (VI.B.10) of this building-level remains to be
                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                 —
                          described. Of this the north wall was still standing to its original

37 West wall of shrine VI.B.8
                     i                        38 North and west walls of
                     iiis
                        ‘i                    shrine VI.B.10 restored



height of 3-35 metres. It continued in use during Level VI A, during
which the floor-level rose 60 cms, but even this height was in-
sufficient to take the monumental plaster panel on the west wall,
about 30 cms higher than the ceiling, so that the central part of the
building must have been raised, probably in the form of a berceau                    Fig. 38
made of reeds and plaster or constructed in wood as in the Lycian
houses.
  A large figure of a goddess, of which only the legs and part of the
body remained in situ, was shown in the position of giving birth to a
ram (shown as a ram’s head in the customary manner). The scene is
supported by a frame which contains three superimposed heads of
bulls with aurochs horns. In one of the many phases of decoration,
the figure of the goddess was painted yellow, as the one in shrine
VI.8. On either side of the frame there were deep niches in the wall;
between the two at the left hand side of the goddess a lower jaw of a
boar was inserted into the wall and the frame round the niches was
painted with checkerboard patterns. The high deep niche on the
other side was subdivided by a vertical partition on which was fixed
a ram’s head, and a small bull’s head surmounted this in a shallow
recess. A large ram’s head with two pairs of actual horns was placed
on the central post along the north wall, and a large bull’s head          Plate 28; Fig. 39
appeared from the east wall above a deep, red-painted niche. In
                                                                                        125


                                        SON, AL b2/4\
   SHONA STATE MUSEUM LIBRARY - TUC
Catal Hiiyiik
                           Level VI B poorly preserved wall-paintings surrounded this head,
                           which may also have been painted, but as the result of the con-
                           flagration it was far too difficult to clean. Between the bull’s head
                           and the post a pair of pendulous woman’s breasts appeared, open at
                           the nipple end and painted red like the muzzle of the bull. From each
                           of them the beak of a Griffon Vulture (Gyps vulvus) protruded,
                           as each breast contained a complete skull. Beyond the post a horn
                           was moulded in plaster and, as in shrine VII.23, the only entrance
                           into the building lay through a doorway set high up in the wall. The
                           panel below it was painted in the VI B period.
                               During its occupation in Level VI A, the floor level of the shrine
                           rose by 60 cms and the animal heads gradually sank to floor-level;
                           a bucranium was erected on the corner platform and the wall-
                           paintings on the east and west walls were covered with white
                           plaster. A new facade was built in front of the niches on either side
                           of the main plaster panel on the west wall, which remained un-
Fig. 40                    altered until it was destroyed by fire at the end of Level VI A.
39 North and east walls ofshrine VI.B.10 with entrance on the right
                                                                              ts.A
                                                                              ‘
                                                                              1
                                                                              1
                                                                              '
                                                                              1
                                                                              ‘
                                                                              1
                                                                      pense   1
                                                                              ’
                                                                              1
                                                                              1
                                                                              1
                                                                              '
                                                                              ‘
                                                                              '
                                                                              1
I   il; :|!   1                                                               1   led
                                                                                  el
                                                                                  Se


    sles
    i iia i
                                                                 The Shrines and their Reliefs




                                                     0       1   2
                                                     SA _ ea
                                                     ae)             METRES



40 North and west walls of shrine VI.A.10 restored


The destruction of this building preserved a fine collection of stone
statuettes in situ on the floor, for with the stone tools at their dis-
posal the inhabitants of Catal Hiiyiik were unable to dig them out
from under the thick layers of burnt brick fused together by the
tremendous heat of the fire.
  As in this shrine, the wall-paintings of shrine VI.B.8 were covered
with plaster during the new period (VI.A) and two plaster beams, an
upper red one, and a lower white one, were laid over the old paint-
ings. In these ‘beams’ the lower jaws of boar were inserted, nine in
the upper and four in the lower. The bulls’ and the single ram’s head
remained in use and were repainted and two additional small bulls’
heads were placed on the northernmost panel of the east wall. Four
bucrania were erected in a row on the edges of the platforms and the
sunk bull relief was replastered like the entire west wall. The horns         Plate 27; Fig. 41
in the bench were abolished. After a fire in which the tusks of the
                                                                                           127
Catal Hiiyiik




                                                                                  Naf
                                                                                  Ze



                                                                                       f




41, 42 Decoration ofthe north and east walls ofshrine VI.A.8. Above the third phase, and below
the fourth phase. See Plate 27




             bY
                       i
      - ~i




128
                                                        The Shrines and their Reliefs
boars got burnt, the entire building was replastered and each
boar’s jaw was turned into a woman’s breast. In this last phase of the
occupation of this shrine, there were no wall-paintings and when the              Fig. 42
building was deserted its doorway was bricked up and the room
filled with earth and unburnt brick.
   The burnt shrine VI.B.7 was remodelled in VI.A and a new east
wall was inserted in front of the old one. Its new doorway was raised
above floor-level and a red-painted niche was set in the main panel
of the wall. A fine ram’s head and a bull’s head (both with actual
horns) were placed on either side of the southern post, and both
heads were painted with human hands. On the edge of the platform
a ‘bucranium’ was set up, incorporating not the horns of a bull,         Plate V; Fig. 43
but those of a big ram.
   No actual changes seem to have been made during period VI.A
in shrines VI.16, 61 and 44, except continual repaintings. Shrines
VI.B.29 and 31 were built above their Level VII predecessors. The
former building may still have been a shrine and like VI.A.30 may
have had a relief along its west wall, for which there are certain
indications. Shrine VI.B and A.31 was built on top of shrine
VII.31 but except for two fine bulls’ heads, framed by plastered                 Plate 23
posts nothing has survived of the decoration of this room, even the
plaster was stripped off the walls. Other shrines of Level VI.B, such
as 12, I and 5, seem to have been turned into houses and 15 and 29

43 East wall of shrine VI.A.7 with doorway on the left. See Plate V




                                                                                     129
Catal Hiiyiik
                were filled in to form a courtyard. Two bulls’ heads were found
                onthe walls of shrine VI.A.25 as well as afine group of stone statuettes
                and it looks as if this building took the place of shrine VI.B.15
                next door. In the northern area, room VI.A.66, with a fine painted
                bull’s head and a panel of symbols and small human figures, is pro-
                bably a subsidiary shrine. Two others, VI.A.50 and 51 have horns
                set in the benches.
                   After the destruction of Level VI A, a number of shrines may have
                been rebuilt over the main shrines in the southern area (E.V.3, 5,
                6, 8) but their remains are so denuded that one cannot be certain.
                Fragments of reliefs, too scanty to be described here, were found in
                E.V.12, 2 and 4 (bull’s head with paint), buildings which were
                probably shrines and the successors of the Leopard Shrine, shrine
                VI.A.25 and VI.B.15 respectively. The fragments merely show that
                the practice of decorating sanctuaries with plaster reliefs survived
                into Level V, but none of a later date have been found.
                  Before discussing the religion of the people of Catal Hiiyiik,
                the development of wall-painting, the other technique of shrine- and
                house-decoration must claim our attention.




130
                                                                            VI

                                                                    Wall-paintings

|Davee WAS PRACTISED at Catal Hiiyiik throughout the life of
     the settlement; the earliest fragments of wall-painting come
from the building rubbish found below a house of Level X and the
latest covered walls in Level Il, by which period paint was also
applied to light-coloured pots, though not yet on any scale. Painting
was not confined to walls, but was also applied to plaster reliefs,
clay statuettes, skeletons, wood, baskets and finally to pottery. It
may be assumed that textiles were dyed, and paint was certainly
applied to eyes and eyebrows, cheeks and lips of the women, if not
to their bodies. In short, the people of Catal Hiiyiik painted what they
could and when they could. Excavations at aceramic Hacilar,
Mesolithic Beldibi and the Upper Palaeolithic caves of Okiizlii’In
and Kara’In on the subtropical south coast of Anatolia have shown
the earlier phases of a well-established tradition of painting in
Turkey.
   At Catal Hiiyiik a full range of pigments was in use, derived on the
whole from minerals, such as iron oxides (red, brown and yellow
ochres), copper ores (bright blue azurite, green malachite), mercury
oxide (cinnabar for a deep red), red, possibly from haematite,
manganese mauve or purple, galena for lead grey. The plaster back-
ground is cream or dead white and was locally available from the
Pleistocene lake beds. Black was obtained from soot. The colours
were finely ground with pestle and mortar but not perhaps mixed
with animal fat or vegetable oil or white of egg, though all of
which were available, dried in lumps or shaped into crayons and
spread on flat stone palettes. Fine brush strokes imply the use of
brushes, some extremely fine, whereas plain panels of red may have
been painted with the use of a rag dipped in a pot of paint, as is still
done today in the villages around Catal Hiiyiik. Once in Level VI,
                                                                                131
Catal Hiiyiik
                mica, a mineral, finely pounded was added to the mauve paint to
                produce a glittering effect.
                   The paint was applied directly to the wall without previous
                tracing of outlines and the painters were evidently sure enough of
                themselves to dispense with this preliminary procedure. In a series
                of unfinished paintings in shrine A.IIL8 the process of execution
                of an elaborate textile pattern can be followed in detail (see p. 154).
                The recurrence of numerous patterns and the complete repainting
                of complicated scenes, such as a deer hunt, about four times suggests
                the existence of ‘books’ of patterns and scenes, probably on cloth or
                felt.
                  The following colours were in use: all shades of red and brown,
                buff and yellow, pink and orange, mauve, grey and black, and
                blue. All these were used in wall-painting, but blue occurs once
                only, though both blue and green were used for painting parts of
                skeletons in Levels VI, VI B and VI A. Polychrome paintings are as
                common as monochrome ones and are not confined to any period.
                   In shrines and houses, wall-paintings had a ritual function. When
                the painting had served its purpose—we do not know how long this
                took, it may have been a year or the duration of certain festivals—
                it was covered with a layer of white plaster. The same area might be
                repainted at a later date and there may be as many as a dozen paintings
                on one wall, but this is not common and there may be a hundred
                layers of white plaster covering a wall-painting. During the vast
                majority of the years when shrines and houses were in use their
                walls were white.
                   Wall-paintings at Catal Hiiytik may be divided into six groups:
                  1 Plain panels of paint without any motifs, usually red, orange,
                    pinkish red or brownish red. Black panels occur only in shrine
                    VIL.ar.                                                    ;
                  2 Panels of geometric patterns in monochrome or polychrome,
                    simple    or   elaborate   with   repetitive   motifs,   rectilinear   or
                    curvilinear.
                  3 Panels with symbols; solid circles, quatrefoils, crenellations,
                    stylized flowers or stars, etc.
                  4 Human hands, either isolated or grouped into panels or borders
                    of hands framing panels with geometric or naturalistic designs.
132
$9, 60 Copy and original of a landscape painting from north and east walls of shrine VII.14. In the
foreground is a town rising in graded terraces closely packed with rectangular houses. Behind the
town an erupting volcano is shown, its sides covered with incandescent volcanic bombs rolling
down the slope of the mountain. Others are thrown up from the erupting cone above which hovers
a cloud of smoke and ashes. The twin cones suggest that an eruption of Hasan Da§, rising to a
height of 10,672 feet (3,553 metres) and standing at the eastern end of the Konya Plain and visible
from Catal Hiiyiik, is recorded. See Plate I




                                               assent
                                       ON, OEP: pit
61-63 The Hunting Shrine of Catal Hiiyiik Il (A.III.1). The east wall was decorated with a long
scene of dancing hunters, armed with bows and clubs and dressed in skins and bonnets of leopard
skin, and a number of deer. Only the left hand fragment was in situ, above, the rest had slipped down
into a Hellenistic robbers trench (visible above a woman’s skull treated with red ochre, below right),
but could be restored on paper. Among the dancers are some lively naked acrobats, a man striking
a drum and a number of strange figures, painted half red, half white which were possibly headless.
A similar figure from the north wall of the shrine, beyond the big bull shown in Plate 64, is armed
with a mace, below left. Below the floor of the shrine only female burials were found, and there
were no burials below the platform normally occupied by the male of the house, a situation
without parallel at Catal Hiiyiik
64 An enormous red bull occupied the greater part of the north wall of shrine A.III.1, once again
emphasizing the strength of religious tradition at Catal Hiiyiik, where bulls always occupy this
position (Plates 11, 12, 14) facing the Taurus (‘Bull’) Mountains, perhaps not a coincidence. This
great beast, over six feet long, dominates the decoration of the shrine and the awe inspired by
this monster is clearly shown by the small size of the male figures that surround it. The tops of the
horns, tail and the lower part of the legs with the hoofs are lost. Between the horns stands another
figure painted half white, half red and above, in front and behind are male hunters, dressed in
monochrome red skins (and not leopard skins), unfortunately poorly preserved. Though some are
armed and the excited hunters surround the animal, no wounding or killing is shown and it is
doubtful whether the scene represents the hunt
65 This limestone concretion,
from shrine VI.A.10, of which
only the top was carved into a
human head probably embodies
the chthonic aspect of the
Mother Goddess. Semi-aniconic,
it emphasizes the fear and awe
inspired by stalacmitic under-
ground caverns of the Taurus
Mountains, the haunt of the Earth
Goddess and the realm of the
dead
66 Coarsely modelled figurines of animals in baked clay from Level VI. Wild boar and a feline head
are on the left, a horned animal (bull or cow) on the right and a headless figure below. The coarse
bristles of the boar are shown by nail imprints. Nearly all these figures are intentionally maimed or
broken and many bear ‘wounds’ inflicted with obsidian arrows or other offensive weapons. Found
in groups buried in pits, these figures had evidently been used in a hunting ritual in which they had
served as substitutes for the animals the hunters hoped to kill
67, 68 Large clay figure of a
goddess   supported     by   two
felines, giving birth to a child.
An early example of the con-
cept of the goddess as “Mistress
of Animals’, it was found in a
grain bin of shrine A.IL1, where
it may have been placed to
promote the fertility of the crops
by sympathetic magic
69 Semi-aniconic figure of a pregnant (?) goddess in blue limestone from shrine VI.A.10. It consists
of a small boulder with incised eyes and mouth, sufficient to turn the stone into a shape resembling
a woman. Catal Hiiyiik VI has yielded examples of several theoretical stages of sculpture. They
range from the aniconic but highly suggestive concretions and stalactites, purely natural and
unworked by human hand, through semi-aniconic figures in which a likeness was enhanced with a
few lines by the sculptor (Plates 65, 69, 72); a head or arms added to statuettes carved with a mini-
mum of detail (Plates 70, 71, 88, 91), or fully realistic, but schematized human forms (Plates 78-80,
83-87)
70-72 White marble figures from shrine VI.A.10: a double
goddess above, a small schematized figure below. The double
goddess with two heads, two pairs of breasts, but a single
pair of arms is the earliest representation yet of a concept
familiar to Anatolian religion, recurring later at Hacilar I
and Kiiltepe. It probably represents the two aspects, mother
and maiden, of the great goddess, predecessors of the “Two
Ladies’ of the Knossos texts, the famous ivory from
Mycenae and the Demeter and Kore of Classical Greece
73-76 The pair of statues of goddesses
with leopards, in brown and blue lime-
stone, (each shown in front and back
view), were found together with a boy
on a leopard (Plate 86). Evidently made
by the same sculptor, they reflect the
same recurrent idea of mother and
maiden, here amplified by the addition
of a male child. These statues were
found in shrine VI.A.10, but they were
already old and headless and they may
originally have come from shrine VIL8.
Accompanied by their sacred animal,
the leopard, these statues stress the
aspect of the deities as Mistress and
Master of Animals, the connection
with nature and wildlife. The goddesses
stand behind the animals, whereas the
boy god rides on it. Of the pair, the
mature nude figure, left, in brown lime-
stone is evidently the mother, whereas
the young figure with a shawl of skin
round the neck, right, in blue limestone
evidently represents the daughter, or
maiden aspect of the goddess. The
figure of the boy god is in brown lime-
stone, like that of his mother, a subtle
distinction which is typical of neolithic
Catal Hiiyiik
<77 This fine alabaster figure of a stand-
  ing goddess is carved in the more
  naturalistic style characteristic of the
   later building-levels of Catal Hiiyiik.
   It was found in the storeroom of shrine
   E.IV.4. The burning of the building
   has caused the alabaster to blister which
   accounts for the great patch on the body
   of the figure and her left arm. The hole
   in the head is peculiar and may have
   served for the attachment of a cap,
   crown or flower? As with all these
   early statuettes, the figure lacks a mouth




   78, 79 Above, the upper part of a fine
   marble statue with arms worked in the
   round and delicately carved breasts.
   The lower half of the figure was already
   lost when it was deposited in shrine
   VI.A.10. The fine, painted baked clay
   statue, below, was found in the ante-
   room of shrine VI.A.61 and shows a
   delicacy of modelling in hands and
   breasts not often encountered. The
   figure is painted with cross-like flower
   patterns, familiar from the wall-paint-
   ings. To date it is the earliest example
   of a naturalistically modelled figure in
   clay from Anatolia
81 Necklace of blue apatite beads, graded in size, and in
the shape of highly schematized steatopygous goddesses,
with two shell pendants. Found with the red ochre burial
of a young woman (?) below the large building IV.8. The
schematic goddesses have clear links with similar figures
from Peterfels in Baden and representations of women in
French caves of the Upper Palaeolithic
80, 82 Kneeling figure of white marble, partly burnt,
depicting a goddess from shrine VI.A.25, found together
with the figure of a bird of prey, below, probably a vulture,
and the statue of an adolescent male god (Plate 84). It is
likely that the grim owl-faced deity with the vulture repre-
sents yet another aspect of the goddess; the goddess of
death, the crone of later mythology
83 Unique greenish-grey schist plaque from shrine VI.A.30 with four figures in bold relief. On
the left a couple of deities are shown in embrace; on the right a mother holding a child, whose head
is unfortunately lost. It is possible, if not probable, that the two scenes relate a succession of events;
the union of the couple on the left and the intended result on the right. The goddess remains the
same, the male appears either as husband or as son. This may be one of the earliest representations of
the hieros gamos, the ‘sacred marriage’
                                                                            Wall-painting
  5 Naturalistic paintings; goddesses, human figures, bulls, birds,
     vultures, leopards, deer found either by themselves or grouped
     into elaborate scenes like deer hunts, bulls with human figures,
     funerary rites, etc.
  6 Representations of landscape and architecture; volcano and
    town and mortuary structures.

The distribution of these varied subjects is indicated in the table on
p. 81 which indicates the range of such subjects in the various build-
ing-levels so far excavated. Subject to confirmation by later excava-
tions it appears that groups 1 and 2 (plain and geometric panels)
span almost the entire period from Level X to II and III respectively.
Group 3 (symbols) also runs from Level X-II, but human hands
(group 4) have not so far been found after Level VI A and group 6
is represented only in Levels VII and VI. Naturalistic paintings have
a wide range, starting in Level IX with a black bull, but vultures
occur only in VII and VII and human figures are rare in the lower
levels (VIII-VI A). Elaborate and lively scenes of hunting, etc.,
appear to be characteristic only of the end of the period in Levels IV
and III, where they occur in four shrines.
   A preliminary analysis then shows the existence side by side of
geometric and naturalistic painting, as in the earlier Upper Palaeo-
lithic of Europe and Anatolia. In the Early Chalcolithic painted
pottery we find the continuation of both these groups, especially in
the pottery of Hacilar where the geometric designs are accompanied
by the ‘fantastic style’, which includes purely naturalistic forms with
highly schematized elements of the same nature (birds, bulls, rams,
snakes, etc.).
  The use of red paint on panels, posts, niches, doorways and some-
times on benches, platforms or animal-heads in plaster, architectural
or decorative details of houses and shrines is widespread and hardly
a single well-preserved house is without it. It is obviously part of the
building-tradition and it has survived in a number of villages around
Catal Hiiyiik to the present day. It has no structural significance and
its use must therefore be regarded as ritual. It is paralleled by the red
ochre burials or the use of red paint on baskets and boxes and in each
                                                                                       149
Catal Hiiviik
                    case red paint, symbolic of blood and life, has a protective function.
                    It wards off evil spirits and protects the object so decorated, be it the
                    body of the dead, the wall of the house or shrine near which he
                    slept, the bench or platform on which he sat or slept, the posts which
                    support his roof and which might fall down, the boxes in which
                    precious possessions were kept or the baskets in which his food was
                    stored. In a world filled with evil spirits such protection was essential
                    and if we could only discover the colour of garments we might
                    safely assume that red cloth was made for this very purpose. There
                    is one scrap of evidence which proves the use of red cloth; a number
                    of broken beads in Level VI contained red stains of thread and as no
                    red ochre was present in the grave, these can only have come from
                    the thread. Nor is it at all impossible to assume that the red panels
                    over the platforms imitate hangings of red cloth, just as the geometric
                    panels copy patterned textiles. Rows of holes for fixing such hangings
                    occur in a number of shrines (VII.8; VI.A.10) in a position at the
Figs 25, 26         foot of the wall, where such panels with imitation hangings are most
                    often found.
                       It is probably not a coincidence that solid black panels have been
                    found only below the vulture painting in shrine VII.21, where they
                    alternate in time with red ones. In this context black evidently
                    represents death and mourning. How far the inhabitants of Catal
                    Hiiyiik carried this symbolism is difficult to tell, but we have found
                    black vultures and red vultures, red bodies and one faded black body
                    (in room VI.A.27), black bulls and red bulls, and rows of alternate
                    ted hands and black hands. Such contrasts need not be purely
                    decorative and probably have a meaning. It may be argued that red
                    and black are some of the easiest available colours, but the paintings
                    at Catal Hiiyiik, more often polychrome than not, show no lack of
                    pigments available so that such a theory is hardly tenable. Nor
                    should we attach too much importance to a naturalistic rendering of
                    colours in the depiction of humans and animals. The male population
                    of Catal Hiiyiik, though naturally sunburnt, was white skinned, but
                    males are painted red with black hair. Women are painted red or
                    white and, though it may be argued that they were less sun-tanned
                    than the men, they nevertheless worked in the fields or on the roofs
150


      ARIA TATE MUISFIM TIRRARY . THAN      AZ. mer7t
                                                                          Wall-paintings
of the houses where they would be exposed-to the sun. The white
figures of women might indicate a white dress rather than white
bodies and the evidence is quite inconclusive. They are distinguished
from the men in shape rather than in colour. The same applies to the
bulls, and, whereas the male aurochs was probably black in colour,
the huge red figures in shrines VI.8 and III.1 are evidently also bulls
judging by their horns and the only possible figure of a cow (shrine
VII.1) was painted blue! Also vultures in life are neither red nor
black but brown.
   Prima facie acceptance of the colours as naturalistic would create
a naive picture of a polychrome society of red or white women, red
men with red or black hands pursuing blue cows and red and black
bulls, which is anything but convincing.
   Panels with geometric decoration are common and varied and
may also be used for the decoration of plastered posts (as in the
Leopard Shrine VI.B.44 or house A.IIL.10), although these are
usually painted red. Sometimes the patterns consist of groups of
parallel vertical (house VI.B.28) or horizontal lines (house VIII.1);
frequently more elaborate patterns are preferred, such as great
panels of concentric circles in shrine VIII.2 above a dado of black and
red triangles. On the east wall of this shrine these were repeated four
times but on the north wall they only formed a single layer. L-
shaped patterns in red or orange covered the main panel on the
north wall of house VI.B.3 and the panel below the doorway in
shrine VI.B.10. Checkerboard patterns surrounded the niche below
the boar’s jaw in the same building; superimposed triangles, half
red, half white, a post in house A.III.10. Vertical wavy lines in red
surrounded a niche painted orange in shrine III.13, horizontal
ones decorate the bull’s head in shrine VI.A.66; A-shaped patterns,
upright and reversed in black and red, cover a panel on the west wall
of house VI.B.45. Groups of orange dots occupied the lower panel
of the north wall of shrine VI.A.66, the central eastern panel of which
bore a pattern of concentric circles and pointed stars in white and
orange on cream. Many of these are too fragmentary to reconstruct,
but hardly any two are the same. Some, like the orange painting
from the north wall of shrine IX.1, defy interpretation.
                                                                                    151
Catal Hiiyiik
                       Another series, however, starting with a polychrome painting in
                    shrine [X.8 and continuing with a whole group in Levels VIII-VI A,
                    evidently represent textiles and their resemblance to Anatolian
                    ‘kilims’ (i.e. thin woven rugs) is striking. As weaving was widely
                    practised at Catal Hiiyiik and dyeing would present no difficulties,
                    since all the necessary plants for the production of vegetable dyes
                    grow wild around the mound, the probability that kilims were
                    already produced should seriously be considered. In this connection it
                    is particularly interesting to note that two of these wall-paintings
Plates 30, VIII;    from shrine VII.21 imitate a stitched border. On a painting this makes
Figs 14, 15
                    no sense unless a kilim provided its prototype. In two superimposed
Fig. 24             wall-paintings from shrine VIL1 the stitched border, indicated by
                    impression in the previous shrine, is painted as a row of light and
                    dark squares, neatly marking the edge of the kilim. Rather than
                    suggesting that these wall-paintings inspired the later weaving of
                    kilims, these borders indicate the reverse, and it seems now likely
                    that kilims have been woven in Anatolia since the late seventh
                    millennium Bc, or for at least the last eight thousand years.
                       Favourite motifs of these kilim patterns are rectangles filled with
                    Union Jack patterns, alternate rows of red and black triangles with a
Plates 30, VIII     central white dot, or squares filled with concentric lozenges, with
                    or without a border. This may be grooved (as in shrine VII.21)
                    or merely painted (shrines VII.1 and 8, and VI.B.1 or VI.A.50),
                    but in a number of cases it was faint and could not be preserved
                    (e.g. shrines VI.B.15, [X.8 and VIII.8).
                      Whereas the kilim patterns of Levels IX-VII are fairly simple,
Plate 29; Fig. 44   those of Levels VI B and VI A show great sophistication and a new
                    motif is introduced which looks like a string of vertically or diagon-
                    ally arranged lozenges, varying in shape and size and combined with
                    zigzag and wavy lines. Other elements look like the fine mesh of a
                    shawl or a pattern of bricks or openwork reed matting, but their
                    origin is probably to be sought in the sophisticated textiles of this
                    period. About a dozen such paintings covered the two panels of the
                    east wall of shrine VI.B.1, which was repainted over and over again.
                    Continuity in decoration marks this building which was built on top
                    of an earlier shrine in Level VII similarly decorated with numerous
152
44 North and east wall
ofshrine VI.B.1 with the
‘mortuary’ wall-painting
on the north wall, and
textiles and kilim pattern
paintings over the main
platforms. On the wall
beyond    the   bench   are
painted    ‘bones’.     See
Plates 8, 29




kilim-patterns. Many of these paintings were exceedingly frag-
mentary and the conflagration which destroyed this building twice in
Level VI has reduced the fine layers of plaster to the thickness of a
dead leaf as well as changing its colour. The earliest of the textile
paintings is also one of the most complicated; many of the later
paintings on the northern panel resemble each other without being
identical. The finest of all, one of the latest, though only half pre-    Plate 29; Fig. 44
served and measuring nearly 1-8 metres in length, has a pattern as
complicated as many a modern kilim and is painted in red, white,
orange-red and grey on buff. Not only the general effect, but the
colour variations in the vertical bands, without affecting the pattern,
is that of a textile. Within the triangles the fill motif resembles a
stylized flower or, less likely, a four-fingered hand. The central
vertical bands show a simplified design whereas the broader outer
bands are more elaborate. There is some evidence to show that this
kilim pattern was once repainted, but not enough survived to be
certain that the later painting followed exactly the same pattern.
Along the top a border with a wavy line on alternate red and white
background marked the kilim’s edge below a plastered horizontal
beam. Fragments of a similar kilim pattern, also with red and white
mesh bordering a triangle were found in house VI.B.3 next door,
and another version is seen on the posts of the Leopard Shrine.                     Fig. 29

                                                                                       153
Catal Hiiyiik
                         Kilim patterns of the same sort decorated the east and north walls
Plates 37, 38; Fig. 45 of the somewhat later shrine VI.A.50. Of these the one on the main
                       panel of the east wall, was the most interesting and was painted in
                    red, black and white. Against a mesh background three vertical
                    bands of lozenges with rounded triangles on either side stand out.
                    The fill-motifs are more      varied here; stylized flowers,     crosses,
                    horns and even a small hand. The other paintings lack the mesh
                    background, and the semicircles have no fill-motifs.
                       Simpler textile patterns consisting of vertical bands with zigzag
                    or lozenge motifs occurred in shrines VI.B.1 and VI.B.15, and a
                    particularly interesting pattern in red was found in house VI.B.6s.
Plate 35              Panels with ‘leopard spots’, identical with the patterns on the
                    leopard reliefs are less common, but they occurred in the richly
                    painted shrine VI.B.1. It is possible that these paintings replaced
                    actual hangings of leopard skin, in the same way as red panels and
                    kilim paintings replaced actual cloth and textiles.
                       In Levels V and IV only fragments of striped patterns and two
                    triangles painted in black were found on the central post of the east
                    wall of shrine E.IV.1. In Level III, however, an entire shrine (A.III.8)
                    was ornamented with kilim and textile patterns. The latest of these is
                    unfinished, but was meant to cover the entire building except the
                    south wall, as is clear from the red triangles covering all three walls.
Plates 31, 32       In fact, only the painting of the north-west corner was completed.
                    Two rows of vertical panels divided by parallel horizontal lines
                    formed the pattern and each panel contained groups of lines diagon-
                    ally arranged in a zigzag pattern rather like woven mats. The trian-
                    gular interstices were filled with red paint. From the unfinished panels
                    the painter’s method can be followed in detail: first he put down the
                    red triangles, leaving space enough for the white ones; then he put
                    in the grey ground in stripes, leaving white lines round the red
                    triangles and thirdly and finally he repainted the white lines. This
                    final over-painting in white was clearly to be seen in the most
                    perfect areas of the painting. Some pleasant irregularities in the
                    design are similar to deliberate ‘faults’ in Anatolian kilims, the idea
                    being that perfect work can only be made by God. The way in which
                    this kilim was intended to cover the walls—running round the
154
                                                                          Wall-paintings




45 East end of shrine VI.A.50 with
paintings of kilims, a figure of the         ,
goddess and bucrania. See Plates 37,38   #




corners of the room—gives one the sense of a wall-hanging of
enormous size (14°4 metres, or over 45 feet).
   Below this painting on part of the west wall was another con-
sisting of two vertical rows of red crosses or flowers outlined in pink     Plates 33, 34
and associated with crenellations of an even earlier layer with
quatrefoils in orange-red with a pink border. Elements of this earliest
pattern have also survived on the north and east wall, associated
with barbed zigzag lines (honeycombs in section ?) and other motifs.
These may be regarded as textile motifs and at the same time as
symbols, presumably of fertility. A pattern of deep red dots and V’s,
it would seem, immediately preceded the unfinished kilim pattern,
so that there is evidence for not less than four superimposed patterns
on the west wall (orange-red quatrefoils; large red quatrefoils; dots
and V’s and finally the red, white and grey kilim).
   A parallel for the kilim is found in a shrine (A.III.13) where an
identical pattern, but coloured black and white, covered earlier
paintings of a hunting scene on the north wall. Finally no geometric
or figurative paintings have so far been found in building-level II,
from which only red panels survive.
                                                                                     155
Catal Hiiyiik




                IX The enthroned goddess from the shrine in Level II, the latest found at Catal Hiiyiik. Supported
                by two felines, the goddess is Mistress of Animals and is shown giving birth to a probably male
                child. She is made of baked clay and was found in the grain bin of the shrine

                X Group of three statuettes in blue (left) and brown limestone, from shrine VI.A.10, showing the
                double aspect of the goddess, maiden and mother, accompanied by the divine child—all three
                statues in association with a leopard, the sacred animal of the deities of the animal world and of
                nature

                XI Detail of a doe and fawn from the hunting scene in the ante-chamber of shrine A.III.1., the
                latest shrine with pictorial representations found at Catal Hiiyiik

                XII Burial of a woman with funeral gifts in shrine VI.B.20. On the left a round basket imprint
                in white, then a polished obsidian mirror set in lime plaster and just beyond it a small oval basket
                containing rouge

                XIII Fragment from the southern part of the dancers painting on the east wall of shrine A.III.1,
                showing a hunter in white loin-cloth and black-spotted, pink leopard skin. Round the neck he
                wears a pendant and in his right hand he holds a bow

                XIV Ceremonial dagger of flint from male burial in shrine VI.B.29. The dagger which is polished
                on one side and pressure-flaked on the other was provided with a carved bone handle representing
                a snake

                XV Bead necklaces and bracelets of various cut and polished stones, mainly from Levels VI.A and B.
                Blue apatite necklace of beads in the form of stylized goddesses from a shrine IV.8 red ochre
                burial. Eye for fastening belt hooks, of polished bone, from a burnt burial in shrine VI.A.5
156
XII
       XIV




ve >
                                                                           Wall-paintings
   Symbols are frequent in the wall-paintings of Catal Hiiyiik and
we have already had occasion to refer to them in the description of a
number of paintings in Levels VI and III. Most motifs may have
had a symbolic meaning and, among these, human hands and
quatrefoils, probably a stylized flower, are at once the most pro-
minent and the most ancient. The earliest fragment of a wall-painting
from Catal Hiiyiik, that found in the debris below a house of Level X,
shows such a quatrefoil, shaped rather like a Maltese cross; this
probably decorated the jamb of a doorway as do many others in                     Plate 36
Levels VII and VI B. They appear as fill-motifs in kilim paintings of
Levels VI B and VI A, or decorate whole fields in rows in shrine
A.IIL8 described above.
  Far more elaborate is a panel from shrine VI.A.66 where such                    Plate 40
flower-like motifs occur on either side of two others; an object
resembling at first sight a ‘double axe’ and a mauve and orange
wheeled cross with strange projections at the end of each arm. One
of the arms overlies the flower on the right and the flower itself
covers a crenellation pattern like those from the west wall of shrine
A.IIL8. Three small goddesses and two superimposed human figures,
a steatopygous female and a male archer are painted between the
wheeled cross and the flower pattern to the right. Although over-
painting is notable, no layers of white paint intervened between these
layers of paint and additions were therefore made to already existing
paintings in the way of Upper Palaeolithic and many primitive
paintings. At Catal Hiiyiik this procedure is unique. It is impossible
to extract the meaning from this painting as a whole, but we can at
least make some suggestions about the symbols. As double axes are
not found at Catal Hiiyiik, there are no grounds for interpreting
this symbol as a double axe. This strange shape finds its best parallels
in a number of stone beads from the same building-level, and its
association with stylized flowers might possibly suggest that some
sort of insect (bee or butterfly) is meant. The small double triangles
seen between the four petals of the flowers and beyond do not
suggest that these are necessarily part of the flower, they look more
like moths attracted by the flowers. One of the most common moths
round Catal Hiiyiik is the hummingbird moth, which flies by day,
                                                                                      I61
Catal Htiytik —
                  and the ‘double axe’ may represent some bright butterfly, of which
                  there are plenty in spring in the Konya Plain when the plain is
                  studded with flowers.
                     The wheeled cross also presents difficulties and is unique at Catal
                  Hiiyiik. Could it represent four tall standing figures with upraised
                  arms and legs combined into a circle—the four representing the
                  points of the compass or the four regions of the plain—doing homage
Plate 39          like the two human figures one of which covers her face to the thrice
                  repeated mother goddess hovering in the distance? Does this wall-
                  painting symbolize an act of homage to the great goddess on a
                  spring morning in the Konya Plain amids fields of flowers and
                  humming insect life nearly eight thousand years ago, or is this too
                  fanciful an interpretation? It would be rash to deny the existence of
                  agrarian rites in Neolithic religion; they are well attested in Minoan-
                  Mycenaean and later Greek cults which owe so much to Anatolia.
                     There are, moreover, other paintings at Catal Hiiyiik in shrine
                  VIL.B.8 (east wall) that again seem to depict fields of flowers and
                  insect life. Two superimposed paintings depict versions of a single
Plate 42          composition. The earlier, which is also the more complete, shows a
                  cellular structure in red. On the left these cells are not filled with any
                  design; in the central portion of the painting white circles, sometimes
                  with a central dot, fill the cells and most of these on the right are
                  filled with a flower-like pattern, parallel wavy lines, winged or
                  wingless insects. The red cellular structure is part of the painting
                  and not superimposed on it. The interpretation suggested was that
                  of the life-cyle of the bee in a honeycomb with closed cells on the
                  left, from which, in the middle, the bees emerge to fly freely in a
                  field of flowers on the right. Rows of four-fingered human hands in
                  pink and black along the top and in pink (vertical) and white
                  (horizontal) along the bottom provide a frame for this intriguing
                  picture.
                     The later wall-painting, superimposed on the other after a lapse of
Plate 41          time was similar in composition, but only the southern end has
                  survived. There are some differences however, the main one being
Fig. 46           that the cellular pattern is an addition to the original painting which
                  shows a field of flowers and branches from which sway wingless
162
                                                                                              Wall-paintings


                 >. aN
                 WSK                                              Se
                                                                                                   +,
                                      ie                                 x                     y

                  46 Copy of a later painting on the east wall of shrine VI.B.8 with the red net pattern removed
                  showing insects and flowers. See Plates 41, 42



insects or chrysalises, whilst other insects or butterflies hover with
 clearly marked wings around the flowers. That this scene was in-
 spired by nature is clear in spite of stylization and the subject is
evidently spring (there are no flowers in the Konya Plain after the
end of June). The most incongruous element in these paintings is the
four-fingered hands and why are these four-fingered only here?
One cannot help wondering why Neolithic man’s most important
crops—the spiked ears of wheat and barley—alone never appear in
any of these wall-paintings. Could there be a remote symbolism
connecting these hands with the ears of corn? Did neolithic man
perhaps have the notion that the ears were the plant’s hand where we
talk about ‘heads’ or ‘ears’. Why do we find this interest in plant
and animal life in ritual wall-paintings but to man’s interest and
advantage?
   We may perhaps suggest a different explanation for these scenes;
the cycle of the agrarian year with the blank field on the left repre-
senting the fallow field; the circles and dots, the holes in which the
seeds were planted; the flowers and insects, the emergence of the
crops, and the red cellular net pattern with hands on either side a
symbolic representation of the gathering of the fruit, in other words
the harvest. The idea of ‘netting the harvest’ could easily have been
                                                                                                           163
Catal Hiiyiik
                derived from the other occupation of Neolithic man, the hunt in
                which nets were certainly used.
Plates 43, 44      The association of hands and net-like patterns recurs in shrine
                VII.8, which lies directly below the building with the scenes just
                described. In a wall-painting which occupies part of the west and
                north walls we find the same association of red and black hands
                above and red hands below a series of alternate red and black linear
                net-like patterns. Here there are no fields of flowers, but there is a big
                black bull further along the north wall. Whether a connection exists
                between the two actual paintings is impossible to affirm and the bull
                could conceivably be somewhat later in date.
                   Still another shrine (VI.B.10) shows a net-like painting, with some
                hands added in a certain phase around the head of a bull above a
                niche, perhaps another symbolic attempt at capture. If translated to a
                religious sphere (conquest of death’), a parallel for this is found in
                the same building where a checkerboard pattern (another representa-
                tion of a net?) surrounds a similar niche surmounted by the lower
                jaw of a boar, another death-symbol. Parts of red lines suggestive of
                nets or a stockade appear behind a bull on the north wall of shrine
                A.III.1 and two panels of painting on the north wall of shrine VI.B.15
                show a black and red net-pattern, textile-like in precision and more
                regular than that of shrine VII.8. This is partly covered by another
                and larger panel with about three score hands, fifty-seven of which
                have survived. Finally it may not be a coincidence that the bulls’
                heads and the ram’s head above the net and hand patterns on the east
                wall of shrine VI.B.8 are also painted with pictures of nets and hands,
                as if these animals, like the bull and the boar in the neighbouring
                building, were to be captured. Where this idea of net and animal
                occurs in shrines, it is on the east or north wall, traditionally asso-
                ciated with death and above the platforms beneath which the
                dead rested (this specific location also applies to the boar’s jaw and
                niche in shrine VI.B.10).
                   A further panel of human hands left in reserve on a red background
                was found below the later of the two paintings discussed above on
                the east wall of shrine VI.B.8 and may have been associated with it.
                All the hands are those of adults and they look like hands held on the
164
                                                                            Wall-paintings
wall round which paint was applied, whereas most others (except
those in house VI.A.63) were painted on the wall in a positive
technique. Most hands at Catal Hiiyiik are right hands, but there are
a number of left hands. All are, however, complete hands and there
are no signs of mutilation, such as are claimed for a number of
representations in Upper Palaeolithic cave sanctuaries, especially
Gargas in the Pyrenees. The curious empty circle in the palm which
occurs on a large number of the Catal Hiiyiik paintings is easily
explained and is the result of pressing a hand dipped in paint on to
the wall. If care is taken to press all fingers to the wall the centre of
the palm does not touch it thus leaving a circle free of paint. The
fact that so many hands are painted (and not impressed) in this way
shows that the practice of dipping hands in paint was widespread
and used, e.g., on animal heads, goddess-figures, etc.
   The interpretation of paintings or impressions of hands—and to
this we may add one foot imprint—then is varied. There is either the                Plate 7
idea of touching a sacred figure in search of protection, obtaining its
blessing and warding off evil (which is implied in protection) or
association of hands with other scenes suggests something quite
different; it would appear to be an abbreviation for people, just as
bulls’ and rams’ heads apply the same principle of pars pro toto for
bull and ram. “All hands’ still has the same meaning today in many
languages, and some of these paintings may be captioned ‘All
hands to the harvest’ or ‘All hands to the net’ a way of expression
that has survived the eight thousand years that separate us from the
Anatolian Neolithic. There is probably no need to remind any
reader that the harvest, that symbol of Neolithic achievement and
man’s delivery from hunger, still to this very day demands every
available hand. It is man’s hands which differentiate him from the
animal, and this most versatile of instruments has made him what he
is. That Homo sapiens should have realized this and given recognition
and expression to it in his art is no less than we can expect. From
Neolithic times onwards the hand became the symbol of creation,
of effort, both human and divine, and of man himself. It is the hand
which sought blessings in prayer, the hand which caressed and the
hand which warded off evil.
                                                                                       165
Catal Hiiytik
                   Paintings of human figures, goddesses and animals are compara-
                tively rare at Catal Hiiyiik. The goddess is usually represented in
                plaster reliefs, which may or may not have been painted. Three
                small goddesses, each with raised arms and upturned legs were
Plate 39        found on the painting from shrine VI.A.66 already described, but a
                much larger one, about 61 cms in height, was found on the southern-
Fig. 45         most panel of the east wall of shrine VI.A.50 painted in monochrome
                red, showing the same familiar position. So far this is the only figure
                of a large goddess painted on the wall and not modelled in relief.
                   Leopards, attributes of the goddess, were found only in shrine
                VI.44 and these also were modelled in relief and painted; bulls,
                the symbol of the male deity, occur more frequently in relief than
Plate 11        in paint. On the north wall of shrine [X.8 a large black bull was
                painted, only part of which has survived. Below its front hoof is a
                rectangular structure painted in red, the significance of which is not
                clear. The bulls on the north walls of shrines VII.8 and VI.8, cut
                into the plaster and painted, have already been described and the
                only remaining bull, that from shrine A.III.8, will be discussed below.
                Two fragmentary birds come from a broken panel on the east wall
                of house VI.B.34 and they may have been part of a larger scene
                destroyed by a deep Hellenistic pit, the stagnant water of which
                caused the downfall of this panel in antiquity.
                   Wall-paintings of vultures attacking human bodies are found
                only in three shrines of Levels VII and VII and illustrate the pre-
                liminaries of the burial habits of the Neolithic population of Catal
                Hiiyiik, which consisted of secondary burial of skeletons cleaned by
                vultures. These paintings are therefore of the utmost importance as
                they shed light on a practice which may have been far more widely
                practised than is commonly realized.
                   In the earliest painting, which comes from the east wall of shrine
Plate 46        VIIL.8 two large black vultures are shown, painted over the remains
                of an earlier polychrome kilim painting. Between them is a minute
                human figure, shown swinging a sling in vigorous motion, presum-
                ably to ward off the two vultures from the small headless corpse
                which lies on its left side to his right. In his left hand he is holding an
                object which may have been a mace or club. Behind the vulture on
166
                                                                              Wall-paintings
the left there are more black slings and the indistinct remains per-
haps of a further red figure. The lower part of the painting has been
destroyed by damp.
   The second vulture painting decorated the north wall of shrine                   Figs 14, 15
VII.21. One complete group of two vultures, face to face over the
headless body of a human figure, survives, but beyond the post on                     Plate 47
the wall the wings of a further vulture were found which indicates
that the scene was probably repeated, but with only one vulture as
the presence of the doorway leaves no room for a pair. In this shrine
the entire scene was painted in a fine reddish-brown paint on a dead-
white background. The collapse of the wall has obliterated the tops
of the vultures heads, but the crests are clearly shown. With their
enormous wings, these gruesome creatures dwarf the small headless
human figure between them and this differs from all others in being
shown with uplifted arms and widespread legs, as if it were lying on
its back. A further peculiarity of this painting is seen in the legs of the
vultures which, far from being naturalistically drawn as in shrine
VIIL.8, are clearly those of human beings. The question therefore
arises whether these vultures really portray beasts of prey or human
beings disguised in vulture garb performing what is evidently a
funerary rite. For this there is plenty of evidence in the shrine, which
contained four human skulls.
   It is not difficult to imagine the awe and terror which the wall-
paintings of shrine VII.8 must have inspired in Neolithic man, c.
6200 BC, on entering. All around its north and east wall, a great
frieze showed not less than seven vultures with outspread wings                        Fig. 47
making a feast of six small headless human beings. Vultures do
not remove skulls so that it may be assumed that the absence
of heads is a pictorial convention to indicate corpses. The burials
found below this gruesome scene were all anatomically intact
and none had lost their skulls, so there is no immediate connec-
tion between the burial-rites and the wall-painting in this shrine.
The corpses in the painting are shown in positions in which we find           Plates 45, 48, 49
the dead are buried, either contracted on their left side or fully ex-
tended. Five large vultures are shown on the north wall and con-
tinue into the east wall up to the first post, and on the two large
                                                                                           167
Catal Hiiyiik
                panels of that wall even larger vultures are portrayed with wing-
                spans of about 5 feet, i.e. nearly life-size. The bird represented is
                probably the Griffon vulture (Gyps vulvus) of Anatolia, very fre-
                quently seen in the Konya Plain and a most useful bird in countries
                where the law forbids the burying of dead animals. These scenes
                speak for themselves and are evidently connected with the burial
                rite of excarnation for which there is abundant evidence at Catal
                Hiiyiik. The beaks of vultures leave no marks on the bones, they
                only tear off the flesh, and the brain inside the skull is not disturbed.
                   Disarticulated skulls and other elements of bodies occur in two
Plate 8         wall-paintings from shrine VI.B.1. In the first of these, painted on
Fig. 44         the east wall, a jumble of human bones is shown reminiscent of a
                disturbed grave, and in the second a series of what looks like human
                skulls, or rather decomposing heads and some bones are shown
                below a construction of reeds and matting (described above, p. 65),
                which probably represents the mortuary where the rites of ex-
                carnation were practised, presumably well away from the site and
                probably upstream.
                  In only one other building, a shrine (E.IV.1) of Level IV, is a scene
Plates 50, $1   presented which seems to be part of a funerary rite. Below the torso
                of a man (painted red) in.a white loin-cloth (?) the head of a bearded
                man is shown and a little higher up towards the left there are the
                remains of what may have been a second head which, judging by the
                remains of a diadem of round discs, may have been that of a woman.
                This wall-painting is very badly destroyed, but there is certainly no
                room for two complete human figures and it seems far more likely
                that the red man was carrying two or more human heads. The
                carried head of the man is bearded and has a big lock of black hair;
                his grinning mouth and forehead are painted red as if smeared with
                blood and the eyes are closed. Other dabs of red are found on his
                cheeks, but no nose is indicated, and the impression one gets is that
                of a dead man.
                   Of the rest of the scene little can be made out except a small white
Plate 53        figure with short legs, a plump torso and raised arms, another small
                white figure and two groups of white, red and black lines which defy
                interpretation in their present state. Of the paintings along the south
168
                                                                                                  Wall-paintings
                                                                                                              fi)




47 Earliest paintings on the north and east walls ofthe Vulture Shrine, VII.8. See Plates 45-48



wall only the legs of some figures painted in red are preserved, but
they show that figures at least 18 cms in height were once painted on
that wall. The state of preservation of the figures on the main panels
of the east wall is most unsatisfactory, and only the upper part of a
small red male figure now survives among a number of fragments of
white persons or objects. To the right of the northern posts, decor-
ated in one phase with black geometric patterns and later covered
with red and white paint, a small standing figure of a woman in a
leopard-skin dress, red necklace and red anklets is all that survived.
Over the north-east platform remains of a hunting (?) scene fallen
from the north wall on to the floor of the shrine could at least be
drawn in reconstruction. Four male figures, wearing white garments
and animal skins, are shown moving towards an unintelligible scene
on the left, which looks like an animal (bear ?) trapped in a net.
Beyond it another male figure extends a hand towards an animal
head (?) and beyond that is a solid mass of red paint. There is evidence
that the west wall of this shrine had also been ornamented with
paintings, of which only specks survived. The destruction of this
                                                                                                            169
Catal Hiiyiik
                building, which was directly below the surface of the mound is
                most regrettable, for it is one of the very few decorated with a
                series of scenes in which human beings played a prominent part.
                   The only other wall-painting from a building of Level IV (A.IV.1)
                was found on the central post of its north wall. It is only a fragment
Plate 52        but shows two running male figures and the now-headless figure of
                a bull, in front of the bull are the remains of a third human figure
                which is running or has fallen and is the object of the bull’s attack.
                The other traces of indistinct figures belong to an almost obliterated
                later painting, the subject of which is no longer clear. The tall slender
                bodies, the long heads, the line of the hair shown in black are all
                similar to the human figures in shrine E.[V.1 and would seem to be
                characteristic of a style of paintings in building-levels IV and IIL.
                   Remains of a small but lively hunting scene were found on the
                walls of room A.III.13. Here a stag, accompanied by two fawns (one
Plates 56, 57   is lost but for its hind-legs), is pursued by a hunter and his dog. The
                man is shown at the point of releasing an arrow from his bow and the
                schematized rendering of the body has nevertheless captured this
                moment of haste and tension. His legs are bent and his animal-skin is
                floating behind him in the rush of action. The representation of a dog
                is the only proof for domestication of this animal at Catal Hiiyiik.
                This painting was later coated with white plaster and part of it
                covered with a black and white kilim pattern.
                   Next to the small room with the hunting-scene lay the remains of a
Fig. 48         large shrine (A.III.1), which has yielded some of the finest wall-
                paintings yet found at Catal Hiiyiik. These are also the latest, dating
                from about 5800 or a little after; let us say the first quarter of the
                fifty-eighth century Bc. Like many of the buildings found directly
                below the surface of the mound this shrine had suffered much from
                Hellenistic intrusions which had damaged the greater part of the
                east and west wall. Its antechamber, decorated with a large deer-
                hunt, was remodelled after a fire and the wall-painting was cut back
                by an unknown amount. Only the greater part of the north wall with
                its painting of a bull was more or less intact, but this painting had
                suffered from roots and animal holes and had faded more than any
                other in the building.
170
48 Restoration of the main room ofshrine A.III.1. See Plates 61-64



  The south wall of the antechamber bore the scene of a deer-hunt        Plates 54, 55, XI
painted in monochrome red without any additions in other colours.
It measured c. 1-5 metres in its present truncated state and was re-
painted four times with exactly the same pattern. The painting, now
in the Ankara Archaeological Museum, is the second of the four (the                  /
first was badly destroyed and most fragmentary) and as this was the
first wall-painting to be found at Catal Hiiyiik, we are much indebted
to Mr Ernest Hawkins, the Byzantologist, for his help and teaching
us how to remove a wall-painting from a burnt mud-brick wall.
  The scene shows five or six men, of different sizes, some naked and
others dressed in animal-skins which project stiffly from the waist,
armed with bows, slings or maces and a lasso (?), attacking a herd of
Red Deer (Cervus elaphus). The herd consists of three stags, two does
and two young fawns fleeing to the right of the picture. Many of the
animals turn their heads towards their pursuers and in the bottom
                                                                                         171
Catal Hiiyiik
                    register a fine stag has been brought down by two of the men who are
                    apparently preparing to kill it, while the leader of the hunt, drawn to
                    a larger scale, fixes his attention on another large stag, above which
                    a fragmentary small man appears. Two others are shooting arrows
                    at the does. The scene is extremely lively even if the naturalism of the
                    animals is tempered by pictorial stylization. Built into the new south
                    wall of the room was a fragment, probably derived from the same
                    scene, showing the feet of another large deer. It is unfortunately
                    unknown how much of this painting has been lost, for it is conceiv-
                    able that it covered not only the south but also the west wall of the
                    antechamber before the alterations.
                       The south wall of the main room of the shrine had no wall-paint-
                    ings, but a single stag was painted on the southernmost portion of
                    the east wall on the middle panel some 61 cms above the floor.
                    The lower panel was deeply recessed, and on its north wall remains
                    were found of a painting in black, red and white, which, with
Plate 58            some ingenuity, could be restored into a fine stag’s head, but this
                    restoration is by no means certain.
                      The north wall of the building was decorated with a wall painting
Fig. 48             of which a great bull, 2-05 metres in length, occupied the centre. Its
                    feet were painted on the lower panel and have not survived. Sur-
Plates 61, 62, 64   rounding the bull a number of running male figures were drawn,
                    armed with bows and dressed in animal-skins. These were not only
                    fragmentary, but in many cases their colours had faded and there
                    were traces of over-painting. Two of these figures, one between the
                    curving horns of the bull, the other far behind him, are painted half
Plate 62            red, half white. The first figure wears a red animal skin and is armed
                    with a bow, the second wears a pink leopard skin with black spots
                    and is waving a club or mace, and both are headless. The other
                    hunters painted red originally had heads, though some have lost
                    them as the paintings deteriorated.
                       Towards the west end of the north wall a group of hunters,
                    including the headless figure in the leopard skin, are turned towards
                    another animal, smaller than the large bull, that was painted on the
                    west wall. Fragments of two hunters appear near his hind quarters
                    and between them and two others are a number of red lines which
172
                                                                          Wall-paintings
may represent a net or stockade. This originally extended much
further down, but as its fragments were found in a Hellenistic pit
which had cut away the north-west corner (and most of the brick-
work of the west wall) restoration, even on paper, remains somewhat
uncertain. It seems extremely likely that a second and smaller bull
surrounded by hunters once occupied the west wall up to the door-
way. The entire scene of what is almost certainly a bull hunt (and not
a scene of bull-worship) still measures 5-5 metres in its truncated
state and was probably another metre or so in length originally. This
painting was the earliest one on the north and west wall and thus
dates from the earliest occupation of the shrine. Traces of repainting
were found among the figures surrounding the big bull and patches
of solid red paint covered the net and the hindquarters of the
second animal. What they represented can no longer be ascertained.
   The east wall of this shrine was originally decorated with a great
panel 3-4 metres in length and 66 cms in height, set some 61 cms
above the level of the two main platforms, and extending from the
north-east corner to the wooden post. It showed scenes of dancing in             Plate 61
connection with a deer hunt and not less than twenty-four human
figures are wholly or partly preserved out of an unknown number.
Of this exciting wall-painting only a large fragment (about 91 cms
in length) was still in situ at the north end of the wall together with
two other fragments, one along the top edge of the panel with the
antler of one deer and the head of a second and four human figures,
the second along its southern edge (1-2 metres in length) below the
second stag. This piece had slipped into a Hellenistic trench together           Plate 63
with numerous other fragments when the trench became water-
logged. The arrangement of the small fragments in connection with
the larger pieces, though based on the position in which they were
found is therefore reconstruction rather than fact, but the result is
entirely convincing. What we do not know is whether more figures
were originally present in the open spaces left in the reconstruction,
since, if there were originally more, their fragments have perished.
   On the major fragment of the wall-painting three successive layers
of painting were clearly recognizable: first, the earliest and best
preserved, then a middle one with larger figures running towards the
                                                                                     173
Catal Hiiyiik
                right and a third and latest painting with two rather lifeless figures
                depicted in reddish-brown. In style these latest figures resemble some
                of those painted around the great bull, but they do not appear to be
                contemporary, as the bull-hunt is undoubtedly of the same period as
                the earliest deer-hunt. The latest of the three paintings on this wall
                being in monochrome and in a different style, was easy to recognize.
                A man in an animal-skin is shown holding two bows and behind him
                is a second man with a small animal (dog ?) before him. Nowhere
                else on this wall were further fragments of this painting found.
                   The middle painting is in polychrome and shows extremely lively
                figures larger than those of the lowest layer, running at great speed
                towards the right. They‘are dressed in pink leopard-skins with black
                spots and wear bonnets of the same material. Most of them are armed
                with bows or club. The object of their attention are probably the
                deer, which seem to have been repainted once. A number of figures
                of this phase are preserved in patches only over earlier ones, alas not
                enough to complete this scene, but it may be assumed that groups
                of hunters running towards the deer from both sides formed its
                subject.
                   The earliest painting is also the best preserved. The major frag-
Plate 61        ment shows a scene that should probably be interpreted as a dance of
                the hunters. With the exception of two figures in the bottom register,
                a drummer and a bowman with raised sling, all the figures are
                shown proceeding to the left in three superimposed rows. The three
                figures in the middle row (there may have been more originally)
                are larger in size and the first is painted half red, half white, and
                is headless like the third figure which is all white except for a
                leopard-skin on the shoulder. The middle figure wears a white
                loin-cloth as well as a leopard-skin (pink with black spots) in which
                all figures except two naked acrobats are dressed. Similarly all figures
                wear berets of leopard-skin. They are armed with bows and slings
                and one figure in the top row is shown holding a small animal,
                possibly a dog. It appears that the dance takes place around the
                central figure in the middle and its purpose is possibly to insure the
                success of the hunt which is shown in the same panel further to
                the right. Here two stags and a fawn are shown, as well as a number
174
                                                                           Wall-paintings
of hunters all dressed in the same garb, and except one at the very end
of the picture, all moving towards the left. No headless figures are
found here, but one man placed below the stag in the middle of the
scene is differently dressed in a pale yellow skin with white borders
(lion- or deer-skin ?). Towards the far end of the painting a number
of inexplicable objects appear; a skin (?) in front of the man below the        Plate XIII
second deer, deer’s tracks (?) behind him and beyond that a poly-
chrome design and two grinning human (?) heads above. Their
meaning is obscure, but they tend to remind us that the wall-paint-
ings at Catal Hiiyiik were not art for art’s sake, but had a ritual
meaning.
   Two important questions remain to be answered: the relationship
between the bull and the deer-hunt and the identity of the headless
figures found in both paintings. Although it seems unlikely that
bull and deer-hunt were painted by the same person it is probable
that they are of the same date and it is by no means impossible that
the two scenes are meant to be seen as one painting symbolizing the
hunt. They more or less flow into each other and it will not have
escaped notice that in the dancing scene the majority of the partici-              Fig. 48
pants advance towards the left, i.e. towards the bull, who for sheer
size and magnificence dominates the entire composition. In a way the
deer on the right are balanced by the second animal on the far left,
and in both hunts we find the mysterious headless harlequins. When
we compare these with the headless corpses of the vulture paintings,
the interpretation of these figures as dead ancestors may gain some
credence. That great hunters of the past were invoked to partake in
the hunting-rites of the living does not strain one’s credulity and the
only way of indicating their status was to show them headless and
parti-coloured. As it seems extremely unlikely that the entire popula-
tion, or even all the males, were dressed in leopard-skins, we may
assume that the hunters here represented were a small section of the
populace entitled to this ceremonial       dress, in other words     the
priesthood. It seems unlikely that at this period the entire able
manhood of Catal Hiiyiik, which must run into the thousands,
partook in annual hunting-rites and it is far more likely that the
conduct of such rites was entrusted to a select body of priests. That
                                                                                      175
         tes
       BE)   Pye a»|
      &,               Rim,   Cra
Catal Hiiyiik
                this shrine was devoted to the hunt seems beyond reasonable doubt
                and it may be significant that the second shrine nearby was entirely
                decorated with floral symbols and kilims, symbols of agriculture and
                weaving, occupations pre-eminently associated with women. Nor is
                it probably a coincidence that the shrine of Level II was built on top
                of this latter building and that stamp-seals and grain as well as nine
                female statuettes should have been found in the building, which may
                have still been reserved for women. The hunting-shrine of Level III
                soon lost its early decoration and about thirty to thirty-five layers of
                white plaster covered its paintings, which belonged to the first years
                of its use. In Level II the shrine was not rebuilt and with the decline
                in hunting came the decay of the obsidian industry in Level IL.
                Sometime during the fifty-eighth century sc agriculture finally
                triumphed over the age old occupation of hunting and with it the
                power of woman increased: this much is clear from the almost total
                disappearance of male statues in the cult, a process which, beginning
                in Catal Hiiyiik Il, reaches its climax in the somewhat later cultures
                of Hacilar.
                   Wall-painting also came to an end and the painting of pottery
                took its place, but with the greatly reduced space for painting
                animals, deities and figures were broken down and stylized almost
                beyond recognition in the ‘fantastic style’ of Hacilar; only hands and
                textile patterns survived unchanged for another five hundred years.
Plates 59, 60      There remains but a single wall-painting to be described, which
                more than any other illustrates the artistic genius of the people of
                Catal Hiiyiik. Painted on the north and east wall of a shrine (VII.14)
                of Level VII, soon after 6200 Bc according to radiocarbon dating, it
                represents that rarest genre of early painting, a landscape and needless
                to say it is unique. In the foreground is shown a town with rect-
                angular houses of varying sizes with internal structures reminiscent
                of Catal Hiiyiik houses clearly indicated. Each house has its own walls
                and they are placed one next to the other without any open spaces.
                The rows of houses rise in terraces up to the top of the mound (as in
                the section of Level VI B and no doubt VII also).
                  Beyond the town and much smaller as if far away, rises a double
                peaked mountain covered with dots and from its base parallel lines
176
                                                                            Wall-paintings
extend. More lines erupt from its higher peak and more dots are
grouped beyond its right slope and in horizontal rows above its
peak, interspersed with horizontal and vertical lines. A clearer picture
of a volcano in eruption could hardly have been painted: the fire
coming out of the top, lava streams from vents at its base, clouds of
smoke and glowing ash hanging over its peak and raining down on
and beyond the slopes of the volcano are all combined in this paint-
ing. It is not difficult to localize this picture: Hasan Da (10,673 feet)
is the only twin peaked volcano in Central Anatolia and it lies at the
eastern end of the Konya Plain, within view of Catal Hiiyiik.                       Plate I
The Central Anatolian volcanoes became extinct only in the second
millennium Bc. Moreover, these volcanoes and Hasan Daé especially,
were the source of much raw material, in particular that of obsidian,
for Catal Hiiyiik, a source from which the site probably derived
much of its wealth. It may be surmised that it was not only for its
great cutting power, its transparency, reflective power and its jet
black appearance that this material was so highly prized. Its volcanic
and thus chthonic origin would have linked it to the underworld, the
place of the dead, and it was a true gift of mother earth, and therefore
imbued with magical potency. These considerations may help in
explaining why an artist late in the seventh millennium sc recorded
the wonder and awe of a volcanic eruption against the foreground of
the town of Catal Hiiyiik on the wall of one of its shrines. If the
picture is unique so was the occasion and probably only at Catal
Hiiyiik had Neolithic people reached the necessary degree of civil-
ization or possessed the artistic genius to record such an event for
posterity.




                                                                                       177
VIll

