Sculpture in the Round


                 ESIDES THE WALL-PAINTINGS and plaster reliefs that decorate the
            Basse of shrines and a number of houses, the people of Catal
            Hiiyiik practised sculpture in the round in the form of stone and clay
            statuettes depicting their deities in anthropomorphic or near-
            anthropomorphic form. None of these is more than 30 cms in
            height and most are considerably smaller, varying from 5 to 20 cms
            on the average. The materials out of which such small cult statues
            were fashioned vary from terracotta to soft calcite, chalk, pumice
            and alabaster and from limestone to volcanic rocks and white marble.
            Bone tools were used for modelling, obsidian and flint tools cut the
            rock. For polishing, sand, crushed volcanic glass (obsidian) and
            perhaps emery were available, but all these raw materials with the
            exception of clay had to be brought from beyond the limits of
            the Konya Plain. The techniques were probably the same as those for
            the preparation of polished axes and adzes, maceheads, stone vessels,
            pendants and beads, and much labour could be saved by carefully
            choosing suitable boulders out of which the statues were to be cut.
              Like many artists from the Upper Palaeolithic to the present, those
            of Catal Hiiyiik appreciated the weird and suggestive shapes of
            natural rock formations, stalactites, stalagmites, limestone concretions
            or strangely weathered stones. It does not require an overdose of
            imagination to imagine a host of deities, humans or petrified animals
            in the grandeur of one of the stalagmitic caves, of which plenty were
            available in the Taurus Mountains. That Neolithic people visited
            such caves is clear from the fact that broken-off stalactites were
            deposited in the shrines together with cult statues on every occasion.
            Many indeed resemble clusters of breasts, udders or even human
            figures and it was obviously because of this resemblance, however
            remote to us, that they were collected and carried back to the shrines.
178
                                                                           Sculpture in the Round
On more than one occasion, a resemblance was enhanced by some
elementary sculpting. A block of limestone resembling a male riding
an animal had a head carved on it; in another case a fearful image was
created by carving a fine head on a knobbly limestone concretion.                         Plate 65
Limestone pebbles and boulders have incised features which turn                           Plate 69
them into shapes strangely resembling modern sculpture.
   Often a little carving suffices to turn a pebble into a schematic                      Plate 72
seated goddess, but far more often naturalistic figures are carved
out of a block of stone that can have had no previous resemblance to
the final product. It would be utterly wrong to assume a line of
typological development from aniconic, semi-aniconic to naturalistic
image at least for this Early Neolithic period at Catal Hiiyiik. All
three forms occur side by side in the same buildings and a typological
approach can only lead to chaos and misunderstanding. What strikes
one most in the stone sculpture of this site is its diversity and the lack
of what might be called a dominant style. A further factor to be
borne in mind is the sacredness of a cult image. Unlike the wall-
paintings which were covered with plaster or the reliefs which were
desecrated when a shrine was filled in, cult-statues were not left in a
shrine when it was abandoned. They were removed and taken to
another shrine and carefully preserved like the cult-statues in our
churches. As the result, it is quite as possible theoretically to find cult-
statues, made let us say in Level VIII, in a shrine of Level VI as it is to
find a Romanesque sculpture of the Crucifixion or a Flemish primi-
tive in a Baroque church. The building in which it is found does not
necessarily date the object. As many of the Catal Hiiyiik statues are
made of very durable stone, it is theoretically possible that many are
much older than the buildings in which they were preserved as heir-
looms, still magically potent, of a more remote past. It is therefore
possible to argue that many of the stalactites, semi-aniconic figures,
schematic figures, etc., need not be contemporary with the fine
naturalistic statues with which they are found, but may be the
remains of much earlier periods. On the other hand, such a procedure
is arbitrary and is based on the preconceived idea of a typological
development for which we have as yet no evidence whatsoever. The
only proper solution to this problem is the location of the workshops
                                                                                              179
Catal Hiiytik
                in which the statues were made and only then will it be possible to
                establish a firm chronological sequence. In the meantime we must
                accept the possibility that stylistically utterly different types of
                statues were produced side by side. In Late Neolithic Hacilar VI we
                again find highly naturalistic clay statues side by side with menhir-
                like slabs of stone. Both show the same treatment of hair, eyes and
                nose and they are evidently contemporary with each other, in spite
                of the primitive crudity of the work in stone. Different functions,
                unfamiliarity with a new material and a quantity of other unknown
                factors may account for such stylistic discrepancies. Such factors are
                more likely to mislead the art-historian than the archaeologist, who
                is less concerned with grouping and stylistic classification than with
                the general cultural context.
                   From the context in which these statues are found it is clear that
                they served as cult-statues in the shrines and embodied the various
                deities, or aspects of deities, worshipped by the Neolithic population.
                With very few exceptions, these statues only occur in shrines in
                contrast to crude clay figurines, mainly of animals but including
                clumsy and highly schematized human figures, that are never found
                inside shrines but are stuck between the bricks or walls of shrines or
                occur in groups in pits near them. The contrast between statuettes
                and crude figurines is not only artistic but functional, and whereas the
                first probably represent cult-statues the second are ex-voto figurines
                left by worshippers or, as in the case of wounded and intentionally
Plate 66        broken animal figurines, substitute representations of game magically
                killed or disabled in a hunting ritual.
                   The cult statuettes found in the shrines are a most valuable source
                for the reconstruction of Neolithic religion at Catal Hiiyiik, and in
                contrast to most other Neolithic sites they do not entirely consist of
                ‘Mother Goddesses’, but also show a male deity. Moreover, many of
                these statuettes occur in groups, carved in the same material and
                sometimes with stylistic affinities, possibly made by the same sculptor.
                They are anything but uniform and one definitely has the impression
                that different aspects of the deities are stressed. Various ages, hieros
                gamos (ritual marriage), pregnancy, birth, command           over wild
                animals, etc., are all clearly defined and many of the statuettes tell a
180
                                                                     Sculpture in the Round
story besides simply representing the goddess or the god; they refer
to a certain episode in the life of the deities or they more clearly
define a well-known association. This explicitness is a characteristic
of both Catal Hiiyiik and Hacilar and may have been typical of
Neolithic Anatolian religion in general.
   To avoid a tedious and lengthy description of the fifty or so
statuettes discovered at Catal Hiiyiik so far, they have been listed
together with information on the material of which they are made,
their height and findspot on pp. 202-3. From the same list it is evi-
dent that statues of a female deity far outnumber those of the male
deity, who moreover, does not appear to be represented at all after
Level VI. Most of the statuettes from the early levels (VII, VI) were
carved in stone, whereas in the later levels ([V-II) the majority are
modelled in clay and baked. The features are generally more natura-
listically rendered and this naturalism is evidently the result of a long
tradition of modelling in clay. Coarser clay figurines already appear
in Level IX, remaining virtually unchanged throughout the period.
   Characteristic of Catal Hiiyiik is the representation of deities in
human form where cult statuettes are concerned, whereas in the
plaster sculpture and wall-painting only the goddess is thus portrayed.
There can be little doubt that the Neolithic people of Catal Hiiyiik
conceived their deities in human form endowed with supernatural
power over their attributes and symbols taken from a familiar animal
world. As a symbol of male fertility an aurochs bull or a large ram
was more impressive than man himself and the power of wild life
and death was suitably symbolized in the leopard, the largest and
fiercest wild animal in the region; in the destructive ferocity of the
boar or in the impressive spectacle of flocks of Griffon vultures.
Nothing suggests that these animals themselves were regarded as
gods. Just as Neolithic man had learned (or was learning) to dominate
nature through animal domestication and agriculture, so the power of
his deities over wild life was clearly expressed in his sculpture.          Plates 67, 68, IX;
Leopards support the goddess in her confinement; leopard-cubs rest                     Fig. 49
on her shoulders and leopard-skins clothe her. Two goddesses                 Plate 87; Fig. 50
of different age stand behind leopards, patting their backs, and the         Plates 73-76, X
boy-god is shown riding another, a convincing picture of the Divine                  Plate 86
                                                                                          I81
Catal Hiiyiik




                                                                    49 Clay statuette of a
                                                                    goddess holding two
                                                                    leopard cubs. From
                                                                    shrine A.III.1

                   Family; mother, daughter and son as Mistresses and Master of wild
Fig. 26            animals. A similar scene decorated the west wall of shrine VII.8
Plates 18-20, VI   and a pair of leopards, male and female, modelled in relief and
                   painted was found in shrine VI.B and A.44. In another case, shrine
Fig. 23            VII.1, a bull and a cow take the place of leopards and the emphasis
                   here may be on a domesticated or domesticable species.
                      The frequency with which the goddess is shown associated with
                   wild animals probably reflects her ancient role as the provider of
                   game for a hunting population, and as patroness of the hunt. Her
                   statuettes alone were found in the hunting shrine of Level IIL.
                   Animal figurines, wounded or maimed in effigy during a hunting
                   ritual, were found in pits near shrines VI.B.12 and IV.4, both of
                   which contained plaster reliefs or statuettes of goddesses. Her
                   association with possibly domesticated animals has been noted and
                   her power over plant life and hence agriculture is clear not only




                                                                    50 Painted clay figure of
                                                                    a goddess. From shrine
                                                                     VI_A.61. See Plate 79
                                                                       Sculpture in the Round




51 Painted clay statuette of a
goddess in a leopard skin dress.
From shrine E.IV.4




from the numerous representations of floral and vegetable patterns,
painted on her figure or in her shrines, but also from the association        Plate 79; Fig. 50
of her statuettes in heaps of grain and crucifers in shrine VI.A.44               Plates 67, 68
(the Leopard Shrine) and the discovery of the birth-giving goddess
in a grain-bin of the Level II shrine. Here again the presence of the
statue suggests a rite of sympathetic magic. The decoration of the
second shrine of Level III, ornamented entirely with floral patterns              Plates 31-34
or textile designs, suggests that she was regarded as much as an
agrarian deity as a patroness of weaving, innovations of supreme
importance for the Neolithic period. Her association with life has
its inevitable counterpart in her association with death. She is shown
                                                                             Plates 67, 68, IX;
giving birth to a son, represented in human form or as a bull or                        Fig. 52
ram in the numerous shrines, and the immediately preceding stage,
pregnancy, is as much in evidence in the statuettes as in the plaster         Plate 77; Fig. 53
reliefs. As a probable goddess of death, she is accompanied by a bird
of prey, possibly a vulture and her grim expression suggests old age,             Plates 80, 82
the crone of later mythology. Her symbols of death, vultures, are
frequently represented in early shrines (see pp. 166f.), and an elaborate
symbolism, foreshadowing the words ‘in the midst of life there is
death’, finds plastic expression in mother’s breasts which incorporate
skulls of vultures, fox and weasel or the lower jaws of boars with
enormous tusks, eminently symbolic of the scavengers which thrive
on death. A firm belief in afterlife is well attested by the burial
customs and amulets of the goddess (highly stylized and graded in
diminishing sizes like the similar Magdalenian figures from Petersfels
                                                                                           183
                                                            52 Clay statuette of a goddess
                                                            supported by leopards giving
                                                            birth. From a grain-bin in shrine
                                                           A.II.1. See Plates 67, 68, IX


Plate 81   in Baden) which covered the neck of a red-ochre burial in Level IV.
           Other amulets show bulls’ heads representing the male deity. So even
           in death the protection of the deities was sought and the care of the
           dead suggests the idea of resurrection, the denial of death, the tenet of
Plate 65   all religion. The stalactite goddess probably also stresses the idea
           of chthonic power and the underworld.
              If the goddess presided over all the various activities of the life and
           death of the Neolithic population of Catal Hiiyiik, so in a way did her
           son. Even if his role is strictly subordinate to hers, the male’s role in
Plate 83   life appears to have been fully realized. A small stone plaque shows a
           couple in embrace on the left and mother with child, the offspring
           of the union on the right. The birth of a god is frequently portrayed




                                                            53 Complete clay statuette of a
                                                            seated goddess. From shrine
                                                            A.II.1
84, 85 Male deities, though not as prominent as their female counterpart, are still a feature of
neolithic Catal Hiiyiik. The proud adolescent figure, above, found with the Death Goddess and
her vulture in shrine VI.A.25, seems characteristic of the confidence, pride and virility of the male at
Catal Hiiyiik, still a figure to be reckoned with and not yet entirely subservient to the wiles of
women, as at Hacilar. The second white marble figure, below, shows a seated male wearing a cap
of leopard skin and multiple bracelets worn above the elbow. Presumably he represents an aspect
of hunting, which alone was responsible for the presence of an independent male deity in the
neolithic of Catal Hiiyiik
86-91 Of the six statuettes illustrated here only one is
definitely female, above right. Made of baked clay it repre-
sents a young woman dressed in a blouse of leopard skin
and a fringed woollen skirt and was found in shrine A.II.1.
Four of the five male gods shown are seated on animals: the
boy god, above left, part of the group in Plates 73-76 has
already been described; a bearded male seated on a bull,
left, from the Leopard Shrine (VI.A.44), and the white
calcite figure on a bull from shrine VII.21, the rear view of
which is shown, above. The blue limestone bearded god ona
bull, right, was found in shrine VI.A.10 together with the
figure, above right, of aperson in a long garment. Two of
male figures are bearded and therefore probably represent
the Goddess’s husband, whereas the younger figures
probably represent her son, the boy god, or her adolescent
lover
92,93 The people of neolithic Catal Hiiyiik buried their dead below the platforms of houses, above,
and shrines, opposite, alike, -but only after the flesh had decomposed or had been removed by
vultures or other natural agents. The bones, still in anatomical context, were wrapped up in cloth,
or matting, and then deposited in earth graves below the platforms of their ancient homes. When
a building was inhabited for a length of time, several burials would take place one on top of the
other (house VI.B.34, above) often leading to the disturbance of earlier skeletons. In other cases,
shrine VI.8, opposite, individual skeletons with their funerary gifts are easily disentangled
94, 95 In one unusual burial
in shrine VI.1, the brains had
been removed from the skull
and a wad of fine cloth sub-
stituted, above. As the build-
ing above was destroyed by
fire the action of the heat was
sufficient to ensure carboniz-
ation of the material. A burial
from shrine VI.7, below, has
as a bracelet, dentalium beads
and a red-painted basket as
grave goods
96, 97 Above, burials
found below the main
(female)   platform   of
house E.IV.1 with the
latest burial semi-intact
on the left and a row of
displaced earlier skulls
beyond.     Below,     a
woman’s skull decor-
ated with a broad band
of cinnabar from shrine
VI.B.20, one of the
relatively few ochre-
burials
98-102 Male and female funeral gifts. Above, a fine collar of boar’s tusk, incised and perforated,
from a female burial in house VII.12. A bone spatula ending in a human hand and a bone bodkin
came from a female burial in house IV.11. Below, finely polished bone belt-hooks and an eye for
fastening a belt were found with male burials in shrines VI.A and B.20. Above right, a two pronged
fork and, below right, two spatulae from houses A.III.2, B.II.1 and shrine E.IV.4, respectively
103, 104 Above, a bracelet of red and
white small stone beads, blue and white
limestone tubular beads and six deer
teeth from the burial of a woman in
house [X.1. Right, a necklace of black
limestone beads and large beads of lead,
from the burial of a young woman in
shrine VI.A.10
105-108 In many instances wooden vessels were extremely well preserved at Catal Hiiyiik VI, not
only in graves, but some even in burnt buildings, below. The most outstanding products are boxes
with closely fitting lids, above, rectangular (from shrine VI.A.1) or oval (from shrine VI.10). These
were carved out of blocks of wood without any joinery or gluing. The lids are usually provided
with a small lug which serves as a handle (below). Handles were also carved on the large oval meat
dish, opposite below, from shrine VI.61, nearly 50 cm. long. Oval bowls were very common, the
oval box above, came from shrine VI.10, and they varied in shape and depth, some were like sauce-
boats, others boat-shaped
109-112 Three examples of pottery and a stone vessel from
Catal Hiiyiik: a straight-sided cream burnished bowl from
Level Il, above left; a dark burnished ware cooking pot with
two ledge handles from house IV.8, centre, and a jar on four
feet from house A.III.14, below, decorated with faint dia-
gonal stripes of paint. Stone vessels were a luxury at Catal
Hiiyiik, a good example is the spouted dish of red sand-
stone, above, from shrine VI.A.8
113-115 Among the many weapons at Catal Hiiyiik, skilfully
chipped in obsidian and flint, a group ofdaggers is outstanding. A
simple flint dagger, above, was found in its leather sheath in the
storeroom of house VI.B.28. Two other daggers in flint are
pressure-flaked on one side, smooth on the other, right, both were
offerings from shrine VI.A.14. A group of long obsidian arrow-
heads, below, lay in a bag next to the legbones of a male skeleton
in shrine VI.B.20 as funerary gifts
116-118 Textile fragments from burials in shrine
VI.A.5. Above, cloth tapes served to tie up the bundles
wrapped in cloth; centre, woollen cloth with tabby
weave covered a long bone of one of the skeletons
in a shrine, but apart from this plain woven cloth
there were other weaves such as the shawl or fish net
weave of the piece shown below
119 Coiled baskets occur in all building-levels of neolithic
Catal Hiiyiik and they served every possible purpose; they
were used for gathering food, for the storage of grain,
contained jewellery and toilet articles or were used for
burials of infants, children and even adults, right, from
shrine VI.B.20




                                                               120 Rushes were in common use as a floor covering,
                                                               but they were usually placed below woven mats,
                                                               made from marsh grass which produced a very fine
                                                               weave. Both are visible in the floor covering of
                                                               shrine VI.A.14, left, with carbonized matting on the
                                                               left and the white decayed reeds on the right
121 Baked clay seals are a prominent feature of the neolithic at Catal Hiiyiik and they occur from
Level VI B to Level II. They have a flat lower surface and bear incised patterns, among which spirals
and especially meanders or meandroids are most common. Most are oval, round or sub-rectangular,
but one exhibits a flower shape, so common from the textile paintings. They could have been used
for stamping patterns on plain cloth rather than for painting the human skin, as is often assumed


ARIZONA STATE MUSEUM LIBRARY . THICSON. AZ. osyey
                                                                      Sculpture in the Round
 in the shrines and once in a statuette. Differences in age distinguish
  between the god as son (the boy god on the leopard, the adolescent             Plates 84, 86
_ god); the hunter in a leopard skin cap or the consort-husband, who is               Plate 85
 shown bearded and seated on his symbol, the bull.                           Plates 88, 89, 91
   This same distinction in age is made a number of times in represent-
 ing the goddess as mother or daughter (the group with the leopards,          Plates 73-76, X
 the pair from the leopard shrine in black volcanic stone) or, occasion-
 ally as a twin figure which finds a parallel in the large twin plaster          Plates 70, 71
 goddess on the west wall of shrine VI.14. Here the idea of pairs is                   Fig. 32
 twice shown; one of the two goddesses gives birth to a large and a
 small bull’s head, son and consort. In other cases age is shown by
 absence of breasts, more mature contours, hood and cloak, etc., all                 Plate 90
  of which would be immediately obvious to Neolithic people.
    The divine family then was patterned on that of man; and the four
  aspects are in order of importance: mother, daughter, son and
 father. The question now arises whether Neolithic people wor-
 shipped these as four divinities or as two, for mother and daughter
 (or perhaps girl and mother) are but two aspects of the concept
 woman; son and father that of man. It would be extremely difficult
_to decide in this matter, but the general feeling one gets from the
 material favours the existence of but two deities: the Great Goddess
 and her son and paramour. Later parallels from Crete and Bronze
 Age Greece would tend to confirm this conception of the Divine
 family (Demeter, Kore or Persephone, and child Ploutos, as in the
 case of the exquisite ivory from the acropolis at Mycenae), the
 reference to the “Two Ladies’ in the Knossos texts and the dual role
 of Cretan Zeus, Phrygian Attis and Phoenician Adonis, associated
 with only one main goddess in the pattern of the dying and reviving
  god. It must be emphasized though, that the idea of a dying god does
 not appear to derive originally from Anatolia, and was probably
  unknown in the Anatolian Neolithic.
    What is particularly noteworthy in the Neolithic religion of
  Anatolia, and this applies to Catal Hiiyiik as much as to Hacilar,
  is the complete absence of sex in any of the figurines, statuettes,
  plaster reliefs or wall-paintings. The reproductive organs are never
  shown, representations of phallus and vulva are unknown, and this
                                                                                           201
    Catal Hiiyiik
                           is the more remarkable as they were frequently portrayed both in the
                           Upper Palaeolithic and in the Neolithic and Post-neolithic cultures
                           outside Anatolia. It seems that there is a very simple answer to this
                           seemingly puzzling question, for emphasis on sex in art is invariably
                           connected with male impulse and desire. If Neolithic woman was
                           the creator of Neolithic religion, its absence is easily explained and a
                           different symbolism was created in which breast, navel and preg-
                           nancy stand for the female principle, horns and horned animal heads
                           for the male. In an early Neolithic society like that of Catal Hiiyiik
                           one might biologically expect a greater proportion of women than
                           men and this is indeed reflected in the burials. Moreover, in the new
                           economy a great number of tasks were undertaken by the women, a
                           pattern that has not changed in Anatolian villages to this day, and this
                           probably accounts for her social pre-eminence. As the only source
                           of life she became associated with the processes of agriculture, with
                           the taming and nourishing of domesticated animals, with the ideas
                            of increase, abundance and fertility. Hence a religion which aimed
                            at exactly that same conservation of life in all its forms, its propaga-
                            tion and the mysteries of its rites connected with life and death,
                           birth and resurrection, were evidently part of her sphere rather than
                           that of man. It seems extremely likely that the cult of the goddess was
                           administered mainly by women, even if the presence of male priests
                           is by no means excluded, and such rare objects as obsidian mirrors,
                           leopard-skins and finely wrought belt-fasteners may have been part
                           of the ritual paraphernalia of female and male priests.

List of Sculptures
li. limestone; ma. marble (white); sc. schist; ba. basalt or volcanic stone; cl. clay; ca. calcite; al. alabaster.
Heights are in centimetres.

Goddess                                                                   Material     cms     shrine     plates
 1. Semi-aniconic concretion with head.        Chthonic, cave or
                                                 mountain aspect             li.       19°6    VIA.10           65
 2. Pebble figures                             Pregnant (?) goddess          li        16-0    VIA.10
                                                                                       117     ~=VIA.10         69
 3. Kneeling goddess with bird (vulture?) Goddess of death                   ma.       17-0" AV LALaS
                                                                                        5°3
Goddess                                                             Material    cms      shrine      plates
4. Broken figure holding something       = Mother and child(?)_—ma.              9°5     VIA.10
5. Twin Goddess                            Mother and daughter   ma.            16°4     VIA.10        70; 71
6. Goddess and god in embrace              Ritual marriage       SC.            II'5     VIA.30            83
 7. Goddess holding child                  Mother and child            Sc,      Lrs$     VIA.30            83
 8. Pair of goddesses                      Mother and daughter         ba.      16°3     VIA.44
                                                                       ba.      120      VIA.44
 9. Pair of goddesses, male child and      Mother, daughter and        li.      II‘o     VIA.10        73-76
      leopards                                son as mistress and      li.      10°5     VIA.10
                                              master of animals        li.        515    VIA.10            86
10. Seated goddess with two leopard cubs   Mistress of animals         cl.       70      AU:          Fig. 49
11. Seated goddess giving birth                                        cl.      16°5     A.IL1     67, 68, IX
12. Seated goddess, dressed in leopard skin (painted)                  cl.        6:0    IV.5         Fig. 50
13. Standing goddess, dressed in skirt and leopard blouse              cl.        5°0    A.IL.1            87
14. Seated goddess, painted with flowers                               eh        4°I     VIA.61            79
15. Cloaked and hooded goddess                                         li.       8-0     VIA.10            90
16. Goddess with mouth and pendant breasts                             li.        78     VIA.10
17. Goddess in flounced robe (?)                                       ca.       lie     VIA.25
18. Goddess seated on something                                        ca.       4°2     VIL.24
19. Squat goddess                                                      al.       SI      VIB.45
20. Crude chalk goddess                                                ch.       6°0     VIA.44
21. Schematic seated goddess (no head)                                 Ti,        4°5    VIA.44
22. Schematic goddess with arms on breast                              ma.        5°70   VIA.10            72

23. Seated goddess with crossed legs                                   ma.        6°5    A.II.1
24. Miniature seated goddess with crossed legs                         ma.        3°0    A.IIL.1
25. Standing pregnant goddess                                          al.       12°7    E.IV.5            77
26. Standing goddess                                                   li.        si     A.IL1
27-33. Group of seven seated goddesses                                 cl      5-8°0     A.IL1        Fig. 53
God
 1. Child god riding leopard               Master of animals           li.        595    VIA.10    73-76, 86
 2. Adolescent god seated on stool         Son of goddess              ma.      21°5     VIA.25           84
3. Seated god with leopard cap             Son and hunter              ma.      12:0     VIA.10           85
4. Seated god, bearded                     Consort                     al.       9°8     VIA.44
5. God on bull                             Consort (?)                 ca.     . 190     VIL21             89
6. Bearded god on bull                     Consort (?)                 al.       10.7    VIA.44            88
                                           Consort (?)                 li.       II‘O    VIA.10            gI
7. Semi-aniconic god on animal             Consort (?)                 li.       10'0    VII.24
8 . Twin (?) god on bull (?) fragment                                  ca                V1I.23
IX

Burial-customs and Grave-goods


                HE NEOLITHIC PEOPLE of Catal Hiiyiik buried their dead below
           a ee: platforms of houses and shrines and only rarely below any
           other part of the floor. No burials have been found in storerooms or
           courtyards and extramural burial, such as was found at aceramic
           Hacilar c. 7000 Bc, was apparently unknown at Catal Hiiyiik.
             It is now clear that secondary burial was practised at this site, i.e.
           the skeletons were stripped of soft tissues before burial inside the
           dwellings, probably not just for simple reasons of hygiene but
           part ofa highly developed pattern of rites of passage. Upon death the
Plate 8    corpse of the deceased was probably removed to a mortuary outside
           the settlement where vultures cleaned the corpses down to the bones
           and dry ligaments. Presumably the dead were exposed on platforms,
           accessible to the birds and insects, but not to dogs and other scaven-
           gers which carry off bones. Evidently care was taken to preserve
           the skeleton intact in anatomical position and a check was kept on
           their identity. Whether this was the duty of the relatives or that of a
           special class of undertakers is of course not known, but the former
           seems more likely. To strip the flesh of the unborn child found in
           shrine VI.14 other methods were evidently used, such as immersion
           in a pot of water for only in this way could the minute bones survive
           intact. In a fair number of skeletons the brain was still in the skulls,
Plate 94   but in one instance it was removed and a ball of fine cloth substituted.
              It seems extremely likely that the burial of the dead coincided with
           the annual spring or early summer redecoration of houses and shrines,
           when the population must have found other quarters for the duration
           of the burial rites, the white-washing and the time required for the
           plaster to dry out thoroughly. This implies that the dead were kept in
           the mortuary until the annual ceremony and it is therefore not
           surprising to find some differences in the state of excarnation of the
204
                                                            Burial-customs and Grave-goods
corpses. Some had lost fingers or toe bones or the head had become
detached whereas others still contained human fat and traces of flesh
at the time when the burials took place. Some skeletons were more
or less disjointed whereas others were still anatomically intact with
not a single bone out of place. From the preservation of perishable
materials, such as cloth, skin, fur, etc., frequently preserved below the
skeletons it is clear that they were buried only when they had reached
a state of complete or near desiccation. Wrapped in cloth or skins
fastened with cloth straps and leather thongs or fibre rope, the
skeletons were buried below the platforms at an average depth of
60 cms, sometimes laid on mats but more often directly in the earth.              Plate 119
The edges of the platforms served as a demarcation line and no burial
protruded beyond them, but where for lack of space the dead were
buried below the floor they were put in oval graves.
  No definite orientation was observed, but the head is usually
turned towards the centre of the building and the feet towards the
wall. Most, but not all the dead lie on their left side in a contracted            Plate 93
position but some are extended on their back with head to the wall
and feet towards the centre of the room (red-ochre burial in E.IV.8
and one burial in VI.B.10). In the shrines and houses of Level VI
(A and B) several layers of burials are not uncommon and later                     Plate 92
burials frequently disturbed the bones of earlier interments. In the
later layers less care seems to have been taken not to disturb earlier
burials and their bones and skulls are frequently rearranged and
funeral gifts scattered. Throughout the Early Neolithic period from                Plate 96
Level X to I no change in burial-customs seems to have occurred.
   Individual graves are rare. Most houses and shrines served as family
burial sites and the longer a building was occupied the greater is the
number of bodies found. The maximum number, thirty-two
individuals, came from shrine VI.B and A.10, occupied throughout
Levels VI B and A, but house VI.B.34 yielded not less than twenty-
eight burials. On the other hand shrine VI.61, also occupied in both
Levels VI B and VI A, yielded only thirteen and shrine VI.A.25
a single woman and child. It proves impossible to correlate the
number of burials, sometimes extending over generations, to the
length of occupation of a building and the very small number of
                                                                                      205
Catal Hiiyiik
                dead found in certain buildings, especially in the lower levels
                (IX-VII) or in Level V, makes one wonder where their occupants
                were buried. It is for instance inconceivable that only six deaths took
                place during the 120 years or so that the great vulture shrine (VII.8)
                was used, and this again suggests that shrines were not continually
                used as burying places, but may have been reserved for special
                individuals only. The same question arises in the case of houses,
                where the number of burials seldom suggests that all their occupants
                had been buried in the building. Only one house, VI.B.34, with
                twenty-eight burials over a period of about a century or four
                generations of seven individuals per generation (including small
                children) approaches what one would expect, but in all other build-
                ings of Level VI the number is much less (three burials per house for
                the entire VI B and A period of about 150 years cannot represent all
                the dead). So where are they buried? Only excavation on a much
                larger scale might eventually settle this intriguing problem, which at
                the moment is insoluble, as a great number of burials in Level VIB
                shrines have not yet been excavated. There remains however one
                possible solution to account for only 229 skeletons of Level VI (A
                and B) in thirteen shrines and eight houses, and that is by assuming
                that the dead buried in the shrines are part of the population of the
                houses (on the assumption that the shrines were occupied only at
                certain times of the year for religious ceremonies). If the 229 burials
                are divided over eight houses, the average of 28 dead occurred per
                house over six generations (or about 150 years, the estimated length
                of Levels VI B and A together). This gives four to five dead per
                generation in each house, which agrees with the size of the building,
                the sleeping space and hence the average size of a family. This would
                mean that more than two-thirds of the population (160 out of 226)
                was buried in the shrines, which confirms our opinion that the entire
                quarter was inhabited by priests and priestesses, who would naturally
                prefer to be buried in hallowed ground. This picture will probably
                need modification when excavations are resumed and more burials
                are found in shrines and houses of this quarter, so no great reliance
                should be placed on the actual numbers of dead here used for calcu-
                lation. It would be extremely interesting to compare these results
206
                                                             Burial-customs and Grave-goods
from the priests quarter with a purely residential area and see if the
number of dead buried below the houses is considerably greater.
Evidence from the upper levels cannot be used for comparison as
there is good reason to show that the area remained a shrine area.
   A further point of considerable interest emerges from a study of the
skeletons and their burial gifts and that is that those dead buried in
shrines or probable shrines are generally better provided for than the
dead buried in the houses. This again suggests that the privileged
dead buried in the shrines had been people who during life had
enjoyed affluence, respect or authority; in fact members of a higher
social order or distinction than their relatives buried in the houses.
These differences marked as they are, should not be exaggerated;
even the burials in a number of shrines were by no means richly
equipped, and bordered on poverty (e.g. shrines VI.14, 15, 25, 12;
VII.r and 8, etc.). The equipment of the dead was subject to a
number of considerations: his status in life, his own wishes, the
respect or covetousness of his relatives, possible religious consider-
ations, the nature of his death, etc.; in other words factors which no
archaeologist can ever hope to distinguish. The greater number of
burials in houses and shrines alike were not provided with any gifts.
   Out of a total of about 400 skeletons (or parts thereof) only eleven
may be singled out as ochre-burials, painted with red ochre or
cinnabar (mercury oxide) on the skull or skull and body. Such
burials are then far from common, but occur from Levels [X to III
almost exclusively in shrines. Moreover, most if not all, appear to
have been of the female sex, but, with some exceptions, their funeral
gifts, the main item of which was a necklace, are not rich ones
by Catal Hiiyiik standards. One was a prematurely born infant
(VI.A.14), another a mother buried with a child on top of her
and accompanied by an adze, a flint dagger with chalk pommel, a
spoon and spatula and some fresh water mussels filled with red
ochre (VIII.1). A third, a girl of about seventeen who suffered
from a broken femur which might have crippled her ([X.1), was
treated with red ochre all over the body and had cinnabar
applied to the skull as well. With her were several necklaces and
some copper and lead beads, the earliest found on the site. Red ochre
                                                                                        207
Catal Hiiyiik
                also covered the skull and entire upper part of the body of a child
                (E.IV.8) accompanied by a fine necklace of apatite beads of graded
                size in the form of highly schematized goddesses, a bone pin and a
Plate 97        fine obsidian blade. The skull of a woman with a necklace of sliced
                dentalium. beads (VI.B.20) bore a broad band of brilliant cinnabar
                paint. Another red ochre burial in shrine E.IV.4 was provided with
                shells and red painted pebbles.
                   Green paint was found on three burials in Levels VI and VII;
                in one case, it covered the bones of a man, in another it had been
                applied to the eyebrows of a female skull (VI.B.20). More common
                than green pigment (malachite ?) was a bright blue azurite paint
                applied to the area around the neck of ten skeletons, male and female
                in Levels VII and VI. Blue and green apatite beads seem to take the
                place of these copper carbonate pigments in Levels V and IV.
                Gifts with the blue- and green-painted burials were rich in compari-
                son to those of the red-ochre ones, but unlike the latter, they were
                found both in shrines and houses, and were applied to both sexes.
                   Two groups of objects, never found in houses but confined to
                burials in shrines, female and male respectively, are mirrors of ob-
                sidian (Levels VI B to IV) and bone belt-fasteners, possibly connected
                with ceremonial leopard-skin dress (Levels VI B, VI A, and III?).
                Presumably these should be regarded as attributes of certain priest-
                esses and priests, which would explain both their rarity and their
                discovery in shrines. Fine flint daggers and spouted stone vessels also
                appear only as gifts in shrines or with male burials beneath shrines.
                   The variety of funerary gifts gives one a fair picture of the range
                of objects and materials used in daily life and it may here be noted
                that no single object seems to have been made exclusively for
                funerary use. Pottery vessels, figurines of humans,        animals   or
                cult-statuettes were never buried with the dead.
                   All the dead were probably buried in their garments, and wooden
                bowls, cups and boxes as well as baskets and food, berries, peas,
                lentils, grain, eggs or a joint of meat are found with the dead irres-
                pective of their sex. Among the other funeral gifts there are marked
                differences between those that accompany men on the one hand and
                women and children on the other. Articles of personal ornament
208
                                                       Burial-customs and Grave-goods
are a prerogative of the women. Cosmetic sets containing a small
spoon, a fork and a palette; shells filled with red ochre, ointment-
sticks of bone, baskets with rouge (red ochre mixed with fat),
obsidian mirrors, are exclusively found with women. Jewellery,               Plate XII
though not confined to the fair sex, takes the form of necklaces,
bracelets, armlets and anklets of beads of a vast variety of stones,          Plate 95
shell, clay, bone, animal teeth and, less common, beads of copper
and lead. Finger-rings may be made of bone or copper, and wooden
pins are sheathed in the same material. Other bracelets are made of
marble, alabaster or grey limestone, and there is a collar carved of
large boar tusk. Bone pins fastened women’s garments near the
shoulder. Amulets and pendants are common. Where a woman is
buried with a child spoons, spatulae and ladles of bone frequently
occur. Tools are less frequent, but include awls for sewing, bodkins
for basketry work, knives and hoes. Children have necklaces,
pendants, and rings, but otherwise no specific burial gifts.
   Male burials show little taste for jewellery. A few beads, pendants,
shells or animal teeth may have been worn on a string round the
neck, as is also shown in the wall-paintings, but no male was adorned
with elaborate necklaces like the women. Instead he was equipped
with his weapons; maces with perforated heads of polished stone,
daggers, knives and firestones for striking fire of flint (often accom-
panied by a piece of sulphur). The firestones are frequently found
together with a knife and a scraper, all showing a ‘pocket sheen’,
derived from frequent handling with greasy hands, and once carried
in a leather bag. On a few occasions a composite tool has been
produced that combined all three functions: knife, scraper and fire-
stone, the predecessor of our pocket-knife. Groups of arrowheads,            Plate 115
single spearheads, a few sickle-blades, knife-blades of obsidian or
flint are very often buried with the male dead. Hooks-and-eyes for
fastening belts, antler toggles for loin-cloths or cloaks were articles
of male dress. Metal, if not altogether absent, with male burials is
extremely rare. Baked clay stamp-seals have been found in two
graves, but the sex of their owners could not be determined. One
male was provided with a ceremonial dagger, a stone bowl, green
paint and ointment-sticks and a bone scoop.
                                                                                  209
x

Crafts and Trade


                  GREAT NUMBER of objects used in everyday life have been
            A recovered at Catal Hiiyiik, abandoned on the floors of houses as
            successive settlements burnt, broken or thrown away with the swept-
            out domestic rubbish, deposited as offerings to the gods in shrines,
            as funeral-gifts with the dead, or safeguarded in hoards below the
            floor. Owing to the many fires from which people fled for their
            lives, the abandoned material is rich and varied, but one specific
            conflagration, that in which the settlement of Level VI A perished
            c. §880 BC, fiercer than most, led to the preservation of a quantity of
            perishable materials, such as cloth, fur, leather, and wood, which
            are not normally preserved. The terrific heat generated by the burn-
            ing town, which must have smouldered for a long time, penetrated
            to a depth of about a metre or more below the level of the floors,
            carbonising the earth, the bones of the dead and their burial-gifts
            and arrested all bacterial decay. The scorching heat was enough to
            destroy most of the cloth in which the dead were wrapped, but it
            has survived intact below the skeletons.
               As a result of this fire much perishable material is available for
            study and as the fire came at a period in the history of Catal Hiiyiik
            which marked the transition from a society still largely relying on
            wood and basketry for its vessels instead of pottery (which becomes
            common only after the fire, in Level V), this unique evidence is
            extremely valuable. Far too often the archaeologist is forced to
            evaluate a culture from a few broken pots, and tools and weapons
            of stone and bone, which may conceivably present a false or in-
            complete picture. At Catal Hiiyiik it is clear that the crafts of the
            weaver and the woodworker were much more highly esteemed than
            those of the potter or the bone-carver, and one may well wonder
            whether these two crafts have not been generally underrated or at
210
                                                                            Crafts and Trade
  least inadequately represented among the achievements of the
  Neolithic period.
     Very few signs of industry have been found in the priestly quarter
  excavated at Catal Hiiyiik, apart from such normal domestic occupa-
  tions as the preparation of food, the baking of bread and slingstones
  in ovens, the cutting of wood for fuel, awls for the mending of
  clothes and bodkins for the repair of mats and basketry; primary
  occupations which did not need skilled labour.
     On the other hand, there is no evidence that any of the more
  specialized crafts were performed in this quarter—such as the
  chipping of obsidian tools and weapons, the polishing of stone tools,
  the drilling and manufacture of beads, the weaving of cloth, etc. The
  objects found in the houses and shrines of the quarter are all finished
  products, and the area of the workshops where these items were
  made, sold or bartered, must lie somewhere else on the mound. The
  amount of technological specialization at Catal Hiiyiik is one of the
  most striking features of this highly developed society which was
  obviously in the vanguard of Neolithic progress. The result of this
  specialization is equally apparent, for the quality and refinement of
  nearly everything made here is without parallel in the contemporary
  Near East. The priests and priestesses evidently did not bother to
  weave their own cloth or chip their own tools, they went to the
  bazaar and utilized the handiwork of others. Nor did they reap their
_ own grain or spin their wool, and the idea of a home-industry was
  evidently frowned upon by these elegant sophisticates. Out of over
  two hundred rooms we have but one sickle and less than a dozen
  cores of obsidian, a single spindle-whorl and not a single loom-
  weight. However, there was evidence for fourteen cultivated food-
  plants, a great deal of cloth and hundreds of finely finished obsidian
 weapons. Consequently one is better informed about the actual
 artefacts which these people used than about the technology of their
 manufacturing processes, many of which remain to be studied.
 How, for example, did they polish a mirror of obsidian, a hard
 volcanic glass, without scratching it and how did they drill holes
 through stone beads (including obsidian), holes so small that no fine
 modern steel needle can penetrate? When and where did they learn
                                                                                        211
Catal Hiiyiik
                to smelt copper and lead, metals attested at Catal Hiiyiik since Level
                IX, c 6400 Bc? Did they use coal as fuel as well as for making beads
                 and pendants? These and a host of other questions may only be
                 answered when the workshops are found, and perhaps not even then.
Fig. 1             One of the most fascinating tasks is the location of the sources
                tapped by Catal Hiiyiik for its raw materials, for with the exception
                of clay, reeds and wood nearly everything used was made from
                materials not locally available. Even timber for building (oak and
                juniper) does not grow in the plain, but was brought from the hills
                and probably floated down the river. Fir, used for carving wooden
                bowls, was brought from the forests in the Taurus Mountains,
                so were numbers of foodstuffs. Greenstone and volcanic rocks could
                be found somewhat nearer, the first on a low ridge between Cumra
Plate II        and Karaman, the latter on the Karadag, the prominent mountain
                which dominates the centre of the Konya Plain. In its foothills lime-
                stone is also available. Farther east lies a set of volcanoes, still active
                during the Neolithic period; Mekke Dag, Karaca Dag, the twin
Plate I         peaked cone of Hasan Dag and, farthest away to the north-east, the
                giant Erciyes Dag. Obsidian was obtained from some of these vol-
                canoes and it is definitely known to occur on the Karaca and Hasan
                Dag, and near the crater lake of Acigél (Topada). A red obsidian with
                black streaks occurs in a deposit on the Nevsehir road. Which of
                these sources provided the obsidian for Catal Hiiyiik has not yet been
                definitely established, but the main source was probably Hasan Dai.
                Calcite and alabaster probably came from the Kayseri region, fine
                white marble from western Anatolia. Stalactites must have been
                derived from limestone caves known to exist in the Taurus
                Mountains south and west of the plain. The western hills behind
                Konya, rich in brightly coloured iron oxides, may have provided
                a great number of pigments and cinnabar was mined near Sizma,
                north-west of Konya. The provenances of the copper ores, (cuprite,
                malachite, azurite), of haematite, limonite, manganese, galena
                and lignite have not yet been determined, but all these metals
                are common in the Taurus Mountains. Trade with regions further
                south is well attested in the form of Mediterranean shells (especially
                dentalium, but with a sprinkling of cardium, cowrie and whelks),
212
                                                                                 Crafts and Trade
and fine tabular flint, the nearest sources of which lie in the region
of Gaziantep, south of the Taurus Mountains. Good flint is un-
known on the south Anatolian plateau, but there is some cream,
brown, yellow and red chert which was, however, little used at
Catal Hiiyiik.
  The common use of all these rocks and minerals clearly shows that
prospecting and trade formed a most important item of the city’s
economy and undoubtedly contributed appreciably to its wealth and
prosperity. The sources of a great number of rocks are still unknown
or can only be guessed and in this category fall apatite, rock crystal,
carnelian, jasper, chalcedony, and several others.
  The stone industries of Catal Hiiyiik mark the climax of neolithic
chipping and polishing and betray an immensely long ancestry.
Certain tools such as the huge scrapers for cleaning hides are ulti-
mately   derived   from   the Middle     Palaeolithic   flake-industries,
whereas the bulk of tools are made in the blade-industry which first        Mmyy
                                                                              euhaess                  es                ,
appeared in the Upper Palaeolithic at the same time as Homo Sapiens.        ah “ne“ie
                                                                                    mh nisCea

For chipping tools and weapons Neolithic man at Catal Hiiyiik                                                      “a
made predominant use of black obsidian, derived from the volcanoes          it
                                                                            eitha
                                                                                     My,         at Mtlls at
                                                                                                 ih itt ie

whose peaks are visible from the site on a clear day. A certain
                                                                                                 Ai.                 A
                                                                            ii msn Vf) U the
                                                                                         he
                                                                                      Weal
                                                                            rityp)
                                                                                iyipMh eq                     Tie
amount of flint, not locally available, was, however, used and its           a
                                                                             UayenTG
                                                                                      yn
                                                                                       (its earee
                                                                                              Wc
                                                                                                       a Gittiouta
                                                                             ee D) Le,
tougher quality was evidently recognized, for it was employed in the         ta) inn
                                                                                   wy ( Mi
                                                                                                  a           ne




manufacture of daggers with serrated edges, scrapers, firestones (for        aoMd
                                                                               yy Dy a(eee
                                                                                       lil)fe
                                                                                       I    (a


striking fire) and a small number of knives. The sharper but more                yn , Haan
brittle obsidian was fashioned into a great number of tools and                  ¥a

                                                                                 wm)
                                                                                             iHhvi

                                                                                                 ihHae"
                                                                                                       (aul
weapons among which the spearheads, up to 18 cms in length, and                  heBiari
                                                                                 a


two sizes of arrowheads, perhaps suited to a long and short bow,                     >iLe MG
                                                                                     SellyMae
                                                                                      v)
are the finest products. Bifacially pressure-flaked, these weapons                    a “0
                                                                                     yeutjes

rival the finest Solutrean specimens. Unifacial pressure-flaking is                    Me NGtA

found only on the flint daggers which were first ground down to the                        By
                                                                                           mH itroy

required thickness and then flaked to produce a serrated cutting edge.                      ae




These daggers had hilts of wood, sometimes with a pommel of                 54 Ceremonial flint dag-
chalk and one particularly fine ceremonial weapon was provided              ger with bone handle.
                                                                            From a male burial in
with a hilt of bone carved in the shape of a snake with beady eyes and      shrine VI.A.29.                                   See
pointillé incision simulating the reptile’s scales. It was fixed to the     Plate XIV
blade with lime, which may have been mixed with resin, and
                                                                                                                             213
Catal Hiiyiik
                 the final fastening
                                  was done by means of fine twine wound round
                 the lower part of the hilt. Scrapers of all sizes, knives, sickle-blades,
                 gouges, chisels and a few burins make up the rest of the industry.
                 Picks and hoes are absent, borers or piercers rare in stone, their place
                 being taken by thousands of bone awls. Cores, roughouts and raw
                 material occur in hoards, showing that fabrication was done on the
                 site, though evidently not in the quarter excavated. In the latest
                 levels (III and Il) there is a marked decline in the chipped stone
                 industry, which had reached its climax in Levels VII-V, and a few
                 atypical microliths appear. The latter are not only rare, but unusual
                 and without parallel yet their presence does not affect the develop-
                 ment of the industry, which is characterized by large tools and is
                 not microlithic. In fact it is already clear that this industry was
                 derived from an earlier one in obsidian, also characterized by large
                 tools as well as by the total absence of microliths.
                    The polished stone industry is no less developed; obsidian mirrors,
                 carved and polished statuettes, finely ground and perforated mace-
                 heads, fitted with shafts of wood c. 63 cms in length, or shorter
Plate 112        shafts of bone;    polished    stone   bowls,   cosmetic   palettes,   and
                 thousands of fine stone beads show a high technological develop-
                 ment. Saddle querns, rubbing stones, mortars and pestles, polishing
                 stones, rings of stone, bracelets, grooved stones for polishing bone,
                 greenstone axes, adzes and chisels (and also miniatures of these)
                 for fine woodwork abound. Flint axes and adzes are quite unknown.
                 There appear to have been few stones that the Neolithic people of
                 Catal Hiiyiik were not able to work by grinding, polishing and
                 perforating.   The notable exceptions      are granite, gneiss, basalt,
                 diorite and other hard igneous rocks which were not used.
                    The same techniques of grinding and polishing were applied to
                 shell and bone, elements of which are frequently combined with
Plates 103, XV   stone beads in necklaces,     armlets, bracelets and anklets, where
                 possible in striking and harmoniously blended colour-schemes.
Plate 98         Boar tusk was less commonly used, but when found it is often
                 perforated or ornamented with incised geometric designs.
                   Bone tools and implements are very common and range from
                 oval cups and scoops to ladles, spatulae, cosmetic tools (spatulae
214
55 Characteristic wooden
vessels from shrines or
burials in Levels VI A
and VI B. See Plates
105-108




ending in little carved hand forks, ointment sticks, etc.), to pins,     Plates 99, 101, 102
bodkins, awls, punches and polishers for leather working. Antler
toggles and finely polished hooks and eyes for fastening belts have                Plate 100
already been mentioned and bone wrist-guards were used by archers.
Small bone handles may have held copper awls. Incised decoration is
rare on bone tools and ornaments, and in general incision was little
practised. Most of the stone tools must have had wooden, rather than
bone handles, which explains their rarity. Antler was also fairly rare
and was used mainly for toggles and once for making a sickle.
  Wood was widely used; trees were cut with polished greenstone
axes. Adzes and chisels in the same material, used for carpentry, are
abundant and all timber at Catal Hiiyiik, oak or juniper, was
squared, not only the roof beams and the posts but also the ladders.
Wooden vessels were cut with stone tools out of fir and possibly
other soft woods. The Neolithic woodworkers created a sophis-
ticated set of wooden vessels: great meat dishes 50 cms in length                    Fig. 55
with carved handles, oval bowls with ledge handles, deep or shallow         Plates 106, 108
round bowls and dishes, boat-shaped vessels, sauceboats and an egg-               Plate 107
cup. Small boxes occur in many varieties, each with a well-fitting
lid. These may be square, oblong or oval and frequently have small                Plate 105
lugs, a knob on the lid and sometimes relief decoration. Others again
were painted red.
                                                                                        ais
Catal Hiiyiik
                  It is clear from the pottery shapes that throughout the Neolithic
                period at Catal Hiiyiik pottery occupied a secondary position and
                was unable to free itself completely from hitherto current shapes in
                wood and basketry. As late as Level II (c. 5750-5700 Bc) a fair number
                of pottery shapes are angular and wooden, imitate wooden boxes,
                or have wooden feet. This shows conclusively that wooden vessels
                continued to be made side by side with the pottery until the end of
                the settlement, and there is d priori no reason why woodworking
                should have declined. Generally the importance of ceramic produc-
                tion in the Neolithic has probably been greatly overrated. It was a
                technological advance like any other and was no doubt useful for
                cooking, but it was easily breakable, hard to transport, in these early
                phases not so easy to fire well and aesthetically not very attractive.
                It is only in the later part of the Neolithic that improved firing
                conditions led to the production of cream coloured wares, which in
                the immediately following period, the Early Chalcolithic, were
                lavishly decorated with painted designs. The few streaks and bands of
                paint on light coloured pots, that make a sporadic appearance since
                Catal Hiiyiik Level III, showed little promise of the spectacular
                painted pottery that was to come.
                   The monochrome Neolithic pottery of Catal Hiiyiik is made
                from a fine grit-tempered clay (usually without any straw). It was
                built up in coils on a flat base and the walls of the vessel were after-
                wards thinned out by paddle and anvil method, which involved
                beating the clay walls with a wooden paddle against a wooden block
                held inside the pot. When leather hard, the pot was burnished with
                apiece of bone or a pebble to reduce porosity and producea fine shine
                when fired. The firing was apparently done in a bread oven or in a
                closed kiln with separate firing chamber of which two were found in
                Level VI. With the exception of a few bowls in Levels IV-II which
                have simple horizontal incised lines (without white fill) along the
                rim, the Catal Hiiyiik pottery is not decorated. Impressed designs,
                roulette impressions or combing with the edge of a cardium shell,
                barbotine pattern, etc., characteristic of a small proportion of the
                contemporary neolithic pottery of Mersin, Tarsus, Ras Shamra, etc.,
                on the coasts of Cilicia and North Syria, is unknown on the Anatolian
216
                                                                          Crafts and Trade
Plateau or on the coast of Pamphylia, where similar Neolithic wares
occur in a number of caves and rock-shelters.
   The colour of this Catal Hiiyiik neolithic pottery varies consider-
ably: most of the hole-mouth cooking-pots, exposed to fire, are              Plates 109, 110
dark grey or brownish black and a number of bowls show the same
colours. Others are red, buff, light grey, beige and orange as early as
Levels X and IX, when this pottery is first found. Some of the coarse
ware is brick red (Levels X-IX), but it is confined to these early
levels. To call this pottery (as has been done) ‘Dark burnished ware’
or ‘Syro-Cicilian’ is inaccurate, for much of it is light in colour and
its distribution is not confined to the north-eastern corner of the
Mediterranean, but includes the entire south Anatolian Plateau.
   It is clear that the beginnings of pottery manufacture have not
yet been reached at Catal Hiiyiik, where it has been found down to
Level XIII in 1965. From Level V onwards pottery is regularly
found in every house and it gradually increases both in quantity
and quality as time goes on. Lighter-coloured wares increase,
often with fine mottled surfaces and more elegant shapes and by
the end of Level II, c. 5700 Bc, cream-coloured bowls are com-
mon, painting begins and tubular vertically placed lugs make their
first appearance. The cooking-pots show little change in shape from
Level X to Level I, but their lugs gradually change to crescentic
ledge handles. Bases are usually flat, but ring and disc bases occur
early and some of the later vessels have four elegant L shaped feet.               Plate 111
    Clay balls, baked in ovens, and clay figurines of human beings
and animals were common and some of these balls bear incised
decoration. Baked clay was also used for the production of beads
and pendants, slingstones, stamp-seals and statuettes at least from
Level VI B onwards, i.e. after 6000 BC.
   Particularly interesting is the use of copper and lead, in the form
 of beads and pendants, tubes and other trinkets, as early as Level IX,             Plate 104
 c. 6400 BC. Finds of copper and lead beads occur in nearly every
 building-level and it would not be surprising if gold and silver were
 also known, even though they have not yet been found or recog-
 nized. A lump of slag from Level VI A has shown upon analysis that
 copper was being extracted from its ore and the presence of lead,
                                                                                         207
Catal Hiiyiik
                which occurs in Anatolia as galena, implies smelting as early as Level
                IX. Other copper beads have been produced from native copper
                which occurs, for example, in quantity at Ergani Maden, north of
                Diyarbakir, and probably elsewhere in Anatolia. The presence of a
                copper awl, 4 cms in length in a stratified position in the lower levels
                of the village site of Suberde, some fifty miles south-west of Catal
                Hiiyiik at a date roughly comparable to Catal Hiiyiik X-VI, throws
                interesting light on the spread of metal-working even to the villages
                surrounding the Konya Plain. The beads were made from thin
                hammered copper sheets rolled up, but it is not yet clear whether
                heat was applied to facilitate this. Further analyses are in progress.
                   The evidence for weaving at Catal Hiiyiik is manifold; clay or
                silica imprints of mats and baskets and carbonized remains of the
                same; wall-paintings showing goddesses in richly coloured and
                patterned garments, and men in white loin-cloths; statuettes wearing
                fringed garments and finally numerous fragments of woven cloth,
                felt, string, thread and rope of plant fibre.
                   Spirally-worked coiled baskets are common in all levels and in a
                deposit of grain some actual fragments of thin plant stems, possibly
                cereal straw, sewn or tied with grass blades, were found in Level IV.
                The basketry technique used here consisted of taking a continuous
                strip or bundle of regular thickness of straw or other plant-stems
                and tying them together in spiral coils by means of bast or other
                flexible material, so that each turn of the bast around the bundle is
                connected with the previous ring and finally the straw is completely
                covered by the bast. In this way it is possible to build up a tight
                container, just as pottery may be built up from a consecutive series of
                strips of clay. The two techniques are, in fact, closely related.
Plate 120          Rush carpets covered numerous floors and most are woven in a
                pattern of quadruple warp and weft of very fine rushes or marsh
                grass. In the carbonized state the stems are no more than a millimetre
                thick. Others were coarser. In a number of cases it could be estab-
                lished that the mats were woven with a pattern ‘placed diagonally
                to the outer edge. It is worth noting that the same patterns are woven
                in mats to this day in the village of the Konya Plain and elsewhere in
                southern Anatolia.
218
                                                                           Crafts and Trade
   Baskets were used for a great variety of purposes; for the collec-
tion and storage of food, as grain bins, for the safe keeping of mirrors
and rouge and as containers for the skeletons of children and even
adults. Some were provided with lids.
   The fragments of fine woven cloth from the burnt burials of
Level VI show great technical skill and have been studied by Mr
Harold Burnham of the Department of Textiles in the Royal
Ontario Museum. His report is not yet available at the time of
writing, so that the notes which follow are of a preliminary nature.
Owing to the carbonization of the material we are unfortunately not
yet certain whether the fibre used was wool or mohair, perhaps both
were used. The possibility that the material was linen, i.e. flax fibre,
can be discarded as flax was not grown at Catal Hiiyiik, nor any-
where else before c. 5000 Bc, which is far too late for a potential
import. The yarn used is two-ply, i.e. two spun threads wound
around each other. No selvage has been preserved, but there is a fine
piece of a twined heading cord on a large fragment of plain tabby
weave, found inside a human skull. Whereas most of the pieces show
a fine plain weave, there are others with a widely spaced weft,                    Plate 118
producing a shawl-like textile. Still others show knotting resembling
a fish-net pattern. Cloth tapes are also found and a young woman                   Plate 116
buried in shrine VI.A.25 wore a string skirt, the ends of which were
encased in small copper tubes for weighting it. Fringes are also                   Plate 117
commonly found and a small statuette from Level II shows a short                    Plate 87
skirt with a fringe above and below. One piece of cloth was mended
and the sewn edge was clearly visible; the stitch was rather coarse.
  All the cloth being carbonized, no traces of colour have survived,
but as several of the goddess reliefs show brightly coloured and
patterned garments, such must have existed. Evidence for red thread
has survived in a number of broken beads, the perforations of which
are still stained red. As there was no red ochre present in the grave,
this colour must have come from the thread. The abundance of
kilim patterns painted on the walls of shrines likewise suggests
that gaudily coloured woven rugs were as common a feature of the
Neolithic period in Anatolia as they are now. All this evidence
suggests that dyeing was well known and some of the commonest
                                                                                        219
Catal Hiiyiik
                           weeds in the neighbourhood of Catal Hiiyiik are madder (Rubia
                           tinctorum), woad (Isatis tinctoria) and weld (Reseda luteola), which
                           yield a deep red, a blue and a strong yellow respectively. Bedstraw,
                           dock and others, also found in the plain, are well known dye-
Plate 121; Fig. 56         producing plants. The numerous stamp-seals of baked clay bearing
                           intricate designs of spirals and meanders on shapes which include
                           quatrefoils or flowers and human hands, may have been used to
                           stamp patterns on cloth and need not have been used solely to paint
                           the human skin. None retain any traces of colour, which is not sur-
                           prising, for a vegetable dye is more subject to decay than the mineral
                           pigments of the wall-paintings. That cloth was indeed stamped with
                           coloured patterns is suggested by some wall-paintings in shrine
                           IIl.8 which includes numerous quatrefoils, or those of Early Chal-
                           colithic Can Hasan decorated with pseudo-meanders like many of
                           our seals. Already appearing in Level VI, the most elaborately
                           decorated ones derive from Levels IV, II and II.
                              Apart from garments of woven cloth, animal-skins and fur were
                           certainly worn as is indicated by numerous wall-paintings, statuettes
                           and fragments in the graves. Leopard-skins were particularly in
56 Stamp seals of baked    favour, a fashion that has lasted to the present day. Bonnets were
clay with decorative
patiens  from Levels       WOLD, raebut we * have no evidence
                                                        id    ree»             Lek
                                                               for footwear, which        babl
                                                                                   was probably
VI-II. See Plate 121      | ™made of leather and much needed on the snow-covered wintry
                           plateau. Belts were probably made of the same material, but no
                           fragments have survived; however, one dagger was still found in its
                           leather sheath. Tanning may have been known for acorns, brought
                           from the hills, are numerous. Slings were probably of leather and
                           bowstrings were probably made from animal gut.
                              The excellent preservation of perishable materials at this site offers
                           great hopes for further interesting finds when the excavations can be
                           continued.
                                                                            XI

                                          The People and their Economy

Gis. BASIS FOR the spectacular development of the Neolithic at
     Catal Hiiyiik was evidently laid by efficiently organized food
production and conservation. That the Neolithic people of this site
had successfully established their ‘Neolithic Revolution’ which
meant freedom from hunger, is proved by abundant evidence. In
fact, few other sites have preserved such an abundance and variety of
foodstuffs and from the sheer size of the as yet uninvestigated
aceramic Neolithic mound it is reasonable to conjecture that the
same sort of conditions which we find from c. 6500 Bc (Level X)
onwards had prevailed for at least a millennium before, if not con-
siderably earlier. We are still ignorant of the ecological factors
involved in the establishment of the first settlement in the plain, in an
area which, as Dr Hans Helbaek has shown, cannot have provided by
any stretch of imagination the wild progenitor of all forms of barley,
the two-row Hordeum spontaneum or the progenitor of emmer,
Triticum dicoccoides. Everything indicates that the plant husbandry of
Catal Hiiyiik must have a long prehistory somewhere else, in a
region where the wild ancestors of these plants were at home,
presumably in hilly country, well away from the man-made en-
vironment of the Konya Plain. If we may theorize for a little, this
statement of the eminent palaeobotanist implies that agriculture was
introduced into the plain, not just before Level X, about the middle
of the seventh millennium, but much earlier at the time when
Catal Hiiyiik was founded. Such agricultural beginnings must have
started long before the moment at which the first carbonized remains
of grains and small legumes make their appearance in the settlements
of the Near East, around 7000 Bc at aceramic Hacilar 5 in Anatolia,
at Beidha VI near Petra and in the Bus Mordeh period of the settle-
ment of Alikosh on the edge of the lowlands of Khuzistan. Even
                                                                             221
Catal Hiiyiik
                those simple patterns of agriculture show a consistent specialization
                with hulled two-row barley as the main crop, emmer (Triticum
                dicoccum) cultivated or wild, coming second, some wild einkorn,
                lentils, pea or vetch as legumes and pistachio and acorns. The
                beginnings must be sought in the Natufian of Palestine, the still
                unknown earlier aceramic of the Anatolian Plateau, and in Khuzistan.
                This will take one into a ‘Protoneolithic’ period which began at the
                end of the Pleistocene, archaeologically speaking just after the end of
                the Upper Palaeolithic.
                   No study has been made of the ecological and climatic conditions
                prevailing at the end of the Upper Palaeolithic on the Anatolian
                Plateau, butJ.Birman informed the author in 1963 that he had found
                definite evidence on the Anatolian Plateau, including the mountain
                ranges of the Taurus which surround the Konya Plain, for a Last
                Glacial relapse and a minor readvance of ice during the Younger
                Dryas of Western Europe (c. 8850-8300 Bc). K. W. Butzer in his
                Environment and archaeology (Chicago, 1964, pp. 425-6), argues that
                this final cold period probably did not pass unnoticed in the Near
                East, producing for example, evidence for moister climate in Palestine
                and Egypt during part or all of the Natufian period. The rather
                modest temperature changes (1-3° C) would not have been significant
                for human habitation, but the depression of the snow line may have
                had its effect on the distribution of wild cereals which may have been
                excluded from certain regions. Modern conditions would not have
                prevailed until c. 8000 Bc, which is very much the same time-range
                that may be indicated for the beginnings of agriculture in Anatolia at
                the end of the Palaeolithic. This period saw not only the first estab-
                lishment of the “Protoneolithic’ village of Jericho, dated by C-14
                before 8000 Bc but also of contact with Anatolia, from which the
                first obsidian was exported to Jericho, a contact that was maintained
                throughout the eighth millennium (Jericho Pre-pottery Neolithic A).
                Perhaps the first agricultural settlements started to appear in Anatolia
                as in Palestine after c. 8300 Bc, perhaps in the eastern hill-zone beyond
                the Konya Plain where lie the sources of obsidian. This is, of course,
                pure speculation, not as yet based on any firmly established facts,
                but the practices of early agriculture, the traditional wooden-house
222
                                                              The People and their Economy
architecture of Catal Hiiyiik, and likewise the commercial and perhaps
ritual importance of obsidian may point to this hilly region.
   The conquest of the plain must, as Helbaek has pointed out, come
later. Its exact date is unknown, but man by then was able to intro-
duce agriculture into a new environment, where seeds were sown in
the flood pools of the Carsamba river which drains from the great
mountain lakes of Beysehir and Sufla into the fertile alluvial plain
around Cumra. As late as 6000 Bc the Konya Plain teemed with wild
life and both the zoologists who have studied our material, Dexter
Perkins Jr and Pierre Ducos regard the plain as a favourable eco-
logical niche which produced maximum size in such species as
aurochs (Bos primigenius), a pig (Sus scrofa) and Red Deer (Cervus
elaphus). Perhaps it was the presence of great herds of these desirable
animals that attracted man to the grasslands of the plain. However
that may be, considerable ecological differences are marked in the
seventh millennium sc between the animals of the plain and those
living round the intramontane lake of Sugla near Seydisehir, as
revealed by the recent excavations of J. Bordaz at the village site of
Suberde. Here 90 per cent of the animal-bones belonged to wild
sheep, pig and Red Deer, the remaining 10 per cent being aurochs,
goat, wolf, fox and tortoise. A small race of pigs, different from the
gigantic species of the Konya Plain, is perhaps the only animal that may
have been domesticated. At Catal Hiiyiik on the other hand domestic
sheep and goat occur even in the lowest layers, but pigs are not
domesticated and the possibility of domestication of the aurochs
cannot yet be proved statistically. In the microlithic obsidian and
flint industry of Suberde the great hunting weapons of Catal Hiiyiik
are conspicuous by their absence and even the arrowheads are differ-
ent. Evidently the hunting of large game was less a feature of Neo-
lithic life in this village than it was at Catal Hiiyiik where the main
quarry was formed by the herds of aurochs, wild pig, and Red Deer.
Two species of wild ass, wild sheep, Roe Deer, Fallow Deer, an
occasional gazelle, fox, wolf, and leopards were also hunted. No
bones of lion have yet been found, but there may be some bear.
A wall-painting is not the only evidence for domestic dog. Birds and
fish were also caught but they were obviously less prized; of snails
                                                                                       223
Catal Hiiyiik
                there is no trace. The people of Catal Hiiyiik then made good use of
                the hunter’s paradise of the Konya Plain and it is of interest to note
                that, as time went on, it became more and more difficult to find large
                horn-cores for ritual purposes. The horns used after Level V are
                very small compared to the enormous ones so common in Levels
                VII and VI. The same rarity of large specimens may have led to a
                reduction in the size of spearheads and arrowheads which is notable
                after Level V and finally to the decline of the stone industry in Levels
                III and II after which incidentally, the wall-paintings disappear.
                   Compared to the simple agricultural products of aceramic Hacilar
                5, enormous progress was made at Catal Hiiyiik during the seventh
                millennium. By Level VI, c. 6000 Bc, not less than fourteen food-
                plants were cultivated. Many more species have been identified, but
                those mentioned here are the economically important ones. The
                principal crops were emmer, einkorn, naked six-row barley and pea,
                all occurring in great quantities from Levels VI-II. Bread-wheat
                (Triticum aestivum) also makes its first appearance in Catal Hiiyiik VI.
                The field pea was more common than the purple pea (Pisum elatius)
                and lentil. A species of vetch (Vicia noena) and cultivated bitter vetch
                (Ervum ervilia) also appear in Level VI. Two cruciferous plants,
                Shepherd’s Purse (Capsella bursapastoris) and the salt-loving Erysimum
                sisymbrioides were grown as sources of plant fat equivalent to the
                gathering and cultivation of linseed in more easterly areas at a later
                date. Among fruit seeds brought from the hills, presumably the
                Taurus Mountains in the south, were almonds, acorns, pistachio
                (Pistacia atlantica), apple, juniper and hackberry (Celtis australis). The
                latter occurring even in the deepest levels of Catal Hiiyiik, was
                apparently used for making wine. Many weeds provide indications of
                the conditions prevailing in the Konya Plain some eight thousand
                years ago and salt-loving species already show that salinity was a
                feature of the Cumra area as it is now.
                   It may be of interest to speculate about other kinds of food. Bever-
                ages such as beer and wine were evidently known, but grapes and
                olives do not appear to have been domesticated till the fourth or
                even third millennium. The acid in the caps of acorns is used today to
                start the process of making yoghurt, and domestic sheep and goats
224
                                                            The People and their Economy
  were evidently kept for their milk and fleece as much as for their
  meat. When     butter and cheese, sour buttermilk or ayran were
  invented we shall probably never know, but they may well be
  Neolithic. Salt, a necessity in the preparation of vegetable foods, was
  easy enough to find in the Konya Plain and the Neolithic station of
  Ilicapmar on a small salt-lake to the south-west of the Tuz Golii
  may have been a trading post specializing in salt export. The paint-
  ings of insects hovering over fields of flowers conceivably suggests
  that honey was known. Other sweetening agents are to this day
  extracted from the bark of trees by nomads in southern Anatolia.
  Resins and birch bark may have been used for fastening tools and
  weapons on to shafts and into handles; bitumen is unknown on the
  Anatolian plateau.
     Of the Neolithic population of Catal Hiiyiik nothing definite can
  be said until the skeletons have been studied by Mlle Denise Ferem-
bach and Professor Lawrence Angel. The following preliminary
  notes are derived from the observations of Mr D. Biernoff. The
  population of Catal Hiiyiik appears to have been of two different
  races (recognized by Mlle Ferembach), dolichocephalic Proto-
  Mediterranean and another brachycephalic element, and of fairly
  tall stature. The average for women being between 5ft and sft gins,
  that for men between sft gins and sft roins with few individuals
  in the extreme brackets. Few people seem to have been more
  than forty years old. There are no individuals among the burials
  that showed signs of violent death, nor is any skull trephined.
  A few individuals show broken limbs, signs of arthritis and caries of
 the teeth. On the whole, however, dentition is excellent. Childbirth,
 fevers, and pneumonia are suggested as the main causes of death, not
 degenerative diseases. Among the skeletons women and children far
 outnumber men. These observations are subject to confirmation.
    Not much can be said about the Neolithic social structure as the
 excavations have revealed only the religious quarter. The position of
 women was obviously an important one in an agricultural society
 with a fertility cult in which a goddess was the principal deity.
 Social inequality is suggested by sizes of buildings, equipment and
 burial gifts, but this is never a glaring one, Full-time specialization
                                                                                    225


       PRIZONA STATE MUSEUM LIBRARY . TUCSON. AZ
Catal Hiiytik
                is fairly obvious and the workshops lay elsewhere on the mound.
                The variety of arts and crafts practised at Catal Hiiyiik is nearly as
                great as that of the developed civilizations of the Early Bronze Age.
                Only the arts of book-keeping or writing and music are not repre-
                sented among the finds. The existence of an ordered pattern of society
                is evident from the stereotyped house plans, from the standard
                features and equipment and a strong conservatism is shown by the
                frequent rebuildings on the same plan, the strict architectural lay-
                out and the very few changes that can be observed in the culture
                over a period of some eight hundred years.
                   In contrast to other contemporary Neolithic cultures, CatalHiiyiik
                preserved a number of traditions that seem archaic in a fully devel-
                oped Neolithic society. The art of wall-painting, the reliefs modelled
                in clay or cut out of the wall-plaster, the naturalistic representa-
                tions of animals, human figures and deities, the occasional use of
                finger-impressed clay designs like ‘macaroni,’ the developed use of
                geometric ornament including spirals and meanders, incised on seals
                or transferred to a new medium of weaving; the modelling of
                animals wounded in hunting-rites, the practice of red-ochre burials,
                the archaic amulets in the form of a bird-like steatopygous goddess,
                and finally certain types of stone tools and the preference for dental-
                ium shells in jewellery, all preserve remains of an Upper Palaeolithic
                heritage. To a greater or lesser extent, such archaic elements are also
                traceable in a number of other post-Palacolithic cultures, such as the
                Natufian of Palestine, but nowhere are they so pronounced as in the
                Neolithic of Catal Hiiyiik. The reason for the continuance of such
                Upper Palaeolithic practices there may be due to a strong conserva-
                tism but one suspects that it had its origin in the very important part
                that hunting continued to play in the economy of the Konya Plain.
                In view of all these survivals one is inclined to believe that this civili-
                zation is descended from an Upper Palaeolithic, probably Anatolian,
                of which hardly anything is known. It would be premature to
                speculate further about the ancestry of Catal Hiiyiik until excavation
                has been carried further, nor would a comparison with contemporary
                cultures in the Near East be of any profit as long as so much inter-
                vening territory remains to be explored, and other key-sites remain
226
                                                         The People and their Economy
unpublished. To describe the impact of this Neolithic civilization
on its neighbours and successors, both in Anatolia and the adjacent
countries of south-eastern Europe would demand another volume.
Dr Hans Helbaek is now in a position to show that it was the agri-
cultural development of Neolithic Anatolia that was responsible for
the spread of agriculture into Europe, preparing the way for the
beginning of European civilization which is our common heritage.
   Seen in this light, the Neolithic civilization of Catal Hiiyiik
represents something unique in the long history of human en-
deavours: a link between the remote hunters of the Upper Palaco-
lithic and the new order of food-production that was the basis of all
our civilization.
   Our task is not yet done; at least a decade of continuing work lies
ahead. It is to be hoped that, with the co-operation of the Turkish
authorities, the excavation of the earliest town of Anatolia and one of
the earliest in the world, may shortly be resumed. Meanwhile,
something of that town’s remarkable quality is here presented as a
foretaste of further discovery.




                                                                                  227
