     to proceed in phases, which may sometimes be described loosely
and even cynically as fashions. Archaeology, the objective study of
that human and therefore somewhat temperamental subject, Man-
kind, is not free from this foible. These ‘fashions’, however, are not
merely a matter of whimsy; basically, they are often responses to
advancing techniques and mark the intermittent and sometimes
abruptly rising escalation of understanding. The present book,
viewed in perspective, represents one of these upward steps.
   Away back in the 1870's, Schliemann dramatically elevated the
world remembered by Homer into a subject capable of material
study. Troy, Mycenae, Agamemnon began to live not only in
Homeric verse but in terms of battlements and burials which, in
death and decay, gave a new life to epic tradition. This was
the romantic era of archaeology. The detailed correctness of
the new picture is not here in question; the broad likeness
having been achieved, lesser men have filled in the hands and
feet—it is their job. Later, Sir Arthur Evans in Crete began to
paint in the prehistoric background of Homer and, with
gradually advancing skill, depicted an imaginative dawn of
Mediterranean and European civilization. The wider functions
and capacities of archaeology were becoming plain for all
to see.
  But, unregarded by Evans, in the year (1900) in which the excava-
tion of his Minoan Crete began, there died in Dorset a certain
General Pitt Rivers who for twenty years, amidst the scrubby
vestiges of prehistoric and peripheral Britain, had been quietly and
industriously elaborating archaeological techniques. These, another
twenty years after his death, were to begin the scientific revolution
Catal Hiiyiik
                of his craft and were to lead, whether consciously or subconsciously,
                to the two decades of technical advance which marked the inter-
                war period. Between 1920 and 1940 there was a sudden blossoming
                of understanding. This included but was not confined to a new
                appreciation of ‘stratification’, a phenomenon already recognized a
                century earlier by geologists. It comprised also a general realization
                of the importance of environment in human progress; the recon-
                struction of the natural surroundings which, in great variety, had
                challenged Man and stimulated his advancement. The re-creation,
                for example, of vegetation and climate in various places and periods
                and on various soils was developed by the analysis of ancient
                deposits of pollen. Soil-maps and vegetation-maps began to give an
                enlarged meaning to human distributions, static or mobile.
                  And then, after the Second World War, there was another leap
                forward. New scientific aids of one kind and another came to the
                help of the archaeologist and threatened to turn archaeology itself
                into a science. At least they prepared, in anticipation, to turn the
                postulate of “Two Cultures’—the sciences on the one hand as apart
                from the humanities on the other—into nonsense ten years before
                it was proclaimed at Cambridge in the Rede Lecture of 1959. Above
                all, in 1949 Libby’s announcement of the radiocarbon (C-14) method
                of dating organic materials had given archaeology a powerful new
                scientific instrument for establishing a rough-and-ready chronology
                back to something like 50,000 years before the advent of writing,
                and so opened up a whole series of new horizons in the human
                achievement.
                   This ingenious by-product of nuclear research was promptly
                turned to good if sometimes unskilled use. It was now possible to
                interrelate cultures and civilizations intelligently with one another
                and with the present; ages unknown to history or to viable legend,
                and inadequately related by stratigraphy alone, took on a new mean-
                ing. Archaeology had indeed entered upon a fresh and revealing
                phase for which ‘fashion’ is a wholly inadequate term; to define it
                narrowly, the C-14 phase.
                   And the backward reach of the C-14 technique is happily sufficient
                to cover the most vital over-all period of human endeavour; that in
                                                                     General Editor's Preface
which Man at last learned, in addition to gathering food, to produce
it; thus almost indefinitely enlarging the potential size of the social
unit and providing the essential basis of civilization, the ability to
live in towns and cities.
  In so far as the Eurasian zone is concerned, the focus of this
greatest of all human achievements proclaims its own geographical
terms. The wild prototypes of the principal Eurasian herd-animals
(goats, sheep, cattle) and edible grasses (wheat, barley) occur or have
occurred roughly between the Himalayas and the Mediterranean.
Within that area, therefore, it may be supposed that the earlier
attempts at domestication and cultivation took shape: always with
the proviso that in other parts of the world—in the Western if not
in the Eastern Hemisphere—equivalent advances may, at one time
or another, have been independently achieved. And within that
considerable Near Eastern and Middle Eastern region with which we
are here concerned it is apparent that the earlier advances were
liable to be located in the foothills; those, for example, of northern
Iraq, Palestine, and southern Anatolia. This is altogether natural, since
the circumscribed shelter of the semi-upland valley matched the size
and capacity of the small societies which were still inevitably in the
earlier stages of food-production. Only the confident development
of food-producing techniques could be expected to result in a social
expansion commensurate with the formidable problems presented
by the great riverine plains.
   And here Catal Hityiik comes vividly into the picture. It lies upon
an accessible and fertile landscape at a height of 3,000 feet above
sea-level, and consists of two riverside mounds, the larger of which
is 32 acres in extent. Thus by the seventh millennium, the age to
which the earlier excavated strata are shown by C-14 evidence to
belong, the settlement was of very substantial size, fully worthy of
the urban designation which Mr Mellaart has given to it. As a fully-
fledged town at that early date—three or four millennia before the
famous cities of Mesopotamia—it is of more than professional
interest. After its primary precursor, the eighth-millennium walled
oasis-town ofJericho inJordan, it occupies a sort of midway position
in the emergence of Civilized Man. As such, it may fairly be regarded
Catal Hiiyiik
                as something more than just another archaeological excavation; it
                represents an outstanding human accomplishment in the upward
                grade of social development, and may be expected therefore to be
                of general interest even to a modern age which may have lost
                something of the easy Victorian certainty of Progress.
                   The present moment is opportune for the publication of the
                results of the three seasons of excavation to which the site has been
                submitted. The first stage of the work may now be claimed to have
                ended, and some delay is inevitable before digging is continued.
                Meanwhile a reasonably complete presentation of the remarkable
                and sometimes bizarre results of the excavation to date is desirable
                in a form more congenial to the reader than the technical reports in
                Anatolian Studies can be expected to be. And there is ample material
                for this more general approach. Apart from the important contribu-
                tion which Catal Hiiyiikk has made in the wider context of human
                studies, the idiosyncracies of its inhabitants give it a personality of
                some special local and individual interest. The strange character of
                its closely packed buildings, into which in the absence of doorways
                the visitor presumably ascended or descended by ladder; the
                numerous shrines with their remarkable furnishings; and above all
                the curious and sometimes a trifle macabre artistry which doubtless
                reflects a religious thinking as involved and inscrutable as illiterate
                (if not literate) religions are bound to be—all these and other per-
                sonalia combine to illustrate a community of an entertainingly
                esoteric kind. In one way and another Mr Mellaart’s work is here
                offered as a notable contribution alike to the single-mindedness and
                the diversity of civilization in remote perspective.
                                                                 MortTIMER WHEELER




Io
                                  Foreword and Acknowledgements


Bea EXCAVATIONS conducted by the author at Catal Hiiyiik
  from 1961 to 1963 with the generous support of a number of
learned bodies in Britain, the Commonwealth and America have
revealed a new and unexpected chapter in the history of Anatolia.
   Catal Hiiyiik has proved to be not only a major neolithic site,
yielding rich evidence of a remarkably advanced civilization that
flourished on the Anatolian Plateau in the seventh and early sixth
millennium sc, but it was also the centre of art in a period that
hitherto had been regarded as inartistic. Catal Hiiyiik is remarkable
for its wall-paintings and plaster reliefs, its sculpture in stone and
clay as well as for its advanced technology in the crafts of weaving,
woodwork, metallurgy and obsidian working. Its numerous
sanctuaries testify to an advanced religion, complete with symbolism
and mythology;     its buildings to the birth of architecture and
conscious planning; its economy to advanced practices in agri-
culture and stockbreeding, and its numerous imports to a flourishing
trade in raw materials.
   This book is an account of the first three seasons of work at this
promising site and a summary of what has been learnt about it
through the patient recording by a large team of archaeologists
assisted by natural scientists.
   The excavations were made possible through the generous support
of the following institutions and benefactors:

  The British Academy,
  The University of London, Institute of Archaeology,
  The University of Edinburgh,
  The Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, Canada,
  The Australian Institute of Archaeology,
                                                                         II
Catal Hiiyiik
                  Christchurch University, New Zealand,
                  The British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara,
                  The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research,
                    New York,
                  The Bollingen Foundation, New York,
                  The Ny Carlsberg Foundation, Copenhagen,
                  The late Francis Neilson, Esq.
                  W. J. Beasley, Esq.
                  The Earl of Crawford and Balcarres,
                  W.E. D. Allen, Esq.
                  and a number of anonymous donations.

                Technical aid to the expedition was provided by the German
                Archaeological Institute, Istanbul; Shell, Ankara; BP (Aegean Ltd.)
                Istanbul; and the Conservation Department of the Institute of
                Archaeology, University of London.
                   The expedition has profited much from collaboration with natural
                scientists: Dr Hans Helbaek (National Museum, Copenhagen),
                palaeo-botanist; Dr Dexter Perkins, Jr, zoologist; Mlle Denise
                Ferembach (Institut de Paléontologie Humaine, Paris), physical
                anthropologist; Dr H. Burnham (Royal Ontario Museum), textile
                expert; Professor R. Pittioni and his team of metallurgists at Vienna;
                Mr H. Hodges (Institute of Archaeology, London), conservation and
                Professor A. Berkel (Forestry Dept, University of Istanbul) and
                E. Tellerup, Esq., (Copenhagen) for wood analysis. Other analyses
                have been carried out by Dr S. J. Rees-Jones of the Courtauld
                Institute, London (pigments); Dr G. F. Claringbull (Department of
                Minerology, British Museum, Natural History), Dr I. C. J. Gal-
                braith (Department of Ornithology, British Museum, Natural
                History); the Rev. H. E. J. Biggs (Department of Malacology,
                British Museum, Natural History); the Radiocarbon Laboratories of
                the University of Pennsylvania (Dr E. K. Ralph), and the Centre
                National de Recherches Scientifiques at Gif-sur-Yvette, near Paris.
                Analyses of obsidian were made by Mr Colin Renfrew (Cambridge).
                The flint and obsidian industry was studied by Mr Perry Bialor
                and Mr Peder Mortensen.
I2
                                                   Foreword and Acknowledgements
  During the excavations Mrs M. A. Mellaart and Mr Ian Todd
were the photographers; Mr Peter Winchester, Mr N. Alcock and
Miss P. Quinn the architect-surveyors; Miss Anne Louise Stock-
dale and Mrs Grace Huxtable the artists; and conservation was
entrusted to Dr Hans Helbaek, Miss Fiona Greig, Mrs D. Biernoff
and Miss Viola Pemberton-Piggott. During the summer and autumn
of 1964 Mr H. Hodges, Miss M. White, Miss T. Martin, Miss P.
Pratt and Miss V. Pemberton-Piggott worked on the conservation
of wall-paintings from Catal Hiiyiik in the Archaeological Museum,
Ankara.
   Archaeological field assistants at Catal Hiiyiik included: Miss
Diana Kirkbride (now Mrs Hans Helbaek), Mr Ian Todd, Mr D.
Biernoff, Mr John Farrar, Mr Mark Davie, Miss Birsen Giiloglu,
Mr Refik Duru and Mr J. Yakar. Mr Ali Riza Biiyiiklevent, Mr
Behcet Erdal and Mr Hayrettin Solmaz acted as representatives of
the Turkish Government.
   It is a pleasant duty to express my gratitude to all these institutions,
benefactors, scientists, scholars and assistants, who have thus con-
tributed to the success of the Catal Hiiyiik expedition and without
whose support this book would not have been written.
   We are not less indebted to the Turkish Department of Anti-
quities and Bay Riistem Duyuran, then its Director and to Bay
Mehmet Onder, the present Director, then Director of the Konya
Museums; to Bay Rebii Karatekin, Vali of Konya and Bay Adnan
Kizildagh, Kaymakam of Cumra and numerous other local
Turkish authorities, for their help and assistance, hospitality and
interest.
  And finally, we thank our labour force, veterans of Beycesultan
and Hacilar, or newcomers from Kiiciikkéy, our foreman Veli
Karaaslan and our ustas Rifat Celimli, Mustafa Duman and Bekir
Kalayci, for their skill, experience and devotion.
  Preliminary reports on the Catal Hiiyiik excavations have been
published annually in Anatolian Studies (vols XII, 1962; XIII, 1963;
XIV, 1964) as well as in the following journals: Illustrated London
News, New Scientist, Archaeology, Horizon, Scientific American, Science
et Avenir, and Archaeologische Anzeiger. An exhibition of copies of
                                                                              13
Catal Hiiyiik
                Catal Hiiyiik wall-paintings was held at the Institute of Archaeology
                at London; in the Jewish Museum, New York, and at the Royal
                Ontario Museum, and some of our finds have toured Western
                Europe with the exhibition of treasures from the Ankara Museum,
                where all our finds are kept.
                  Academic response to the Catal Hiiyiik discoveries has been great
                and public lectures were given at Istanbul, Athens, Nicosia, Beirut,
                Amman, Jerusalem, Athens, Vienna, Berlin, Frankfurt, Marburg,
                Ziirich, Geneva, Paris, Lyons, London, Oxford, Cambridge,
                Manchester, Leeds, Newcastle, Bristol, Edinburgh, St Andrews,
                Toronto, New York and Bryn Mawr. The need for a book on
                Catal Hiiyiik is therefore fairly obvious.




14
                                                                         Introduction


©. a. THE RING of professional archaeology, Catal Hiiyiik
      is still a name of little meaning. But the recent excavation of
the site—still far from complete—has in fact given it an importance
of an outstanding kind which it is the purpose of this book, during a
pause in the field-operations, to indicate in a general way to a wider
public. Already, after a mere three seasons’ work (1961-63), the
results may fairly be described as a spectacular addition to our know-
ledge of the earlier phrases of the human achievement in terms of
urban settlement. For already Catal Hiiyiik ranks, with Jericho in
Jordan, as one of man’s first known essays in the development of
town-life. Before 6000 Bc Catal Hiiyiik was a town, or even a city,
of a remarkable and developed kind,
   The site lies 32 miles south-east of Konya in southern Turkey and
will be described on a later page. Here, by way of introduction,
something may be said of the general framework of terminology and
technology which are assumed in the presentation of the results so
far reached, together with a summary of some of these results in the
Near Eastern context.
   First, as to terminology. Traditionally the prehistory of mankind
is divided into a number of periods, based on the typology of his
tools and weapons       in stone or metal: Palaeolithic,   Mesolithic,
Neolithic (Old, Middle and New Stone Age), followed by the
Bronze and Iron Ages. This typology, devised in the nineteenth
century for the prehistoric cultures of Europe, is now in many
respects obsolete, but it is still in common use and has been adapted
by Near Eastern scholars. However, as excavations have progressed
and new evidence has become available, it has been found necessary
to introduce more periods, such as Chalcolithic (a period in which the
first metal tools and weapons came into use on a modest scale side
                                                                                    15
Catal Hiiytik
                by side with others in stone), and further subdivisions, such as a
                Protoneolithic, a Neolithic without pottery (‘Pre-pottery’ or, less
                committally, ‘Aceramic’) to distinguish these phases or cultures from
                others of a more developed Neolithic kind with pottery. Both
                the Chalcolithic and the Early Bronze Age have likewise been
                subdivided into subperiods, and with good reason.
                   Then as to the technology of dating. New methods of dating
                by means of the radioactive isotope of carbon (C-14) is rapidly
                providing a more nearly absolute chronological framework for
                prehistory all over the world, thus supplanting earlier schemes
                based largely upon guesswork.
                   A third factor of great importance is geography, for cultural
                development has been by no means the same all over the world, and
                regional differences can be extremely pronounced. Near Eastern
                archaeology during the last twenty years has disposed of the old
                cherished theories that all civilization developed in the Fertile
                Crescent, or, more simply, in Mesopotamia and Egypt. Botanists
                have shown that agriculture, the basis for the development of any
                civilization, did not start in the river valleys of the Euphrates, the
                Tigris or the Nile, but in the upland valleys, where the wild ancestors
                of the cultivated cereals had their natural habitat.
                   Subsequently to the Palaeolithic, two culture-provinces existed
                south of the Taurus Mountains, an eastern one in the Zagros Moun-
                tains and a western in Syria~-Lebanon and Palestine. Anatolia has
                links with the western, not with the eastern group. This in turn
                suggests that there were a number of foci in the early development of
                civilization, and not a single one. Every year the study of the origins
                of civilization in the Near East becomes more complex and thus more
                human. Natural environment plays a decisive role in these early
                developments: people do not start sowing wheat in areas where
                this plant does not naturally grow, nor is metallurgy invented in
                areas devoid of ores. On the Anatolian plateau obsidian is abundant
                but flint is absent, so flint tools are rare: axes are made of greenstone
                in Anatolia, because this material is abundant, but in Syria and
                Palestine they are made of flint. To polish greenstone is fairly easy,
                but polishing flint is not; Anatolian axes are therefore always
16
                                                                            Introduction
polished, Syro-Palestinian ones only on the cutting edge. Such
differences in technique arise from the material and have nothing
to do with date.
   The mechanics of cultural diffusion are many and varied. There is
a direct trade with one’s neighbours, let us say across the rivers or the
mountains, or that of the nomads whose recurrent and seasonal
travel from one area to another makes them excellent culture
transmitters. Another sort of diffusion comes when settlers move on
to cultivate and colonize new territory, perhaps impelled by drought,
floods, crop-disease, locusts or other pests, by soil-exhaustion, or
population-increase. Whereas in the former instance time-lags are
negligible, they may be pronounced in the latter. The spread of
agriculture and stock-breeding from Anatolia to Europe is evidently
a case of the latter form of culture-diffusion, marked by appreciable
time-lags. A further form of diffusion leading to secondary Neolithic
culture, in which colonizers with agriculture, etc., come into contact
with, and transfer some features to, other people still in an earlier
stage of development appears characteristic of Europe but is not yet
attested in the Near East.
   In Western Asia it would appear that there are at the moment at
least three known centres where early civilizations developed in the
postglacial period; the Zagros Mountain zone, Palestine and Jordan,
and the South Anatolian Plateau. Of the preceding Upper Palaeo-
lithic cultures much less is known in the Near East than in Europe,
partly from inadequacy of exploration and partly perhaps because
in this warmer zone open-air sites may have been more abundant
than the occupation of caves and rock-shelters which help to guide
the modern explorer. Not a single open-air site has been excavated,
not a single Upper Palaeolithic statuette is known; wall-paintings
have not yet been found, and engravings on rocks and. pebbles or
art mobilier are confined to one small area of the Near East, the region
of Antalya on the south coast of Turkey. This is enough, however,
to show that art both in its naturalistic and geometric form, existed
during the Upper Palaeolithic in Anatolia in a region a few days’
travelling from the Konya Plain in which the Catal Hiiyiik civiliza-
tion was to arise. The artistic production of the so-called ‘Early
                                                                                      17
Catal Hiiyiik
                Natufian’    culture of Palestine, immediately post-Palaeolithic, is
                well known and also points to Upper Palaeolithic traditions. Though
                less articulate the engraved pebbles and bone tools of the sites of
                Shanidar and Zawi Chemi, again of ninth millennium date, imply
                the same existence of such a tradition in the Zagros area. (Without
                detailed description or definition, these and other place-names may
                be sufficient to indicate the general shape and extent of the cultural
                problem in the light of present knowledge.)
                  In the tool-kit of the various Protoneolithic cultures (Natufian,
                Shanidar, Beldibi) there are numerous resemblances to the final
                Upper Palacolithic cultures of the same regions (Kebaran, Zarzian
                and Belbasi), but also enough differences to show that neither the
                Natufian, nor the Shanidar culture is descended from the Kebaran
                or the Zarzian. The Beldibi culture, however, looks like a develop-
                ment of its predecessor Belbasi, and both are confined to the south
                coast of Turkey. If so, this is the only instance where a post-Palaeo-
                lithic culture can be derived from an Upper Palaeolithic one in the
                Near East.
                   However, archaeologists are agreed in regarding the Proto-
                neolithic and Neolithic populations of the Near East as descendants
                from earlier Upper Palaeolithic tribes of hunters who during the
                crucial Protoneolithic period (roughly the ninth and eighth mil-
                lennia) invented and developed a new settled economy based on the
                domestication of plants and animals. Where and how this came about
                is still obscure but its importance for human development was such
                that the late Professor Childe named it the “Neolithic Revolution’—
                a phrase which becomes less apt as our knowledge of the uneven and
                complex development of food-production (the process which
                Childe had principally in mind in coining the phrase) becomes a
                little more adequate.
                   Although the earliest domesticated plant-remains found do not
                yet much antedate 7000 Bc (from the aceramic Neolithic at Hacilar,
                Beidha, Alikosh), the standard of domestication reached and the
                variety of crops grown presupposes a long prehistory of earlier
                agriculture which may well go back to the beginning of the
                Protoneolithic, c. 9000 BC.
18
                                                                          Introduction
  Even if actual plant-remains have not yet been found, grinding-
stones and mortars, sickles and storage-pits all suggest the beginnings
of agriculture. Rock-shelters and the mouths of caves were still in
use, but open settlements     are known     in the Natufian (Eynan,
Jericho, Beidha) and in the roughly contemporary Karim Shahirian
of the Zagros zone (Zawi Chemi-Shanidar,          Karim    Shahir, Ali
Kosh). At Zawi Chemi domesticated sheep are attested around
8900 BC, which makes sheep the earliest domesticate. Hunting, of
course, continued to provide the population with most of their meat.
The purpose of animal-domestication was food-conservation and the
production of milk and, in the case of goat and sheep, hair and wool.
Fishing and fowling, the collection of roots and berries, mushrooms,
snails, etc., evidently also added to the variety of foods available,
and food was collected in baskets. Awls and needles of bone suggest
skin-garments, and leather-working in general. Spindle-whorls do
not yet occur.
   The burials in Shanidar cave may belong to the Zawi Chemi
settlement whereas intramural burial is well attested in the Natufian
of Palestine. This difference in burial-habits between the two culture-
areas south of the Taurus continues into the Neolithic: no burials
were found at Karim Shahir or Jarmo, but at Jericho they are very
numerous. In the Natufian of Eynan the use of red ochre with
burials is widespread and there are numerous examples of frag-
mentary or partial burials. Funeral gifts are common; necklaces and
head-dresses of dentalium shells, or perforated gazelles’ phalanges
are characteristic of the Natufian. The Early Natufians belonged to
an Eurafrican race (dolichocephalic) which may be related to the
Upper Palaeolithic population of Europe and is widely distributed
throughout the Near East.
   Already in Early Natufian times a sanctuary was established near
the great spring of Jericho. Somewhat later, still well before 8000 Bc,
people with a Natufian stone industry settled around the spring in
flimsy structures and in time a small mound about four metres
high arose as the nucleus of later Jericho. This period has been called
‘Protoneolithic’ and is still little known. Two important innovations
may be noted in the stone industry: the first appearance of notched
                                                                                    19
Catal Hiiyiik
                arrowheads, which indicates an early use of the bow, and the first
                import of obsidian, a black volcanic glass, used for the manufacture
                of tools and weapons. Recent analysis has established a Central
                Anatolian origin for this obsidian and we thus have evidence for
                trade with Anatolia perhaps as early as 8300 BC.
                   This small settlement grew rapidly in size and importance during
                the eighth millennium, the ‘Pre-Pottery Neolithic A’ period of
                Jericho. The houses were round, like those of Early Natufian Eynan
                but built of brick and domed, and soon the need was felt for forti-
                fications. A huge stone tower with internal staircase, three super-
                imposed city walls and a deep rock-cut ditch outside the wall
                introduce monumental architecture in the Near East. The stone
                industry, virtually unchanged from that of the preceding period and
                still microlithic is now accompanied by a fine bone industry.
                Pottery and stone vessels are unknown and containers must have
                been made of basketry, bast or skins. The obsidian trade with
                Anatolia continues. Burial habits betray Natufian origins, partial
                burials are common, groups of skulls occur, but the use of red ochre
                in burials, found elsewhere before and during this time, is not
                recorded. Anthropological research has established a new racial
                element, also dolichocephalic, but more gracile: the so-called Proto-
                Mediterranean, living side by side with the Eurafrican Natufians
                at Nahal Oren in Palestine in the final Natufian, contemporary with
                Jericho Pre-Pottery Neolithic A. Compared to the Early Natufian,
                these later phases appear to have been artistically uncreative. Towards
                the end of the eighth millennium Jericho was deserted and soon after-
                wards the site was taken over by a different cultural group, possibly
                the one against whom the massive fortifications of Jericho had been
                erected. A complete break in culture follows: the newcomers of this
                ‘Pre-Pottery Neolithic B’ period, which certainly covers the entire
                seventh millennium and may have lasted even longer, still knew no
                pottery, but made vessels of stone. Their houses were no longer
                round, but rectangular. Their bricks were different and larger, their
                plaster floors were covered with red ochre or haematite and polished.
                Circular mats covered some of the floors. A few buildings seem to
                have been shrines; clay figurines of ‘Mother Goddess’ type appear,
20
                                                                             Introduction
but burial-customs differ little if at all from those of previous periods.
A series of human skulls with features modelled in plaster and
painted, and groups of human figures more or less naturalistically or
schematically modelled but of almost natural size, belong to the
later phases of the period and suggest cult-practices and revival of
art. The stone-industry isa new one with fine arrowheads, tanged and
often barbed, large sickle-blades, polished greenstone axes, but little
obsidian. There is evidence for domestic goat, dog (?) and cat (?).
At some stage of the period a wall of large boulders surrounded the
settlement.
   This culture is known throughout the Jordan valley and has links
with the aceramic Neolithic of Ras Shamra in North Syria and
Tell Ramad in South Syria, whence it may well have come. More
remote parallels may be suggested with aceramic Hacilar (c. 7000 Bc)
in south-western Anatolia, where again we find rectangular build-
ings, red plaster floors and human skulls used in certain rites, but
such features may have been widespread throughout these periods
in the Near East.
   The next development from aceramic to ceramic Neolithic is
known south of the Taurus in its early phases only in Syria, at Ras
Shamra and Tell Ramad, but has not yet been published in detail
and its radiocarbon dating is not yet available. At Jericho there is a
lacuna, probably of great length, and the evidence from other
Palestinian sites is equally unsatisfactory.
   At Ras Shamra on the North Syrian coast the aceramic period
(V. 1) comes to an end c. 6436+ 100 Bc, and is followed (in V. 2)
without any other appreciable changes in the culture by the introduc-
tion of a fine monochrome burnished ware, usually red and some-
times brown or black, apparently undecorated. With it are found a
coarse burnished ware, rarely incised and a thick chalky white ware,
crumbly and badly fired, which seems to imitate limestone bowls of
the aceramic period. Another ware is coated with lime-plaster,
perhaps a hangover from vessels in perishable materials, treated that
way to make them impervious to heat. Both these latter wares soon
disappear, but they are found at the beginning of the period at a
number of Syrian sites, as well as at Byblos in the Lebanon. At Tell
                                                                                       21
Catal Hiiytik
                Ramad in the south the sequence is similar, but a good number of
                burnished pots are heavily decorated like the Early Neolithic wares
                of Byblos which in my opinion may have been dated much too late.
                  What is particularly important is the fact that the fine mono-
                chrome wares of Ras Shamra, Amuq A, etc., clearly show their
                South Anatolian ancestry and appear in Syria at a date which is
                not far removed from the first appearance of this same ware on the
                Anatolian Plateau at Catal Hiiyiik around 6500 Bc. Other parallels
                may beestablished between Syria and Byblos and the South Anatolian
                Plateau in the obsidian and flint industry of this period and there is
                evidence for a lively trade in these materials at Catal Hiiyiik.
                   This period of transition from aceramic to ceramic Neolithic, the
                half millennium between 6500 and 6000 Bc in round terms, is
                essential to our understanding of cultural progress in the Near East,
                but it is still obscure in Syria, Palestine, Cyprus and Iraq, where the
                inadequately excavated and still unpublished small village-site of
                Jarmo, in the northern foothills of Iraq, appears to offer an eastern
                variant of this important transition.
                   The excavations at Catal Hiiyiik throw abundant light on the
                civilization of a town of just this period in Anatolia and the great
                depth of the underlying deposits promises to yield evidence for the
                genesis of this remarkable civilization when excavations can be
                resumed. The wealth of material produced by Catal Hiiyiik is
                unrivalled by any other Neolithic site. Moreover, not being a village
                but a town or city, its products have a definitely metropolitan
                air: Catal Hiiyiik could afford luxuries such as obsidian mirrors,
                ceremonial daggers, and trinkets of metal beyond thereach of most of
                its known contemporaries. Copper and lead were smelted and worked
                into beads, tubes and possibly small tools, thus taking the beginnings
                of metallurgy back into the seventh millennium. Its stone industry
                in local obsidian and imported flint is the most elegant of the period;
                its wooden vessels are varied and sophisticated, its woollen textile
                industry fully developed. At Catal Hiiyiik we can actually study the
                transition from an aceramic Neolithic with baskets and wooden vessels
                to a ceramic Neolithic with the first pottery. Abundant carbonized
                food-deposits establish the range of crops grown, collected or
22
                                                                            Introduction
imported from the hills, the standard reached by agriculture c.
6000 BC, and the centre from which these crops reached Europe at
the beginning of its Neolithic colonization. The animal-bones and
the shrines show the importance of a new animal about to be
domesticated: Bos primigenius.
  As the dead were buried in the settlement, hundreds of Neolithic
graves have been found, providing rich evidence for anthropological
study. Funeral gifts, though not rich by later standards, are less
sparing than among other contemporary cultures. Red-ochre burials
are still found, and there is abundant evidence for secondary burial
and excarnation (burial after exposure and the removal of flesh and
sinews). Trade is well established and the main export was probably
obsidian (and greenstone axes).
   And last but certainly not least there is the evidence for Neolithic
religion in the form of numerous shrines, artistically decorated with
reliefs in plaster, either modelled on the walls or cut into the plaster
when in position, or with wall-paintings in one or more colours, and
covering a period securely fixed by numerous radiocarbon dates to
the centuries between 6500 and §700 Bc. In the shrines were found
cult-statues of male and female deities, carved in a variety of stones or
modelled in clay and sometimes painted, predecessors of the series
from Hacilar. Until the discovery of Catal Hiiyiik there was virtually
no evidence from the Near East wherewith to trace any possible
connections between the naturalistic and geometric art of the Upper
Palaeolithic of Europe and the first manifestation of art in the form of
painted pottery and a few figurines of the Early Chalcolithic of the
Near East, at least four or even five thousand years later. The
current interpretation of Upper Palaeolithic art as an expression of
hunting magic, a view borrowed from backward societies like
Australian aborigines, etc., offered little hope of establishing any link
with the later fertility-cults of the Near East which centre around
the figure of a Great Goddess and her son, even if the presence of
such a goddess in the Upper Palaeolithic could hardly be denied,
which it is not.
  The position has radically changed: Catal Hiiyiik and Hacilar
have established a link between these two great schools of art
                                                                                     23
Catal Hiiyiik
                and a continuity inreligion can be demonstrated from Catal Hiiyiik
                to Hacilar and so on till the great ‘Mother-Goddesses’ of archaic
                and classical times, the shadowy figures known as Cybele, Artemis
                and Aphrodite.
                  At the other end of the scale much work remains to be done,
                but the archaeological, anthropological and artistic record of Catal
                Hiiyiik is already strongly suggestive of an important heritage from
                the Upper Palaeolithic. A. Leroi-Gourhan’s brilliant reassessment of
                Upper Palaeolithic religion (Les religions de la préhistoire, Paris, 1964)
                has cleared away many misunderstandings, and the resulting inter-
                pretation of Upper Palaeolithic art centred round the theme of
                complex and female symbolism (in the form of symbols and animals)
                shows strong similarities to the religious imagery of Catal Hiiyiik;
                to such an extent indeed that ancestral Upper Palaeolithic influences
                may still be lingering at Catal Hiiyiik, as they so obviously are in
                numerous cult-practices of which the red-ochre burials, red-stained
                floors, collections of stalactites, fossils, shells, are but a few examples.
                  The importance of the site of Catal Hiiyiik, clearly stratified
                and easily datable as it is, for the study of art, archaeology, religion
                and technology of this vital period, contemporary with the generally
                miserable period of the Mesolithic in Europe, needs, I hope, no
                further emphasis.

Mersin

                   The ancient mound of Mersin, called Yiimiik tepe, lies on the
                east bank of the river SoSuk Su, some 2 miles west of the modern
                town. It was excavated by Professor John Garstang in the winter
                seasons of 1937-39, and 1946-47 (see J. Garstang, Prehistoric Mersin,
                Oxford, 1953).
                  The mound, an oval with a maximum length of 200 metres, covers
                12 acres and rises to a height of 25 metres (over 80 feet) with approxi-
                mately thirty-three building-levels covering a range from the Early
                Neolithic, c. 6250 Bc, to medieval Islamic. Whereas               the later
                sequence, from the Early Bronze Age onwards, is rather incomplete
                and better attested at Tarsus, the reverse is the case for the early
24
                                                                              Introduction
  periods, the Neolithic and Chalcolithic, for which Mersin remains
  the Cilician type-site.
    The first early site to be excavated in Anatolia, Mersin is important
  in that it offers the possibility of establishing links between the
  Neolithic and Chalcolithic of the Anatolian Plateau (Catal Hiiyiik,
  Can Hasan) and that of North Syria (Ras Shamra, Byblos, etc.).
    In the period with which this book is concerned, the Neolithic,
  Mersin was a fair-sized settlement, frequently rebuilt, producing
  pottery very like that of Catal Hiiyiik, but often bearing impressed
  decoration. Its stone industry, in obsidian imported from the plateau,
  offers close parallels to that of Catal Hiiyiik, but is more rustic in
  appearance. Local chert is also used. No substantial buildings were
  encountered in the trenches by which the Mersin Neolithic was
  investigated, and no traces of shrines or art were found.
     Unless the limited excavations in the Neolithic levels offer a mis-
  leading picture, Mersin was a rather rustic village site with good
  craftsmanship in pottery and stonework but little or no sophistica-
  tion. In this respect it greatly resembles the other Neolithic establish-
  ments in Syria, the Lebanon and Palestine, but clearly differentiates
  itself from the artistic people on the Anatolian Plateau.

                                                                               Hacilar

  A small Neolithic and Early Chalcolithic mound lies about one mile
  west of the village of Hacilar, 17 miles west of Burdur, on the
  Anatolian Plateau, roughly north of the Mediterranean port of
  Antalya. The site has a maximum diameter of about 150 metres and
  is 5 metres in height. Excavations were carried out there under the
  auspices of the British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara in the
  years 1957-60 by the author. The final publication has not yet
  appeared, but Anatolian Studies, VIII-XI (1958-61) contain the
  preliminary reports on the excavations.
    The excavations revealed remains of three different periods: the
  aceramic Neolithic village, dating from c. 7000 Bc; then after a long
  gap in occupation a Late Neolithic village (Hacilar [IX-VI), dating
  from about 5750-5600 Bc, followed without any break by Early
                                                                                        25


ARIZONA TATE actin TIRRARY .TUCSON. AZ. 8572
Catal Hiiyiik
                Chalcolithic occupation (Hacilar V-I), the main characteristic of
                which is a sophisticated painted pottery. The settlement came to an
                end about 5000 Bc and the site was not reoccupied.
                   The main characteristics of these three periods are: rectangular
                mud-brick architecture with red-painted plaster floors, no pottery
                or figurines and virtually no finds (of small objects), except grain,
                for the aceramic Neolithic.
                   A highly sophisticated Late Neolithic settlement is Hacilar VI,
                with big houses, monochrome and some simple painted pottery, a
                fine series of statuettes in clay and stone vessels, bone objects, grain,
                etc. There is a rich Early Chalcolithic with monochrome and fine
                painted pottery, less naturalistic figurines, fewer objects but abundant
                food remains. Poor architectural vestiges mark Levels V—III, but
                there is a complete settlement in Level II and part of a great fortress
                in Level I. Considerable changes in painted pottery in Level I suggest
                newcomers with different techniques and traditions.
                   Links with Catal Hiiyiik are particularly notable in the Late
                Neolithic pottery and clay statuettes, but diminish during the Early
                Chalcolithic.




26
                                                                           I

                                                  The Site of Catal Hiiyiik

CG         HUYUK, one of the most ancient sites in Turkey, lies on
  >
     the Anatolian plateau, nearly 3,000 feet above sea-level and
32 miles south-east of Konya. It is situated in the centre of fertile     Fig. 1
wheat lands, watered by the Carsamba Cay which, emerging from
the Lake of Beysehir in the Taurus Mountains, flows into the
Konya Plain near Cumra to lose itself in the salt steppe beyond Catal    Plate II
Hiiyiik. The great double mound of Catal Hiiyiik, which derives its
name from a road-fork at its northern end, was built on an old branch
of the river about a mile south of the village of Kiiciikkéy, the
headquarters of the expedition.
   The vast plain of Konya is rich in ancient sites, but though a few
were recorded by R. O. Arik between Konya and Cumra no
systematic survey of the plain was made until 1951, when the author,
as a scholar of the British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara, began
his Anatolian survey with the Konya Plain. Although the mound of
Catal Hiiyiik was noted in the distance in 1952, dysentery and lack of
transport prevented its more formal discovery till it was possible to
complete the survey of the more distant parts of the Konya Plain.
  On a cold November day in 1958, just before nightfall, the author,
accompanied by Mr Alan Hall and Mr David French, reached the
double mound of Catal Hiiyiik. Much of the eastern (Neolithic)
mound was covered by turf and ruin-weed (peganum harmala)
but where the prevailing south-westerly winds had scoured its
surface bare there were unmistakable traces of mud-brick buildings,
burned red in a conflagration contrasting with patches of grey ash,
broken bones, potsherds and obsidian tools and weapons. To our
surprise these were found not only at the bottom of the mound, but
they continued right up to the top, some 15 metres above the level
of the plain.
                                                                              27
                                             Maritsa

                                         ae




                                        ch

                                       WZ
                                             7,friday

                                                                                     Ck    ato




                                                                                   VE     SNSSEKARA'IN Ps
                                                                                        Oj    GARK "IN “7,




1 Early Neolithic sites
in southern Anatolia
and North Syria and
the sources of raw
materials in the area

                             The importance of our discovery was clear from the beginning,
                          for both the pottery and the obsidian arrowheads found were
                          strikingly like the neolithic material excavated years ago by Professor
                          J. Garstang in the deepest levels of the site of Mersin, some 200 miles
                          away on the southern Turkish (Cilician) coast. It should be remem-
                          bered that in 1958 it was still widely believed that there had been no
28
                ACERAM/IC NEOLITHIC                                                                  al   ALABASTER
                EARLY  NEOLITHIC
                          ott
                                                                                                     ci   CINNABAR
                    GATAL

                    KIZILKAYA
                                HUYUK

                                         TYPE
                                                TYPE
                                                           ==   LIMIT OF
                                                                NEOLITHIC
                                                                             EARLY
                                                                                                     co   COPPER


                    CILICIAN         TYPE                  Wd   CILICIAN    TYPE                     fl

                                                                                                     gr
                                                                                                          FLINT

                                                                                                          GREENSTONE

                LATE
                    AMUQ       A
                           NEOLITHIC
                                    TYPE
                                                           WW   AMUQ    A TYPE
                                                                                                     le   GALENA     (LEAD)

                    HACILAR

                    MENTESE
                                    VI

                                     TYPE
                                           TYPE
                                                           om   LIMIT
                                                                LATE
                                                                         OF HACILAR
                                                                        NEOLITHIC
                                                                                         VI   TYPE   ob

                                                                                                     s
                                                                                                          OBSIDIAN

                                                                                                          SALT,    SULPHUR

           G>Pp
           OfO0eFIKIRTEPE                TYPE
                                                                LIMIT OF
                                                                MARMORA
                                                                             SEA  OF
                                                                             NEOLITHIC




       © ANKARA



Ser
 £ P PE




GREAT           SALT
      LAKE          ¥                              :




                                                           a
[ILICAPINARSS
     s—@
        CES
—————                               ——     @—          b         :                                                                            Fi




                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                                          ‘
                                                                                                                             AAC EEE ES
                                                                                                                         s
                               —Karaca      Dag
                          ==



ee
     CATALS

is




——                       wW
                    o.          4
                      “4
                       ~ Su)
Trt          tery   yAm
                    le




                    Neolithic habitation on the Anatolian Plateau. The mound at Catal
                    Hiiyiik provided eloquent proof to refute this theory, and what was
                    particuarly encouraging was the huge size of the site (a third of a
                    mile in length), the absence of thick layers of later occupation and
                    the presence of a somewhat later mound on the other side of the
                    river, which looked as if it would continue the sequence from
                                                                                                                                                   29
Catal Hiiyiik
                Neolithic to early Chalcolithic, just as at Mersin. Some of the
                painted pottery picked up there could indeed be linked to the latter
                site, but most of it was differently decorated.
                   Here then was a major site demanding excavation, but at the time
                of the discovery we were fully engaged by the excavations of Hacilar,
                a site near the lake of Burdur some 200 miles west of Catal Hiiyiik.
                It was only in 1960 after a fourth season of excavations that virgin
                soil was reached over a large area at Hacilar and excavations ceased.
                   Excavations at Catal Hiiyiik began in 1961 and were continued
                on a larger scale in 1962 and 1963, with ever-increasing success.
                In 1964, however, the excavation was interrupted and, instead,
                conservation-work was undertaken in the Ankara Museum by a team
                of specialists from the Institute of Archaeology of London University.
                The moment was opportune to evaluate the evidence and to summar-
                ize in this volume the result of three years’ work at this site, and its
                bearing on the Neolithic development of Anatolia.
                   One of the main reasons for selecting Catal Hiiyiik for excavation
                was that it seemed to fill the gap in occupation established at Hacilar
                between the desertion of the aceramic (non-pottery) village and the
                first arrival of the Late Neolithic people (c. 5750 Bc) with a different
                and already fully developed culture. Earlier stages of the Neolithic,
                ancestral to those of Late Neolithic Hacilar, evidently existed and
                the site of Catal Hiiyiik offered the best opportunity to explore such
                Early Neolithic cultures. Excavation at this site would also serve to
                fill the geographical gap between Hacilar and Mersin, and in view of
                the evident importance of the great alluvial plain of Konya Catal
                Hiiyiik was expected to produce local peculiarities, different from the
                Neolithic of Mersin.
Plate 1           The main mound of Catal Hiiyiik (the eastern one) forms an oval,
                measuring about 450 metres in length and 275 in width, thus cover-
                ing about 32 acres. This makes it the largest Neolithic site hitherto
                known in the Near East. Its height is about 17-5 metres above the
                present level of the plain, and a small sounding has already estab-
                lished that occupation extends to a minimum of 4 metres below this
                point, without reaching virgin soil. The depth of Neolithic deposits
                at Catal Hiiyiik (19 metres or more) is nearly twice that of Mersin
30
2 Site plan of Catal Hiiyiik showing the
extent ofthe excavations                 od gkSay
                                                    --—    i    Coe

                                        fo                            ae


                                   |         9            100              200 256m
                                             EEE                           ees


and considerably more than that of Jericho (13-7 metres), and the
reason for it lies in the fine preservation of a number of building-
levels, where the walls of houses are preserved to a height of 2
metres or more.
   Erosion has played its part in shaping the contours of the mound
and it is clear that a considerable depth of deposit has been washed
away by the rains and thunderstorms of the last seven thousand years.
Of the topmost building-level (O) only some foundations remain;
the floors have fallen a prey to the elements, and on the western
slope the outermost rows of buildings show the same unmistakable
signs of denudation.
  The mound consists of a great central hump, steep on both long
sides but fading gently towards the south, whereas at the northern
end there is a secondary but lower hump. Along its eastern side lies a                Pigs?
fairly broad ‘skirt’ of occupation now cut by the irrigation-channels
which surround the mound; and from the occupation-debris
                                                                                        31
Catal Hiiyiik
                dug up from these canals it would appear that the ‘skirt’ dates
                from a fairly late phase of the Neolithic period, roughly corre-
                sponding to Levels IV-II on the top. Part of this low-lying area
                is covered by a modern cemetery, but the full extent of the site
                extends a little beyond the line of the irrigation-channels. On the
                western side, the foot of the mound nearest to the old river bed is
                under cultivation and a dust-track still in use prevents exploration
                down to the river-bed.
Plate 2           Excavations have been concentrated so far in an area of about
                an acre on the exposed western slope, where burnt buildings were
                visible even before the start of the excavation. Moreover, one would
                expect the earliest occupation of the site to have started nearest to the
                river. What sort of quarters and buildings lie on the other side of the
                mound or on the flat eastern ‘skirt’ we have not yet ascertained; but
                after three seasons of work it could appear from the gradual slope
                of the buildings towards the north and east that the original centre
                of the mound lies to the north-north east of the area in which we
                have been working. Although much has already been accomplished
                it is clear that this area alone cannot give us a complete picture of the
                structure of the mound as a whole.
                   No remains of buildings of a date later than the Neolithic have
                yet been encountered onthe mound, but the upper levels of the site
                are badly infiltrated by brick-pits of the late Iron Age and the
                Hellenistic period. On top of the mound a pit of the latter date was
                found with bricks stacked for drying still in situ. Some of these
                shapeless pits are up to 4 metres in depth and cut straight through the
                underlying Neolithic houses and shrines. On the western slope,
                however, very few pits were found and the buildings are therefore
                better preserved.
                   It does appear from the area excavated that occupation gradually
                shrank in extent after building-level V, so that we were fortunate in
                obtaining steadily increasing ground-plans for the lower building-
                levels. It is possible that the occupation on the eastern ‘skirts’ dates
                from these later phases and corresponds to an eastward shift in the
Fig. 3          settlement, so that the total area of occupation in Levels V-I need
                not have been smaller than that of earlier levels.
ce)
1 The mounds of Catal Hiiyiik seen from the north. Catal Hiiyiik on the Anatolian plateau, 3,000
feet above sea level, lies 32 miles south-east of Konya. It is a double mound, the eastern neolithic
one rising to a height of about 50 feet, covers 32 acres, whereas the western mound, its successor, is
little smaller, but only 20 feet in height, and still unexcavated, Between the two mounds lies the old
bed of the Carsamba Cay, the source of the rich alluvial soils on which the neolithic people of Catal
Hiiyiik practised intensive agriculture. The now almost treeless plain was once covered with woods
and parkland inhabited by Red Deer and wild cattle
2 Denuded mud-brick walls of building-level V on left and burnt and well-preserved rooms of
building-level VI on right, on the west slope of the neolithic mound, looking south to the plain.
The photograph shows the neat and regular layout of the rooms; one next to the other without


3 House VII.12 seen from the south-west corner. A classic example of the arrangement of platforms
in a house with east-west axis with a single platform and bench against the north wall and further
platforms against the west wall. The hearth is just visible to the right
streets or passages. See plan, Figs. 7-9. Hearths and ovens are easily recognized. When building
remains are so denuded it is almost impossible to distinguish between houses and shrines having the
same plans but different decoration
    4 House A.III.10, the south-east corner with details of the oven in the south wall (bottom left)
    twice renewed, bonded brickwork and the diagonal mark of a wooden ladder set against the plaster
    of the wall. The position of the ladder, the oven and the hearth never changes in the buildings of
    Catal Hiiyiik
5-7 Wall-painting, above, in red on white from house VI.B.65 the subject of which, though uncer-
tain, may include the representation of ladders. Below, superimposed bread ovens of building-levels _
IV and V in a domestic courtyard, open to the sky. They are constructed of mud-bricks set on edge
and their great size suggests a bakery rather than private domestic use. Opposite, above, hand and
foot impressions in red paint on the east wall of house VI.A.63 near the porthole-like doorway lead-
ing to the kitchens. Such open doorways, never provided with doors, are found in most houses
and one could only crawl through them into storerooms or other similar small rooms
8 Polychrome wall-
painting from the
north wall of shrine
VLB.1. This prob-
ably represents          a
mortuary structure,
lightly      built      of
bundles      or      reeds
and       matting,      in
which  the dead
were removed for
the first stage in
the neolithic burial
rites, the process of
excarnation,      as    is
suggested      by the
human skulls and
bones shown below
9 North wall of shrine VI.10,
preserved up to roof-level, 11
feet above the floor of the
building, the lower 2 feet are
part of the original structure.
Both floor levels show clearly
in Plate 10. Note the charac-
teristic overhang of the
panels, the central post sup-
ported by a ram’s head in
plaster and the pillar of the
bucranium on the platform’s
edge




                                  10 North wall of shrine VII.10 below the decayed remains of its successor shrine
                                  VI.10 (see Plate 9), a characteristic example of continuity of cult at Catal Hiiyiik.
                                  Less well-preserved is the central post and ram’s head with a single horn and the
                                  plaster of the walls has been cut into animal shapes
11, 12 Examples of bulls at Catal Hitytik. The fraementary painting of a black bull, above, on the
north wall of shrine IX.8 is seen through the doorway leading into the sanctuary from an ante-
chamber. Only the legs and hoofs of a bull facing east (right) are preserved and to the left its hind-
quarters are partly obliterated by a cut-out figure of a feline head. The cut-out figure of a black
bull, below, on the north wall of shrine VII.8, is two building-levels later, but in the same position
as the figure above, and illustrates a further instance of continuity of cult. It is cut through nearly
a hundred layers of white plaster but fortunately, not through the earlier wall paintings of the
vultures (Plates 48, 49)
13,14 Above, a baked clay model of a boar’s head from a pit in Level VI. It is:.part of a figurine used
in hunting rituals in which the animal was magically killed or disabled in effigy. The head should
be compared to the cut-out in shrine VII.45 (Fig. 27). Below, the north wall.of shrine VIB.8-with a
damaged figure of a huge cut-out bull in the same position as its:predecessor in:shrine, VIL8,
immediately below. There is evidence to’show that this bull, more graceful than its predecessor,
was alternately painted red and. white and was less deeply incised. There were no: wall-paintings
below it and it lasted through both phases of Level VI
15, 16 The corner platform and the bench of shrine VI.61. This impressive building, evidently
dedicated to the cult of the male god, symbolized in the form of a wild bull, bore no wall-paintings
or reliefs. It was decorated with two huge bucrania set on the edge of the north-east corner plat-
form, above, and with an even more impressive row of seven horn cores of Bos primigenius set in the
bench at the southern end of the main platform, below. Six of these were at the same level and the
seventh raised above it, like a serried row of stylized bulls’ heads, one behind the other, in awesome
splendour
17 Plaster relief of a stag
from the north-east corner
of shrine VII.10. Set in a
shallow niche in the north
wall, this relief was pro-
duced partly by model-
ling, partly in cut-out
technique. Nearly three
feet in height it shows a
stag, perched on a rock
turning its head backward,
as if glancing at its pur-
suers, an attitude found
also in the stag hunt in
Plates 54, 55. and in the
Late Neolithic theriomor-
phic vases of Hacilar VI.
The left outline was pro-
duced   by cutting away
the plaster, the rest    is
modelled in low relief
18, 19 The Leopard Shrine (VI.B.44). The main panel on the west wall of this shrine was decorated
with the bold relief of two painted leopards, the decoration of which had been repeated over and
over again, so that finally there were nearly forty layers of painted plaster. One of the finest and
best preserved is illustrated in a copy, above, and a detail of the right-hand leopard, below, shows the
actual state of preservation. The burning of the two wooden posts between which the panel was
set partly destroyed the animals and the hindquarters of the left-hand animal were carried away by
a deep Hellenistic pit
20, 21 The Leopard Shrine (VI.B.44). The entire relief, above, nearly six feet long was set above a
red panel, flanked by painted posts. In its later phases, which may be assigned to Level VI.A, the
painting became less naturalistic and the fine rosettes. of the earlier phases were replaced. by dots
and dashes, executed in black (as before) but on a lemon yellow background, below. The eyes,
mouth and the outline of the claws were still accentuated in red. As layer upon layer of plaster was
added the animals gradually lost their crisp outline




                                                                                                        Leesan
22-24 Bulls’ heads in plaster, incorporating the horn cores of Bos primigenius, often of considerable
size, are a feature of the west walls of many Catal Hiiyiik shrines. Two bulls’ heads of unequal size
with red-painted ears and muzzles protrude from the right-hand body of the Twin Goddess in
shrine VI.14, above left. Two others formed part of the decoration of the west wall of shrine VII.31,
above right, the rest of which is lost. Earlier ones were provided with clay horns, below, and faced
the relief of a goddess, with defaced head, in shrine VII.31
25, 26 Plaster reliefs of goddesses are frequent in the shrines of Catal Hiiyiik VI and VII. Arms and
legs are either outstretched, above, and Plate 24, or turned upwards and the latter indicates a position
of childbirth, below. The lower part of a goddess figure from the north wall of shrine VII.45, above,
resembles that of shrine VII.31 (Plate 24), but the figure on the west wall of shrine VI.8, below, is
shown giving birth to a bull’s head, placed below her legs (cf. Fig. 23). Goddesses giving birth are
unpainted, the others are often ‘dressed’ in a bright colour
27, 28 Contrasting symbols of life and death are a constant feature of Catal Hiiyiik. In the third
phase of the decoration of the east wall of shrine VI.8, two rows of lower jaws of wild boar were
stuck into the wall, to be covered in the next stage by womens’ breasts modelled in clay. On the
corresponding wall of the neighbouring shrine VI.10, below, a pair of woman’s breasts each con-
tained the head of a Griffon vulture (Gyps fulvus), the beak of which protruded from the open
red-painted nipples. Beyond the post there was a horn in plaster; evidently a male symbol; and
beyond the breastsa huge bull’s head surmounted ‘a red-painted niche
                                                                            Il

                                                The Dating of Catal Hiiyiik


     HE FIFTY-FOOT Deposit of Neolithic remains at Catal Hiiyiik,
     so far explored, has yielded the remains of twelve successive          Fig. 3
building-levels. These represent twelve different cities, not phases
or repairs of single buildings. They have been numbered from the
top (O-X) and there are two different building-levels in VI; VI A
and VI B. It is possible that Level VII also consists of two levels, but
this is not yet certain. Not all these were of the same duration and
this is evident not only from the series of radiocarbon dates, but also
from the state of the buildings themselves. Dwellings constructed
of mud-brick are generally assumed to have short lives, but these
vary from region to region and depend as much on the quality of
the mud-brick and the solidity of construction, upkeep, etc., as on
earthquakes, floods and the climatic conditions of the region.
   At Catal Hiiyiik each building had its own walls and was hemmed
in by others, a method of construction which gave greater solidity
to the buildings than they would have had if free-standing. More-
over, the inhabitants were careful to replaster their buildings con-
tinually, both inside and outside, a routine which materially con-
tributes to the longer life of a mud-brick building by keeping out
damp and rain, the main enemy of sun-dried brick. In the Konya
Plain, the average annual rainfall is the lowest in Turkey, less than
16 inches (400 mm.), and most of the rain falls at two distinct
periods, around May and November, in the latter half of the year
often in the form of snow. Only the summer months are hot, dry
and rainless, and to this day replastering is carried out after the rains
of spring, to dry slowly during the summer. Weather-conditions
allow for building and plastering but once during the year, and there
is no reason to assume that conditions were essentially different
during the Neolithic period.
                                                                               49
                                                                                                                                                                why




                                                       >4


                                                       HOE
                                                       ara tal =
                                                       =
                                                                                               ce poner rv SOR Se   SRN   S SS OS SUCCES   SNS SPS SSSR?   SH
                                                       ee
                                                       eee        ene     LINE & FLOOD ; DEPOSIT




3 Plan and section of Catal Hiiyiik showing the shifting pattern of occupation in the excavated
area


                               At Catal Hiiyiik in every room, both large and small, built-in
                            furniture, walls, floors and ceiling, were coated with a fine tenacious
                            white clay (ak toprak), found locally and still in use. The layers of
                            plaster in each building can be counted and, though they are roughly
                            consistent within each building-level, they vary considerably from
                            level to level. This surely is an indication of the age of a building,
                            the more so when one finds that those buildings that have been re-
                            plastered most often (up to 100 plaster layers in Level VI B and up to
                            120 in Level VII) are in a poor state of preservation compared to
                            those with thirty to sixty plaster layers which are well-preserved.
                            In the former cases the buildings had become worn out; the plaster
                            bulged, the walls were leaning at drunken angles, and they had
                            become so dangerous for human habitation that they were con-
                            demned, pulled down and levelled. This was done by removing the
                            flat roof and the beams on which it rested, by pulling out the wooden
                            wall-posts which supported the main roof-beams, and by knocking
                            down the upper parts of the walls until the room was filled with
                            broken brick and plaster. In none of the buildings of the upper levels
                            (VI A-I), where the wall-plaster is well preserved and relatively thin,
                            is there evidence for deliberate demolition, but these levels had been
                             destroyed by fire when the houses were still fit for habitation.
                               It appears then that with annual replastering the age of each
                             house and building-level can be roughly counted and the maximum
 50



       re   VIAL   HIVOLU   IF)                             {        as          =    ft)
                                  ee   aa   ec   i |                        x   aay    |
                                                 ca.        iN.    P —e    mila G, lt
                                                                           Ss
                                                              The Dating of Catal Htiytik
age to which a house was allowed to stand varied from a century to
120 years. Unforeseen circumstances usually shortened this excessive
life-span, and on account of the frequent fires in the upper levels
the rate of building increased considerably. Confirmation for the
length of individual building-levels, as based on the annual rate of
replastering, has come from radiocarbon dates. Counts of plaster
layers then further help as a check on the accuracy of such C-14
dates and between the two systems a fairly reliable absolute dating
can be established.
   Catal Hiiyiik and Hacilar are the only two sites in Anatolia
which have been dated by a consistent series of radiocarbon dates,
and the results shown on p. 52 are on the whole very satisfactory
if one remembers that any of these dates may be a hundred years
too early or too late; but a century is of little importance for the
dating of cultures up to 9,000 years old. Most of the dates obtained
come from charred timber (roof-beams or posts) in burnt buildings
and thus date the cutting of the tree for the construction of the
building in which it was found. Such dates give one the date of
construction, whereas dates obtained from grain in burnt buildings
give the date of the destruction, grain being never much more than a
harvest old before it is consumed. Whereas grain cannot be kept for
ever, timber (mainly oak and juniper at Catal Hiiyiik) can and was
re-used, and much of the wood from the unburnt Levels VII and
VI B was evidently saved for re-use or for fuel. In this way it is
possible to obtain dates which are far too early for the building-
levels in which such old wood was found; e.g. in the case of the C-14
date for Level IV, 6329 Bc+99, which may represent a post taken
from a building in Level IX, or the 6200 Bc+97 date which comes
almost certainly from Level VIL, although it was re-used in a building
of Level VI B.
  The radiocarbon dates from Levels [IX and X, derived from the
ashes of hearths, give only an approximate idea of the dates of those
levels. Although the general sequence of radiocarbon dates is
consistent, individual dates must be used with caution and they
should not be dogmatically accepted if other evidence argues against
their validity. Nevertheless, it remains our only method for dating
                                                                                       ay
Chronological Table

                         HACILAR
          C. SOOOLEC™:     A enna eines
                            Id
                          -Ic
                           Ia   52474119                     Radiocarbon dates in italic type.
          Gece             Ilb                              extreme tolerance.
                           Ila 54344131                     All dates calculated with half-life of
          C. $435 ak               ok                             5730.
                           IV                                Doubtful dates in brackets.
          c. $§00
               600   Te         iE   One Me
          oP               VI 5620+ 79
                           Vil                CatTaL Huyux
                           Vill                              O
                           IX 5614492                        I
                              5706
          ¢. §700 -—————-_                    ¢. $720                            :
                                                                          5797       79
                                              ¢. $750        il

                                                                          5807494
                                              Saree          IV           (6329+ 99)
                                              G.°$830. —- | SUN ween ae ca            ee ee ees ee
                                                             Vi           5920494
                                              6: $880        FS, vane dewalt ste ean eel        eee
                                                             VIA          5781496         destruction
                                                                          5800+ 93
                                                                          5815+92         beginning
                                                                          5850+ 94
                                              faa            VIB          5908+ 93
                                                                          5986494         beginning
                                              c. 6050/6070 VII            6200497 ()
                                              C7200      OU Aas oe nie eins coe ane eae ee
                                                            VI
                                              Fa CABG.   i Nicks aac         ates 3 eee ea
                                                            IX         64864102
                                              COGRIO ES Mie A         On eo kee toates eaenane eeS
                                                            »,4        6385+ 101
                                              CC GSOO Sl AN Redes suse       he aah ates Gaara eect eee
                                                             Pre-X floor levels (not yet dated)
52
                                                              The Dating of Catal Hiiytik
such early cultures and as the method gains in precision so will our
dating gradually improve. The old method of guesswork-dating is
no longer acceptable in scientific archaeology.
  The fourteen radiocarbon dates then place Catal Hiiyiik X-II
between c. 6500 and $700 BC in a space of eight hundred years and
we may perhaps allow another century for Levels I and O. After
5600 Bc the old mound of Catal Hiiyiik was abandoned, for what
reason is not known, and a new site was founded across the river,
Catal Hiiyiik West. This appears to have been occupied for at least
another 700 years until it also was deserted without, however, any
obvious signs of violence or deliberate destruction.




                                                                                       53
1

The Architecture of Catal Hiyiik

               T HAS BEEN the purpose of the excavations to try to establish the
                lay-out of the architectural complex or complexes andso to obtain
            the maximum amount of information about the nature of this
Plate 2     Neolithic city. Horizontal digging was therefore resorted to rather
            than vertical digging by means of trenches, which might give a
            stratigraphic sequence without much delay, but would tell us far too
            little about the nature of the buildings. Moreover, the presence of
            precious wall-paintings would not have allowed vertical excavation,
            and buildings had to be cleared laboriously one after the other. It is
            for this reason that virgin soil has not yet been reached anywhere
            on the site.
               Although we have thus learnt much about the nature of the
            settlement and the ways in which these Neolithic builders planned
            their structures we have not yet succeeded in isolating a complete
            building-unit in the space of an acre, and these units appear to have
            been of considerable size. In building-levels VI A and VI B we
            have come nearest to this goal in locating courtyards and an outer
            wall round three sides of a vast block of buildings, but its eastern
Figs 8, 9   edge remains to be found. Of the later levels (V-II) we have found
            only the western edge and open space beyond, and of building-levels
            I and O little is still known, for their remains are either preserved
            only in limited areas (Level I) or are too badly preserved (Level O)
            to allow any statements to be made about the overall character of the
            buildings concerned.
               In dealing with the architecture of Catal Hiiyiik we are therefore
            obliged to concentrate on those building-levels (II-VI) which have
Figs 4-10   produced a coherent plan. The earlier levels, VII-X, have only been
            tested in a few restricted soundings and they seem to follow the
            general pattern of building seen in Levels VII-VI.
54
                                                          The Architecture of Catal Hiiytik
  Finally, the lower strata were reached at the end of the 1963
season in a test trench below the floor of a house of Level X which
was only a metre wide and 3 metres long. Whereas this clearly shows
that the occupation on the mound prior to Level X was at least 4
metres thick, the nature of the material was such as to suggest that
we were dealing with at least ten successive plaster floors of court-
yards at the western edge of the ancient mound and not with the
remains of superimposed houses, unless these were of an altogether
different nature.
   All buildings at Catal Hiiyiik were constructed of sun-dried
rectangular mud-bricks, reeds and plaster. The bricks were formed in
a wooden mould squared with an adze. Stone is not found in the
alluvial plain in which the site was situated and for foundations up
to six courses of mud-brick were used, well sunk below the level
of the floor. The use of pisé or tauf was apparently unknown. Most
of the brick was made with much straw, but in Level III sandy brick
without any straw is also found and contrary to the well-known
proverb it is of excellent quality. Most of the bricks are greenish
in colour, but the sandy bricks are buff: A black mortar, rich in
ash and broken bones (occupation-debris), was lavishly used, espec-
ially in the lower levels (VI) where the layer of mortar is often
nearly as thick as the bricks (6 cms as against 8 cms). Bonding was
practised.
  Brick sizes varied and more than one size was in use in each level;
the sizes are here tabulated:

  Level II      Standard size:     65/6737 X8 cms
                Large size:        95 X37X 8 cms
  Level II      42X25 x8 cms
                72 X 32 X 8 cms
  Level IV
  Level V       62 X 16 X 8-10 cms
                92 X 16 X IO cms
  Level VI A Standard size:        32168 cms
             Others:               32 X22 X9 cms
                                   38x 12x 8 cms
                                                                                         oD
Catal Hiiyiik
                     Level VIB    Standard size:   32168 cms
                                  Others:          40+? X24 10 cms
                                                  44-50X 31 X 10 cms
                     The flat roofs were made of bundles of reeds with a thick mud
                   cover on top and a mat below to prevent an incessant rain of bits of
                   reeds falling on the floors. Two stout main beams and numerous
                   small beams supported the heavy roofs. There is no direct evidence
                   for the existence of a second storey of light materials or a partial
                   second storey such as a verandah with columns, extending over part
                   of the building, but some houses may have been provided with
                   them. In any case some structure protected the light- and ventilation-
                   shafts and the entrance-hole in the roof along the south wall. This
                   may have taken the form of a hutch of wood provided with a
                   wooden door, or it may have been a verandah or portico. That such
                   protection was indeed provided is clear from the good preservation
                   of the wall-plaster near the entrance-hole; this would not have been
                   the case if the plaster had been exposed to the open sky.
                      Entry through the roof is one of the most characteristic features of
                   all buildings at Catal Hiiyiik; there was no other access to houses and
                   shrines. But secondary rooms, used for storage, entry-passages or
                   light-shafts, are entered from the main room through low open
                   doorways, square, rectangular or oval in shape and up to 72 or 77
                   centimetres in height. None of these openings was provided with a
Plate 7            door, and one could only move through them in a squatting or
                   crawling position. Each house had a wooden ladder made of squared
                   timber (10-12-5 cms thick), one side of which rested along the south
Plate 4            wall, where it has left an easily recognizable diagonal mark in the
                   plaster. This ladder led to a hole in the roof and through this same
                   hole the smoke from hearth, oven and lamps, escaped. For this
                   reason the kitchen end of the house, where hearth and oven are
                   situated, is always placed along the south wall. To retain the maxi-
Plate 4; Fig. 11   mum amount of heat, ovens (there may be more than one) are
                   always set partly into the wall. They are oval in shape and vary in
                   height, but all are provided with flat tops. Near the oven there is
                   usually a deep but low recess in the south wall, which was evidently
                   used for the storage of fuel (wood, brush or straw). The hearths are
56
                                                              S:SHRINE




4-7 Plans of building-level II,
above; III, above right; IV,
centre; V, below




                      .
                     -_-
                                                   .e                          7       .
                    Pe   WBe
                                                   °
                                                                          ave
                                                                         wept      .
                          Weel
                                   .                                      .
                          8    |
                                                                           4
                                       $2 SHRINE


                                       fe)              10m
                                               Limit of excavation




 c: COURT
 S:SHRINE


                                                                     8 Plan of building-
                                                                     level VIA




            rectangular or square in Levels I-VI B, round or square in the lower
            levels, but they are always raised and provided with a curb to
            prevent the spilling of ashes and glowing embers. It is unusual
            to find more than one hearth in each room, and the kitchen part of
            the house occupied one-third of the available space.
Plate 3        Raised platforms were arranged along the walls in the shape of an
            L around the remaining square which was sunk and covered with a
Fig. 11     mat. The usual arrangement of the platforms provides for a small
            square platform in the north-east corner and a much larger platform
            with a higher bench at the south end (nearest to the kitchen) situated
            against the east wall. This was framed between two wooden posts
            which were plastered and frequently painted red. One or more
            subsidiary platforms are found against the north wall and still another
            frequently occupies the south-west corner near the oven. This
            arrangement is the normal one in buildings whose main axis is
58
         °

          C:COURT   S:SHRINE




9 Plan ofbuilding-level VIB




10 Plan of building-level VI
                                 Geese et




                               C:COURT   S:SHRINE




                                                          {\

                                                    .            Suse

                                                        fae      a
                                                                  Toren          a
                                                          a
                                                           Ce.

                                                               B
                                                               a |




                                                           mS
                                                            SS
                                                    SSSESSRSN           pene
                                                                        ee           ;
                                                                             %
Catal Hiiytik
                oriented north to south, but in those buildings that have a west—east
                orientation the small platform is set against the north wall, though
                the larger platform and bench remain constantly set against the
                east wall.
                  These platforms, as carefully plastered as the rest of the house and
                frequently provided with rounded kerbs, are the prototypes of the
                Turkish sofa (and divan) and served for sitting, working and sleep-
                ing. They are often covered with reed or rush matting as a base for
                cushions, textiles and bedding. Below these platforms the dead lay
                buried, and from studying the burial customs it is possible to affirm
                that the small corner platform belonged to the male, the master,
                whereas the much larger and main platform belonged to the mistress
                of the house. The woman’s bed never changed its place, nor did the
                arrangement of the kitchen, but the man’s bed did. The sociological
                implications to be drawn from this are fairly obvious. Children were
                buried either with the women or under the remaining platforms, but
                they never accompany the master of the house.
                   From the bedding space provided by these platforms, which may
                vary from house to house and shrine to shrine, one can possibly
                make some calculations as to the size of a family. The main platform
                easily holds two adults, the corner ones a single adult or two small
                children. No single building provided sleeping space for more than
                eight people and in most cases the family was probably smaller.
                There is one house with but a single platform (A.III.13); there are
                several with two, but none have more than five.
                  The arrangement of sleeping platforms is not confined to houses
                but is also found in buildings which, on account of their interior
                decoration, served as sanctuaries or shrines. Here also the dead were
                buried beneath the platforms and hearths and ovens are found.
                However, for reasons to be explained later it seems unlikely that the
                shrines were continuously inhabited. What section of the population
                was entitled to live and be buried in the sanctuaries is of course
                unknown, but it would be reasonable to assume that it was the
                priestly class and their families,
                   It is evident from the wall-paintings in houses and shrines that there
                was a system of bringing light into the interior of these buildings
                                                                The Architecture of Catal Hiiyiik

    11 Diagrammatic view of a
    typical main room at Catal
    Hiiyiik showing timber frame-
    work, panelling, and platforms,
_   bench, hearth, oven and ladder




    other than that of a few stone lamps put in small niches in the
    wall. As the buildings rose up the slope of the mound in serried ranks,
    lighting would have been difficult but for the fact that each house
    had its own walls and its own roof level different from those of the                  Fig. 12
    surrounding buildings. By stepping the roofs light could be brought
    into the rooms through a series of small windows set high up in two
    of the four walls below the eaves (in the excavated area in the south
    and west wall, so that the light fell on the platforms along the east
    and north walls). It may be surmized that in buildings on the east side
    of the mound the windows were in the east and south wall and the
    position of the platforms was reversed. The position of the platforms
    is probably conditioned by the necessity of bringing light into the
    room and would differ according to the location of the building on
    the mound.
       With the exception of occasional holes filled with sand or gravel
    set near the hearth, there are no arrangements for drainage in these
                                                                                              61
Catal Hiiytik




12 Schematic reconstruction ofa section ofLevel VI with houses and shrines rising in terraces one
above each other



                            buildings. For sanitation and rubbish disposal any open space, either
                            courtyards or ruined buildings, were used and the thick ash deposits
                            in these open spaces were efficient sterilizers. Houses and shrines
                            were kept scrupulously clean; remains of meals such as broken bones
                            are a rarity in any building.
                               Most houses have a storeroom and in some of these grain-bins of
                            dried clay, about a metre high, were found in pairs or in rows. These
                            were filled from the top and emptied through a small hole at the
                            bottom (at floor level) so that the lowermost deposit of grain, most
                            exposed to damp, was always used first. In other storerooms grain
                            was stored in coiled baskets or in skins, but storage in pits lined with
                            straw or matting, though common in later periods, appears to have
62
                                                           The Architecture of Catal Hiiyiik
been almost unknown. One is given the impression that each family
baked its own bread, but in Levels IV and V huge bread-ovens                           Fig. 6
with diameters of 1-5-1-8 metres and built of bricks set on edge
were found in a courtyard which suggests a bakery.
  Other storerooms contained rows of clay boxes filled with
knuckle-bones, stone tools, axes, polishing stones or sling ammuni-
tion, these latter particularly common in Levels II and III. Saddle
querns and mortars are found in most houses and are often sunk into
the ground, in contrast to the later practice at Hacilar where they are
embedded in raised platforms to facilitate grinding.
   A few houses have side by side with the usual oven another with a
separate fire-chamber and a larger domed chamber than most ovens.
These may have been simple pottery kilns. The domed chamber is
always ruined which suggests that it was rebuilt for each firing and
was completely closed during the firing process.

                                Survivals of Earlier Forms of Architecture

A further feature of the Catal Hiiyiik buildings which is particularly
interesting is the use of a timber frame in the mud-brick construc-
tion, which accounts for the characteristic panelling of the walls.
In the earlier building-levels this timber frame is very pronounced
(X-VI A) whereas in the later levels, though still present, it tends to
become less conspicuous.
   By pure chance the conflagration in which the settlement of Level
VIA perished has led to the preservation of the entire north wall and
the adjoining sections of both the west and the east wall of shrine
E.VI.10, thus giving us the entire height of the building (3-3 metres                  Plate 9
interior measurement) and precious details about its constructions.
The wooden framework was burnt out, but the baking of the brick
walls has preserved its skeleton so that an accurate reconstruction can                Fig. 11
be made of the building.
   The most interesting feature of this construction is certainly the
fact that the wooden framework could stand by itself, independent
of the mud-brick walls. The brick filling (32 cms or just 1 foot thick)
is awkward and of little strength and one can hardly escape the
                                                                                           63
Catal Hiiytik
                conclusion that the timber frame incorporates the main elements not
                of a brick, but of a wooden house, where the panels between the
                horizontal and vertical beams were filled with partitions of lathe-
                and-plaster or wooden planks. Peculiar to this wooden structure was
                a sort of corbelling, i.e. above each horizontal beam the walls are
                brought forward up to 23 cms, a feature that is not only decorative
                but originally devised to decrease the width of the room so that
                shorter timbers could be used for the roof-beams.
                   The origins of such wooden houses must be sought not in the
                almost treeless Konya Plain, but in the forest zone of the Taurus
                Mountains or their foothills on the edge of the plain. In the earliest
                levels of Catal Hiiyiik it would appear that this type of wooden house
                was readapted to local conditions and thin mud-brick walls were
                substituted for the traditional lathe, plaster and wood panels within
                the timber frame. The result of this is that the weight of the over-
                hanging wall sections and the thick layers of plaster weakened the
                structure and when the wood rotted (as in Levels VII or VI B) or was
                destroyed by fire (as in Level VI A) the upper parts of the walls, left
                unsupported, toppled down without fail. The builders of Catal
                Hiiyiik learnt their lessons, and from Level V onward they con-
                structed much thicker walls with larger bricks, greatly reduced the
                overhang and thus created structurally much sounder buildings.
                Gradually the emphasis on the timber framework was reduced and in
                Level II even the wooden posts were replaced by mud-brick pillars
                engaged against the wall. Thus internal buttresses were formed (the
                prototypes for the Early Chalcolithic ones of Hacilar and Can
                Hasan) and the framework retained only a decorative function.
                  The characteristic panelling of the walls at Catal Hiiyiik is thus the
                result of the use of a timber frame, the elements of which are usually
                emphasized by the use of red paint. These panels in three super-
                imposed rows with the middle one at least twice as high as the two
                others, lend themselves admirably to interior decoration, such as
                reliefs or wall-paintings. In houses, as distinct from shrines, ornamen-
                tation was sparingly used and it was on the whole confined to
                the lowermost panel, varying in height from 60 to 80 cms above the
                main platform and the small platform in the north-east corner. The
04
                                                        The Architecture of Catal Hiiyiik
much larger middle panel is but rarely painted and the uppermost
panels are never painted. Painted decoration in houses is found in
several varieties; plain panels in various shades of red are by far the
most common, geometric patterns, or hands or feet are much less                 Plates 5, 7
frequent. More or less naturalistic subjects are mainly found in
shrines, but there are some exceptions: birds decorated a central
panel in house E.VI.B.44 and concentric circles and stars covered the
same panel in E.VI.A.66. The well preserved buildings of the lower
levels show that painting was widely practised and the comparative
rarity of painting in the later levels is probably the result of the poor
state of preservation rather than of a decline in this art.
  Another form of decoration, found both in shrines and in houses
is the use of stylized bucrania which consist of a small pillar of brick
in the upper part of which are incorporated the horn cores and the
frontal of a wild bull (Bos primigenius), set on the edge of the main
platform in a number of houses, to serve probably as a symbol of
protection. In no single house was such a bucranium found intact
and only the scars remain, but in sanctuaries the bucrania occur in
multiples and they are frequently found more or less intact. It would             Plate 15
appear that a single bucranium may be found in a house, whilst
rows of bucranium are confined to shrines, where they may also be
painted.
  Evidence for still another sort of building comes from an intriguing
wall-painting found on the north wall of a shrine in Level VI B                    Plate 8
(VI.B.1). The painting, about a metre long and 71 cms in height
covered the lowermost panel and depicts a series of human skulls
and bones below an architectural facade. A building with four gables
separated by five pillars is represented in red and white paint on a
buff surface, and the grisly remains of human bodies are obviously
meant to be inside this building, which probably represents the
charnel house where the dead were excarnated before burial in the
settlement (see below, p. 204). The representation of the building is
quite clear and it would seem to bear close relation to reed structures
of the type still built in the marshy regions round the Lake of Eber
(north-west of Konya); as also to the representations of reed huts in
predynastic Egyptian art, and to the magnificent reed architecture
                                                                                        65
                                                                               :
Catal Hiiytik
                of the Marsh Arabs in southern Iraq. On the basis of these pa
                our wall-painting would appear to represent a series of §
                rooms constructed of wood and matting with tall bundles of
                forming the corner posts of these presumably rectangular stru
                The binding of the reed columns is clearly indicated and so
                matting which forms the walls of the rooms. The flower-like «
                which crown the gables are probably stylized forms of the ¢
                bundles of reeds where they meet at the top, as in the Iraqi n
                and sarifas. The strange shapes which occupy the “doorways
                the rooms may be interpreted as hangings and both the symb
                top of the tables (the quatrefoil) and the ‘arm’ on the hanging
                right may be intended to ward off evil. Both symbols we
                encounter on many other paintings.
                   If our interpretation of this interesting wall-painting is
                approximately correct, we may assume that such charnel ]
                built of reeds were erected near the site of Catal Hiiyiik for th
                stage in the funerary ritual. But buildings of this nature sugge
                other and simpler forms of building than those on the mound
                still practised by the Neolithic people of Catal Hiiyiik, if only
                service of the dead. As funerary practises tend to preserve a
                customs, we may well ask if buildings of this nature do not bele
                earlier traditions than those we see on the mound of Catal H
                traditions which may well antedate the use of mud-brick |
                which we now know did not start with Level X but were al
                used a millennium or so before. Monumental reed archit
                of the type depicted in our wall-painting may have been chat
                istic of a period when mud-brick was still unknown and
                buildings may have been commonplace at the beginning «
                Protoneolithic period, c. 9000 Bc, if they did not already e:
                the Upper Palaeolithic.
                   Wooden houses and reed structures, vestigial remains of trad:
                architectural forms, have taken us back a long way into th
                unexplored past of the Neolithic traditions of Catal Hiiyiik
                must now return to our mound and see how these early bi
                planned their town.

66
                                                                     The Town   P


INS GLANCE at the plans of the various building-levels at
      Catal Hiiyiik suffices to show that its builders were well aware
of the necessity of planning an orderly settlement, far removed from
the disorderly and random agglomeration of freestanding huts and
hovels characteristic of the Protoneolithic period in Palestine, the
only region where settlements of this period have been explored
in extenso.
   Orderliness and planning prevail everywhere; in the size of bricks,
the standard plan of houses and shrines, the heights of panels, door-
ways, hearths and ovens and to a great extent in the size of rooms.
Hand and foot seem to have been the standards of measurement with
four hands (8 cms) to a foot (c. 32 cms); this is most clearly seen in the
Level VI bricks which are one hand thick, two hands wide and four
hands long (8 x 16 x 32 cms).
  In the size of houses there are of course variations according to the
family’s need: they range from small ones with a floor space of 11-25
square metres to huge ones with areas of 48 square metres, but the
most common size of houses and shrines varies from 25 to 27 square
metres, i.e. rooms of about 6 x 4:5 metres.
   Houses are invariably of rectangular plan and the lines of the walls
are as straight as the eye could make them. Storerooms and subsidiary
chambers are arranged around the main rooms according to in-
dividual needs and their position is of little consequence. Most appear
to have been lower in height than the main rooms.
   Because of the habit of building one structure on top of the other,
using the old walls as foundations a certain homogeneity of plan
was created, but by subdividing rooms or joining others together, by
using the site of one or more rooms for creating a courtyard or open
space, the plans of individual building-levels vary considerably even
Catal Hiiytik
                if the general layout is to a great extent preserved. It will eventually
                be of great interest to trace the plans of the successive building-levels
                down to the original master-plan which the conservative builders of
                Catal Hiiyiik continued to follow through numerous centuries.
                   The Neolithic builders were faced with a number of problems such
                as defence, communications between different quarters, terracing on
                top of an old mound, the arrangement of rectangular buildings to fit
                within the contours of an oval mound and the problems of providing
                enough light for the dense agglomeration of buildings, especially in
                the lower levels. This problem was solved by less congested planning
                which makes its appearance in Level VI A (compare the VI B and
Figs 8, 9       VI A plans) and continued in use until the end of the settlement.
                Access to these new courtyards was gained by narrow passages,
                open to the court, probably carrying a flight of wooden stairs that
                led to the roof. Wooden ladders facilitated access from roof to roof.
                The main use of the large courtyards appears to have been for the
                disposal of rubbish and for sanitation and they also provided more
                air, light and space. They were not used for keeping domestic animals
                in, nor for domestic tasks such as cooking or baking and no burials
                ever took place in the courtyards.
                   The need for defence may be the original reason for the peculiar
                way in which the people of Catal Hiiyiik constructed dwellings
                without doorways, and with sole entry through the roof. Villages
                of this type are still found in central and eastern Anatolia, in the
                Caucasus and in the mountains of western Iran. Defence against
                potential enemies and against floods are the two main reasons for
                such a construction. A solid outer wall built of stone is the alterna-
                tive, but stone was not available in the plain and floodwaters will
                eventually undermine any wall of mud-brick, however substantial.
                Moreover, the city of Catal Hiiyiik was extensive and would need
                considerable man-power to man the entire circuit against enemy
                attack. Once the wall was breached an enemy would have been able
                to break into the city. The solution adopted at Catal Hiiyiik was a
                different one: the planners did not build a solid wall, but surrounded
                the site with an unbroken row of houses and storerooms, accessible
                only from the roof. Even if an enemy succeeded in breaching the
68
                                                                          The Town Plan
wall he found himself in a closed room from which the ladder had
no doubt been removed with the defenders waiting for him on the
roof. To take the settlement would involve close fighting from house
to house in a maze of dwellings which would be enough to dis-
courage the attacker. The efficacy of the defence system is obvious
and, whatever discomfort it involved for the inhabitants of the city,
there is no evidence for any sack or massacre during the 800 years of
the existence of Catal Hiiyiik, so far explored in the excavations.
What any enemy might attempt to achieve was to set fire to the
settlement, and so far no wells have been discovered, but it is also
clear that the people of this city were sufficiently well equipped with
slingshot, bow and arrow, lance and spear to keep any attacker well
away from the foot of the walls. What caused the final abandon-
ment of the settlement is still far from clear, but there is as yet no
evidence for massacre and the new site across the river, where the
inhabitants subsequently settled is nearly as large as the mound they
had left.
   The plan of Level VI B shows two terraces; an upper one with                    Fig. 9
rooms in two rows (nos 47-32 and 52-27) and a lower terrace
bordered by an outer range of rooms (nos 24-39) at the bottom of
the mound. In this plan a great number of house-walls form a con-
tinuous line, evidently the result of planning blocks of houses and
shrines as a single construction. Narrow rows of houses with an
east-west axis alternate with broader rows with a north-south axis,
but this principle has not been carried through to its logical end and
pleasant irregularities break the monotony of row after row of
dwellings and shrines. In Level VI A the complex of four shrines                   Fig. 8
(nos 14 and 7, 10 and 8) is well balanced with courtyards in
between and on either side, and a similar arrangement of shrines on
either side of a courtyard is found on the upper terrace.
  In Level VII rows of shrines alternate with rows of houses; in                  Fig. 10
Level IV a system of courtyards is well developed and in Level Ill                 Fig. 6
the main shrine is again flanked by long narrow rooms. Finally in                  Fig. 5

Level II there are two clearly marked complexes, but these are only                Fig. 4

partly excavated. Between the two is a gate passage, which is better
preserved in the previous building-level, III. The tower-like structure
                                                                                      69
1 Hiiyiik
                 north of the entrance passage was filled with great masses of burnt
                 mud-brick which extended all over the surrounding area, suggesting
                 that it may well have been a tower of greater height than the
                 buildings around it. The original gate passage was narrowed by
                 additional brick walls so that it was easy to block in case of an attack.
                 The strange structure which lies immediately in front of it is not a
                 house and marks a change in the original plan, being constructed at a
                 somewhat later date. It obstructs direct entry into the settlement and
                 may have served as a guard-house and the crooked passage which
                 forms a cul de sac on the left while leading to a series of storerooms
                 may have been devised to mislead intruders. The examples quoted
                 show clearly that the builders of Catal Hiiyiik did not construct at
                 random but according to preconceived plans. So far no wells have
                 been discovered.


     Total no.
el   ofrooms        Houses’      Shrines               Proportion

                       4            I           4 houses to one shrine

                       7            yD          3-4 houses to one shrine

                      II            2           5-6 houses to one shrine

                      II?           a?          inconclusive

                      20           II           2-3 houses to each shrine
eee  ee ee         ee
 31 14     2 houses to each shrine

                      20           II           2 houses to each shrine

                       2            2

                       I            I           Insufficient Evidence

                       I            I
                                                                    The Town Plan
le area excavated which covers about one acre—a mere
1 of the entire surface of the mound—a great number of
and shrines with their storerooms have been found, but no
ops or public buildings. It must be assumed that these were
 in a different part of the mound and the quarter on the west
ras evidently the residential, if not the priestly quarter of the
ne need hardly point out that Catal Hiiyiik was not a village.
proportion of houses and shrines in this quarter can be tabu-
is shown, but in this count the number of storerooms as
from dwellings is not included. From the table it might be
Jed that there were more shrines in the lower building-levels,
0 points should be borne in mind: (a) a much smaller area
cavated of the upper levels (V-II) and the shrines may have
ther back in the unexcavated portion of the mound, and (6),
badly denuded buildings of Levels IV and V the height of
served walls is often insufficient to detect such features as
intings or plaster reliefs by which shrines are recognized.




                                                                               71
Catal Hiiyiik




                I The twin-coned volcano of Hasan Dag (3,253 metres or 10,672 feet) dominates the eastern end
                of the Konya plain and in clear weather is visible from Catal Hiiyiik on the eastern horizon 84 miles
                away. Active until the second millennium sc it is probably this volcano whose eruption is recorded
                in a shrine of Catal Hiiyiik VII, c. 6200 3c (Plates 59, 60). This view is taken from the north,
                along the Aksaray—Nevsehir road, with the Melendiz Daglari, west of Nigde on the left. Hasan
                Dag is one of the probable sources of the black obsidian used at Catal Hiiyiik

                IL View of the plain of Konya from Catal Hiiyiik, looking east towards the isolated mass of
                volcanic rock of Kara Dag (2,271 metres or 7,451 feet) which divides the plain into two halves.
                Though not a volcano, Kara Dag may have supplied Catal Hiiyiik with the volcanic rocks used
                for querns and mortars, pounders and pestles, being only 22 miles away

                III Shrine VI.14 seen from the east with storeroom (left) and shaft (right) entrances in west wall
                on either side of a monumental relief in plaster, a stylized double goddess with upturned legs of
                which the body on the right is giving birth to a large bull’s head, surmounted by a smaller one.
                Arms and heads have fallen down in the destruction of the building, but one arm is shown on
                the floor (left). Cf Plate 22, Fig. 32. Beyond the storeroom and shaft is shrine VI.A.7 (Plate V)

                IV Shrine VI.B.8, showing the north wall with cut-out figure of a bull (top damaged by later
                building) and the east wall with small bulls’ heads over the corner platform and rows of breasts,
                surmounted by scars of fallen bulls’ heads above the main platform along the east wall. On the
                edges of the platforms are the scars of bull-pillars or bucrania. (Cf. Plate 14 and reconstructions,
                Figs 41, 42)

                V East wall of shrine VI.A.7, showing beyond the projecting plastered edge of post the entrance
                to the shrine (in corner). In the centre of the picture is a red-painted niche and in the foreground
                the plaster head of a ram with the imprint of a red-stained hand, supported by a pillar of earth

                VI Plaster relief of a pair of leopards from the north wall of shrine VI.A.44, partly destroyed by
                Hellenistic pits (left) or by animal burrows (centre). Placed above a red-painted panel, a couple of
                leopards is represented with the female on the left and the male on the right

                VII Plaster relief of pregnant goddess from the east wall of shrine VII.23, richly painted in red,
                orange and black on a white ground. The head, hands and feet were deliberately demolished when
                the building was filled in, probably to rob the figure of its magic potency, a practise common at
                Catal Hiiyiik. The goddess was richly dressed and the painting continues on the wall behind, as if
                she were holding an enveloping garment around her, the prototype of the later Near Eastern
                goddesses who show themselves to their worshippers

                 VIM Grooved and painted kilim pattern from the west wall of shrine VII.21. The grooves and
                 the stitching along the top, imitating the sewn edge of the textile are in white, whereas the panels
                 are alternately in black and red
 72




                                                    eri   Car srag =
a         iy
    4st
                                                                         VI

