                                          The Shrines and their Reliefs


abe NEOLITHIC city of Catal Hiiyiik has yielded among many
     other splendours a unique sequence of sanctuaries and shrines,
decorated with wall-paintings, reliefs in plaster, animal heads,
stylized bucrania and containing cult statues, which give us a vivid
picture of Neolithic man’s concern with religion and beliefs. We
have already seen Catal Hiiyiik man as a builder, we shall now also
recognize him as an artist of no mean stature, for the arts which he
practised were manifold.
  Out of 139 living rooms excavated at Catal Hiiyiik II-X, not less
than forty and probably more, appear to have served Neolithic
religion. Such cult rooms or shrines are more elaborately decorated
than houses and they are frequently, but not always, the largest
buildings in the quarter. In plan and construction they are no differ-
ent from ordinary dwellings and they include all the familiar built-in
furniture, such as platforms, benches, hearths and ovens which we
have already recognized as an integral part of the Catal Hiiyiik
building-tradition. Burials also are common in shrines, but there are
some notable exceptions; none were found in the shrine of Level II
or in the second shrine of Level III (A.III.8).
   Although the decoration of the sanctuaries strongly suggests that
these buildings were used for cult purposes, there is no provision for
sacrifice. There are no altars and no tables for bleeding a sacrificed
animal such as we find in the Early Bronze Age shrines of Beyce-
sultan. Nor do we find pits for blood or caches of bones of sacrificed
animals, and, with the peculiar construction of the Catal Hiiyiik
buildings, it would be impracticable to bring animals into the
buildings for slaughter. If animal sacrifice was practised at all the
slaughtering must have been done elsewhere and choice pieces
brought down to be roasted on the hearth. Our only direct evidence
                                                                          77
Hiiytik
          for burnt offerings consists of small deposits of charred grain pre-
          served between replasterings in red clay of a ceremonial hearth in
          the shrine of Level II. Offerings of other kinds which did not need
          burning are extremely common, and in all shrines small deposits
          of grain, tools, used and unused, pots and bone utensils, a few
          animal bones (perhaps meat offerings) bulls’ horns, eggshells, gaming
          pieces, stamp-seals, in fact any acceptable gift, were found in situ
          as they had been deposited by the worshippers and preserved by the
          conflagrations in which many of these buildings had perished. The
          gifts varied from shrine to shrine: gifts of grain and legumes as well
          as stamp-seals were peculiar to the shrine in Level II; well over a
          hundred obsidian and flint weapons were found in shrine E.VI.A.14;
          piles of aurochs’ skulls, horns and scapulae filled shrine E.VI.A.7;
          votive clay figures of animals and sometimes human beings were
          stuck into the walls of most of the Level VI A shrines in area E.
          Groups of figurines of animals: boar, leopard (?) stag, and cattle,
          used in a hunting ritual during which the animals were wounded
          or maimed in effigy, were found in pits near shrine E.VI.B.12
          and E.IV.4. together with some intact weapons (lanceheads) and
          numerous clay balls (sling ammunition).
             Such finds allow us to gain some insight into the many rites that
          must have been performed in these Neolithic shrines.
             The main criteria for the recognition of shrines at Catal Hiiyiik
          appear to be the following: the presence of wall-paintings of an
          elaborate nature that have obvious ritual or religious significance;
          plaster reliefs showing deities, animals or animal heads; horns of
          cattle set into benches; rows of bucrania and the presence of groups of
          cult statues found in the main room; ex-voto figures stuck into the
          walls; human skulls set up on platforms, etc. All these features do
          not occur in normal houses and the combination of several of them
          leaves one in little doubt that the building in which they are found
          was used as a cult room or shrine.
            There are, however, a number of cases where the denuded remains
          make it extremely difficult to decide whether a building was a house
          or a shrine, and in most cases where there is doubt these are buildings
          which overlie an earlier shrine, and where a continuity of cult may
                                                         The Shrines and their Reliefs
ected. That continuity of cult is a factor to be seriously con-
1 is clear from a whole series of superimposed shrines often
there is no evidence left to regard a building as a shrine, the
ire above it shows the unmistakable characteristics of being
which strongly suggests that the sanctity of the place was
nbered. There is some further evidence which may help to
sh shrines; that of the eleven ochre burials found (Levels XII),
me from definite shrines, three more from buildings that have
ns of reliefs and probably were shrines, and the two remaining
denuded buildings built over earlier shrines. It is therefore a
ility to be borne in mind that red-ochre burials only took place
ctuaries. No single example has been recorded from a building
un. definitely be described as a house.
the ten burials of women with obsidian mirrors (Levels VIB-
ee come from shrines, two from possible shrines that also
ychre burials, two others from buildings situated above shrines,
hree from buildings denuded to floor level. Although less
tive than the ochre burials of women, the burials with mirrors
how a connection with sanctuaries, and it is possible that
ire associated with priestesses.
t-fasteners, made   of polished bone, only accompany        male
s in shrines and they probably served to fasten leopard skins,
is are shown in the wall-paintings. As it is unlikely that the
  population of Catal Hiiyiik were so dressed, leopard skins
bly denote a ceremonial garment of male priests as in dynastic
. Carbonized remains of fur and skin, probably remains of
d skins, have been found in a number of cases of male burials
er with belt-hooks and eyes, but in others the material has not
ed. Baked clay seals and metal are again far more common
burials in shrines than elsewhere but the evidence is not yet
sive.
number of Level VI shrines the frontal bone and horn cores of
sulls are set in a bench, but none are found in houses, unlike
ylized bucrania which are, on a few occasions, also found in
ry dwellings. Likewise ram’s heads frequently occur at the
n of the post against the north wall, bull’s heads are built into
                                                                                    qo
Catal Hiiyiik
                     walls and a stag’s head with actual antlers occurs once on the north           ae
                                                                                                    -e-=



                     wall of building E.VI.B.5, possibly another shrine.
Fig. 13                 All these features as tabulated mark certain and possible shrines
                     and it is therefore quite likely that our table of shrines and houses
                     on p. 70 is in need of modification, as shown below;

                Definite          Probable or        Total of
                shrines’        possible shrines      shrines       Houses

                    I                 —                 I              4
                    2                     I             3              6
                    2                     3             5              8
                    3                     4             if             7
                   Il                     2            13             18
                   14                     2            16             39
                   II                     z            12             19
                    2                     I             3               I
                     I                    I             2             od
                     I                —                 :               I

                   48                 15               63            103


                        For those building-levels of which a sufficient number of buildings
                        have been excavated (III-VII, excepting V) it would appear that for
                        each two houses there was one shrine. In decoration as well as in size
                        there are considerable differences between these shrines: some are
                        obviously major ones and richly ornamented, and as major shrines I
                        would regard VI:61, 44, 45, 31, 14, 7, 10, 8, 1; all of these have a
                        north-south axis; whereas others have but a single wall-painting or
                        animal head, and one cannot help wondering whether these lesser
                        shrines were either subsidiary to the main ones, or the dwellings of a
                        lesser order of cult personnel. Needless to say nothing is known
                         about the Neolithic hierarchy, but the three groups of buildings in
                         this quarter: greater shrines, lesser shrines and ordinary houses may
                         all have been inhabited by various ranks in the Neolithic priesthood.
                         It is not impossible that only the major shrines served the public cult,
                         or were inhabited only periodically at the time of the great feasts,
                         whereas the lesser shrines were the normal residence of the upper
80
             JoT]Ied SOULIYS          UOHISOg
                                           J2AO
                                                 IND)
    BURIALS

                                s2739N3¥3S    Tew
                             som3y    sig TPL Arp
a. i < ” = uii 4 rr= = re”



                                                                                                                S   SEEEEEEE       EERE
                                                                                                                     “a             |
PAINTINGS
WALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Spe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rs}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          StS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          died
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          eed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SlS[S15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ei
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <

                                                                        4            Slo                            nH       g        O}+] 4
                                                                        >            asd<|<]<]    5}5
                                                                                               =)Fed
                                                                                          oyBy ey                   alFan
                                                                                                    ic]rdfyFan]fana as)    ElPa
                                                                                                                        ealfa     SIS)3/518
                                                                                                                                    Salsa                                                                                               ‘feo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4} 09
                                                                  2                           53                         5                     ms
