IX

Burial-customs and Grave-goods


                HE NEOLITHIC PEOPLE of Catal Hiiyiik buried their dead below
           a ee: platforms of houses and shrines and only rarely below any
           other part of the floor. No burials have been found in storerooms or
           courtyards and extramural burial, such as was found at aceramic
           Hacilar c. 7000 Bc, was apparently unknown at Catal Hiiyiik.
             It is now clear that secondary burial was practised at this site, i.e.
           the skeletons were stripped of soft tissues before burial inside the
           dwellings, probably not just for simple reasons of hygiene but
           part ofa highly developed pattern of rites of passage. Upon death the
Plate 8    corpse of the deceased was probably removed to a mortuary outside
           the settlement where vultures cleaned the corpses down to the bones
           and dry ligaments. Presumably the dead were exposed on platforms,
           accessible to the birds and insects, but not to dogs and other scaven-
           gers which carry off bones. Evidently care was taken to preserve
           the skeleton intact in anatomical position and a check was kept on
           their identity. Whether this was the duty of the relatives or that of a
           special class of undertakers is of course not known, but the former
           seems more likely. To strip the flesh of the unborn child found in
           shrine VI.14 other methods were evidently used, such as immersion
           in a pot of water for only in this way could the minute bones survive
           intact. In a fair number of skeletons the brain was still in the skulls,
Plate 94   but in one instance it was removed and a ball of fine cloth substituted.
              It seems extremely likely that the burial of the dead coincided with
           the annual spring or early summer redecoration of houses and shrines,
           when the population must have found other quarters for the duration
           of the burial rites, the white-washing and the time required for the
           plaster to dry out thoroughly. This implies that the dead were kept in
           the mortuary until the annual ceremony and it is therefore not
           surprising to find some differences in the state of excarnation of the
204
                                                            Burial-customs and Grave-goods
corpses. Some had lost fingers or toe bones or the head had become
detached whereas others still contained human fat and traces of flesh
at the time when the burials took place. Some skeletons were more
or less disjointed whereas others were still anatomically intact with
not a single bone out of place. From the preservation of perishable
materials, such as cloth, skin, fur, etc., frequently preserved below the
skeletons it is clear that they were buried only when they had reached
a state of complete or near desiccation. Wrapped in cloth or skins
fastened with cloth straps and leather thongs or fibre rope, the
skeletons were buried below the platforms at an average depth of
60 cms, sometimes laid on mats but more often directly in the earth.              Plate 119
The edges of the platforms served as a demarcation line and no burial
protruded beyond them, but where for lack of space the dead were
buried below the floor they were put in oval graves.
  No definite orientation was observed, but the head is usually
turned towards the centre of the building and the feet towards the
wall. Most, but not all the dead lie on their left side in a contracted            Plate 93
position but some are extended on their back with head to the wall
and feet towards the centre of the room (red-ochre burial in E.IV.8
and one burial in VI.B.10). In the shrines and houses of Level VI
(A and B) several layers of burials are not uncommon and later                     Plate 92
burials frequently disturbed the bones of earlier interments. In the
later layers less care seems to have been taken not to disturb earlier
burials and their bones and skulls are frequently rearranged and
funeral gifts scattered. Throughout the Early Neolithic period from                Plate 96
Level X to I no change in burial-customs seems to have occurred.
   Individual graves are rare. Most houses and shrines served as family
burial sites and the longer a building was occupied the greater is the
number of bodies found. The maximum number, thirty-two
individuals, came from shrine VI.B and A.10, occupied throughout
Levels VI B and A, but house VI.B.34 yielded not less than twenty-
eight burials. On the other hand shrine VI.61, also occupied in both
Levels VI B and VI A, yielded only thirteen and shrine VI.A.25
a single woman and child. It proves impossible to correlate the
number of burials, sometimes extending over generations, to the
length of occupation of a building and the very small number of
                                                                                      205
Catal Hiiyiik
                dead found in certain buildings, especially in the lower levels
                (IX-VII) or in Level V, makes one wonder where their occupants
                were buried. It is for instance inconceivable that only six deaths took
                place during the 120 years or so that the great vulture shrine (VII.8)
                was used, and this again suggests that shrines were not continually
                used as burying places, but may have been reserved for special
                individuals only. The same question arises in the case of houses,
                where the number of burials seldom suggests that all their occupants
                had been buried in the building. Only one house, VI.B.34, with
                twenty-eight burials over a period of about a century or four
                generations of seven individuals per generation (including small
                children) approaches what one would expect, but in all other build-
                ings of Level VI the number is much less (three burials per house for
                the entire VI B and A period of about 150 years cannot represent all
                the dead). So where are they buried? Only excavation on a much
                larger scale might eventually settle this intriguing problem, which at
                the moment is insoluble, as a great number of burials in Level VIB
                shrines have not yet been excavated. There remains however one
                possible solution to account for only 229 skeletons of Level VI (A
                and B) in thirteen shrines and eight houses, and that is by assuming
                that the dead buried in the shrines are part of the population of the
                houses (on the assumption that the shrines were occupied only at
                certain times of the year for religious ceremonies). If the 229 burials
                are divided over eight houses, the average of 28 dead occurred per
                house over six generations (or about 150 years, the estimated length
                of Levels VI B and A together). This gives four to five dead per
                generation in each house, which agrees with the size of the building,
                the sleeping space and hence the average size of a family. This would
                mean that more than two-thirds of the population (160 out of 226)
                was buried in the shrines, which confirms our opinion that the entire
                quarter was inhabited by priests and priestesses, who would naturally
                prefer to be buried in hallowed ground. This picture will probably
                need modification when excavations are resumed and more burials
                are found in shrines and houses of this quarter, so no great reliance
                should be placed on the actual numbers of dead here used for calcu-
                lation. It would be extremely interesting to compare these results
206
                                                             Burial-customs and Grave-goods
from the priests quarter with a purely residential area and see if the
number of dead buried below the houses is considerably greater.
Evidence from the upper levels cannot be used for comparison as
there is good reason to show that the area remained a shrine area.
   A further point of considerable interest emerges from a study of the
skeletons and their burial gifts and that is that those dead buried in
shrines or probable shrines are generally better provided for than the
dead buried in the houses. This again suggests that the privileged
dead buried in the shrines had been people who during life had
enjoyed affluence, respect or authority; in fact members of a higher
social order or distinction than their relatives buried in the houses.
These differences marked as they are, should not be exaggerated;
even the burials in a number of shrines were by no means richly
equipped, and bordered on poverty (e.g. shrines VI.14, 15, 25, 12;
VII.r and 8, etc.). The equipment of the dead was subject to a
number of considerations: his status in life, his own wishes, the
respect or covetousness of his relatives, possible religious consider-
ations, the nature of his death, etc.; in other words factors which no
archaeologist can ever hope to distinguish. The greater number of
burials in houses and shrines alike were not provided with any gifts.
   Out of a total of about 400 skeletons (or parts thereof) only eleven
may be singled out as ochre-burials, painted with red ochre or
cinnabar (mercury oxide) on the skull or skull and body. Such
burials are then far from common, but occur from Levels [X to III
almost exclusively in shrines. Moreover, most if not all, appear to
have been of the female sex, but, with some exceptions, their funeral
gifts, the main item of which was a necklace, are not rich ones
by Catal Hiiyiik standards. One was a prematurely born infant
(VI.A.14), another a mother buried with a child on top of her
and accompanied by an adze, a flint dagger with chalk pommel, a
spoon and spatula and some fresh water mussels filled with red
ochre (VIII.1). A third, a girl of about seventeen who suffered
from a broken femur which might have crippled her ([X.1), was
treated with red ochre all over the body and had cinnabar
applied to the skull as well. With her were several necklaces and
