                                          The People and their Economy

Gis. BASIS FOR the spectacular development of the Neolithic at
     Catal Hiiyiik was evidently laid by efficiently organized food
production and conservation. That the Neolithic people of this site
had successfully established their ‘Neolithic Revolution’ which
meant freedom from hunger, is proved by abundant evidence. In
fact, few other sites have preserved such an abundance and variety of
foodstuffs and from the sheer size of the as yet uninvestigated
aceramic Neolithic mound it is reasonable to conjecture that the
same sort of conditions which we find from c. 6500 Bc (Level X)
onwards had prevailed for at least a millennium before, if not con-
siderably earlier. We are still ignorant of the ecological factors
involved in the establishment of the first settlement in the plain, in an
area which, as Dr Hans Helbaek has shown, cannot have provided by
any stretch of imagination the wild progenitor of all forms of barley,
the two-row Hordeum spontaneum or the progenitor of emmer,
Triticum dicoccoides. Everything indicates that the plant husbandry of
Catal Hiiyiik must have a long prehistory somewhere else, in a
region where the wild ancestors of these plants were at home,
presumably in hilly country, well away from the man-made en-
vironment of the Konya Plain. If we may theorize for a little, this
statement of the eminent palaeobotanist implies that agriculture was
introduced into the plain, not just before Level X, about the middle
of the seventh millennium, but much earlier at the time when
Catal Hiiyiik was founded. Such agricultural beginnings must have
started long before the moment at which the first carbonized remains
of grains and small legumes make their appearance in the settlements
of the Near East, around 7000 Bc at aceramic Hacilar 5 in Anatolia,
at Beidha VI near Petra and in the Bus Mordeh period of the settle-
ment of Alikosh on the edge of the lowlands of Khuzistan. Even
                                                                             221
Catal Hiiyiik
                those simple patterns of agriculture show a consistent specialization
                with hulled two-row barley as the main crop, emmer (Triticum
                dicoccum) cultivated or wild, coming second, some wild einkorn,
                lentils, pea or vetch as legumes and pistachio and acorns. The
                beginnings must be sought in the Natufian of Palestine, the still
                unknown earlier aceramic of the Anatolian Plateau, and in Khuzistan.
                This will take one into a ‘Protoneolithic’ period which began at the
                end of the Pleistocene, archaeologically speaking just after the end of
                the Upper Palaeolithic.
                   No study has been made of the ecological and climatic conditions
                prevailing at the end of the Upper Palaeolithic on the Anatolian
                Plateau, butJ.Birman informed the author in 1963 that he had found
                definite evidence on the Anatolian Plateau, including the mountain
                ranges of the Taurus which surround the Konya Plain, for a Last
                Glacial relapse and a minor readvance of ice during the Younger
                Dryas of Western Europe (c. 8850-8300 Bc). K. W. Butzer in his
                Environment and archaeology (Chicago, 1964, pp. 425-6), argues that
                this final cold period probably did not pass unnoticed in the Near
                East, producing for example, evidence for moister climate in Palestine
                and Egypt during part or all of the Natufian period. The rather
                modest temperature changes (1-3° C) would not have been significant
                for human habitation, but the depression of the snow line may have
                had its effect on the distribution of wild cereals which may have been
                excluded from certain regions. Modern conditions would not have
                prevailed until c. 8000 Bc, which is very much the same time-range
                that may be indicated for the beginnings of agriculture in Anatolia at
                the end of the Palaeolithic. This period saw not only the first estab-
                lishment of the “Protoneolithic’ village of Jericho, dated by C-14
                before 8000 Bc but also of contact with Anatolia, from which the
                first obsidian was exported to Jericho, a contact that was maintained
                throughout the eighth millennium (Jericho Pre-pottery Neolithic A).
                Perhaps the first agricultural settlements started to appear in Anatolia
                as in Palestine after c. 8300 Bc, perhaps in the eastern hill-zone beyond
                the Konya Plain where lie the sources of obsidian. This is, of course,
                pure speculation, not as yet based on any firmly established facts,
                but the practices of early agriculture, the traditional wooden-house
222
                                                              The People and their Economy
architecture of Catal Hiiyiik, and likewise the commercial and perhaps
ritual importance of obsidian may point to this hilly region.
   The conquest of the plain must, as Helbaek has pointed out, come
later. Its exact date is unknown, but man by then was able to intro-
duce agriculture into a new environment, where seeds were sown in
the flood pools of the Carsamba river which drains from the great
mountain lakes of Beysehir and Sufla into the fertile alluvial plain
around Cumra. As late as 6000 Bc the Konya Plain teemed with wild
life and both the zoologists who have studied our material, Dexter
Perkins Jr and Pierre Ducos regard the plain as a favourable eco-
logical niche which produced maximum size in such species as
aurochs (Bos primigenius), a pig (Sus scrofa) and Red Deer (Cervus
elaphus). Perhaps it was the presence of great herds of these desirable
animals that attracted man to the grasslands of the plain. However
that may be, considerable ecological differences are marked in the
seventh millennium sc between the animals of the plain and those
living round the intramontane lake of Sugla near Seydisehir, as
revealed by the recent excavations of J. Bordaz at the village site of
Suberde. Here 90 per cent of the animal-bones belonged to wild
sheep, pig and Red Deer, the remaining 10 per cent being aurochs,
goat, wolf, fox and tortoise. A small race of pigs, different from the
gigantic species of the Konya Plain, is perhaps the only animal that may
have been domesticated. At Catal Hiiyiik on the other hand domestic
sheep and goat occur even in the lowest layers, but pigs are not
domesticated and the possibility of domestication of the aurochs
cannot yet be proved statistically. In the microlithic obsidian and
flint industry of Suberde the great hunting weapons of Catal Hiiyiik
are conspicuous by their absence and even the arrowheads are differ-
ent. Evidently the hunting of large game was less a feature of Neo-
lithic life in this village than it was at Catal Hiiyiik where the main
quarry was formed by the herds of aurochs, wild pig, and Red Deer.
Two species of wild ass, wild sheep, Roe Deer, Fallow Deer, an
occasional gazelle, fox, wolf, and leopards were also hunted. No
bones of lion have yet been found, but there may be some bear.
A wall-painting is not the only evidence for domestic dog. Birds and
fish were also caught but they were obviously less prized; of snails
                                                                                       223
Catal Hiiyiik
                there is no trace. The people of Catal Hiiyiik then made good use of
                the hunter’s paradise of the Konya Plain and it is of interest to note
                that, as time went on, it became more and more difficult to find large
                horn-cores for ritual purposes. The horns used after Level V are
                very small compared to the enormous ones so common in Levels
                VII and VI. The same rarity of large specimens may have led to a
                reduction in the size of spearheads and arrowheads which is notable
                after Level V and finally to the decline of the stone industry in Levels
                III and II after which incidentally, the wall-paintings disappear.
                   Compared to the simple agricultural products of aceramic Hacilar
                5, enormous progress was made at Catal Hiiyiik during the seventh
                millennium. By Level VI, c. 6000 Bc, not less than fourteen food-
                plants were cultivated. Many more species have been identified, but
                those mentioned here are the economically important ones. The
                principal crops were emmer, einkorn, naked six-row barley and pea,
                all occurring in great quantities from Levels VI-II. Bread-wheat
                (Triticum aestivum) also makes its first appearance in Catal Hiiyiik VI.
                The field pea was more common than the purple pea (Pisum elatius)
                and lentil. A species of vetch (Vicia noena) and cultivated bitter vetch
                (Ervum ervilia) also appear in Level VI. Two cruciferous plants,
                Shepherd’s Purse (Capsella bursapastoris) and the salt-loving Erysimum
                sisymbrioides were grown as sources of plant fat equivalent to the
                gathering and cultivation of linseed in more easterly areas at a later
                date. Among fruit seeds brought from the hills, presumably the
                Taurus Mountains in the south, were almonds, acorns, pistachio
                (Pistacia atlantica), apple, juniper and hackberry (Celtis australis). The
                latter occurring even in the deepest levels of Catal Hiiyiik, was
                apparently used for making wine. Many weeds provide indications of
                the conditions prevailing in the Konya Plain some eight thousand
                years ago and salt-loving species already show that salinity was a
                feature of the Cumra area as it is now.
                   It may be of interest to speculate about other kinds of food. Bever-
                ages such as beer and wine were evidently known, but grapes and
                olives do not appear to have been domesticated till the fourth or
                even third millennium. The acid in the caps of acorns is used today to
                start the process of making yoghurt, and domestic sheep and goats
224
                                                            The People and their Economy
  were evidently kept for their milk and fleece as much as for their
  meat. When     butter and cheese, sour buttermilk or ayran were
  invented we shall probably never know, but they may well be
  Neolithic. Salt, a necessity in the preparation of vegetable foods, was
  easy enough to find in the Konya Plain and the Neolithic station of
  Ilicapmar on a small salt-lake to the south-west of the Tuz Golii
  may have been a trading post specializing in salt export. The paint-
  ings of insects hovering over fields of flowers conceivably suggests
  that honey was known. Other sweetening agents are to this day
  extracted from the bark of trees by nomads in southern Anatolia.
  Resins and birch bark may have been used for fastening tools and
  weapons on to shafts and into handles; bitumen is unknown on the
  Anatolian plateau.
     Of the Neolithic population of Catal Hiiyiik nothing definite can
  be said until the skeletons have been studied by Mlle Denise Ferem-
bach and Professor Lawrence Angel. The following preliminary
  notes are derived from the observations of Mr D. Biernoff. The
  population of Catal Hiiyiik appears to have been of two different
  races (recognized by Mlle Ferembach), dolichocephalic Proto-
  Mediterranean and another brachycephalic element, and of fairly
  tall stature. The average for women being between 5ft and sft gins,
  that for men between sft gins and sft roins with few individuals
  in the extreme brackets. Few people seem to have been more
  than forty years old. There are no individuals among the burials
  that showed signs of violent death, nor is any skull trephined.
  A few individuals show broken limbs, signs of arthritis and caries of
 the teeth. On the whole, however, dentition is excellent. Childbirth,
 fevers, and pneumonia are suggested as the main causes of death, not
 degenerative diseases. Among the skeletons women and children far
 outnumber men. These observations are subject to confirmation.
    Not much can be said about the Neolithic social structure as the
 excavations have revealed only the religious quarter. The position of
 women was obviously an important one in an agricultural society
 with a fertility cult in which a goddess was the principal deity.
 Social inequality is suggested by sizes of buildings, equipment and
 burial gifts, but this is never a glaring one, Full-time specialization
                                                                                    225


       PRIZONA STATE MUSEUM LIBRARY . TUCSON. AZ
Catal Hiiytik
                is fairly obvious and the workshops lay elsewhere on the mound.
                The variety of arts and crafts practised at Catal Hiiyiik is nearly as
                great as that of the developed civilizations of the Early Bronze Age.
                Only the arts of book-keeping or writing and music are not repre-
                sented among the finds. The existence of an ordered pattern of society
                is evident from the stereotyped house plans, from the standard
                features and equipment and a strong conservatism is shown by the
                frequent rebuildings on the same plan, the strict architectural lay-
                out and the very few changes that can be observed in the culture
                over a period of some eight hundred years.
                   In contrast to other contemporary Neolithic cultures, CatalHiiyiik
                preserved a number of traditions that seem archaic in a fully devel-
                oped Neolithic society. The art of wall-painting, the reliefs modelled
                in clay or cut out of the wall-plaster, the naturalistic representa-
                tions of animals, human figures and deities, the occasional use of
                finger-impressed clay designs like ‘macaroni,’ the developed use of
                geometric ornament including spirals and meanders, incised on seals
                or transferred to a new medium of weaving; the modelling of
                animals wounded in hunting-rites, the practice of red-ochre burials,
                the archaic amulets in the form of a bird-like steatopygous goddess,
                and finally certain types of stone tools and the preference for dental-
                ium shells in jewellery, all preserve remains of an Upper Palaeolithic
                heritage. To a greater or lesser extent, such archaic elements are also
                traceable in a number of other post-Palacolithic cultures, such as the
                Natufian of Palestine, but nowhere are they so pronounced as in the
                Neolithic of Catal Hiiyiik. The reason for the continuance of such
                Upper Palaeolithic practices there may be due to a strong conserva-
                tism but one suspects that it had its origin in the very important part
                that hunting continued to play in the economy of the Konya Plain.
                In view of all these survivals one is inclined to believe that this civili-
                zation is descended from an Upper Palaeolithic, probably Anatolian,
                of which hardly anything is known. It would be premature to
                speculate further about the ancestry of Catal Hiiyiik until excavation
                has been carried further, nor would a comparison with contemporary
                cultures in the Near East be of any profit as long as so much inter-
                vening territory remains to be explored, and other key-sites remain
226
                                                         The People and their Economy
unpublished. To describe the impact of this Neolithic civilization
on its neighbours and successors, both in Anatolia and the adjacent
countries of south-eastern Europe would demand another volume.
Dr Hans Helbaek is now in a position to show that it was the agri-
cultural development of Neolithic Anatolia that was responsible for
the spread of agriculture into Europe, preparing the way for the
beginning of European civilization which is our common heritage.
   Seen in this light, the Neolithic civilization of Catal Hiiyiik
represents something unique in the long history of human en-
deavours: a link between the remote hunters of the Upper Palaco-
lithic and the new order of food-production that was the basis of all
our civilization.
   Our task is not yet done; at least a decade of continuing work lies
ahead. It is to be hoped that, with the co-operation of the Turkish
authorities, the excavation of the earliest town of Anatolia and one of
the earliest in the world, may shortly be resumed. Meanwhile,
something of that town’s remarkable quality is here presented as a
foretaste of further discovery.




                                                                                  227
