                                                The Dating of Catal Hiiyiik


     HE FIFTY-FOOT Deposit of Neolithic remains at Catal Hiiyiik,
     so far explored, has yielded the remains of twelve successive          Fig. 3
building-levels. These represent twelve different cities, not phases
or repairs of single buildings. They have been numbered from the
top (O-X) and there are two different building-levels in VI; VI A
and VI B. It is possible that Level VII also consists of two levels, but
this is not yet certain. Not all these were of the same duration and
this is evident not only from the series of radiocarbon dates, but also
from the state of the buildings themselves. Dwellings constructed
of mud-brick are generally assumed to have short lives, but these
vary from region to region and depend as much on the quality of
the mud-brick and the solidity of construction, upkeep, etc., as on
earthquakes, floods and the climatic conditions of the region.
   At Catal Hiiyiik each building had its own walls and was hemmed
in by others, a method of construction which gave greater solidity
to the buildings than they would have had if free-standing. More-
over, the inhabitants were careful to replaster their buildings con-
tinually, both inside and outside, a routine which materially con-
tributes to the longer life of a mud-brick building by keeping out
damp and rain, the main enemy of sun-dried brick. In the Konya
Plain, the average annual rainfall is the lowest in Turkey, less than
16 inches (400 mm.), and most of the rain falls at two distinct
periods, around May and November, in the latter half of the year
often in the form of snow. Only the summer months are hot, dry
and rainless, and to this day replastering is carried out after the rains
of spring, to dry slowly during the summer. Weather-conditions
allow for building and plastering but once during the year, and there
is no reason to assume that conditions were essentially different
during the Neolithic period.
                                                                               49
                                                                                                                                                                why




                                                       >4


                                                       HOE
                                                       ara tal =
                                                       =
                                                                                               ce poner rv SOR Se   SRN   S SS OS SUCCES   SNS SPS SSSR?   SH
                                                       ee
                                                       eee        ene     LINE & FLOOD ; DEPOSIT




3 Plan and section of Catal Hiiyiik showing the shifting pattern of occupation in the excavated
area


                               At Catal Hiiyiik in every room, both large and small, built-in
                            furniture, walls, floors and ceiling, were coated with a fine tenacious
                            white clay (ak toprak), found locally and still in use. The layers of
                            plaster in each building can be counted and, though they are roughly
                            consistent within each building-level, they vary considerably from
                            level to level. This surely is an indication of the age of a building,
                            the more so when one finds that those buildings that have been re-
                            plastered most often (up to 100 plaster layers in Level VI B and up to
                            120 in Level VII) are in a poor state of preservation compared to
                            those with thirty to sixty plaster layers which are well-preserved.
                            In the former cases the buildings had become worn out; the plaster
                            bulged, the walls were leaning at drunken angles, and they had
                            become so dangerous for human habitation that they were con-
                            demned, pulled down and levelled. This was done by removing the
                            flat roof and the beams on which it rested, by pulling out the wooden
                            wall-posts which supported the main roof-beams, and by knocking
                            down the upper parts of the walls until the room was filled with
                            broken brick and plaster. In none of the buildings of the upper levels
                            (VI A-I), where the wall-plaster is well preserved and relatively thin,
                            is there evidence for deliberate demolition, but these levels had been
                             destroyed by fire when the houses were still fit for habitation.
                               It appears then that with annual replastering the age of each
                             house and building-level can be roughly counted and the maximum
 50



       re   VIAL   HIVOLU   IF)                             {        as          =    ft)
                                  ee   aa   ec   i |                        x   aay    |
                                                 ca.        iN.    P —e    mila G, lt
                                                                           Ss
                                                              The Dating of Catal Htiytik
age to which a house was allowed to stand varied from a century to
120 years. Unforeseen circumstances usually shortened this excessive
life-span, and on account of the frequent fires in the upper levels
the rate of building increased considerably. Confirmation for the
length of individual building-levels, as based on the annual rate of
replastering, has come from radiocarbon dates. Counts of plaster
layers then further help as a check on the accuracy of such C-14
dates and between the two systems a fairly reliable absolute dating
can be established.
   Catal Hiiyiik and Hacilar are the only two sites in Anatolia
which have been dated by a consistent series of radiocarbon dates,
and the results shown on p. 52 are on the whole very satisfactory
if one remembers that any of these dates may be a hundred years
too early or too late; but a century is of little importance for the
dating of cultures up to 9,000 years old. Most of the dates obtained
come from charred timber (roof-beams or posts) in burnt buildings
and thus date the cutting of the tree for the construction of the
building in which it was found. Such dates give one the date of
construction, whereas dates obtained from grain in burnt buildings
give the date of the destruction, grain being never much more than a
harvest old before it is consumed. Whereas grain cannot be kept for
ever, timber (mainly oak and juniper at Catal Hiiyiik) can and was
re-used, and much of the wood from the unburnt Levels VII and
VI B was evidently saved for re-use or for fuel. In this way it is
possible to obtain dates which are far too early for the building-
levels in which such old wood was found; e.g. in the case of the C-14
date for Level IV, 6329 Bc+99, which may represent a post taken
from a building in Level IX, or the 6200 Bc+97 date which comes
almost certainly from Level VIL, although it was re-used in a building
of Level VI B.
  The radiocarbon dates from Levels [IX and X, derived from the
ashes of hearths, give only an approximate idea of the dates of those
levels. Although the general sequence of radiocarbon dates is
consistent, individual dates must be used with caution and they
should not be dogmatically accepted if other evidence argues against
their validity. Nevertheless, it remains our only method for dating
                                                                                       ay
Chronological Table

                         HACILAR
          C. SOOOLEC™:     A enna eines
                            Id
                          -Ic
                           Ia   52474119                     Radiocarbon dates in italic type.
          Gece             Ilb                              extreme tolerance.
                           Ila 54344131                     All dates calculated with half-life of
          C. $435 ak               ok                             5730.
                           IV                                Doubtful dates in brackets.
          c. $§00
               600   Te         iE   One Me
          oP               VI 5620+ 79
                           Vil                CatTaL Huyux
                           Vill                              O
                           IX 5614492                        I
                              5706
          ¢. §700 -—————-_                    ¢. $720                            :
                                                                          5797       79
                                              ¢. $750        il

                                                                          5807494
                                              Saree          IV           (6329+ 99)
                                              G.°$830. —- | SUN ween ae ca            ee ee ees ee
                                                             Vi           5920494
                                              6: $880        FS, vane dewalt ste ean eel        eee
                                                             VIA          5781496         destruction
                                                                          5800+ 93
                                                                          5815+92         beginning
                                                                          5850+ 94
                                              faa            VIB          5908+ 93
                                                                          5986494         beginning
                                              c. 6050/6070 VII            6200497 ()
                                              C7200      OU Aas oe nie eins coe ane eae ee
                                                            VI
                                              Fa CABG.   i Nicks aac         ates 3 eee ea
                                                            IX         64864102
                                              COGRIO ES Mie A         On eo kee toates eaenane eeS
                                                            »,4        6385+ 101
                                              CC GSOO Sl AN Redes suse       he aah ates Gaara eect eee
                                                             Pre-X floor levels (not yet dated)
52
                                                              The Dating of Catal Hiiytik
such early cultures and as the method gains in precision so will our
dating gradually improve. The old method of guesswork-dating is
no longer acceptable in scientific archaeology.
  The fourteen radiocarbon dates then place Catal Hiiyiik X-II
between c. 6500 and $700 BC in a space of eight hundred years and
we may perhaps allow another century for Levels I and O. After
5600 Bc the old mound of Catal Hiiyiik was abandoned, for what
reason is not known, and a new site was founded across the river,
Catal Hiiyiik West. This appears to have been occupied for at least
another 700 years until it also was deserted without, however, any
obvious signs of violence or deliberate destruction.




                                                                                       53
1

