Analytical Archaeology
Analytical Archaeology

DAVID           L. C L A R K E
S e c o n d Edition
revised by
B o b Chapman




COLUMBIA U N I V E R S I T Y     PRESS
NEW     YORK
                                                                       Copyright © 1968, 1978
                                                                      Estate of David L. Clarke
                                                                               All rights reserved

                                        Published in 1978 in the United States of America
                                                            by Columbia University Press

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Clarke, David L.
  Analytical archaeology.

    Bibliography: p.
    I n c l u d e s index.
    1. A r c h a e o l o g y — M e t h o d o l o g y . I. C h a p m a n , Bob.
II. Title.
CC75.C535                     1978               930M'028             78-16957
I S B N 0-231-04630-8

10       9    8   7    6   5    4   3    2




Printed in the United States o f A m e r i c a
T o my wife, Stella
  Contents




  Foreword to the revised edition                      xi
  Preface                                              xv
  Acknowledgements                                    xix

1 Introduction and polemic                             i
    I The history of archaeology                       2
   II The nature of archaeology                       10
  III The nature of archaeological data               13
  IV The aims of archaeology                          19
   V Terminology, definition and meaning              23
  vi Models                                           30
2 Culture systems - the model                         42
    I Systems theory, an outline                      42
   li A tentative general model                       72
  III Discussion                                      77

3 Cultural morphology and cultural
  ecology - the setting                                84
    1 The nature of cultural systems                   85
   II Culture as an information system                 88
  in Culture as a system with subsystems              I°I
  iv Environment as a system with subsystems          132
4 Material culture systems - attribute and artefact   149
    I Introduction                                    149
   II Attribute and artefact systems                  152
  III Phase pattern regularities                      162
  IV Time pattern regularities                        180
   V System pattern regularities                      195
viii   Contents

 5 Artefact and type                       205
     I Introduction                        205
    II Artefact-type systems               207
   III Phase pattern regularities          209
   iv T i m e pattern regularities         217
    v System pattern regularities          237

 6 Assemblage and culture                  245
     I Introduction                        245
    n Cultural assemblage systems          249
   III Phase pattern regularities          261
   iv T i m e pattern regularities         272
    v System pattern regularities          285


 7 Culture and culture group               299
     I Introduction                        299
    II Culture group systems               302
   III Phase pattern regularities          305
   IV T i m e pattern regularities         315
    v System pattern regularities          324


  8 Culture group and technocomplex        328
      I Introduction                       328
     II Technocomplex systems              330
    III Phase pattern regularities         337
    IV T i m e pattern regularities        339
     V System pattern regularities         354


  9 Group ethnology                        363
      1 Introduction                       363
     II Internal evidence                  367
    hi Recent ethnographic evidence        370
    iv Historical ethnographic evidence    394


 10 Entities and processes and procedure   409
      I Introduction                       409
     II Entities                           412
    III Processes                          416
    iv Procedure                           458
                                 Contents    ix
l i Discussion and speculation              465
      I Theoretical background              465
     II Disciplined procedure               471
    III Archaeological grammar              479
    IV Speculations                         485

   Definitions                              489
   Bibliography                             497
   Index                                    514
Foreword to the revised edition




During the early months of 1976 David Clarke began planning a
second, revised edition of this book. By academic standards the first
edition had been a great publishing success and all copies printed in
Britain had been sold. But the demand for the book had continued,
with second-hand copies fetching high prices. His intention was to
reduce the volume by over 200 pages, remove outdated aspects and
repetitive passages, summarize overlengthy sections, improve the
prose style where it was obscure and write two new chapters. He
agreed with the publishers that the revised edition would be submitted
to them in the autumn and asked me to assist him with much of the
preliminary work. We discussed the general areas of revision which
were thought necessary and I started to work on the book after Easter.
      After his death at the end of J u n e 1976 I consulted both the
publishers and Mrs Stella Clarke about the revision. Both agreed that
they wished it to go ahead, although it could not be in exactly the same
form as had been planned. David's own personal papers were of little
help, since like with many other subjects he carried most of the ideas
in his head and what was jotted down in note form was heavily
condensed or illegible! T h e book clearly breaks down into two parts,
theory and methods, and although both have been developed in the
last ten years it has been the methods that have undergone the most
drastic changes. T h e r e are important recent works on the use of
computer and mathematical models (Doran and Hodson 1975) and on
the application of quantitative techniques of spatial analysis derived
from contemporary geography (Hodder and Orton 1975). Many of the
suggestions and examples contained in chapters 1 1 - 1 3 of the first
edition have been pursued by other archaeologists in different areas of
the world and in order to do justice to this work at least two, if not
xii   Foreword to the revised edition

three, new chapters would have had to be written. As far as I was
concerned, this would have meant too great a personal intrusion into
the publication of someone for whom I had the greatest admiration
and respect.
     T h e alternative plan, which I have adopted in this revision, is to
retain the first part of the book with its basic structure intact. T o this I
have added the concluding chapter (chapter 14 in the first edition).
Now of course theory is a constant source of debate within
archaeology, and the thoughts expressed in Analytical            Archaeology
have been both welcomed and condemned, accepted and criticized.
T h e concepts and language of systems theory are nowhere expressed
in such detail in relation to archaeological entities and the argument
for a more rigorous concern with theory has seldom been put more
forcefully. Although some archaeologists may find the message rather
baffling (because of its unfamiliar expression) or brash or think it
irrelevant to their own detailed interests, the book remains popular
and influential. As regards David Clarke's development of Gordon
Childe's methodology (a hierarchical classification of archaeological
entities, among which the culture is the central organizing unit), there
are those who now argue that the interpretation of these entities in
terms of social groups is unrealistic and helps to mask important
variability in human behaviour in the past (see chapter 9, note 1). In
the light of these gradual shifts in theoretical orientation, it would
seem useful to have the classic statement of 'hierarchical' or 'culture'
 theory in archaeology available to both students and professionals
 alike.
    Other justifications for the revised edition can be put forward. T h e
discussion of systems theory remains both useful and stimulating. T h e
condemnation of ambiguity, undisciplined procedure and lack of
concern with theory are matters which the student of archaeology
would benefit from reading. Finally, there is the more general value of
a book which is openly outward-looking - exploring other areas of the
disciplinary universe for methods and concepts which may be of use in
our own subject. Students should be made aware of the 'frontiers' of
their subject and there is no finer example of this attitude than
Analytical   Archaeology.
   In line with the author's wishes I have tried to make the book more
comprehensible without sacrificing the basic ideas in it. I have
simplified some of the arguments and removed some of the more
repetitive or confusing passages. New references and figures have been
                              F o r e w o r d to the revised edition    xiii

added. Wherever possible I have confined my intrusions into the text
to notes at the end of each chapter. T h e s e are designed to comment on
more recent developments in both methods and theory and will I hope
lead the reader on to other sources. In one or two cases I have included
material from the original Part I I in this edition, and on two particular
occasions I have rewritten more substantial parts of the text: on econ-
omic subsystems in chapter 3 and on diffusion models in chapter 10.
    During the course of revising this book I have received welcome
encouragement and professional assistance f r o m Richard Bradley,
David C o o m b s and Mike Fulford. I have also benefited f r o m the
patience of the publishers and the encouragement of M r s Stella
Clarke. M y w i f e J a n has been of immeasurable help in the preparation
of the typescript and her tolerance of a reviser working to an increas-
ingly closer deadline. M y greatest acknowledgement is to David
Clarke himself. During the eight years in which I studied under him as
both undergraduate and research student he was an unfailing source of
stimulus and encouragement in my work and his personal kindnesses
were too numerous to mention. Like others of my generation in
Cambridge, I count myself fortunate to have known him and to have
gained from his help and friendship. T h i s revised edition has been
produced in memory of a most exceptional man whose contribution to
contemporary archaeology was outstanding.

Reading                                                    Bob C h a p m a n
September 1977
Preface




Archaeology is an undisciplined empirical discipline. A discipline
lacking a scheme of systematic and ordered study based upon declared
and clearly defined models and rules of procedure. It further lacks a
body of central theory capable of synthesizing the general regularities
within its data in such a way that the unique residuals distinguishing
each particular case might be quickly isolated and easily assessed.
Archaeologists do not agree upon central theory, although, regardless
of place, period, and culture, they employ similar tacit models and
procedures based upon similar and distinctive entities - the attributes,
artefacts, types, assemblages, cultures and culture groups. Lacking an
explicit theory defining these entities and their relationships and
transformations in a viable form, archaeology has remained an intui-
tive skill - an inexplicit manipulative dexterity learned by rote.
    It seems likely, however, that the second half of the twentieth
century will retrospectively be seen to mark an important threshold in
the development of archaeology - a phase of transition towards a new
disciplinary configuration. Since the 1950s archaeologists have been
made increasingly aware of the inadequacies of their own archaic
formulations by the disjunctive comments of a whole new generation
of techniques and procedures now widely used in the fields of inter-
jacent social sciences. T h e adaptive repatterning of archaeology has
been set in motion by the discipline's coupling with the study of
systems, games theory, set and group theory, topology, information
and communication theory, cultural ecology, locational analysis and
analytical and inductive statistics powered by those key innovations -
the digital and analogue computers. A whole array of new studies has
developed whose implications have diffused piecemeal into
archaeology and which increasingly permeate its fabric in a somewhat
xvi   Preface
disconnected fashion. One response to these new developments has
been to avoid them by a nostalgic retreat into historiography, another
response has faced these innovations and initiated a period of groping
experiment, inevitable error, and constructive feedback, whilst yet a
third response awaits the outcome, inert within carefully encysted
reputations - all of these reactions are concurrently in full develop-
ment.
    However, merely to add these new techniques to the existing
structure of archaeology, like so many lean-to extensions of a shabby
and already rambling edifice, is no solution to archaeological amor-
phism. The implications of these developments must be integrated
within a fully congruent and re-designed discipline - the feedback in
these new couplings is such that not, only must these techniques be
selectively modified to match archaeological dimensions but
archaeology must itself adapt and change to gain the best advantage of
this freshly emergent potential.
    This book therefore follows Bacon's conception of the necessary
development of scientific theory by 'anticipations, rash and premature'
(Novum Organum, 1620). This book is a personal attempt towards the
integration demanded by the events sketched above - it is a synthesis
of many analyses in an attempt to trace system regularities. Above all
else, this work is a temporary and tentative assessment of a complex
theoretical development that must inevitably take one or two more
generations to mature as a reasonably comprehensive and fairly viable
set of disciplined procedure. The increasingly mathematical, statistical
and computerized analysis of archaeological data will certainly ensure
that the hitherto tacit and naive archaeological models will be made
viable and explicit, or abandoned and replaced. These models will
themselves escalate from iconic to analogue and then symbolic models
of many kinds - ensuring an increasingly direct liaison with computer
studies and a more powerful and general development of synthesizing
axioms and principles within the discipline itself.
     It is perhaps necessary to relate analytical archaeology to
archaeological central theory and to other archaeological approaches.
 The contemporary study of sociocultural systems has emphasized that
 the analysis of ancient or modern human units and their products
 cannot be satisfactorily accomplished in terms of information from
 single network aspects of these complex systems. The social, psy-
 chological, linguistic, religious, economic and material attributes of
 hominid communities cannot be realistically studied if isolated from
                                                          Preface    xvii

the integral context of the sociocultural and environmental 9ystem
precipitating them in that particular mutually adjusted configuration.
It may not be possible for the archaeologist to specify the exact values
of these former factors but his analyses must at least take into account
their interdependence, the probable range of their limited tolerance,
and the compounded constraint imposed by such limitations.
    It follows that since one may selectively trace an infinity of parti-
cular networks through sociocultural systems and their fossil remains,
no single approach can have the sole prerogative of accuracy and
informative utility. Consequently, there are as many competing
opinions about the proper orientation and dimensions of archaeologi-
cal analysis as there are archaeologists - thus even the domain of
archaeology is partitioned into the overlapping fields of vigorous rival
archaeologies (Chang 1967, p. 137) or 'paradigms' (Clarke 1972) upon
which the progressive development of archaeology depends. Never-
theless, there is one critical subsystem within archaeological studies
which may not claim pre-eminence in virtue but which may claim droit
de seigneur in the whole domain - and that is archaeological central
theory, the largely tacit procedures common to archaeology every-
where.
    Almost every kind and class of archaeological study contributes
something to our understanding of the domain of archaeology but all
such studies, in their turn, depend upon the adequacy of the general
theory which frames their analyses and which should unite studies
within the discipline regardless of area, period, and culture. The
introductory polemic of chapter 1 must be understood in this context
as intended merely to redress the balance in which central theory has
been neglected in the pursuit of narrative history and particularist
analyses. There is certainly a valuable role for all the rival archaeolo-
gies but the central theory uniting analytical archaeology will remain
central - however weak and inadequate its contemporary manifes-
tations may be. Analytical archaeology is therefore primarily a syntac-
tical approach to synthesis and central theory, a changing corpus of
conceptual frameworks which emphasize that no archaeological study
can be better than the ideological assumptions which underlie the
development of its arguments.
    It is with deep gratitude that I acknowledge the assistance and
support which has been afforded me by colleagues in Europe, Africa
and America. In particular I would mention the extensive and stimu-
lating support of Professor J. G. D. Clark of Cambridge, at whose
xviii   Preface

original request the course of lectures was written that have been
recast in this volume. At the same time it is a great pleasure to
acknowledge the impetus and direction imparted to this work by the
friendship and kindness of Dr P. H. A. Sneath, a small side-effect of
his dynamic impact upon British studies in numerical taxonomy. T o
my College, Peterhouse, I owe the academic frame which has enabled
me to live in and exploit the atmosphere of opportunities which
circulate in a great University; perhaps the most fundamental gift that
I can acknowledge.
    I would also like to mention the debts that I owe to certain
contemporaries and colleagues, especially Glynn Isaac and David
Pilbeam, Mike Jarman and Paul Wilkinson - a stimulating reservoir of
provocative comment.
    For invaluable help with all my work I would like to thank my
wife, to whom this book is dedicated - Stella Clarke.

Peterhouse                                                     D.L.C.
January 1968
Acknowledgements




T h e authors and publishers wish to thank the following for permission
to reproduce figures from the sources given below:

      A. P. Watt & Son for fig. 5 (fig. 4 / 1 1 / 1 from An Introduction to
Cybernetics by W. Ross Ashby, published by Chapman & Hall Ltd);
Association of American Geographers for fig. 17b (by P. R. Gould
from Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 53); P. R.
Gould for figs 17a and 17c; these figures reproduced in Locational
Analysis in Human Geography by P. Haggett, published by Edward
Arnold Ltd; the Editor, Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift, for figs 18 and 19
(figs 1 and 2 by F. Barth from Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift, 1959-60,
Bind X V I I ) ; Academic Press Inc (London) Ltd for figs 20, 102 and
io
   3 (fig s 5 a n d 6 from Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence and Settlement : A
Predictive Model by M. A. Jochim, and figs 24 and 25 from Spatial
Archaeology edited by D. L. Clarke); the Prehistoric Society for figs
2 1 , 30a, 30b, and 3od (figs 6, 7 and 9 by G. Barker from Proceedings of
the Prehistoric Society, 1972, X X X V I I I , figs 6 by L. Vertes and 7 by J .
G. D. Clark from Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, N S , X X V I , and
fig. 5 by H. Case from Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, N S ,
X X V I I ) ; Scottish Academic Press Ltd for fig. 25 (fig. 5 from Cali-
bration of Hominoid Evolution edited by W. W. Bishop and J . A.
Miller); the American Anthropological Association for fig. 27 (figs 3 - 5
by J . R. Sackett from American Anthropologist, 1966, 68, pt 2, no. 2);
George Harrap & Co. Ltd for figs 28a, 28b and 89 (fig. 18 from
Anthropology by A. L. Kroeber and fig. 1 from Man and Culture by C.
Wissler); W. H. Freeman & Co. Ltd for figs 28c and 55 (figs 8.6 and
9.1 from Principles of Numerical Taxonomy by R. R. Sokal and P. H.
A. Sneath); J . Briard and the Laboratoire d'Anthropologie, Rennes
for fig. 30c (fig. 103 from Les Depots Bretons et L'Age du Bronze
xx    Acknowledgements

Atlantique); the Macmillan Company for figs 31 and 32 (figs 13 and 14
from Differential Psychology: Individual and Group Differences in
Behaviour by A. Anastasi); the Editor, Acta Archaeologica           Lundensia
for figs 33-5 (figs 81 and 83 by M. P. Maimer from Acta Archaeologica
Lundensia, no. 2); the Editor, World Archaeology for figs 37, 92 and 93
(fig. 1 by G. Isaac from World Archaeology, 1969, 1, and figs 19 and 22
by I. Hodder from World Archaeology, 1974, 6); Country Life Ltd (the
Hamlyn Publishing Group) for fig. 38 (pp. 56 and 58 from The
Country Life Collector's Pocket Book by G. B. Hughes, illustrated by
Therle Hughes); the Editor, American Antiquity for figs 39, 47, 108,
109 and n o (figs 5 and 3 by E. Dethlefsen and J. Deetz from American
Antiquity, 1966, 31, and figs 1, 2 and 3 by D. C. Roper from
American Antiquity, 1976, 41); Penguin Books Ltd for figs 40a and
40b (figs 42 and 25 from Facts from Figures by M. J. Moroney); the
University of California Press for figs 44, 45, 77 and 86 (figs 1 and 2 by
A. L. Kroeber and J. Richardson from Anthropological Records, 1940,
5, no. 2, and p. 5 and diagram 4 by E. W. Gifford from Anthropological
Records, 1940, 4, no. 1); Edinburgh University Press for figs 53, 65
and 91 (figs 9.17 and 9.25 from Mathematics and Computers in
Archaeology by J. E. Doran and F. R. Hodson, and fig. 105 from
Ancient Europe by S. Piggott); the Biometrika Trust for fig. 54 (fig. 6
by F. R. Hodson, P. H. A. Sneath and J. E. Doran from Biometrika,
 1966, 53, nos 3, 4); the Editor, Fieldiana : Anthropology for fig. 57a (fig.
59 by A. Spoehr from Fieldiana : Anthropology, 48); the American
Museum of Natural History for fig. 57b (fig. 24 by J. A. Ford and C.
 H. Webb from Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of
Natural History 46, pt 1); W. Shawcross and the Polynesian Society for
fig. 58a (fig. 7 from the Journal of the Polynesian Society, 73) ; the Editor,
 Nature for fig. 66 (fig. 1 by J. E. Doran and F. R. Hodson from Nature,
 1966, vol. 210); Methuen & Co. Ltd for fig. 90 (figs 20.9, 20.10 and
 20.12 from The Emergence of Civilisation by C. Renfrew); Gerald
 Duckworth & Co. Ltd for fig. 94 (fig. 1 by A. J. Ammerman and L. L.
 Cavalli-Sforza from The Explanation of Culture Change edited by C.
 Renfrew); the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and
 Ireland for fig. 95 (fig. 6 by A. J. Ammerman and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza
 from Man, NS, 6); the Editor, Lund Studies in Geography, and Lund
 Universitets Geografiska Institution for fig. 96 (p. 118 by W. Bunge
 from Lund Studies in Geography, Series C, General and           Mathematical
 Geography 1, and by T . Hagerstrand from Avhandlingar, no. 25);
 Svenska Sallskapet for Antropologi och Geografi for fig. 97 (on p. 226
                                            Acknowledgements         xxi
by E. Bylund from Geografiska Annaler, 42); the Editor, Lund Studies
in Geography for fig. 98 (on p. 1 1 9 by R. L. Morrill from Lund Studies
in Geography, Series B, Human Geography 24); Cambridge University
Press for figs 99, 100 and 101 (figs 5 . 1 7 , 5.18, 5.30 and 5.33 from
Spatial Analysis in Archaeology by I. Hodder and C. Orton); the
Editor, Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania and the
University of Minnesota Press for fig. 104 (figs 1 - 4 by M. Levison, R.
G. Ward and J . Webb in Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in
Oceania, 1972, V I I I , and figs 20, 26, 27, 28 from The Settlement of
Polynesia : A Computer Simulation by the same authors); the Institute
of British Geographers and the American Association of Petroleum
Geologists for fig. 106 (by R. Chorley and P. Haggett in Institute of
British Geographers Publication, no. 37, and by W. C. Krumbein in
Bulletin of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists, 40); and
Edward Arnold Ltd for fig. 107 (fig. 9.21 from Locational Analysis in
Human Geography by P. Haggett).
i     Introduction and polemic

      Now, here, you see, it takes all the running you can do, to
      keep in the same place.
              T h e Queen to Alice, Through the Looking-Glass,
                                                     chapter 2,
                              LEWIS    CARROLL      1832-1898




Every year produces a fresh crop of archaeological excavations, a new
harvest of prehistoric artefacts. Every decade produces one or more
sites of outstanding importance and impact, that linger on in the
literature or sparkle briefly on the glossy pages of ephemeral pub-
lications. T h e archaeologists come and go, new names and sites
outshine the old, whilst hundreds of years of collected material
overflows and submerges our museum storerooms. At the same time a
relentless current of articles and books describe and label the new
material so that the intrepid archaeologist, by dint of furious activity,
can just maintain his status quo against the constant stream of data.
However, the nebulous doubt arises in our minds that a modern
empirical discipline ought to be able to aim at more rewarding results
than the maintenance of a relative status quo and a steady flow of
counterfeit history books.
     T h e purpose of this work is to draw attention from specific
archaeological areas and periods to the general theory underlying
modern archaeology, to refocus this attention on the inconsistencies
and inadequacy of general archaeological theory, and to integrate
powerful new methods into our analytical armoury. T o achieve these
ends we need some knowledge of the historical development of
modern archaeology, for we cannot fully comprehend contemporary
concepts and theories without knowing something of their origins. We
must understand how archaeology reached its present curious and
transient state, if only to emphasize that the views of our time have no
finality, and in order that we might assess the comparative develop-
ment of prehistoric studies with that of related disciplines. When we
have outlined the historical background we can proceed with a deeper
understanding to investigate the nature of archaeology and its raw
2   Analytical Archaeology

material, and the nature of the subject's aims, ailments and potential
development.


I   The history of archaeology
T h e historical background of archaeology, like that of most modern
arts and sciences, takes us back to the Italian Renaissance and the
reawakening of philosophical curiosity. T h i s extraordinary florescence
developed cumulatively upon the 'commercial revolution' which
revitalized certain of the Italo-Byzantine maritime cities in the twelfth,
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries of our era. In these centuries the
mercantile cities of Venice, Genoa, Pisa, Amalfi and Naples gradually
surpassed in wealth the greatest centres of the classical world, financ-
ing in their turn the rise of Rome, Florence, Milan and the cities of
northern Italy.
     By the fifteenth century the commercial empires of Genoa and
Venice stretched from the Canaries to the Caspian Sea and from the
Netherlands to the river Niger in Africa. From their permanent
colonial bases around the Mediterranean and the Black Sea the
Venetians and Genoese established regular trade with China and the
Mongol hordes, with Arab and Negro Africa and with the Hanse cities
of north Germany. From the Orient came spices, precious metals,
silks, jewels, porcelain, paper for the bankers' notes and Renaissance
sketchpads, the printing press for learned works, the Chinese cross-
bow and gunpowder for the notorious Genoese mercenaries and above
all the compass, clock and astrolabe with their navigational potential
for the Voyages of Discovery across open seas. From Africa and the
markets of Timbuktu, Florentine and Genoese merchants bought
gold, ivory and slaves; from the northern trade came cloth, timber,
corn, iron, tin and copper. But beyond price were the myriad ideas,
 innovations and inventions which this overall trade network focused
 on the receptive cities of northern Italy.
    Quite apart from our interest in the Renaissance as the germinal
background for archaeological curiosity, the whole phenomenon of
cultural florescence is one to which we will return in a later chapter
(chapter 6). Nevertheless, we can observe in this particular case that
the Renaissance florescence was based on the politically diverse urban
centres of northern Italy, followed a massive economic boom, grew by
cumulative integration of innovations - ransacked from neighbouring
cultures - and finally reached a threshold of expansion in the fifteenth
                                        Introduction and polemic          3

century. A f t e r culminating in an exponential burst of development in
many interrelated fields the phenomenon subsided in Italy, only to be
continued in a secondary form in France and the North.
     Retrospectively, we see the many interrelated fields of develop-
ment of the Renaissance 'super-nova' as the crucial formulation of the
basic format of many contemporary arts and sciences. Nevertheless, in
their Renaissance setting these diverse arts and sciences were integral
aspects of the 'new philosophy' and later the 'experimental method'.
T h e Renaissance scholar pursued a wide unitary spectrum of studies
although we may now retrospectively label them for their contribu-
tions in single disciplines. Leonardo da Vinci was a painter, sculptor,
engineer, architect, physicist, biologist and philosopher but to his
contemporaries he was simply a scholar of the new philosophy, ending
his days like so many of his countrymen in the service of the king of
France, Francis I.
     A n early facet of the Renaissance was the literary revival and the
search for ancient Latin texts of unimpeachable style urged by the
Florentines Petrarch, Dante and Boccaccio. In these recovered classi-
cal volumes, in the results of the great Genoese inspired voyages of
discovery and in the stirrings of Renaissance curiosity the components
of archaeology slowly formed. In the same context the essentials of
modern mathematics were being developed by Tartaglia and Cardano;
natural history, medicine and chemistry by Salviani, Belon, Aldro-
vandi and Malpighi; anatomy by Vesalius and Fallopius; physics and
astronomy by Galileo, Copernicus, Torricelli and Leonardo. Against
this setting the first scientific societies were formed - at Naples in 1560
the Academia Secretorum Naturae, at Rome in 1600 the Academia dei
Lincei and later others at Florence (1657), London (1660) and Paris
(1666).
    By the mid-sixteenth century the Italian scholars had made avail-
able most of the major works of the great classical authors, if only from
Latin translations. These classical works preserved observations in
Homer and Hesiod directly reflecting Greek life nine centuries before
Christ and in Homer preserving earlier oral traditions of Sub-
Mycenean times. These and other works preserved contemporary
accounts of the transition from a bronze to an iron technology,
together with ethnographic speculations about the former existence of
an era of stone weapons and tools, such as were occasionally observed
amongst neighbouring barbarians. However, no surviving classical
work unequivocally connects these philosophical speculations with
4   Analytical Archaeology
the stone, bronze and iron artefacts dug from the earth. In this lack of
practical implementation we may detect a crucial difference between
the Greek and the Renaissance attitude towards natural philosophy
and the embryo sciences.
       T h e Renaissance scholars of Italy were therefore able to read with
interest the classical meditations upon a succession of ages in which the
use of stone preceded that of bronze and iron. These ideas are found in
varying forms in some dozen or more classical authors but are best
summarized in the words of Lucretius, 95-53 BC. 'The earliest
weapons were the hands, nails and teeth, as well as stones, pieces of
wood, flames and fire as soon as they were known. Later the properties
of iron and bronze were discovered, but bronze came first, the use of
iron not being known until later. . . gradually the iron blade replaced
the bronze sickle' (De Natura Rerum, verses 1 2 8 3 - 1 2 9 6 : Cheynier
 1936, p. 8). In such passages as this the classical authors preserved a
clear and continuous tradition based on ancient memories and obser-
vation but increasingly philosophical and poetic and quite unconnec-
ted with the ancient artefacts in the soil. T h e peasant who dug up and
preserved these artefacts believed that they were celestial thunderbolts
with magical properties. With the medieval resurgence of European
 peasant traditions the celestial origin became the scholarly hypothesis,
found in the literature from Marbodius ( 1 0 3 5 - 1 1 3 2 ) to Paracelsus
 (i493-i54i)-
        T h e Renaissance immediately brought into conflict the classical
 interpretation of the artefacts as relics of former epochs and the folk
 interpretation of the artefacts as celestial objects of miraculous pro-
 perties. In contrast to the Greek philosophical approach the Renais-
 sance naturalists had early encountered ancient artefacts in the field
 and classed them with other interesting phenomena like the fossils. In
 this context several Renaissance naturalists expressed their firm belief
 in the human origin of these tools. The 'geologist' Agricola (1490-
  1 5 5 5 ) dismissed the idea of celestial origin (Cheynier 1936, p. 9). T h e
 famous naturalist and 'anatomist' Ulysses Aldrovandi ( 1 5 2 2 - 1 6 0 7 )
 asserted that these stone tools were used by ancient peoples before the
 use of metals, supporting his argument with quotations from Pliny.
 Finally, in a definitive work, Michael Mercati ( 1 5 4 1 - 9 3 ) integrated the
 practical observations of the peasants, the knowledge of the classical
 authors and the fresh thought of the 'new philosophy'.
        Michael Mercati is the archaeological counterpart of Cardano in
 mathematics, Vesalius in anatomy, Galileo in the physical sciences and
                                        Introduction and polemic         5

C o p e r n i c u s in astronomy. Mercati can by no means be said to be an
'archaeologist' and yet his work is among the first to contain the
elements f r o m which the subject later emerged. Michael Mercati was
primarily a naturalist, he was Superintendent of the Vatican Botanical
Gardens, he kept a collection of minerals and fossils as well as acting as
medical adviser to Pope Clement V I I I . Being a field naturalist
Mercati's attention was soon drawn to the problem of ancient stone
implements and their origins. His Renaissance education gave him a
sound acquaintance with the works of Pliny, Lucretius and Festus
amongst others and made him aware of the classical tradition of the
former existence of successive eras of stone, bronze and iron tools. A s
a pious Vatican official Mercati also drew from that other great
compilation of ancient oral tradition - the Old T e s t a m e n t , which
parallels H o m e r in its memories of stone and bronze implements and
its historic account of the introduction of iron by the Philistines. T h e
third component of Mercati's understanding was the growing collec-
tion of Asiatic and American Indian artefacts given to the Vatican by
the Italian, Portuguese and Spanish explorers and voyagers. T h e s e
three strands, comprising field observations, ancient tradition, and
contemporary ethnology were the foundations of Mercati's inter-
pretation and remain, in altered form, the foundations of modern
archaeology.
     T h e manuscript which Mercati prepared spoke of the credulity of
the argument for celestial origin and quoted the s u m m a r y of
Lucretius, given earlier in this section. Mercati went on to explain how
flint implements are made and illustrated polished sione axes, flint
arrowheads and blades to point out the purpose of these artefacts. T h e
manuscript as a whole was only part of Mercati's great work on
minerals and fossils, the 'Metallotheca', which remained in the Vatican
library until Pope Clement X I ordered its publication in 1 7 1 7 .
Although unpublished until this late date the work was well known by
the early seventeenth century and the same views appear in the works
of several naturalists of this period. Together with Aldrovandi and
others, Mercati had established that the artefacts excavated b y the
peasants were indeed humanly made tools from ancient times and
directly related this material to the classical hypothesis of a stone,
bronze and iron using succession of ages. T h e addition of contem-
porary accounts of primitive tools and weapons collected by the
merchant explorers completed Mercati's observations (Cheynier 1 9 3 6 ,
pp. 8 - 1 0 ) .
6    Analytical Archaeology
    T h e s e v e n t e e n t h century saw the eclipse of the Italian R e n a i s s a n c e
b y its F r e n c h satellite u n d e r the Italianate courts of the s u c c e s s i v e
Louis,     culminating         in   'le    Roi     Soleil',    Louis      XIV.      We      may
r e m e m b e r that L e o n a r d o w o r k e d in France, as had Cellini and m a n y
other Italian artists and scholars. S e v e n t e e n t h - c e n t u r y        France w a s
p e r m e a t e d w i t h Italian art, science, mathematics, architecture, m u s i c
a n d general fashion. In this context it is hardly s u r p r i s i n g to                   find
M e r c a t i ' s ideas mirrored in F r e n c h Jesuit authors of the period. T h e
F r e n c h c o u n t r y s i d e is especially rich in antiquities either as scattered
artefacts or m o r e strikingly in the great stone m o u n d s and t o m b s .
H e r e , as e l s e w h e r e in E u r o p e , men had d u g and pillaged w i t h little
f u r t h e r t h o u g h t or curiosity about the c u r i o u s tools of stone and
bronze.     It w a s    not    until the       Renaissance       ideas d i f f u s e d    French
scholarship that useful d e v e l o p m e n t s ensued.
     By 1685 the Jesuit M o n t f a u c o n had already p u b l i s h e d a paper on a
megalithic t o m b containing skeletons and stone axeheads, at E v r e u x in
N o r m a n d y . H o w e v e r , by 1 7 1 7 Mercati's great w o r k w a s w i d e l y avail-
able in print. A little later, in 1 7 2 1 , A n t o i n e de Jussieu read a paper at
the A c a d é m i e Royale des S c i e n c e s in w h i c h he r e f u t e d the celestial
theory and c o m p a r e d the artefacts with A m e r i c a n and                    Canadian
I n d i a n flint i m p l e m e n t s - f o r m u l a t i n g a S t o n e A g e on this basis.
S i m i l a r l y , another French Jesuit, Lafitau, published t w o v o l u m e s on
' T h e c u s t o m s of the A m e r i c a n Indians, c o m p a r e d w i t h the c u s t o m s of
early times', w h i c h appeared in 1724. In 1730, M a h u d e l read a paper
to the A c a d é m i e des Inscriptions q u o t i n g M e r c a t i and c o n f i r m i n g the
idea of three successive ages or epochs. M o n t f a u c o n f o r c e f u l l y re-
iterated the same ideas in an illustrated publication of a paper to the
s a m e society in 1734, postulating a Stone, Bronze and Iron                               Age.
By 1758, G o g u e t , in a m e m o i r o n 'L'origine des Lois', could state
that 'the use of b r o n z e p r e c e d e d that of iron . . . f o r m e r l y stones, flint
pebbles, bones, horn,            fish-bones,     shells, reeds, and t h o r n s were used
for e v e r y t h i n g for w h i c h civilized peoples use metal t o d a y . Primitive
peoples give us a faithful picture of ancient societies' ( C h e y n i e r 1936,
pp. 10-14).
     In France Mercati's work was w i d e l y disseminated and appreci-
ated. T h e idea of three successive ages using stone, b r o n z e , and iron is
specifically repeated b y s u c h authors as M o n t f a u c o n and                     Mahudel
w i t h prehistoric artefacts illustrated under these s u c c e s s i v e categories
( L a m i n g 1952, pp. 1 6 - 1 9 ) . T h e s e ideas and their practical and strati-
g r a p h i c implications were f u r t h e r d e v e l o p e d in France in the work of
                                                    Introduction and polemic                  7

men like J o u a n n e t ( 1 7 6 5 - 1 8 4 5 ) and Boucher de Perthes ( 1 7 8 8 - 1 8 6 8 ) .
H o w e v e r , by a c u r i o u s but not inexplicable chance, the full impli-
cations and explicit formulation of the 'three ages' system first
appeared not in F r a n c e - but in D e n m a r k .
       Historically, the f o r t u n e s of the tiny state of D e n m a r k fluctuated
t h r o u g h o u t the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries f r o m the role of a
major S c a n d i n a v i a n p o w e r to bankrupt insignificance and back again.
A small country b u f f e t e d back and forth between alternating alliances
with various great E u r o p e a n Powers, D e n m a r k w a s b e y o n d the
ancient influence of I m p e r i a l R o m a n and early Renaissance literacy,
with a written history shorter by more than 500 years as c o m p a r e d
with its southern n e i g h b o u r s . T h e need to assert the country's ancient
existence and respectable antiquity w a s certainly one significant factor
in the national interest in its antiquities.
      T h e most important cultural influence in D e n m a r k between 1 6 7 0 -
1 8 7 0 w a s u n d o u b t e d l y F r e n c h . With the succession of Christian V
(1670—99) D e n m a r k threw off the narrower restraints of Protestant
philosophy and r e m o d e l l e d its attitudes on those of the brilliant
F r e n c h court. Christian V deliberately reorganized his a r m y , court
and state along the lines of 'le Roi Soleil'. T h e Danish army adopted
F r e n c h styled u n i f o r m s , military formations and w o r d s of c o m m a n d .
T h e D a n i s h court and aristocracy spoke F r e n c h , the royal household
took over the p r o c e d u r e and F r e n c h titles of Versailles, even the royal
decrees w e r e in F r e n c h and Danish. E n c o u r a g e d by g i f t s of m o n e y
f r o m the French king, Christian V and his aristocrats aped F r e n c h
fashions, built c o u n t r y houses in the chateau style and patronized
n u m b e r s of F r e n c h scholars and craftsmen. T h e first serious ripples of
Renaissance learning w e r e reaching D e n m a r k f r o m the s e c o n d a r y
centre of France and continued to arrive until the disastrous
Napoleonic alliance.
    S o w e find sixteenth-century Italian learning p e r m e a t i n g seven-
teenth-century         France      and    finally   reaching eighteenth-                    and
nineteenth-century D e n m a r k . B o b b i n g along with the literary current
we find the ideas of M e r c a t i , M a h u d e l and M o n t f a u c o n a p p e a r i n g in
learned Danish circles, usually unacknowledged but betrayed by their
precise f o r m and s u d d e n appearance. A s early as 1 6 5 5 an old Danish
antiquarian, Olaf W o r m , w a s proclaiming the h u m a n origin of the flint
tools w h i c h he d u g f r o m ancient barrows ( C h e y n i e r 1 9 3 6 , p. 10). M o r e
specific references to the theory of successive ages using stone, bronze
and iron appear sporadically in the Danish as in the F r e n c h and
8   Analytical Archaeology

German literature of the eighteenth century. In Denmark these
remarks, increasingly based on locally excavated collections, culminate
in the works of Skuli Thorlacius (1802) and Vedel-Simonsen ( 1 8 1 3 )
(Aarbfiger 1 9 5 3 , p. 201). Nevertheless, despite the growing acceptance
of the 'three ages' theory and its firm association with the artefacts dug
from the ground in increasing numbers, there was up to this time little
understanding of the implications and potential of Mercati's ideas.
     In 1788 Christian T h o m s e n was born in Copenhagen, the first son
of a wealthy Danish merchant-banker and ship-owner. T h e education
that Christian received was primarily intended to equip him in the
best possible manner to follow his father in the family business. He
was given a thorough grounding in modern languages and literature
with a significant emphasis on French thought and learning. Among
the friends of the Thomsen family was another wealthy Danish
merchant, recently Danish Consul-General in Paris - Consul-General
Grove. During the French Revolution Grove had astutely bought-up
quantities of French art treasures, including antiquities and coins. On
his return from Paris in 1804 the young Thomsen helped arrange the
Grove family treasures and was especially fired with enthusiasm for
the collections of coins and antiquities. By 1807, the year in which the
 British fleet burned Copenhagen, Thomsen had developed his passion
for coins and antiquities by establishing contact with Rasmus Nyerup,
secretary of the Royal Commission for the Preservation of Danish
Antiquities (Bibby 1962, pp. 22-8).
    Christian Jiirgensen Thomsen integrated in one personality a
strong interest in antiquities, a thorough grounding in French
antiquarian thought and a working experience of warehouse
classification as applied to stockpiled merchandise. Whether Mercati's
Renaissance ideas reached Thomsen through a knowledge of the
French works of Montfaucon, Mahudel, Goguet and their many
contemporaries, or whether they came from the same source via the
assimilations of Skuli Thorlacius, Vedel-Simonsen and others remains
unknown. However, the diffusion of ideas is a most complex business
and Thomsen's work is hardly diminished in importance if we suspect
that its stimuli had ancient and widespread sources.'
    In 1 8 1 6 the ageing Nyerup retired, overwhelmed with the burden
of organizing the classification and display of the accumulated Danish
antiquities and the Royal Commission appointed Thomsen to succeed
him. Between 1 8 1 6 - 1 9 he began to reorganize the growing collec-
tion of antiquities. He appears at first to have simply implemented his
                                           Introduction and polemic           9

warehouse technique of classification under raw material and then
subdivided according to probable usage. Nevertheless, the formal
divisions stone, bronze and iron appear from the beginning and his
purblind contemporary critics pointed out there were illogically no
gold, silver, glass or bone age divisions. Clearly, T h o m s e n already
believed in Mercati's 'three ages' system, at first merely as an obscure
guide but later he increasingly perceived the classification as a
conceptual model of considerable predictive value.
      T h e first stages of this revelation were completed by 1 8 1 9 when
T h o m s e n opened his museum to the public with the 'three ages'
demonstrated in three consecutive cases. T h e full awareness of the
implications of the scheme then gradually accumulated and caused
T h o m s e n to write his account of the system in 1 8 3 6 in a ' G u i d e to
Scandinavian Antiquities'. T h e later translation of this work into
German, English and French, combined with T h o m s e n ' s industrious
and kindly correspondence with other scholars, quickly spread the
knowledge of the scheme throughout Europe.
      It has now become rather fashionable to decry and minimize the
importance of the 'three ages' scheme. Certainly it would be strange if
a century and a half of archaeology had not modified and qualified
some of T h o m s e n ' s ideas. Certainly T h o m s e n ' s hypothesis had pre-
cursors but this is the case with most great innovations. In fairness to
T h o m s e n we must compare the information value of collections of
prehistoric artefacts before his work and after it. Before T h o m s e n
physically demonstrated his concept with a large prehistoric collec-
tion, the antiquarian was faced simply with heaps of incoherent data.
A f t e r the development of the 'three ages' model and its later strati-
graphic verification, the grouped artefacts revealed the key to cultural
identity, exposed the sequential patterning of typological development
and tacitly implied the cultural significance of technological and
economic development. Crude though the 'three ages' model may have
been it nevertheless proved to be the basis of cultural taxonomy,
the typological method, and the economic approach to pre-
history. We might care to learn f r o m this example that the ancient
artefacts only took meaning upon the framework of a model - the
conceptual model of the 'three ages'. Archaeological 'facts' take their
meaning f r o m their conceptual arrangement and the adequacy
or inadequacy          of that arrangement,           model, or       hypothesis
accounts for the amount of information made available to the
archaeologist.
10    Analytical Archaeology

    T h e 'three ages' system represents the development of the essential
basis of modern analytical archaeology. T h o m s e n ' s work was
continued by his colleague Worsaae ( 1 8 2 1 - 8 5 ) and by the Swede
Montelius ( 1 8 4 3 - 1 9 2 1 ) and in the overlapping lifetimes of these three
great men the form of modern archaeology was established. Of course
there were many other contributors and contributary streams but in
the essential elements modern archaeology was born. Since those days
we have really added very little of fundamental importance - excava-
tion has become more precise, dating has been dramatically revised
and the volume of material has swollen incredibly. 2 Nevertheless, most
of these contributions are a matter of degree alone, an almost
unavoidable consequence of passing time and hardly a justification for
archaeological complacency. Even in 1847 the great Worsaae could put
the beginning of the Danish Neolithic at c. 3000 BC and fully appreci-
ated careful stratigraphic excavation as well as the aids and dangers of
typological taxonomy.
    We are forced to return to the point of the opening paragraphs that
a modern empirical discipline ought to be able to aim at more reward-
ing results than the piling up of data and a steady output of imitation
history books. T h e truth is that the existing interpretative machinery
of archaeology - the general theory - is neglected and outmoded. 3 If
archaeological 'facts' take meaning from their context, and a model or
hypothesis of that context, then we may have more 'facts' but we are
getting very little more information.


11   T h e nature of archaeology

Archaeology is the discipline concerned with the recovery, systematic
description and study of material culture in the past; the archaeologist
is the man responsible for these studies. 4 Another terminology cur-
rently favours the designation 'prehistoric studies' and calls its opera-
tors prehistorians. Strictly defined, prehistoric studies and the pre-
historian operate only in those areas and periods which lack a
contemporary written account of themselves. Archaeology and the
archaeologist are definitions which contain prehistoric studies and the
prehistorian. It follows that the prehistorian is always an archaeologist
and prehistoric studies are always archaeological. Because archaeology
contributes most heavily to our knowledge of societies without a
written record, archaeology is often synonymous with prehistory and
the archaeologist with the prehistorian, reflecting the common area
                                      I n t r o d u c t i o n and polemic   n

of the two sets. Consequently in this work we will frequently
alternate the terms archaeology and prehistory, archaeologist and pre-
historian without implying any distinction other than that just noted.
Important examples of the wider scope of archaeology stretching
beyond the perimeter of prehistoric studies would include
such aspects as classical, medieval, recent colonial and industrial
archaeology.
     However, despite the general acceptance of the boundaries and
relative disposition of archaeology and prehistoric studies, recent
works have inclined to distort these terms in a dangerous fashion.
There is currently a tendency to take the term prehistorian as meaning
'a writer of history covering periods without written records', with the
implication that the 'prehistorian' is an armchair synthesizer of the
analytical work of the 'archaeologist'. Here the term archaeologist is
warped to mean the unintelligent 'excavator' or the narrow-minded
'specialist' - the term prehistorian thus acquiring a rosy flush of
dilettante virtue at the expense of the devalued archaeologist. It is this
attempt to convey smooth historical narrative as the essence of pre-
historic studies, in the total absence of the record appropriate to that
art and in the presence of records of a quite peculiar and especial
nature - the artefacts, which we may well view as 'counterfeit' history.
T h e expression of archaeological results may call for nicely written
historical narrative but this is a matter of choosing one particular
vehicle to convey results obtained by quite alien methods. T h e danger
of historical narrative as a vehicle for archaeological results is that it
pleases by virtue of its smooth coverage and apparent finality, whilst
the data on which it is based are never comprehensive, never capable
of supporting but one interpretation and rest upon complex prob-
abilities. Archaeological data are not historical data and consequently
archaeology is not history.
     T h e view taken in this work is that archaeology is archaeology is
archaeology (with apologies to Gertrude Stein). Archaeology is a
discipline in its own right, concerned with archaeological data which it
clusters in archaeological entities displaying certain archaeological
processes and studied in terms of archaeological aims, concepts and
procedures. We fully appreciate that these entities and processes were
once historical and social entities but the nature of the archaeological
record is such that there is no simple way of equating our archaeolo-
gical percepta with these lost events. We must certainly try to find out
the social and historical equivalents of our archaeological entities and
12   Analytical Archaeology
processes but w e should not delude ourselves about the simplicity of
these equivalents or our success in isolating them (chapter 9).
    An archaeological culture is not a racial group, nor a historical
tribe, nor a linguistic unit, it is simply an archaeological culture. Given
great care, a large quantity of first class archaeological data, precise
definition and rigorous use of terms, and a good archaeological model,
then we may with a margin of error be able to identify an archaeologi-
cal entity in approximate social and historical terms. But this is the
best we can do and it is in any case only one of the aims of archaeolo-
gical activity. T h e reconstruction of a historical or social picture of
prehistoric cultures, written in historical narrative, is a valid but
incidental and dangerous aspect of archaeology. Although aesthet-
ically satisfying in the familiarity of its form of expression it is neces-
sarily as ephemeral and as reliable as the facial expression recon-
structed on the bones of a Neanderthal skull.
    We can stress that archaeology is, among other things, the time
dimension of anthropology and ethnology. In many parts of the world
recorded ethnology is only a generation or so deep and beyond that lies
only the archaeological record. With the current demise of ethnology
in academic circles it is interesting to notice that archaeology is taking
on many of the tasks and problems formerly left to the ethnologist
('ethnoarchaeology' - for a review see Stiles 1977). Indeed, the
archaeologist might soberly reflect that any failure of archaeology to
establish itself as more than a popular opiate will surely assign the
discipline to the same limbo plumbed by museum ethnology.
     T o recapitulate, archaeology can be redefined as the discipline
concerned with the recovery, systematic description and study of
material culture in the past. Archaeology is a discipline in its own
right, providing a framework within which the entities and processes
of archaeology act one upon another. T h e entities, processes, aims,
procedures and concepts of archaeology have a validity of their own in
reference to the archaeological frame and despite their generation by -
and partial correlation with - former social and historic entities.
     Under this definition we may understand archaeology as having
three interrelated spheres of activity (fig. 2). T h e sphere concentrating
on data recovery - principally excavation, the sphere engaged in
systematic description - taxonomy and classification, and finally the
 integrating, synthesizing study generating models, hypotheses and
 theories. T w o of these spheres are concerned with genuine experi-
 mental data recovery and in their modern form represent the sensory
                                        Introduction and polemic           13

organs of the discipline - these are (i) excavation and collection, (ii)
analytical and statistical taxonomy. T h e third sphere should generate
idealized models or hypotheses about the data received and retransmit
these models to the experimental aspects for further testing and
modification (fig. 2). By the continuous feedback cycle of observation,
hypothesis, experiment and idealized model, the models and hy-
potheses gradually become more accurately adapted to the pattern of
the observed data. Gradually the hypotheses may be elevated to
theories and ultimately the theories elevated to synthesizing principles
- if the results should happily warrant that step.
    T h e sphere of activity undertaking data collection and excavation
is largely outside the theoretical f r a m e of reference of this work. It is
the sphere of data analysis and the sphere of synthesis and theory
which are our main concern. In the analysis aspect we now have a new
experimental dimension of archaeology using p o w e r f u l and incisive
statistical and computer techniques (Doran and Hodson 1975). In the
theoretical aspect we have the long neglected and festering field of
general theory - assiduously avoided by all w h o wish to preserve their
status by concealing their actual method of procedure and dubious
mental concepts. If we intend to try to alter this latter situation then
we must first prepare the foundation by carefully examining the
nature of archaeological data or 'facts' in order that we might handle
them in an appropriate and sensible manner.


hi   The nature of archaeological data

If archaeology is the discipline concerned with the study of past
material culture then artefacts are the archaeologist's main data even
though other specialists may supply him with complementary evi-
dence on fauna, flora, dating and the like. T h e archaeologist's facts are
artefacts and the information observed about their contextual and
specific attributes. T h e contextual attributes are the special concern of
the experimental sphere of archaeology dealing with data recovery.
T h e specific attributes are the main concern of the other experimental
sphere of the discipline - the sphere of analysis and classification or
taxonomy. T h e total information f r o m these sensory spheres of
activity feeds observations into the third sphere of synthesis and fits
the best model or hypothesis to the observations for further testing.
T h e fundamental property of the data is that it is observed or
perceived information based on attributes of the artefacts.
14   Analytical Archaeology
    In order to gauge the nature of archaeological data it is essential to
analyse both the qualities of the 'observations', 'perceived facts', or
'perceived information' and the significance of artefact attributes.
Briefly, it is imperative to realize that 'perceived facts' or attributes are
necessarily facts and attributes selected f r o m a vast range possessed b y
every artefact. We may choose to perceive the length, breadth, thick-
ness and weight of a handaxe but we may not choose to perceive its
chemical composition, its temperature, radioactivity, elasticity,
refractive index and so on. Clearly, we do not observe these latter
attributes because we think them 'archaeologically unimportant' -
consequently, all observations, all perceived facts depend on the
observer, his frame of reference and personal idiosyncrasies. T h e
observer consciously or unconsciously selects the 'facts' to be
perceived and recorded and no t w o observers need record the same
perceptions about even a single artefact. Clearly, then, archaeological
facts or data change in the changing light of what the archaeologist
deems 'significant attributes'.
     T h e attributes of most artefacts are almost infinite and to suggest
that the objective archaeologist must analyse them all is unrealistic and
in practice the attempt is never made. We restrict the archaeological
observations to perceiving and noting those attributes which the
observer believes to have been man-made or selected-for by man. T h i s
latter judgement is again arbitrary and dependent on the observer and
his views or model of the mind of ancient man. We can guess that the
handaxe pebble was not selected for radioactivity or its refractive
index; we reasonably guess that size and weight were selected - for,
probably the material also, but what about colour and all the other
possible attributes? Clearly, some attributes were regularly and care-
fully selected-for and these give us archaeological 'information' or
data, other attributes were not regularly selected-for and make up
distracting 'noise' or 'non-information'. T h e separation between these
classes of attributes ultimately and arbitrarily depends on the obser-
ver's guesses but the term 'regularly selected-for' reveals the statistical
aid that can be sought when dealing with aggregates of similar arte-
facts. T h i s incisive aid will help cut down the area of the individual's
subjective judgement in this matter but can never entirely remove it.
T h e observation and record of the specific and contextual attributes of
 archaeological artefacts is not a procedure capable of producing final
 lists of definitive, unimpeachable facts. Nevertheless, various aids and
 a measure of agreement based on a common discipline will enable
                                         Introduction and polemic           15

archaeologists to decide which attributes are 'certainly' worth investi-
gating and which can be discarded temporarily.
    Which      are the attributes 'certainly' worth        investigating?
Archaeologists agree that those attributes which can only have been
produced on the raw material by h u m a n action are the attributes most
worthy of careful study. On this basis archaeological attributes equal
the results of h u m a n or hominid actions, or sequences of actions, and
regularities amongst artefact attributes represent regularities of
hominid behaviour. T h e archaeologist is therefore studying concealed
and obscure facets of hominid behaviour through the peculiar medium
of the fossilized and congealed results of this behaviour, imprisoned in
the attributes of ancient artefacts. Archaeology is a discipline in its
own right because it alone provides the conceptual apparatus for
analysing these peculiar data; a different discipline and different
conceptual apparatus f r o m that required for the study of history in its
limited sense.
   Archaeological 'facts' or observations are for the most part of two
kinds, either they claim that:

    (a) T h e s e entities have these defined attributes. T h e attributes
         being specific, contextual or frequently both; or
    (b) T h e s e entities have these defined attributes and by inference
        so do certain unobserved or untested entities of the same class.
        T h e entities in both examples can be artefacts, assemblages,
        cultures, sites, or any of the archaeological entities which we
        will later define.

    T h e class (a) observation is the class of 'perceived facts' already
discussed at length. T h e second kind, class (b), is the most useful,
most frequent and most dangerous class of observation found in
archaeological literature - the class of 'generalization', 'inferred facts'
or 'induced facts'.
    T o generalize is to infer that what has been f o u n d true in observed
cases of a class, is also true of certain unobserved cases of the same
class, thus b e c o m i n g a predictive proposition. Most scientific laws and
principles are just such statistical generalizations of very high prob-
ability, asserting no more than the 'constant' conjunction of certain
attributes. Other generalizations are equally respectable and are really
'low-level' laws or principles. F a m o u s examples are Darwin's valid
generalization that 'all white cats with blue eyes are d e a f or Cuvier's
'no animals with horns and hoofs habitually eat flesh' (Mander 1936, p.
16      Analytical Archaeology
72). One might compare with these such archaeological statements as
'all urban societies are food producing' or 'no mesolithic society used
the wheel'. T h e difference between these low-level propositions and
scientific laws resides principally in the degree of statistical reliance or
tolerance that can be placed on the words 'all' or 'no'. If archaeology
can come to terms with the complex problem of adequately defining
the order of probability of such terms there is no inherent reason why
its cumulative information could not be expressed in axiomatic form.
Certainly modern anthropology is moving increasingly and success-
 fully in this direction (e.g. Goody 1976).
     Generalization and induction are one of the main routes by which
new knowledge is revealed from accumulated data. Unfortunately, the
borderline between valid and invalid generalization is such that
philosophers have to fight hard to justify the inductive method at all.
T h e degree of confidence that we are logically justified in placing in
many archaeological generalizations is often undermined by failure to
specify the proportion of observed cases, the variety of circumstances
or the existence of conflicting examples. Despite these abuses most
archaeological propositions are made by inference and induction
rather than by classic deduction (but see Binford 1968a; Watson,
LeBlanc and Redman 1 9 7 1 ; and Hill 1 9 7 2 in support of the 'hypo-
thetico-deductive method'). In the process of deduction a conclusion
follows as a logical consequence of certain premises and cannot be
false while the premises remain true. Whereas in the process of
induction an empirical generalization is inferred from its individual
instances. Archaeological propositions are not only made by inference
or induction, for the most part, but they also happen frequently to be
rather special kinds of induced hypotheses, needing particular and
careful handling in argument.
       A r c h a e o l o g i c a l o b s e r v a t i o n s are v e r y r a r e l y ' g e n e r a l p r o p o s i t i o n s '
of t h e k i n d 'all As a r e Bs' or 'all .4s h a v e Bs'. T h e m o r e c o m m o n
a r c h a e o l o g i c a l p r o p o s i t i o n t a k e s t h e f o r m ' s o m e ,4s are Bs' or ' s o m e / I s
h a v e Bs', m a k i n g t h e s t a t e m e n t a s t a t i s t i c a l o r p r o b a b i l i t y p r o p o s i t i o n
( B r a i t h w a i t e i960, p . 1 1 5 ) . T h u s , we m i g h t say t h a t ' s o m e V e n u s
figurines are G r a v e t t i a n ' , ' s o m e D i m i n i p o t s h a v e t r i c h r o m e s p i r a l s ' , or
' s o m e La T e n e b u r i a l s are C e l t i c ' . It is t h e s e s t a t i s t i c a l o r p r o b a b i l i t y
propositions that r e q u i r e careful h a n d l i n g a n d w h i c h m u s t be carefully
distinguished f r o m the general propositions handled by deductive
methods.
                                       I n t r o d u c t i o n and polemic   17

   T h e special characteristics of probability propositions, including
most archaeological propositions are:

   ( 1 ) T h e y are usually of the form 'some ^4s are Bs' or 'some .4s have
         Bs' (where B may be an attribute).
   (2) Their probability aspect can be of two quite different kinds.
         (a) An aspect of relative frequency - '90 per cent of handaxes
               are between 3 - 3 0 cms long'.
         (b) An aspect of reasonableness or credibility - 'no handaxe
               was used for metalworking'.
   (3) Statistical or probability propositions have limits beyond
         which they are not necessarily true.
   (4) Such propositions are not conclusively refutable by producing
         contrary examples. T h e rejection of a probability hypothesis
         rests on assessing the probability as being outside the limiting
         values - e.g. the proposition that 'most La T e n e equipped
         graves are Celtic' is not necessarily refuted by proving that
         several such burials are Teutonic.
   (5) Probability propositions are usefully integrated into hy-
         potheses by inductive generalization - the inference of an
         empirical generalization from its instances, by the simple
         enumeration of 'n' positive instances without refutation and by
         eliminating every alternative hypothesis while not being
         refuted itself.

These special characteristics of statistical or probability propositions
are elaborated by Braithwaite i960 (p. 1 1 5 ) .
    We may illustrate these points with archaeological propositions. If
we take the statement that 'the majority of burials with a La Tene
metalwork assemblage occur in France and Germany and belong to
Celtic aristocrats' - then this proposition may remain true even though
La Tene graves also occur in Britain and Bulgaria, some Celtic areas
have no La Tene burials at all, some La T e n e burials belong to
Teutons and so on. T h e original statement is in probability form,
there are limits beyond which it is not true, there are contrary exam-
ples but most alternative hypotheses have been eliminated and the
generalization remains valid.
    On similar lines we may take the observation that 'some Mous-
terian industries were made by Neanderthal man'. T h i s proposition is
an inferred generalization based on a limited number of particular
18    Analytical Archaeology
observations. H o w e v e r , the probability nature of the proposition by
no means necessarily supports that 'all Mousterian industries are
Neanderthal products' nor does it exclude the possibility that 'Nean-
derthal man made other industries' or that 'some Mousterian
industries might be the work of H o m o sapiens'. T o conclude that all
Mousterian artefacts were the work of Neanderthalers would be forc-
ing the observation f r o m a rather weak probability proposition to an
untested and sweeping general proposition.
      A s u m m a r y of this overbrief outline of the nature of archaeological
'facts' suggests that the data take the f o r m of observations based on
the specific and contextual attributes of artefacts. T h e s e observations
customarily escalate f r o m 'perceived attributes' to 'inferred attributes'.
E v e n physically perceived attributes are subject to personal bias and
represent a partially agreed selection f r o m an infinite variety -
although this variety can usefully be limited by concentrating on
humanly imposed traits of statistical significance. T h e inferred attri-
butes or induced probability propositions are the most useful and the
 most dangerous and require special treatment and testing, especially
 in respect of negative evidence. Possibly the majority of archaeological
statements are statistical or probability propositions with their own
 special characteristics and proper logical manipulation procedure.
       T h e data studied by the archaeologist and the anthropologist are
 both aspects of the phenomenon of hominid 'culture'. In this sense
 'culture' consists of learned modes of behaviour and its material mani-
 festations, socially transmitted f r o m one generation to the next and
 from one society or individual to another. It is customary to separate
 the material and tangible manifestations of hominid culture and clas-
 sify it apart as 'material culture' as opposed to the intangible 'non-
 material culture'. H o w e v e r , this division is largely conceptual and
 there is no basic difference between the material manifestation of
 abstract concepts of f o r m and function fossilized in the attributes of
 artefacts and the social manifestations of similar concepts ephemerally
 translated into social activities. Activities are sequences of partially
  preconceived actions, artefacts too are similar sequences of similar
  solidified actions as every attribute bears witness. A s manifestations of
  hominid behaviour artefacts f o r m a special case within the broader
  field of animal behaviour, in which many other species already
  demonstrate the use of implements (Lawick-Goodall 1 9 7 1 ) , the hold-
  ing and defence of territory (e.g. W y n n e - E d w a r d s 1962), social
  hierarchy, leadership and social organization on a kinship basis (e.g.
                                        Introduction and polemic           19

H. and J . von Lawick-Goodall 1970). T h e specifically hominid feature
remains the phenomenon of culture - learned as well as instinctive
modes of behaviour, with its material implementation, and its
acquisitive transmission from individual to individual and from group
to group.


iv   The aims of archaeology
T h e aims of archaeology are of course the sum of the aims of
archaeologists and prehistorians in general. Consequently, there are as
many different aims in archaeology as there are archaeologists; some
archaeologists see their role as historians, others consider themselves
palaeoecologists. I have argued that in essence archaeology is uniquely
itself, an immature discipline struggling to find its dimensions and
assert its separate existence from bordering disciplines of greater
maturity. It follows f r o m this that the aims that I will choose are
rather different from those of some of my colleagues but I would
defend them as being central and not peripheral to the essential nature
of the subject.
     T h e reasons for defining our aims became apparent in our investi-
gation of the nature of archaeological 'facts'. T h e s e 'facts' turn out to
be observations in which the nature of the observer and his intentions
play a large part in which 'facts' are observed and recorded. Different
observers see the same 'facts' through differently tinted spectacles. If
the aims of archaeologists vary then these differing aims and objectives
will give varying direction and potential to the analysis of archaeolo-
gical data and may account for differing views of the same 'facts',
without necessarily invoking error on the part of any party (e.g. the
Mousterian controversy - Binford and Binford 1 9 6 6 ; Bordes and de
Sonneville - Bordes 1 9 7 0 ; Mellars 1 9 7 0 ; Binford 1973). On some
occasions this variety of aims and interpretations is a strength rather
than a weakness in that no single view or interpretation of a set of data
can ever be wholly comprehensive or 'true'. Indeed we should
encourage the analysis of archaeological problems from as many
differently based approaches as possible and integrate their overall
consensus. On other occasions, the variety of aims and interpretations
is a grave weakness based not on error, or personal idiosyncrasy but
upon ambiguous and inexplicit terminology, differing use of the same
terms by different individuals. T h i s latter symptom is the single most
damaging characteristic, isolating archaeology in an undisciplined
20    Analytical Archaeology

fever from the calm status of a coherent discipline. T h i s kind of
ailment is not unknown in the case-histories of developing disciplines
and we shall pay some attention to possible remedies in a later section.
Unfortunately the infection is in an advanced state in archaeology
because of the neglect shown to general theory and surgery will prove
painful if the discipline is to survive.
    T h e aims or objectives of archaeology are therefore of more than
passing importance since they direct the overall strategy and m o d i f y
the results. In the light of the earlier discussion about the nature of
archaeology as a discipline and the nature of its data, three broad
objectives seem to be of central importance:

     (1) First, the definition of the fundamental entities that pervade
         the diverse material, their elements, structures and patterns,
         the processes that operate on them, and the effects of the
         processes on the entities in the dimensions of space and time.
         A study in statics and dynamics going beyond particular
         instances.
     (2) Second, the search for repeated similarities or regularities in
         form, function, association, or developmental sequence
         amongst the particular entities from every area, period and
         environment.
     (3) T h i r d , the development of higher category knowledge or
         principles that synthesize and correlate the material at hand
         whilst possessing a high predictive value. T h e development of
         increasingly comprehensive and informative general models
         and hypotheses.

    Archaeologists fall into three groups in relation to these aims.
Those archaeologists who agree with most of these aims and believe
their possible attainment; those who agree with some of the aims but
believe the entity concepts merely abstractions, incapable of viable
definition, and finally, those archaeologists who find these aims sterile,
clinical, inhuman and devoid of the evocative glow and beauty of the
material, whilst expressing disbelief in any synthesizing or predictive
principles. It is tempting to label these first-class, second-class and
third-class archaeologists but perhaps that would be unfair. T h i s text
is designed for the first two viewpoints, the latter will doubtless
continue to cultivate the popular and lucrative fields of vulgarization
or blinker themselves to narrow aspects of narrow problems without
the comfort of knowing the value of their activities. T h e wise
                                       Introduction and polemic          21

archaeologist must skilfully differentiate his discipline and role from
that of entertainer and entertainment on one hand and the meaning-
less accumulation of data on the other. T h e undisciplined and ques-
tionless accumulation of data has in itself no more value than the
collection of engine n u m b e r s or cheese labels, whilst the entertainer
belongs to quite another profession with different allegiances and
motives.
    T h e cynical reader will be demanding to know what are these
fundamental archaeological entities, these processes,             patterns,
regularities and principles? T h e fundamental entities are the attribute,
artefact, the artefact-type, the assemblage, the culture and the culture
group. T h e primary processes are those of inevitable variation, multi-
linear development, invention, diffusion and cultural selection.
C o m b i n e d in many permutations and circumstances these processes
give rise to such c o m p l e x processes as acculturation, and cultural
growth, decay and disintegration. Each level of entity clearly has
corresponding levels of process which are appropriate to that class of
situation.
     T h e repeated similarities or regularities are those systematically
correlated attributes that give recognizable g r o u p identity to members
of a given archaeological class or regularly follow membership of such
a class, or sequence of classes. T h e y may be regularities in material,
social, economic or technological attributes and they may not neces-
sarily be simple 'one to one' regularities any more than a regular
physical wave need be a simple sine wave. In archaeology these
'regularities' follow f r o m certain limiting conditions or constraints
imposed on the material either by physical or social action. T h e s e
limits or constraints may be so gross and obvious as to be unin-
formative, or so unexpected as to bring us new information - we may
observe that the narrower the constraint the greater the predictive
information we can get f r o m it and the greater the degree of regularity.
T h e great importance of these 'limiting conditions' or 'constraints' is
this predictive advantage that can usually be taken of them. Indeed,
our third aim depends on the existence of such constraints in
archaeological and anthropological data (Ashby 1 9 5 6 , p. 1 2 7 ) .
    Synthesizing principles and informative models draw their pre-
dictive capacity f r o m constraints which imply that the full range of
possible variety is not exploited and that many variations are never
found. Gross examples w o u l d be the absence of elaborate metallurgy
amongst hunter-fisher-gatherers or the regularities that we see
22    Analytical Archaeology
occurring independently in areas of Old and New World prehistory -
the independent development of cereal f a r m i n g , stock-breeding,
pottery, copper and bronze metallurgy, cities and city-states, priests,
specialists, temples, writing, the zero, mathematics, astronomy,
calendars and so on. T h e s e regularities and the constraints which gave
rise to them are precisely those which gave usefulness and predictive
power to T h o m s e n ' s 'three ages' model of prehistory. T h e T h o m s e n
model tacitly implied many intercorrelated technological, economic
and social constraints and regularities which only subsequently
became explicit. T h e best models are usually those that are more
comprehensive and accurate than the model-maker first imagined.
     If archaeology is a discipline in search of principles and predictive
models then it is necessarily searching for regularities and the con-
straints which cause them. Since any particular culture is a peculiarly
unique integration of components, the search for regularities revolves
 around the analysis and comparison of limited similarities and
 parallels within each multilinear development. T h e tracing of such
 regularities or repeated correlations that exist within our material and
 the definition of the constraints or 'limits' of the factors involved in
 producing these regularities emerges as a major aim in archaeological
 studies.
     By this time I suspect that we have long ago lost our third class of
 semi-historical prehistorians - the historians without written records.
 Nevertheless, we still march in company with the second class who
 would refute any fundamental entities in archaeological data as ab-
 stractions of no reality, impossible to define in a f o r m that can be used
 and leading to no useful general statements or principles. One answer
 to this criticism is that the function of the archaeologist is not to doubt
 well-tested propositions accepted by common sense, but to provide
 analysis or elucidations of them - the function of the modern philoso-
 pher since G . E. Moore expounded 'that it is futile to doubt, or to
 pretend to doubt, common-sense propositions' (Braithwaite i960,
 P-S).
     It would seem that one hundred years of archaeology and anthro-
pology have shown that the difficult concepts of 'type', 'culture',
'tribe', 'nation', 'family', 'kin' and other similar concepts are common-
sense propositions and have a real existence even should w e be unable
to define them precisely. It would surely be futile to doubt these
propositions merely because our notation is too primitive to define
them adequately. H o w e v e r , immediate help is at hand in the form of
                                      Introduction and polemic          23
developments in numerical taxonomy (Sokal and Sneath 1 9 6 3 ; Doran
and Hodson 1975) which now provide a basis for viable definitions for
such entities as these. Whether or not any general principle or theory
is possible on this fresh basis remains to be seen. It is sufficient that
this excursion has probably finally reduced us to the first class of
prehistorians and in this c o m p a n y we shall be happy to proceed to
investigate these new developments and their implications.


v   Terminology, definition and meaning

In an earlier section it was suggested that the single most restricting
factor in the development of archaeology as a discipline was the
ambiguous and inexplicit terminology. It would be naive to suppose
that defining our terms carefully and precisely would remove this
barrier, although it w o u l d certainly contribute more than any other
single action. A certain range of variation in the meaning of words is
unavoidable and provides a welcome flexibility which in some cases
can amount to predictive suggestion by inferring the unexpectedly
wide but still valid scope of the terminology - even a word can be a
predictive model! Nevertheless it is hardly sensible to worry about
seepage in the terminological dam if great gaps exist in the retaining
wall, allowing torrents of information to go to waste. Similarly, it
would be naive to imagine that individual definitions will be immedi-
ately acclaimed and universally adopted - this has been tried and has
failed and the long hours of impressive International Congresses have
resulted apparently in nothing. But archaeology is not unique in
having this kind of problem and we hinted earlier that it may well be
the disease of immature and g r o w i n g disciplines. If this be the case
then we may find it worthwhile to compare the development of
archaeological terminology with that of contemporary disciplines.
    T h i s chapter c o m m e n c e d with a section on the history of
archaeology. One of the intentions of that essay was to provide an
account for the subject as it stands and to give some impression of the
study changing continuously through time. W e can now use the same
section to compare the development of archaeology in broad outline
with that of some of the other Renaissance stimulated disciplines.
    T h e natural philosophers of the Renaissance reopened areas of
enquiry, speculated about almost everything and tested their specula-
tions with probing experiments f r a m e d to try the predictive value of
their new hypotheses; above all they collected data of all kinds - both
24    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

observations and specimens. T h e cycle of the scientific method -
systematic observations, preliminary hypothesis, testing experiments
and tentative theory, then the reapplication of the model to reality -
these techniques were implicit by the time of Leonardo and explicit in
the works of Galileo ( 1 5 6 4 - 1 6 4 2 ) . T h e s e newly diffused techniques
and the great new tools of the Renaissance - the microscope (1590),
the telescope (1609) and the thermometer (1609) - together flooded
the seventeenth century with countless new observations or 'facts'.
    T h e first result was growing bewilderment and confusion, furious
debate and divisive contradiction. Various incompatible hypotheses
jostled one with another and every authority used his own terms in his
own way. Gradually, however, the philosophers began to specialize in
particular activities and to use specially devised and defined terms
converted f r o m the handiest everyday equivalent. Fierce argument
and sheer convenience gradually selected the most viable entities and
definitions and imperceptibly these passed into disciplined usage as
the field of furious argument shifted to newer foci. Old terms were
defined and redefined whilst new terms were drawn into specific use.
T o this episode we owe the definitions of such concepts as - mass,
force, velocity, acceleration and atom, element and compound, or acid,
base and alkali.
    T h e slowly condensing specialist studies were grouping and
defining their basic entities in forms which made sense of the new
observations and predicted further information about other members
of the class; henceforward the classification of data began on a large
scale. M a n y of the entities defined by the new disciplines were
intangible and possibly 'unreal' outside their own frame of reference -
atom, force, electricity - these are difficult conceptual entities to
define. Nevertheless, such terms were defined and accepted because
they proved useful approximations to a complex reality and they could
also be used to build a calculus of internally consistent hypotheses of
predictive value. T h e great taxonomic schemes of Linnaeus, Darwin,
Mendeleef and others systematically organized classes of animals,
plants, elements and physical particles which were painstakingly erec-
ted in the early frameworks of the great predictive theories of the
scientific disciplines.
    In the separate phases of their development these disciplines show
certain sequential regularities regardless of their particular sphere of
operation. Initially we have the awakening of organized curiosity, the
collection of observational and material data - the piling up of miscel-
                                       Introduction and polemic          25

laneous 'facts'. T h e variety and confusion of this situation leads to
repeated attempts to isolate f r o m the mass of data various coherent
and useful conceptual entities - albeit variously defined and differingly
used. In this second phase some but not all of the concepts prove
useful in synthesizing and s u b s u m i n g the new information in hier-
archies of hypotheses; the successful concepts are saved and fed back
into the next development. In the third phase, large-scale classification
and analysis in terms of the newly defined entities and concepts yields
s o m e comprehensive syntheses in which like entities are not only
classified together but the overall relationships governing the scheme's
regularities are 'explained'. T h e fourth and subsequent phases gradu-
ally see the refined discovery of observations inexplicable in terms of
the old taxonomic syntheses - and the cycle begins yet again, with new
theories s u b s u m i n g old ones as particular cases.
    If we compare the development of archaeology with these parallel
developments of closely related Renaissance lines of enquiry it is
difficult not to notice similar general patterning. Archaeology too
passed f r o m a phase of alchemical mysticism, with its thunderstones
and elf-shot, to a phase of enlivened curiosity and the piling up of
miscellaneous 'facts'. Nineteenth-century endeavours entered the
second phase of defining entities and attempts at syntheses, with the
inevitable variety of contradictory opinions and definitions. T h e
twentieth century continues to pile up data and the attempts to
grapple with it go on, at least in some quarters.
    T h e beginning of some rough common agreement about the
meaning and definition of entities has c o m m e n c e d in this century of
archaeology but it is by no means satisfactorily completed - in main
part by virtue of the disinclination of archaeologists to consider the
inner core of their intuitive procedure. Not only is this reticence
retarding the development of the discipline but it makes teaching by
condensed instruction impossible and endangers the integrity of the
subject. Archaeology is presently writhing in the 'natural history' or
second phase of development - a frustrating time but not entirely
without advantage when compared with the contemporary recasting of
many of the more mature disciplines. It is characteristic of this state
that variety and confusion of opinion and definition are accompanied
by a complacent belief that w e can do no more than collect data, whilst
simultaneously the first usefully defined entities are recognized and
attempts towards reformation and conceptual classification are being
made.
26   Analytical Archaeology

    From this preamble it would appear that the first task of the
archaeologist interested in developing the power of his discipline is to
concern himself with the careful definition of terms and the isolation
of conceptual entities of value. Not in the naive hope that these
definitions will be universally adopted, nor in the vain belief that his
concepts alone are all equally correct, but in the firm conviction that
only in such a way can order gradually be brought to a confused
situation.
    T h e problem of defining the most useful archaeological entities -
attribute, artefact, type, assemblage, culture, culture group - is taken
up in later chapters along with the inherent implications of these
definitions (chapters 4-8). At this point we will concern ourselves with
loose terminology and its results, without for one moment supposing
that this book is in any way free of these perils.
     T h e most frequent forms of dangerous terminology in archaeolo-
gical discussion come under the three classes of 'value judgements',
'non-specific generalizations' and 'ambiguities'. T h e only remedy for
these plagues is to avoid them oneself and to spot them in the
argument of others. Value judgements involve the incorrect trans-
ference of the coloured opinions of the observer to the record of the
observation. Such terms as 'primitive', 'crude', 'degenerate' and
'devolved' are particularly abused. One amusing example is the
contrast between the Victorian and the modern opinion of British
 Neolithic pottery. T h e very ornate Peterborough Ware was just as
highly regarded by Victorian excavators as the 'crude' plain Western
Neolithic Wares. Subsequently the conviction arose that the Peter-
borough Ware was 'thick' (it has baroque rims), 'crude' (it is coil built
as is Western Neolithic pottery) and 'degenerate' (it is often
completely covered with profuse decoration resembling basketry).
T h e s e grounds were used to substantiate a theory claiming that
 Peterborough Ware was made by primitive Mesolithic hunters copy-
ing the fine wares of the earliest Neolithic settlers. Developing
 research indicates that the Peterborough pottery is simply the later
 development of the early Neolithic pottery in a unified and continuous
 tradition (Smith 1974). T h e Victorian appraisal of Peterborough
 pottery was clearly in the light of the prevailing taste for ornate
 composition; the recent esteem of the austere undecorated, Western
 Neolithic pottery stemming from the modern 'Scandinavian' cult of
 austerity and simplicity in adornment. In a similar manner the isolated
 domestic aspects of pottery assemblages are frequently referred to as
                                       Introduction and polemic          27
 degenerate', with implications of temporal lateness, when compared
with the finer vessels from the very same potter's hand. These simple
examples are probably sufficient to illustrate the danger of such terms.
    T h e field of 'non-specific generalizations' has already been briefly
touched upon in the discussion of archaeological 'facts' as inferred
generalizations especially of the kind known as probability prop-
ositions. Non-specific generalizations cover those terms which are
used to support the case for a generalization from numbers of obser-
vations but which fail to define the proportion of instances. T h i s kind
of argument is frequently used when the bulk of the evidence is
contrary to the hypothesis favoured by the manipulator. T h e words to
watch in these cases are 'rare', 'common', 'frequent', 'most', 'some',
'few', 'many' and even unspecified measurements like 'long', 'short',
'thick', and 'thin', are meaningless without a comparative standard.
    Generalization is a valid and useful procedure but a generalization
can be invalid if there are not proportionately enough test cases, if the
circumstances are not controlled and if conflicting cases are not
considered. Most of the offending terms are relative and not absolute
values and they do not say what sample they are of the whole. An
occurrence of 100 observations of a particular correlation might be
called 'frequent', 'common', 'typical', or 'characteristic', especially if
only a total of 150 cases were known. However an occurrence of 100
observations could contrarily be called 'rare', 'atypical', or 'few', if the
investigator had a sample of 100,000. We need to know 'how many
cases were positive' out of 'how many cases were tested' and 'how
many cases were not tested'. T h e degree of confidence that we are
justified in placing in a generalization depends upon the answer to
these questions and these can properly be expressed, if the data are
numerical, in the form of a confidence statistic or by confidence
intervals (Moroney 1957, p. 238).
    This discussion brings us to the most interesting and exasperating
class of malady - 'ambiguity'. T h i s ailment has two common forms,
the use of one and the same term for differing sets of phenomena or
the use of the same term for quite different levels of a hierarchy of sets.
An example of the first kind of ambiguity is often concealed in the
most dangerous of all archaeological terms, the label 'typical' or 'type'.
'Typical' is sometimes used to denote the most common or frequent
form of artefact within an assemblage - so that one might say that the
handaxe is the 'typical' Acheulean artefact. Alternatively, the 'typical'
artefact is used to denote an artefact form so rare and so peculiar as to
28     Analytical Archaeology
be confined to this g r o u p and therefore to be used as a diagnostic
'type-fossil' for the g r o u p as a whole. In this latter sense the split-base
bone point can be said to be a 'typical' Aurignacian artefact, although
it is an absolutely rare item. At one and the same time, sometimes in
the same piece of work, the label 'typical' can be applied to the most
common and the most rare artefact in an assemblage. Great confusion
arises w h e n arguments proper to one sense of the term are transferred
to the other, or what is worse, when attempting to define a population
of assemblages one artefact type is arbitrarily defined as 'typical' thus
prejudicing the definition and the content of the group as a whole.
     A practical example of this latter class of ambiguity arises in the
classification of British megalithic long barrows. In western Britain
two major classes of tombs are defined by the S e v e r n / C o t s w o l d 'type'
and the Clyde/Carlingford 'type' whilst peripheral to these groups and
also running through them are various 'atypical' or 'degenerate' types
 (fig. i). T h e 'typical' S e v e r n / C o t s w o l d tomb is defined as having a




                                                                  Fig. 1 British
                                                                  megalithic tomb
                                                                  typology.
     Severn             Clyde                  Widespread
     Cotswold           Carlingford            unspecialized
     type               type                   type


slightly trapezoidal long mound with a convex horned forecourt and a
transepted megalithic gallery. T h e 'typical' C l y d e / C a r l i n g f o r d tomb
has a rounded rectangular mound with concave horned forecourt and
a simple segmented gallery, without lateral transepts. T h e s e two tomb
types seem nicely defined by this typology and neatly concentrated in
two natural geographical areas. Attempts to trace continental coun-
terparts for both t o m b types have led to the definition of a small group
of transepted tombs on the Loire estuary, taxonomically close to
the Severn/Cotswold type from which it is suggested that the
Clyde/Carlingford type can perhaps be derived as a secondary
development (Daniel 1939).
     However, close examination reveals a rather complex situation.
Both of the 'typical' tomb forms are typical in the sense that they
                                                 Introduction and polemic                   29

represent the integration of all those aspects peculiar to their area;
thus, out of some eighty or so S e v e r n / C o t s w o l d tombs only about ten
present all the 'typical' features, including the transepted chamber.
S i m i l a r l y , in the C l y d e / C a r l i n g f o r d g r o u p of about one hundred and
fifty tombs only fifty or so have all the typical features. It is quite clear
that the sense of the w o r d typical being used here is the sense
emphasizing local peculiarities, the regional idiosyncrasies. If we take
the opposite sense and take as typical the t o m b plan most commonly
f o u n d in the two areas w e find a much more generalized f o r m 'typical'
not only of these two areas but also significantly comprising megaliths
f r o m the coasts of Cornwall, Devon, Dorset and K e n t (Penwith and
M e d w a y groups). T h i s most widespread and frequent 'typical' tomb
f o r m is the rather ovate mound with a flat or slightly indented façade
with a single or multiple segmented c h a m b e r without transepts. If we
took this latter f o r m as 'typical' it would emphasize the c o m m o n basis
of the British regional megalithic long barrow groups and link them
geographically and taxonomically with a very large class of simple
tombs commonly f o u n d in Atlantic France. T h i s view would provide
an interesting alternative hypothesis opposed to, or subsuming,
that deriving the whole phenomenon by unspecified developments
from fourteen tombs on the Loire. T h e important point is the obser-
vation that two different usages of the term 'typical' can give rise to
two opposed hypotheses for the same data. Which of these two hy-
potheses is correct we do not know without detailed research framed
to test the hypothetical models against the data.
     T h i s example stresses the differing implications of the term 'typi-
cal', the one aspect emphasizing g r o u p idiosyncrasies and the other the
group modal type. When it comes to discussing type origins based on
diffusion then the modal or most c o m m o n type is likely to be the most
useful since the idiosyncratic type by definition must often reflect local
lines of development. A s an example of ambiguity arising f r o m one
term defining two different sets the term 'typical' should be avoided at
all costs and a proper definition of artefact type and frequency used
instead.
    T h e alternative f o r m of common ambiguity is the problem of one
term being used for several levels of a hierarchy of sets - the problem
of levels of meaning. T h e problem of one term being used to define
entities of quite different levels of complexity is not easy to spot or to
solve. T a k e , for example, the propositions that 'an axe is a type of
artefact', 'a bronze axe is a type of axe', 'a palstave is a type of bronze
axe'. T h i s list covers a descending hierarchy of 'types' of varying
30   Analytical Archaeology
complexity but each g r o u p on each level is called by an identical term
- a 'type'. Difficulties arise when 'types' which refer to entities of
different levels of complexity are being compared. T h e presence of
one 'type' of palstave as opposed to another palstave 'type' would
probably not be used to divide two assemblages which were similar in
many other respects. H o w e v e r , the comparison between an assem-
blage with a palstave axe 'type' and another assemblage with a stone
axe 'type' would probably be sufficient to attribute one to the Middle
Bronze A g e and the other to the Neolithic horizon. T h e same 'type'
was present in both assemblages at one level - the axe 'type' level, but
at a more complex level the axe 'types' were critically different.
    In much the same way the older text-books describe Paleolithic
entities as forming an Acheulean 'culture', a Mousterian 'culture' or an
Aurignacian 'culture' and yet these levels of meaning for the word
'culture' are quite different from the entities intended by the same
term in the Wessex 'culture' or the Aunjetitz 'culture'. T h e vital word
'culture' is here being used at quite different levels of complexity and
meaning, linked only by being hierarchic classes of the same general
categories, for all of which we are accustomed to use the same word - a
'culture'. If we recognize the different levels of meaning carried by
certain g r o u p terms we not only avoid confusion but also reveal
interesting information about the subtle nature of our intuitive entity
concepts.
    T h e common implication of this prolonged but not exhaustive
discussion of definition and meaning is that the full potential of
archaeology as a discipline can hardly be approached until a concise,
incisive and defined terminology has become widely accepted and
used. T h e preliminary steps towards this objective must involve the
laborious and various definition of all uncertain terms of key
importance in controversial debate, with the ultimate belief that the
best terms will survive. In addition to this objective the plagues of
value judgement, non-specific generalization and ambiguity must be
cast out and where possible the observations should be treated
numerically and statistically.


vi   Models
T h e birth of archaeology as a discipline dates f r o m T h o m s e n ' s concept
of three successive but overlapping technological eras. T h i s replaced
earlier chaotic ideas about ancient artefacts with a simple, largely
                                        Introduction and polemic           31

accurate, predictive f r a m e w o r k for structuring and investigating
archaeological data. T h e s e latter qualities are characteristic of
'models'. Essentially, models are hypotheses or sets of hypotheses
which simplify complex observations whilst offering a largely accurate
predictive framework structuring these observations - usefully
separating 'noise' f r o m information. Which aspect is noise and which
counts as information is solely dependent upon the f r a m e of reference
of the model.
    Models and hypotheses succeed in s i m p l i f y i n g complex situations
by ignoring information outside their f r a m e of reference and by
accurate generalization within it. It has been suggested that our intui-
tive procedure in trying to make generalizing inferences about the
unknown, based on accumulated observations, is usually formed upon
imaginary models so constructed that the necessary consequences in
thought of these mind-models are always the pictures of the necessary
consequences in the real world (Braithwaite i960, p. 9 1 ) . When we
have succeeded in constructing models based upon our accumulated
experience, with the desired properties, we can quickly derive from
them a prediction of the consequences which should follow from a
certain set of facts fitting the model. Clearly, a great deal depends
upon our conceptual models being well constructed and a close fit to
reality.
    T h e r e are a number of different kinds of model, some already
recognizable in archaeological thinking, others are inexplicitly used
and some remain undreamed of. In this section we will introduce the
main kinds of model, outline some dangers of their employment and
discuss three general models concerning archaeology (for a more
detailed discussion of models see Clarke 1972).
    Models can roughly be ordered in three levels of sophistication
each with its appropriate procedure and field of application (Ackoff et
al. 1962). A s a discipline or study progresses it is usually the case that
its models are being raised f r o m the lowest class of iconic models to
that of analogue models and finally to symbolic models or calculus (fig.
2). Iconic models represent observed attributes registered as iconic
symbols - as a code; this lowest level of model frequently follows the
need for condensed documentation. A n archaeological distribution
map and simple histograms or scatter diagrams rank as iconic models
of archaeological situations - useful as concise documentation and
for generalization purposes (fig. 2 model column 1). Analogue
models represent observed attributes by substituting other kinds
                     Iconic models                 Analogue models                     Symbolic     models

                Scaled or coded                  Formulation of                   Mathematical analogue
              isomorphic record of               historic,                       (a) deterministic model
              observations as                    anthropological                 (b) s t a t i s t i c a l model
              graphs, histograms,                or a b s t r a c t analogue     (c) stochastic model
              maps, etc                          simulation                      (d) canonical model

                                                                                 Logical mathematical
                    Generalising /                  Generalising                   consequences of the
                    observations                    observations                "v        model




        INTERPRETATION TEST MODEL/HYPOTHESIS AGAINST THE
                         LATEST OBSERVATION SAMPLES FOR
                               GOODNESS OF FIT


        THEORY                           SYNTHESIZING PROPOSITIONS
                                           ABOUT THE REAL WORLD


Fig. 2         G e n e r a l m o d e l (a) - A m o d e l f o r a r c h a e o l o g i c a l p r o c e d u r e . A m o d e l
for the o r g a n i z a t i o n and relation of a r c h a e o l o g i c a l activities w i t h i n a dis-
ciplined p r o c e d u r e .
M o d i f i e d f r o m the g e o g r a p h i c a l m o d e l of C h o r l e y 1 9 6 4 , p. 1 2 9 .
                                      I n t r o d u c t i o n and p o l e m i c   33

of 'analogous' attributes whose consequences are congruent to those of
the observed attributes. In archaeology analogue models are currently
the most common and most tantalizingly dangerous form of model
with historical, anthropological or abstract situations providing
generalizations transferred to archaeological situations. T h e third and
most sophisticated class of model is the symbolic model in which the
observed attributes are represented by symbols which unlike iconic
symbols are integrated in a specific calculus. T h e calculus of a
symbolic model is usually a mathematical analogue of a deterministic,
statistical or stochastic kind such that reality is approximated by the
logical mathematical consequences of the model. Symbolic models of
this kind have hardly been considered suitable for archaeological
studies but in the light of the growing maturity of the discipline and its
tools this kind of model should be increasingly developed.
    T h e kinds of model ascend in power from the iconic through the
analogue to the symbolic models because each higher rank of model
requires a commensurately greater amount of condensed information
and has a commensurately greater general scope. T h e most sophisti-
cated models are usually mathematical or statistical because these
vehicles allow the least biased and the most powerful pure deductive
systems. An example of the independence of the hypothesis and its
vehicle can be gauged from Einstein's adoption in 1 9 1 5 of a completely
abstract system of geometry developed by Riemann merely as an
exercise in 1854; Einstein found that this piece of geometry provided a
framework of wide predictive value in his theory of general relativity
(Braithwaite i960, p. 48).
    However, at the moment most archaeological models are simple
situation analogues based on history and anthropology or simple
iconic documentations. These models provide different prehistorians
with different conceptual frameworks over which they stretch the
same facts but with differing results which can be compared and
contrasted for their accuracy or inaccuracy in the light of accumulat-
ing evidence. T h e powers of numerical taxonomy promise faint hope
that one day even archaeologists might be able to express their mind
models in efficient abstract terms of high predictive value. In the
meantime it is essential that we appreciate that consciously, or
unconsciously, our minds erect models of archaeological situations
based on our accumulated experience and breadth of vision. These
latter are the features that pick out the skilful from the naive
archaeologist and distinguish good and useful models from bad ones.
34    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y
    T h e topic of bad conceptual models reminds us that throughout
this book the most useful and p o w e r f u l techniques are also repeatedly
the most difficult and dangerous to employ. In model building there
are several inherent dangers. It is all too easy to mistakenly transfer
too many attributes f r o m the model to the theory - this is especially
the case with historically based analogues or generalizations. Some-
times the model adopted is too limited in scope and may obscure
actual relationships because it is insufficiently general. Ideally the
limits of the model and the theory should be identical so that physical
impossibility in the theory should correspond to logical impossibility
in the model (Braithwaite i960, p. 109). Despite these characteristics
model making remains a most powerful procedure and the fitting of
successively more accurate models to reality enlightens as much by the
areas of poor fit as by those snugly accommodated. T h i s is perhaps a
suitable point at which to introduce three general models or frame-
works which will be extensively developed throughout the rest of this
book:

     (a) A model for archaeological procedure - illustrating the three
         main spheres of archaeology as a discipline (fig. 2).
     (b) A model for archaeological entities - the polythetic versus the
         monothetic entity (figs 3, 49).
     (c) A model for archaeological processes - systems theory, the
         general model and its setting in archaeology (fig. 1 1 ) .



(A) A M O D E L F O R   ARCHAEOLOGICAL      PROCEDURE

T h i s model is simply the development of the concepts sketched in
the section on the nature of archaeology as a discipline (section II).
In that section we defined three main spheres of archaeological
activity, comprising observational data recovered by excavation and
collection and falling into either the sphere of contextual attributes
(location, stratification, association etc.) or the sphere of specific
attributes (attributes present or absent amongst the artefacts or
assemblages) these spheres together, or independently, contributing to
the central sphere of synthesis and model building.
      T h e model illustrating these spheres and their relationships is
presented as a flowchart in fig. 2. T h e chart is drawn up in such a way
as to emphasize the difference between the archaeological segment of
the real world and the observations inevitably based upon a small
                                            Introduction and polemic      35

sample of that segment. T h e spheres of contextual and specific obser-
vations can be fully experimental if properly controlled excavation and
data analysis is used. T h e flow starts with the sample of observations
and passes on from the spheres concerned with experiment and data
recovery to the sphere of model and hypothesis operations. T h e three
parallel columns represent the alternative routes of analysis using
iconic, analogue or symbolic models. In reality, as we have noted
earlier, these routes are really alternatives of increasing sophistication.
These methods may be used in a cascade sequence in which an iconic
model is converted into an analogue and then a symbolic model -
either in one sequence of operations or gradually over generations as
the discipline and the data gradually improve in information content.
Finally, a feedback route compares the newly devised model or hypo-
thesis with the latest state of the observational data and agreements
and discrepancies are filtered back into the system again, to provide
fresh modifications or new models. T h e continuous cycle ultimately
producing a distillate of synthesizing propositions, principles or
hypotheses (Chorley 1964, p. 129).



(B) A M O D E L FOR A R C H A E O L O G I C A L   ENTITIES

Most archaeological entities consist of clusters or aggregates of entities
of lower taxonomic rank. We are concerned with groups, groups of
groups, and groups of groups of groups of attributes based on obser-
vational data. Culture groups are clusters of cultures, cultures are
clusters of assemblages, assemblages are clusters of types, types are
clusters of artefacts and artefacts are clusters of attributes or traits. T o
the archaeologist the process of grouping objects into 'sensible'
groups, clusters, or sequences has been a normal activity for decades.
T h e nature of these groupings seemed quite clear ; one made a list of
attributes intuitively prejudging that it would give the 'best' grouping
and then placed entities in the group if they possessed the attributes
and outside if they did not. T h e intended nature of these groups was
also transparently clear, they were solid and tangible defined entities
like an artefact type or a cultural assemblage, each possessed a neces-
sary list of qualifying attributes and they could be handled like dis-
crete and solid bricks. T h i s class of group is well known to
taxonomists and is called a monothetic group - a group of entities so
defined that the possession of a unique set of attributes is both
36       Analytical Archaeology

sufficient and necessary for m e m b e r s h i p (fig. 3) (Sokal and Sneath
1963, p. 13). T h e model for archaeological entities was a monothetic
model.
       T h e monothetic b o x of bricks model is still the prevailing c o n c e p t
tacitly u n d e r l y i n g the definition of most archaeological entities. Pre-
historians still seem to think that in order to define g r o u p s it is
necessary that every m e m b e r within the g r o u p must have all the
q u a l i f y i n g attributes. In practice this ideal has never been d e m o n -
strated in archaeology; no g r o u p of cultural assemblages from a single
culture ever contains, nor ever did contain, all of the cultural artefacts
( C h i l d e 1956, p. 33; 1963, p. 4 1 ) ; no g r o u p s of artefacts within a single
t y p e population are ever identical in their lists of attributes. Instead,
w e are conscious that these g r o u p s are defined b y a range of variation
b e t w e e n defined limits, b y populations of attributes or types of w h i c h
a high proportion are variously shared between individual m e m b e r s of
the g r o u p . T h i s situation is not a monothetic g r o u p i n g at all but
b e l o n g s to the other great class of taxonomic g r o u p s - the polythetic
g r o u p s (fig. 3) (Sokal and Sneath, 1963, pp. 1 3 - 1 5 ) . 5

                                   Entities
                               A B C           D     E     F    G    H     1     J    K    L
     Attributes          1     X    X   X       X    X    X
         or             2      X    X   X       X    X    X
                                                                                                 Monothetic
      artefacts         3      X    X   X       X    X    X
                                                                                                 group
                        4      X    X   X       X    X    X
                        5      X    X   X       X    X    X
                        6                                       X    X     -    X     -     -


                        7                                       -    X     X    -     -    X
                                                                                                 Polythetic
                        8                                       X     -    X    X     X    X
                                                                                                 group
                        9                                       -    X     -    X     X    -

                       10                                       X    -     X    -     X    X
                                   X Present
                                   - Absent
     Fig- 3 General model (b) - A model for archaeological entities. A
     model suggesting that archaeological entities are structured as poly-
     thetic g r o u p populations and may not be treated as monothetic g r o u p
     populations.

       A p o l y t h e t i c g r o u p is - a g r o u p of e n t i t i e s s u c h t h a t e a c h e n t i t y
p o s s e s s e s a l a r g e n u m b e r of t h e a t t r i b u t e s of t h e g r o u p , e a c h a t t r i b u t e
is s h a r e d b y l a r g e n u m b e r s of e n t i t i e s a n d n o s i n g l e a t t r i b u t e is b o t h
s u f f i c i e n t a n d n e c e s s a r y to t h e g r o u p m e m b e r s h i p . W h e r e a s t h e r e is
o n l y o n e f o r m of m o n o t h e t i c g r o u p t h e r e are m a n y v a r i e t i e s of p o l y -
t h e t i c g r o u p i n g a c c o r d i n g t o t h e n u m b e r of s h a r e d a t t r i b u t e s , t h e
                                         Introduction and polemic           37

m a x i m u m and m i n i m u m n u m b e r of attributes shared between any
pair, and the n u m b e r of attributes possessed by each individual. One
of the most important future tasks is going to be the definition of the
precise nature of the polythetic groupings underlying archaeological
taxonomy.
     T h e fundamental implications of the realization that archaeologi-
cal entities are polythetic, or partially polythetic groups of various
kinds is beyond simple statement. For the first time we can honestly
admit the wide variation in attributes defining artefact types, assem-
blages and cultures without having to abandon them as defined enti-
ties. T h e foolhardiness of emphasizing a single attribute or single
type-fossil as the criterion for g r o u p membership can be recognized.
F o r the first time it is possible to see that this a w k w a r d variety and
range of variation of our entities and their attributes underlies their
original potential to change by mosaic and multilinear development
and not by an agreed mythology of simple unilinear typologies. We
need no longer be ashamed of the obvious inadequacies of our
theoretical concepts and definitions in the face of the actual complexi-
ties of the data. Viable definitions of archaeological entities can be
produced and used as the incisive tools they should be, not consigned
to unused primers or buried in glossaries. T h e r e is no longer any need
to sweep the untidy and inexplicable fringe of peripheral forms into
unrealistic 'hybrid' heaps with all the implications of that pseudo-
genetic term.
    Archaeological theory and definition has rather dishonestly and
inconsistently operated at two levels. A theoretical level of inter-
pretation in terms of rigid monothetic groupings and a practical level
of groupings by broad affinity or similarity assessed on an intuitive
basis. T h i s schizophrenic division has seriously impaired the
development of prehistoric studies, in which lip-service has been paid
to a theoretical model of demonstrable inadequacy whilst actual prac-
tical advance has been accomplished by rather furtive groping - with
the results subsequently presented as having been achieved by
intelligent theorizing.
     In conclusion then, this work will proceed on the assumption that
the best model for most archaeological entities is a polythetic model of
some kind (also now advocated in social anthropology - Needham
1975). T h e later chapters will attempt to build up a soundly based
hierarchy of defined entity concepts using this model and will pursue
its far-reaching implications (chapters 4-8). 6
38    Analytical Archaeology

(C) A M O D E L FOR A R C H A E O L O G I C A L   PROCESSES


T h e cultures studied by the archaeologist once existed fully equipped
and working within an ecological framework but now we have only a
few broken cogs, springs and structured fragments from which the
whole clockwork must be restored and the principles of mechanics
induced. Here we have the model of culture as an elaborate machine
with intermeshed working parts, with a measurable efficiency and
inertia, with potential energy and driving forces, tensions and escape
mechanisms, the whole lubricated with social oils. T h e n again we may
take the model of culture as a superorganism, segmented by kinship,
responding to stimulus, extracting a food supply, growing, reproduc-
ing and dying; a complex integration of many small units such that the
aggregate has a much greater potential than the simple sum of the
parts. Finally, we have thought of culture as a physical model in which
constellations of elements are structured into clusters and the clusters
integrated into greater patterns - the cultural galaxies, changing with
time and gliding or colliding with yet other similar cultural galaxies.
All of these models are valuable but not one of them is predictively
useful, they are still at the stage of simple analogues.
    A little thought about these favourite analogues for cultural enti-
ties will reveal that both they and individual cultures share certain
essential characteristics - the very characteristics which give some
power to the analogues but power which in each specific case is spoiled
as a general model by having too limited a scope. If we can distil these
quintessential characteristics we should be able to define a model of
more general scope and utility. T h e s e shared characteristics would
seem to be the essential aspects of being dynamic complex wholes,
formed of intercommunicating networks of entities or attributes - they
are all dynamic systems. T h e general and inherent properties of
different kinds of systems are the field of cybernetics and it is clearly in
aspects of this field that useful models for cultural entities can best be
sought.
    It would be all too easy at this stage to take systems theory as our
model for archaeological processes and the cultural entities that
generate them, without isolating precisely the kind of system these
entities represent. T h i s would simply extend systems theory and its
terminology as yet another vague analogy of no practical potential.
Consequently, although this section puts forward a dynamic system
model as suitable for archaeological conceptualization it will take
                                       Introduction and polemic          39

another two chapters to attempt to define the nature of such
archaeological systems. We must try and understand what kinds of
system exist in archaeology, what are their roles, limits and inherent
properties as systems, how are they networked by subsystems and
within what setting can these systems be conceived as existing? We
cannot possibly be fully successful in these attempts, since anthro-
pologists themselves are only just beginning to analyse social systems
in these terms (e.g. R a p p a p o r t 1968). Given another generation of
results f r o m the analysis of the more fully documented anthropologi-
cal data then the archaeologist may begin more fruitfully to scavenge
archaeologically relevant facets. In the meantime, the archaeologist
can start to explore the potential of the dynamic system models. We
must try to find out which kinds of systems are relevant and which are
irrelevant as archaeological process models and to elucidate the
methods for investigating these very complex systems. H a v i n g
established some idea of the kinds of system involved we can probe
their inherent properties regardless of particular attribute values. In
the light of all these investigations we may attempt to define a general
system model best suited as a f r a m e w o r k for archaeological analysis
and hypothesis. T h e s e are the tasks pursued in the next chapter.
     Briefly, we may anticipate that culture groups, cultures, assem-
blages, types and artefacts changing with time can be thought of as
certain kinds of dynamic systems with certain inherent characteristics
stemming from the general structure of the systems rather than from
their specific attribute or entity values. Our aim is the isolation of
archaeological entities as functional systems, the definition of the
limiting values of the systems' states and the specification of the
inherent properties of the systems as general systems. T h e first part
will concern a general systems model for archaeological entities, the
second part will apply this specifically to cultures, and the third part
will apply the model to artefacts as systems. M u c h of the discussion of
a general systems model must be conceived as applying simul-
taneously to these two levels - to cultures and to artefacts. T h e reasons
w h y so much that is applicable to one level is also applicable to the
other level of entity will gradually become apparent. In the chapters
that follow we are primarily engaged in, first - the development of
suitable general models of predictive value, second - the development
of the setting for such models. At the culture level we can expect a
model which will involve dynamic cultural systems of complex
networked subsystems coupled with an environmental system setting
40     Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

of equal c o m p l e x i t y (figs 22,     2 3 ) . T h e s t u d y of w h o l e sociocultural
systems,     the    mutual       relations      between       such     systems      and     their
e n v i r o n m e n t , and the adaptive c h a n g e s of these s y s t e m s with passing
time constitutes the s t u d y of cultural e c o l o g y and a topic of our third
chapter. H a v i n g spent so m u c h time g e n e r a t i n g models and settings
for the m o d e l s the rest of the text re-applies the implications of these
c o n c e p t s to our special field of archaeological entities and processes
with particular e x a m p l e s (chapters 4 - 1 0 ) .


Notes

      ( 1 ) Daniel ( 1 9 7 6 ) p r e f e r s to emphasize the distinction between the w o r k
of T h o m s e n and that of the earlier Italian, F r e n c h , English and Danish
scholars w h o 'engaged in general philosophical speculations' about tech-
nological ages in man's past. H e argues that these speculations were not a
general w a y of thinking in these countries and that T h o m s e n was unaffected
'in any very significant w a y ' by the ideas of Mercati, Mahudel and others.
G i v e n the currently available evidence, it is difficult to decide between
Daniel's views and the author's conclusion that the stimuli for T h o m s e n ' s
work had 'ancient and w i d e s p r e a d sources'. K l i n d t - J e n s e n ' s recent history of
S c a n d i n a v i a n archaeology ( 1 9 7 5 ) o f f e r s no help in resolving this problem.

    (2) A notable omission in this discussion is the work of V. G o r d o n
Childe, and in particular his development of the concept of archaeological
'cultures' (e.g. 1929). A f t e r the earlier preoccupation with chronological
sequences through the use of stratigraphy and Montelius' typological
method, C h i l d e stimulated a new systemization of E u r o p e a n prehistory by
using the culture as a temporal and a spatial unit of analysis.

       (3) A s an e x a m p l e of the neglect of general theory and methodology, it is
worth noting that before the publication of Childe's Piecing Together the Past
( 1 9 5 6 ) there was no book in Britain w h i c h discussed methodology in an
explicit way. T h i s neglect was also visible in America, with the works of
T a y l o r (1948) and Willey and Phillips ( 1 9 5 8 ) being rare exceptions.

       (4) T h e phrase 'material culture in the past' is here substituted for
'antiquities', which seemed an unfortunate choice of word in the first pub-
lication of this volume. A l t h o u g h the study of material culture in the past is
widely associated with the discipline of archaeology, this is not universally the
case at present. For example S c h i f f e r ( 1 9 7 6 , p. 4) argues that 'the subject
matter of archaeology is the relationships between human behaviour and
material culture in all times and places' (my emphasis). According to this
definition the discipline includes 'traditional' archaeology as well as studies of
material culture in both ethnographic and industrial societies (e.g. S c h i f f e r
 1 9 7 6 , pp. 1 8 8 - 9 3 ) .
                                          I n t r o d u c t i o n and p o l e m i c   41

    (5) Doran and Hodson (1975. PP- 1 6 1 - 7 ) have noted how some
archaeologists (e.g. Childe, Bordes, Krieger) have hinted at the use of a
polythetic model for archaeological entities such as types and cultures. But
there was no explicit development of this concept and they point out that
Childe's classification of types ('the individual members . . . exhibit certain
common features, repeated . . . in all members of the class': Childe 1956, pp.
5-6, my emphasis) was what we would now call monothetic.

     (6) While the polythetic classification of archaeological entities has been
strongly supported and developed within British archaeology (e.g. Doran and
Hodson 1975), some workers in America have taken a different point of view.
Thomas (1970) argues that the author fails to distinguish two important
meanings of 'classification': the first concerns the act of forming groups of
archaeological entities, which Thomas agrees is where the polythetic concept
is vital; the second concerns the identification of new specimens so that they
can be allotted to existing taxa. In the latter case the archaeologist is con-
cerned with a smaller number of criteria which discriminate between taxa,
and Thomas claims that this is a monothetic procedure. Whallon ( 1 9 7 1 , 1972)
goes further than this in maintaining that a monothetic approach, as practised
in plant ecology, gives a more meaningful classification into types of his own
data (Owasco period pottery from central and eastern New York State) than
either polythetic methods or Spaulding's (1953) method for attribute analy-
sis. For example when he used Spaulding's method of testing for significant,
non-random associations between attributes by use of the Chi-square statis-
tic, he found he could only define two pottery types, compared with the
traditional sixteen established by Ritchie and MacNeish. This divergence of
opinion over the use of polythetic classifications in archaeology can be seen
further in Doran and Hodson's (1975, pp. 177-80) criticisms of the Whallon
method, which they claim does not deal with quantitative attributes and
requires a full comparative test on the same data with a polythetic cluster
analysis, as has been done in plant ecology.
2      Culture systems - the model

       Culture is . . . the system of the total extrasomatic means of
       adaptation. Such a system involves complex sets of
       relationships among people, places, and things whose
       matrix may be understood in multivariate terms,
                              LEWIS    R. B I N F O R D . 1 9 6 5 , p . 20Q




I   Systems theory, an outline
Cybernetics, or systems theory, is a complex and rapidly expanding
discipline which it would be quite impossible to condense into this
short section. T h e excellent elementary textbooks by A s h b y ( 1 9 5 6 )
and by Wiener (1948) describe the basis which we need for our
purposes and this sketch amounts to no more than an imperfect
outline intended to acquaint the reader with this kind of approach. An
exhortation to go first to these and other primary sources (e.g.
Bertalanffy 1 9 5 0 , 1 9 6 9 ; Hall and Fagan 1 9 5 6 ; Miller 1 9 6 5 ; Buckley
1 9 6 7 , 1968) cannot be emphasized too strongly.
     Nevertheless, our intention is to use this developing and poten-
tially fundamental craft to help construct a model for archaeological
processes. T h i s will inevitably be an inadequate model but still one
which may summarize our information and promise some capacity for
further development.
     Briefly, the tentative general model that we are about to develop
arises from the assumption that cultural systems are integral whole
units. Material culture, economic structure, religious dogma, and
social organization are on this hypothesis merely subsystems arbi-
trarily extracted f r o m their coupled context by the specialist academic.
T h e sociocultural system is a unit system in which all the cultural
information is a stabilized but constantly changing network of inter-
communicating attributes forming a complex whole - a dynamic
system. An extension of this assumption would suggest that material
culture can only be properly studied if its former coupling within a
sociocultural system is taken into account.
                                   C u l t u r e s y s t e m s - the m o d e l   43

    A general system model on this basis should be representative of
cultural processes at several levels within a sociocultural unit. T h e
designation 'general' model is thus intended to convey the erstwhile
hope that the model will relate the effect of change upon cultural
entities - processes, in fact - from the level of attributes within
artefacts to that of artefacts within cultures, or kinship attributes
within social structure, or religious tenets within a dogma system. T h e
immediate purpose is therefore to give an introductory outline of the
necessary procedure, to create a tentative general system model and to
develop the preliminary implications of the general model for cultural
data.
    It would perhaps be best to start by considering the great variety of
kinds of system that exist in the world and then to take a brief look at
some of their inherent properties or regularities. It is these inherent
properties of various kinds of system which are of particular interest to
us in our pursuit of a model that tells us something about the general
behaviour of particular classes of very complex systems, regardless of
the specific state of their particular attributes. These inherent charac-
teristics of systems of the same class arise from common features in the
structure of the individual systems, the aspect commonly referred to
as 'pattern' in static concepts and which is best transformed into
'system' in dynamic situations changing with space and time. T h e
term system is here taken to embrace any 'intercommunicating
network of attributes or entities forming a complex whole'. We are
thus constructing a mind-model in which we have systems of inter-
communicating attributes or entities such that the components' states
or values change sequentially with space, time, or both and
consequently the overall system state changes with their complex
integration. T h e component attributes or entities are said to be 'inter-
communicating' in that changes in the values or states of some of these
components can be shown to alter with the value or state of some of
their neighbours. Any such change in value or state is customarily
called a transformation and a sequence of transformations following a
particular course is then called a trajectory.
   It follows from this model that any particular system state can be
shown either to be a time or space transformation of another specific
and different system state, or it can be shown that the one sys-
tem cannot be a transformation of the other - however prolonged
the operation. Archaeology revolves about numbers of decisions
grouping some sets of systems - artefacts, assemblages, cultures - as
44   Analytical Archaeology
transformations one of another and differentiating them f r o m other
sets of systems which are claimed as quite separate but parallel trans-
formation sets. T h e problems of sensibly clustering related time and
space transformations and of aligning such clusters to those respective
axes are two of the main problems of archaeology.
     T o complete this elementary picture of a system we must then add
that most systems can be acted upon by various external conditions
and can themselves act upon such conditions. T h e varying external
conditions acting upon the system are called its input and the varying
actions of the system upon its environment are called the system's
output (which output is simultaneously the environment's input and
vice versa) (figs n , 23).
     T h e organic and inorganic objects of the world provide a very large
number, possibly an infinity of classes of system. It follows that in
calling attention to the system aspect of archaeological entities we are
only drawing attention to a single part of this infinity and in doing so
we gain very little new information about these entities. In order to
progress we must specify more and more closely what special cate-
gories of system we are considering and thus define their inherent
properties. Are archaeological entities open systems, closed systems,
plastic systems, determinate or indeterminate systems, 'Black Box'
systems, Markovian systems - and so on ? One answer is that we do not
yet know what sort of system we are dealing with, we know a little
about which kinds of system are not represented and we know little
 bits of these archaeological systems' behaviour that we can roughly
 match in other kinds of system. What we require is a carefully built
and fitted model integrating these bits of knowledge and closely
 approaching our total knowledge of archaeological systems. A
 comprehensive form of such a model, capable of generating each
 parameter and property at any given moment and capable of generat-
 ing its progressive sequences of transformations is called a canonical
 model (Ashby 1956, p. 29). A canonical representation or model
 embodies the transformation trajectories of a system and this makes it
 a powerful and useful model.
    We have not the space in this preamble to attempt a comprehen-
sive survey of the main kinds of system but let us instead take a look
at an arbitrary set of properties commonly found in several classes
of system and possibly related to our search for a model. Perhaps
from these bits and pieces we can construct some temporary
framework.
                                     C u l t u r e systems - the model    45

CONTINUITY

First of all, we are certainly dealing with systems that change as some
c o m p l e x integration of their changing attribute or entity components.
T h i s characteristic capacity for change or transformation is most often
demonstrated as a process of continuous though not necessarily
regular change - overall change brought about by successive,
infinitesimal transformations, individually imperceptible but quite
apparent in cumulative result. T h e importance of conceptualizing our
archaeological systems as d y n a m i c and continuous systems lies in the
special properties of continuous systems.
      One might take an aircraft flying across the sky as an example of a
continuous system, in that its course can be expressed as a cumulative
sequence of successive positions. N o w , if we were intent on shooting
down this aircraft we w o u l d align our missile just ahead of the aircraft
on its present course, knowing that although certain deflecting evasive
action was possible on the part of the aircraft, nevertheless it could not
precipitately change its position in the sky without describing a
continuous course between its f o r m e r and future position. T h e gun-
layer is using the property of constraint which confines the variety of
activities of a continuous system and gives rise to a certain amount of
behavioural regularity, predictable within certain limits; in the case of
the radar tracked aircraft this may be a fatal regularity. Consequently,
the characterization of our archaeological systems as continuous
systems increases the expectation of detecting constraints and resul-
tant regularities in the trajectory of such systems. T h e power of this
constraint lies in the inability of a continuous function to change other
than from one state or value to an immediately neighbouring value
(Ashby 1956, p. 1 3 3 ) . O u r first proposition towards a general model
system is therefore: that the system is d y n a m i c and continuous, with
the attributes or entities having specific values or states which vary by
successive transformations.

FEEDBACK

We have described the kind of system that we are trying to model as an
'intercommunicating network of attributes or entities forming a
complex whole' so that changes in some of these components may give
rise to correlated changes in some of the other system components.
T h i s concept allows us to visualize the components as having com-
municating channels between them, even though these remain as
46         Analytical Archaeology

intangible as the magnetic field linking a moving magnet with a
changing pattern of iron filings. T h i s connection can be symbolized by
a line joining the particular attributes or entities, with an arrow
representing the direction of connection, from the source of stimulus
to the receiving attribute or entity acted upon (fig. 4i).




                      1 IN i\ 1
                                                                       V     U

                                                       1 1     D   1             \




                                                         /             S             Fig. 4 Simple
                                                                                     feedback
(/)               07)                    (/»)           (<V)           iv)           subsystems.
(1) single    channel,   no       feedback
(ii)-(v)     looped   channels,     feedback    subsystems

    However, it is more frequently the case that the attribute or entity
values are coupled or connected in such a manner that a change or
transformation in either one may produce a corresponding trans-
formation in the value of the other. In such a case a connecting line
and arrow must be shown in both directions constituting a 'loop' line
which may run direct (fig. 41, ii) or it may run via another attribute,
entity, or a set of such components (fig. 4iv, v); in all these cases there
is a functional loop feeding back information from the recipient to the
stimulator. Such a connection or loop constitutes a 'feedback loop' and
the recycling of information in this way constitutes feedback in which
the stimulator may be modified by the return of some of its emitted
information. Any two-way arrow in a systems diagram constitutes a
feedback subsystem although it may take various forms (fig. 4i-v).
      Since feedback subsystems will operate wherever and whenever
 such a connecting 'loop' can be traced through the connections of
 networks of nodes in a system, then it follows that a richly networked
 system will usually integrate many such local feedback subsystems.
 T h e special characteristics of such subsystems will then immeasurably
 enrich and complicate the properties of the system as a whole -
 providing it with great flexibility of response. Even with only four
 attributes or entities, each one affecting the other three, then twenty
 separate circuits can be traced through them (fig. 5). Knowing the
 properties of all the twenty circuits does not give complete informa-
 tion about the system. 'Such complex systems cannot be treated as an
 interlaced set of more or less independent feedback circuits, but only
                                                C u l t u r e systems - the model                47




                            Fig. 5 A simple example of a complex
                            system; twenty circuits may be traced through
                            this simple network.
                            Source: Ashby 1956, p. 54.

as a w h o l e . What is i m p o r t a n t is that c o m p l e x s y s t e m s , richly cross-
connected internally, have c o m p l e x ' " b e h a v i o u r s " ,          and that       these
" b e h a v i o u r s " can b e goal-seeking in c o m p l e x patterns' ( A s h b y 1 9 5 6 , p.
54).
       F o r our p u r p o s e s it is sufficient to recognize that m a n y of the
special qualities that s o m e t i m e s a p p e a r to e n d o w c o m p l e x entities and
s y s t e m s with intelligence - goal-seeking, adaptation, response to stim-
ulus, behaviour, self-regulation, m e m o r y , f o r e s i g h t - s t e m f r o m an
a n t h r o p o m o r p h i c view of these kinds of f e e d b a c k s u b s y s t e m s and this
kind of richly n e t w o r k e d s y s t e m . O n e m u s t be c a r e f u l not to attribute
the individual h u m a n capacity f o r reasoned thought to the material
s y s t e m s generated by h u m a n societies - they share certain similar
properties by virtue of b e i n g c o m p l e x s y s t e m s , these properties are
inherent in all such kinds of s y s t e m .
       W e can conclude this brief glance at f e e d b a c k c o u p l i n g s by dis-
cussing the two alternative f o r m s of i n f o r m a t i o n f e e d b a c k - negative
f e e d b a c k and positive f e e d b a c k . Negative f e e d b a c k is said to be
operating if the o u t g o i n g i n f o r m a t i o n (fig. 4 A to Z ) c o m e s back round
the loop ( f r o m Z to A , fig. 4) to its s o u r c e , with a size or sign such as to
diminish the source's output. T h i s kind of f e e d b a c k m a y repeatedly
recycle around the f e e d b a c k loop and c u m u l a t i v e l y d i m i n i s h the
source output to zero. A l t e r n a t i v e l y , the f e e d b a c k i n f o r m a t i o n return-
ing d o w n the loop m a y add to the source's o u t p u t , c u m u l a t i v e l y
p u s h i n g it u p as it r e c y c l e s ; this is positive f e e d b a c k . Both kinds of
feedback are important in their respective capacities f o r b r i n g i n g
s y s t e m s u p to, or a w a y f r o m , states of equilibrium or stability.


E Q U I L I B R I U M OR    STABILITY

T h e vague and u n d e f i n e d usages of the t e r m s ' s y s t e m ' and 'equilib-
r i u m ' are responsible f o r m o r e ' u n r e a l ' p r o b l e m s and h a v e o b s c u r e d
u s e f u l model b u i l d i n g m o r e than any other pair of a b u s e d terms.
H a v i n g said that an entity is a s y s t e m and that it has states of
48   Analytical Archaeology
equilibrium or stability w e have said nothing at all until w e define, or
try to define, precisely what kind of system and what kind of equilib-
rium we are considering. D o we mean stable, metastable, d y n a m i c ,
steady state, unstable or statistical equilibrium, some combination of
these, or some new f o r m of equilibrium special to the entities of our
study? It is easy to see that one of the keys to our problem lies in this
simple challenge, it is less easy to provide a simple answer. We must
try to be more specific about the f o r m s of equilibrium involved
although we are sure to be guilty of some ambiguity in so fundamental
a field.


(1) Stable equilibrium

A system is said to be in stable equilibrium if a small displacement
f r o m the equilibrium state gives rise to a return to that state in due
course. If w e consider a large horizontal concave mirror with a ball-
bearing at rest in the depressed centre of the mirror - then a dis-
placement of the ball-bearing away f r o m the centre will only result in
the ball oscillating about the centre and gradually reassuming its
original state. T h e centre of the horizontal concave mirror is the stable
equilibrium point for this system. Since the state of stable equilibrium
is restored by cumulatively diminishing the disturbing displacement it
follows that such systems may frequently but not exclusively be
returned to stable equilibrium by means of the 'regulating' effect of a
 negative feedback subsystem. T h i s capacity for feedback subsystems
 to act as 'regulators' will be discussed at some length later in this
 section.


(2) Unstable equilibrium

A system is said to be in unstable equilibrium if a small displacement
from the equilibrium state gives rise to a cumulatively greater dis-
placement from that specific state - usually towards some alternative
and fresh equilibrium state. If we balanced our ball-bearing on the
domed centre of a convex mirror - then any slight displacement would
cause the ball-bearing to roll down the dome and away to some new
equilibrium point. Since the state of unstable equilibrium, when
displaced, gives rise to cumulatively greater displacement, it follows
that regulating subsystems may often but not exclusively incorporate
positive feedback outputs to produce this property.
                                   Culture systems - the model         49
(3) Metastable equilibrium

A system is said to be in metastable equilibrium if its state is only
stable in the absence of a suitable catalyst, which if introduced into the
system would immediately initiate displacement away from the equi-
librium state. The potential energy of such a system although mini-
mum is not vanishingly small (Lotka 1925, p. 143). Examples of
metastable systems are super-saturated salt solutions prior to crystal
seeding or explosive mixtures before detonation. Such systems com-
monly involve cumulative change building up to a threshold beyond
which the system cannot continue unchanged. The thresholds can be
regarded as temporarily separating one system state from a successive
sequence of system states, each separated from the other by a
threshold requiring specific 'catalytic' states or values to be intro-
duced, possibly in a particular order, before the system's trajectory can
pass from one state to another. The number and order of the 'essential'
or 'catalytic' values that must be introduced into the system before a
particular transition will take place is some measure of the 'height' of
this threshold.


(4) Steady state equilibrium
A system is said to be in steady state equilibrium if its state is only
stable in the presence of certain constantly maintained variables,
attribute states, or values. If we imagine a system in which a vibra-
tionless helicopter hovers motionless at a fixed point in the air,
containing in its cabin the concave mirror with the ball-bearing
motionless at its central equilibrium point - then in this case the
ball-bearing is in a steady state equilibrium. The ball-bearing will
remain in equilibrium in this system only so long as the helicopter is
maintained 'motionless' by the vigorous expenditure of energy by its
engines and rotors.


(5) Dynamic equilibrium
A system is said to be in dynamic equilibrium if, in spite of the
continuously changing values of its components, at successive points
in time these components closely approximate to a stable state.
Coupled systems are often said to be in dynamic equilibrium one with
another and in such cases although each system is changing, they are
50   Analytical Archaeology
jointly changing in such a way as to trace a path through successive
equilibrium points. One may imagine a giant and a man playing a
game in which a pair of scales is continuously kept in balance although
the giant successively alters the weights on his side, causing
imbalance, and the man must quickly rebalance the scale by altering
the weights on his side; every day the scales are in equilibrium, but
every day the state of equilibrium is changed - thus we have a dynamic
equilibrium with a moving balance point or value. This allusion to a
giant and a man playing a game can be compared with the relationship
between culture systems and their coupled environment systems (for
 Game Theory, see below pp. 66-72).



(6) Statistical   equilibrium

Systems are said to be in statistical equilibrium if the frequency of
occurrence of the component populations continues to remain pro-
portionately allocated according to certain probabilities, regardless of
the vagaries of individual elements. It might be the case, for example,
that the populations of the three Benelux countries remain distributed
in the relative proportions of 3 13! : 1 respectively, even though all the
populations are constantly changing in numbers and people are going
to and fro across the borders. In an archaeological context one might
say that the hunting sites of a certain culture over a certain time are
characterized by populations of artefacts distributed according to the
ratio of five arrowheads, to every three scrapers, for every single burin
- even though individual sites in the class have different absolute
numbers of these artefacts (cf. different Mousterian variants in South
West France). If such observations record very large numbers of
attributes or entities and their relative frequency of occurrence then
this kind of equilibrium may well be sought for.



(7) Equilibrium    basin, area, or set

A system is said to have an equilibrium basin, area, or a stable set of
states or values, when under a certain set of conditions the trans-
formations of these values continue to remain within a limited set
constituting the 'basin' or stable region. In the preceding examples of
different classes of equilibria each case referred to the maintenance of
equilibrium existing at any one of a limited set of states or values. It
                                             C u l t u r e systems - the model   51

follows that an equilibrium basin or stable region can be formulated
for any class of equilibrium - stable, unstable, dynamic, and so on.

     T h i s brief survey sketches some of the different meanings that can
lie behind the term equilibrium when applied to a system. It should be
apparent that the various f o r m s of equilibrium are not necessarily
mutually exclusive, so that a particular system may illustrate an equi-
librium that is both d y n a m i c and statistical in its properties.
Furthermore, we can see that any of these equilibria may refer to
attribute or entity values and states or they may refer to vectors,
sequences of values, or rates of change. T h i s flexibility of the equilib-
rium concept constitutes its greatest asset, since if it is possible to fit
some kind of equilibrium model to our changing entities' 'behaviour'
then it is usually possible to begin some f o r m of canonical or symbolic
representation. A final observation upon this topic might usefully
re-emphasize the need to specify the qualities of the particular breed
of equilibrium under consideration and for the realization that even
within a single system different kinds of equilibrium 'behaviour' may
be illustrated, possibly relevant to the different levels of the system
and its subsystems.

G O A L - S E E K I N G OR H O M E O S T A S I S

Many kinds of system, especially complex richly networked systems,
may appear to have the capacity for searching-out and converging
upon 'desirable' goals or states. T h e continually self-regulating gui-
dance system of a ballistic missile is an example of such a goal-seeking
system, another is the robot           fire-extinguisher which seeks out,
approaches and puts out fires. It is important to differentiate two
properties of these systems - first, that they converge upon some state
- secondly, that the state is customarily described as a 'desirable' one, a
goal. In humanly made systems the goal usually coincides with the end
desired by the manufacturer and can hardly imply 'desire' on the part
of the system especially w h e n , in such cases as the ballistic missile, the
system has a trajectory ending in the system's own destruction.
    It is apparent that goal-seeking 'behaviour' in systems is an
anthropomorphic interpretation of - first, that a system's trajectories
converge upon states of equilibrium - secondly, that some
components of such systems act as regulators and can restrict the
variety of possible outcomes. We will discuss the aspect of regulation
and control in the next section but simple regulation is quite apparent
52   Analytical Archaeology
in such systems as the guided missile, thermostats and mechanical
governors of various kinds. Goal-seeking 'behaviour' is largely an
extension of a human interpretation to systems running towards
equilibrium states or regions, states that may be desirable or undesir-
able according to the point of view. Such equilibrium-seeking is
characteristic of complex systems and it frequently arises from posi-
tive or negative feedback loops which occasion oscillating convergence
upon a stable state. These oscillations about an equilibrium state are
also anthropomorphized as 'searching', 'scanning the set of possi-
bilities for a suitable state', 'trial and error', or 'hunt and stick' (Ashby
 1956, p. 230).
    Whether a humanly made system, such as a cultural system or an
artefact system, has a time-trajectory running from equilibrium to
equilibrium, each preselected and preconceived by its makers, or
whether such systems are stochastically running to successive equilib-
ria poses an interesting question. However, what the use of such
anthropomorphic terms implies is that the appropriate model may be
the same - it does not matter that the multilinear transformations of
the handaxe system were not 'scanning' the variety of alternative forms
for successively more effective variants - the system behaves 'as if' this
did take place. T h e 'adaptation', 'regulation', 'goal-seeking', 'memory
capacity', 'foresight' and 'evolution' of such systems have comparable
 results for the systems as the related human capacities have for human
 beings.


R E G U L A T I O N AND C O N T R O L

Another inherent capacity of certain kinds of complex system is the
capacity to act 'as if' capable of self-control by self-regulation. When a
cold draft blows upon a thermostatically controlled oven the tempera-
ture of the oven drops, the thermostat comes into operation and
increases the temperature, the oven gets too hot and the thermostat
cuts out allowing the temperature to fall. Here we have an error-
controlled regulator oscillating about a set temperature. There are
many different ways of constructing such a regulator and conversely
many different forms that the regulation can take in a system which is
manifestly controlling its own table of 'responses' to 'stimulus'. T h e
principle behind most of these regulators is the same category of
feedback loop responsible for such other 'behavioural' characteristics
as goal-seeking. We can understand that if such complex consequences
                                     C u l t u r e s y s t e m s - the model   53
follow upon so simple a kind of circuit connection as this 'loop', then
almost any complex system is going to manifest this kind of
'behaviour'.
    As a general example let us take a particular environmental dis-
turbance 'E' acting upon - and therefore coupled to - an entity
possessing as part of its system, a subsystem 'R', through which the
input disturbance from ' E ' must pass. T h e resulting state or 'response'
of the entity ' S ' is a limited set out of the total table of possible states
'T', as restricted or constrained by the necessity of being compatible
with the output from 'R'. T h e looped subsystem through ' R ' is acting
as a constraint which reduces the total possible number of outcomes to
a restricted set according to the conditions - ' R ' is acting as a control
and regulator to the system (fig. 6).




     T h e importance of regulating and controlling subsystems of this
kind is their capacity for acting as an 'insulating' medium between the
system and its environment or context. T h e regulator blocks and
filters the extreme range of external fluctuations by constraining their
variety and maintaining the essential system parameters within certain
limits. From the point of view of survival, systems integrating good
regulating subsystems are better able to survive unchanged than
similar systems with less efficient 'insulation'. Regulation controls the
54   Analytical Archaeology
flow of variety from the environment to the system coupled to it.
Much of social and material culture can be seen as in part exercising a
regulating control over the effect of external and internal variations
upon the system outcomes. T h e law of requisite variety suggests that
only variety can modulate or destroy variety (Ashby 1956, p. 207).
Only variety or sophistication in a culture system's components can
force down the variety in the system's final states and keep them
within tolerable limits. We will return to the role of culture as a
regulator on several occasions.


LIMITS AND     NETWORKS

We have been repeatedly stating that certain propositions or certain
conditions are true, or are found to operate in a system, when certain
other conditions are fulfilled, or hold a certain range of values. T h i s
proposition, or that system, or attribute state, is said to remain valid
within certain limits. If the range of these limiting conditions shrinks
to a single point or state, then we say that the proposition is 'the case'
or the system state will be 'such and such' if this condition is operat-
ing. When the system or attribute state in such conditions has become
not a possible range of values but a single value - the system state is
determinate. Conversely, if the single point expands and the limits
become infinitely wide and the same proposition or state remains
valid, then the proposition or state is 'independent' of these particular
conditions, which may vary at will without necessarily altering the
state under consideration. We may then consider these conditions so
permissive in respect of this state or trajectory that they are not
'essential variables' in the sense that they provide no constraint to the
particular state - they tell us nothing about its possible changes. T h e
situation becomes more complex when we not only say that the
limiting conditions have such and such a range but that the accom-
panying state may also have a range of probable values within limits.
T h e system is no longer fully determinate but nevertheless its states
are limited in a way that can be expressed in terms of probabilities (fig.
 10). We will shortly consider the effect of this complication upon the
amount we can say about the 'behaviour' of such a system.
   T h e discovery of the limits which constrain the variety of states of
an attribute or system enables us to understand the regularity in the
'behaviour' of the system or attribute. Such limits are sometimes
observed in relation to human activities or their products but there is
                                          C u l t u r e s y s t e m s - the m o d e l       55

o f t e n reticence about expressing these limits on the g r o u n d s that they
are 'hopelessly broad'. T h i s observation is generally an accurate
recognition of the large range of viable or acceptable states but the
epithet 'hopelessly' broad requires modification. T h e point here is that
although the limits brought about by any one condition may be b r o a d ,
nevertheless the final effect of c o m p o u n d i n g n u m b e r s or relevantly
operating broad limits may still constrain the o u t c o m e quite tightly -
as in fig. 7. We should not abandon a t t e m p t s to investigate and define
the limits operating in a certain study s i m p l y b e c a u s e each individual
set of limits is rather broad.




                                                                                        c




Fig. 7 Compounded constraints - although the limiting conditions of
each particular constraint may be broad a-a , b-b', c-c', d-d', or sets a, b,
c, d, nevertheless their joint operation narrowly constrains the stable area
illustrated by the hatched regions.

    T h e diagram of constraint b r o u g h t about by c o m p o u n d e d limiting
conditions (fig. 7) also enables us to m a k e another o b s e r v a t i o n . If w e
think of our limits as operating at certain points on a linear scale of
values then we tend to draw the limits as t h o u g h they w e r e t w o parallel
lines d r a w n through the operating b o u n d a r i e s (fig. 7). H o w e v e r , w e
can also think of these same limits as d e f i n i n g the b o u n d a r y of a 'set' of
values, reflecting stable areas or regions w h o s e intersecting b o u n d a r i e s
define the constrained e q u i l i b r i u m area (fig. 7). T h i s latter
modification gives us a timely r e m i n d e r that w e are consciously or
unconsciously w o r k i n g within the field of set and g r o u p theory with its
well developed theorems about intersecting sets and subsets, and their
properties. O n c e again we catch a g l i m p s e of a potentially valuable
array of techniques with a s y m b o l i c calculus q u i t e relevant to o u r
ascent f r o m iconic, through analogue to s y m b o l i c m o d e l s (Green
1965)
56      Analytical Archaeology

     S y s t e m s can b e v i s u a l i z e d and d e p i c t e d as i n t e r l i n k e d n e t w o r k s of
a t t r i b u t e s or entities f o r m i n g a c o m p l e x w h o l e , a c o n c e p t w h i c h g i v e s
rise to t h e static i m p r e s s i o n of s t r u c t u r e and p a t t e r n w i t h i n v a r i o u s
entities. O n e c o n s e q u e n c e of the n e t w o r k e d n a t u r e of s u c h c o m p l e x
s y s t e m s is the i n h e r e n t c a p a c i t y for the s y s t e m t o h a v e m o r e p r o p e r t i e s
t h a n s i m p l y the s u m of t h o s e of its c o m p o n e n t s (fig. 5).                    Another
property        worthy       of o u r attention i n v o l v e s t h e infinite n u m b e r                   of
system       c i r c u i t s that   can b e      recognized          as o p e r a t i n g   as   networks
t h r o u g h t h e a t t r i b u t e n o d e s of any c o m p l e x e n t i t y , f o r e x a m p l e t h e
t w e n t y alternative c i r c u i t s l i n k i n g the f o u r a t t r i b u t e s of the e n t i t y in
fig- 5-
     T h i s p r o p e r t y is s i m p l y e x p r e s s e d in fig. 8. T h i s illustration h e l p s
us to u n d e r s t a n d that any p e r s o n , a t t r i b u t e , or a c t i v i t y m a y b e a




       Entity A                      Entity A                    Entity A                     Entity A
     subsystem 1                    subsystem 2                subsystem 3                   subsystem 4

  Fig. 8 A simple illustration of the vast number of network subsystems
  which may simultaneously or sequentially operate through the nodes of a
  system.


simultaneous            member          of    hundreds         of    'independent'            systems        or
s u b s y s t e m s , each o p e r a t i n g for q u i t e d i f f e r e n t p u r p o s e s a n d at q u i t e
d i f f e r e n t levels. O n e e x a m p l e w o u l d b e the m a n w h o at one a n d t h e
s a m e t i m e b e l o n g e d to a f o o t b a l l t e a m , a political p a r t y , a f a m i l y , a
m i l i t a r y unit, a w o r k i n g party and so on - the m a n is a single n o d e
t h r o u g h w h i c h m a n y d i f f e r e n t s y s t e m s o p e r a t e . A n o t h e r e x a m p l e is
that of       most h u m a n         a c t i o n s a n d activities.        An     archaeologist          may
a p p e a r o n t e l e v i s i o n b e c a u s e the act s i m u l t a n e o u s l y satisfies personal
s y s t e m s d e s i g n e d to earn m o n e y , to i n f o r m an a u d i e n c e , to satisfy a
p s y c h o l o g i c a l n e e d , for p r o p a g a n d a p u r p o s e s , to increase status a n d to
fulfil s o m e       obligation.        In these e x a m p l e s t h e           node       uniting      these
v a r i o u s s y s t e m s m a y also be u s e f u l l y t h o u g h t of as a v e c t o r of the
m a n y s y s t e m s a c t i n g t h r o u g h it.
      T h i s e x a m p l e h e l p s to p o i n t out that a c c o r d i n g to the particular
system and network under study                             s o m e n o d e s will be relevant                or
                                            C u l t u r e s y s t e m s - the m o d e l   57

activated and others may not (fig. 8). T h i s is yet another way of looking
at the 'essential variables' taking part in some system trajectory and
differentiating them f r o m similar but inactive nodes loosely belonging
to the same entity but not actively involved in the particular system
development under investigation. T h e essential variables are the
attributes which are relevant to the frame of reference of the study -
they are the attributes connected within the system of interest. A point
which should recall the 'artificial' selection of attributes for study in
connection with particular problems.


A D A P T A T I O N AND D I R E C T I V E   CORRELATION

In any coupled systems or subsystems, a change in attribute states in
one system may frequently occasion similar changes in the coupled
partner, especially if the systems are jointly in equilibrium. When an
observer notices that a change in an environment system is connected
with accompanying changes in a coupled culture system, then he
anthropomorphizes this change as an 'adaptation' by the one system to
changes in the other. We see that this adaptive response is merely a
particular case of jointly correlated transformations in coupled
systems, to be found in any such systems of more than a very simple
structure. T h e r e are scarcely any cases of coupled complex systems
that do not manifest such 'response' by one partner to 'stimulus' by the
other, or the successive sequence of 'adaptation' that follows series of
such changes. Adaptation is an anthropomorphic label for a com-
monplace property inherent in most coupled complex systems.
     Further consideration of adaptive changes with changing condi-
tions leads us to realize that only certain attributes in either system
need change in such situations. T h e attribute states or values that do
change are those 'essential variables' whose stability limits are
exceeded by the particular transitions under consideration. Other
attribute states or values will remain unchanged in the system because
their 'tolerance' is greater than that of the other 'essential variables';
that is to say the set of stable values within their threshold basin is
sufficient to contain the fresh disturbances without transformation.
T h e key 'essential variables' will consequently be different attributes
according to the nature and extent of the particular changes being
considered in the coupled system.
    In anthropology and archaeology it is usually the case that the
systems have a past condition, a present condition and a future
58   Analytical Archaeology

condition, or overall state. In most of these systems the future condi-
tion or state is some function of not only the present condition of the
system but also of a whole sequence of 'essential' variables in past
states of the system. Whether Britain should declare war on Germany
over the Polish issue, in 1939, depended not only on the then condi-
tion of Britain but also upon the whole sequence of alliance conditions
leading up to that time. What happened in this case was some function
of those relevant past and contemporary conditions and the causally
relevant field conditions of the European environment at the time. In
every system changing or 'adapting' with time there is a certain limited
set of attributes or entities whose past and present variation is essen-
tially relevant to some future condition of the system - following
Sommerhoff we will call this limited set 'directively correlated'
towards this future condition (Sommerhoff 1950, pp. 3 7 - 1 1 0 ) .
      A specific future condition is attainable only if the system's attri-
bute states fall within a particular sequence of sets defining the variety
of possible trajectories to that future condition. T h e range of permis-
sible variation in the set of past and present states in order to attain the
future condition may be taken as a measure of the degree of the
directive correlation. T h e number of correlated variables involved in
any directive correlation may be taken as the order of the correlation.
T h i s concept, expressing the degree and order of directive correlation
within a systems time-trajectory, is closely connected with the concept
of the degree of 'coherence', the strength or degree of 'integral
definition' of a cultural tradition and we shall later attempt to use this
measure (chapter 5). We may hope to distinguish between those
attributes of a system which are directively correlated towards some
future condition, the essential variables framed in reference to the
future condition, and those attributes which are not correlated
towards this condition and which may thus vary within less con-
strained limits, with less regularity (fig. n ) . A distinction once again
reminiscent of that between 'information' and 'noise' in communica-
tion systems.


T H E P R O B L E M OF T H E I N C O M P L E T E A N D V E R Y   LARGE
BLACK    BOX

T h i s analogy represents the archaeologist and anthropologist as
investigators attempting to analyse very complex and incompletely
observable systems whose internal mechanisms and subsystems are
                                    Culture systems - the model         59

never fully available for inspection. T h e analogy stresses that the
approach to the problems of cultural analysis must be made in the
light of the nature of the data and the probes available to the analyst.
In particular the analogy raises the whole problem of how the analyst
can proceed when faced with such severe handicaps, what properties
are and are not discoverable in this context and what are the most
efficient methods to use? T h e terms of this analogy subsume the
classic systems problems of the Black Box, the Very Large Box and the
Incompletely Observable Box (Ashby 1956, pp. 8 6 - 1 1 7 ) .
    T h e problem of the Black Box arises in theoretical and practical
terms when the investigator is faced with a complex system,
completely concealed but for an input terminal and an output
terminal. T h e only information available about the system within the
box must come from observing the changing relationships between
varying values at the input and output terminals. Consequently the
investigation of Black Box systems depends upon the tabulation of as
many varied input states and sequences of states as is possible together
with a record of the corresponding output states. T h e investigator will
primarily look for any evidence for constraint in the variety of states
and for regularities in states or sequences of states, such regularities as
we can often observe in archaeological and anthropological data.
Above all, the investigator will be trying to make the system deter-
minate so that the consequences of a given input are known and can be
expressed as a limited set of output states. T h i s output set may be a
single state or a large number of states or values, the set may merely
encompass a variety of probabilities for outcomes - a stochastic table,
or a sequence of possible states, but essentially the set and the possible
variety of outcome is limited, however broad the limits, however
complex the limitation.
     On the basis of such observations the investigator should be able to
draw up a canonical model representing the transformation pattern of
the Black Box and capable of expression as an isomorphic system.
That is to say representation by a system 'with the same pattern' of
behaviour as far as the frame of reference of the observations go - the
greater the variety of observed data incorporated the closer the iso-
morphic model comes to the 'real' system within the box. In this sense
a map can be understood as an isomorphic model of the countryside
and most models may be conceived as diagrammatic, iconic, symbolic,
electrical or mechanical isomorphs of their particular problem 'boxes'.
T h e analog computer and the digital computer can act as precisely
60   Analytical Archaeology
such kinds of isomorphic models and their output may be made to
represent the 'behaviour of the problem box under investigation.
     These brief observations on Black Box problems show that it is
theoretically possible to produce a very accurate and powerful model
of such obscure systems in spite of their shroud, if the correct investi-
gating procedure is adopted. T h e crucial part of this procedure is the
attempt to organize, rewrite, rearrange or relabel the observed trans-
formations in such a way as to make them determinate. In this crucial
activity intelligent juggling and particularly the arbitrary choice of
variables play a central role.
     If we take our Black Box and make it a very large box, with room
for an enormously large and richly networked system then a new
aspect arises. We may have accumulated quite a set of data about the
properties of the individual components of the system before it was
assembled in the secrecy of the box, or conversely after it has been
excavated in fragments, and we may hope to integrate these obser-
vations in a comprehensive model of the new system. However, our
elementary study warned us that the properties of systems are not
simply the aggregate of the properties of their component subsystems.
It is an important property of such systems and populations that their
properties are more complex than the simple sum of the properties of
the components. T h e reason for this we have seen to be the exponen-
tially increasing number of alternative circuits and subsystems that
result from the introduction of just one new node and some channels
 (fig. 5). T h e overall result is that when we test the 'behaviour' of the
 newly assembled very large Black Box we will often find that unexpec-
ted and newly 'emergent' properties appear - sometimes very
 important and surprising ones. A s an example one might take the
 'emergent' property of television pictures as a surprising result of
 networking some valves, an amplifier and a tube in a certain way with
 other components - none of which independently produces pictures.
    T h e cultural importance of very large box systems is that the
archaeologist and anthropologist ought not to be surprised when
systems networking the same components show discrepant properties.
Furthermore, it seems that the 'invention' or development of new
properties and 'behaviour', sometimes of a dramatically important
kind, frequently follows the insignificant rearrangement of otherwise
well-tested components.
    T h e last modification of the box in order to make it more like our
complex systems, has stipulated that it has been incompletely re-
                                   C u l t u r e s y s t e m s - the model   61
covered and therefore incompletely observed. T h e archaeologist has
only a fragmentary and partially studied segment of the real systems,
and even the anthropologist has a similarly biased and limited set of
information about his systems. It is important to note at this point that
a complex entity contains a great number of connected but separate
circuits of systems and specialists studying the same entity may often
be studying quite different circuit systems of the one entity (fig. 8).
T h e anthropologist looks at aspects of the social system of cultures,
archaeologists and ethnologists look at the material system of the same
cultures - the systems are not the same and yet neither are
they unconnected. Serious dangers await those who transfer observa-
tions about the one class of system to the other (Allen and Richardson
1 9 7 1 ) and yet it is important that the coupling between the different
systems and their attributes should be explored and made explicit
(chapter 9).
      T h e incompletely recovered or observed system can often be made
determinate by considering the sequences of attribute states or values
in the table of known variation and by expressing these sequences as
vectors. This assumes that any state of the system can be expressed 'in
the light of' its preceding sequences of states and their attribute
trajectories. This hindsight on the part of the investigator is the device
which enables him to talk of directive correlation towards future
conditions of the system and enables him to restore some predic-
tability. Nevertheless, this hindsight and the observer are alone
responsible for the system appearing to have 'a memory' and to be
moving towards a known 'goal', providing another anthropomorphic
view of a lifeless system.
      We can summarize by suggesting that archaeological and anthro-
pological systems present the classic problems of the Black Box, the
Very Large Box, and the Incompletely Observable Box. T h i s section
has described the special problems of these kinds of system and the
special measures necessary to get them into a determinate form. T h e
greatest difficulty resides in the selection and definition of the 'essen-
tial variables' among the vast numbers and levels of variables that
could be considered - especially since these 'essential variables' may
turn out to be such vectors as 'sequences of states' or 'rates of change'.
Many archaeologists and anthropologists would deny the possibility
of ever getting their systems into a determinate form but fortu-
nately, with the increasing acknowledgement of the complexity
of such systems there has come increasing success in their useful
02    Analytical Archaeology

manipulation; initial oversimplification has always been the biggest
barrier to progressive research (Murdock 1949; Steward 1955).


C H A N G E IN T H E S I M P L E        SYSTEM

T o conclude these observations on some of the inherent properties of
certain kinds of system we should consider the aspect of continuous
change. If we take a simple system with four attribute states or values
a, b, c, d, or similarly if we take four systems a, b, c, d, we may imagine
that there might be three alternative changes or transformations of
these states according to the specific conditions of the system at the
time - let us call these alternative conditions R i , R2, R3. Under
conditions R i the transformation functions so that a changes to c, b to
d, c to d, and d to b; this transformation would usually be written:

                                                , a       b   c   d
                                            Ri: I
                                                  c      d    d   b

with the arrow giving the direction of the transformation. Under other
conditions, R2, R3, other transformations would operate with
different results, let us say:

                          , a       b       c       d              , a       b       c   d
                      R2:1                              and   R3 : 1
                            b     a     d       e                    d       c   d       b

T h e point of this arbitrary example is that all of this cumbersome
information can be succintly expressed as a table or matrix of trans-
formations, thus:

                                                                  i
                T r a n s f o r m a t i o n s of system(s)
                a, b, c, d, under conditions                      Ri     c       d       d   b
                                                                  Rz     b a d e
                                                                  R3
                                                                         d       c       d   b

Archaeological and anthropological data is frequently of this cumber-
some form, with many alternative transformation values according to
the conditions and consequently this kind of table or matrix is a
convenient device for portraying these observations (fig. 16).
    T h e table just illustrated depicts only transformations that are
closed and single-valued. T h a t is to say, the results of the trans-
formations R i , R2, R3, do not create any new states, no x or y appear,
only combinations of a, b, c, d\ under such conditions the trans-
formations are said to be 'closed'. Similarly, the term 'single-valued'
                                  C u l t u r e systems - the model   63
restricts these observations to cases where the given transformation of
a particular state has only one possible result - thus, a -* b. Clearly,
there are many real cases where the transformation of a could give
either b, or c, or d, with equal probability, or with more sophistication
we can imagine a system in which the single transformations of a
might not only be a large number of alternative states but they might
well have varying probabilities according to the conditions. This latter
elaboration is only a moderate one and yet it will obviously produce a
bewildering degree of complication. Furthermore, experience would
seem to suggest that archaeological and anthropological trans-
formations are rarely closed and single-valued but, on the contrary,
they are usually many-valued on a probability basis dependent upon
the conditions. We have therefore developed a model transformation
table of the right general order but not of the right specific level.
     It would seem that archaeological systems are unlikely to involve
only closed or single-valued transformations and they are unlikely to
be simply 'determinate'. That is to say that the 'behaviour' of the
system is unlikely to be predictable on the basis of single chains or
trajectories of transformations. Nevertheless, we intuitively gather
that the frequencies or probabilities of a limited set of derivative
transformations might be susceptible to definition on the basis of the
acknowledged constraint and regularities in the observable data. A
culture and its artefacts are as incapable of immediate and complete
transformation as the example of the flying aeroplane or any other
continuous system. We appear to be looking for a system which may or
may not be determinate, single-valued, or closed and which operates
as if on a probability basis, with the transformations dependent upon
certain limiting conditions. Conveniently, Ross Ashby develops such a
model system - the Markovian system, which we can use as a basis for
further modifications (Ashby 1956, p. 225).
     Now any process which may be described in terms of probabilities
can be correctly called a 'stochastic process* (Cherry 1957, pp. 38-9,
306). It would seem that our desired canonical model might be a
system with transformations that can be summarized as a stochastic
table or matrix of probable outcomes. One example of such a stochas-
tic sequence or chain is called the Markov chain after its discoverer A.
A. Markov, who in 1 9 1 3 published a statistical study of Pushkin's
novel Eugene Onégin. The Markov chain originally implied any pro-
cess generating a stochastic series, the adjacent terms of which are
related by given transition probabilities. Ross Ashby develops his
64    Analytical Archaeology
Markovian system by considering a system whose 'behaviour' can be
summarized by a matrix or table of probabilities such that the pro-
babilities of transition from one value or state to another do not
depend on any earlier states of the attributes or systems. In other
words if a goes to b in 60 per cent of the cases then it must do so
regardless of whether it is an a transformed from a former state d or
an a that was formerly of state c; its present transformation must take
no account of the former trajectory of the state a. Such a system
constitutes a Markovian system which can then be expressed canonic-
ally as a matrix with entities expressing the frequency or probability of
that particular state or value being transformed to some other state,
under the conditions specified for that transformation, thus:

                                        1   a     b         e         d
     Transformations of system(s)
     a, b, c, d, under conditions R i   a   o-o       01        00         10
                                        b   0-3       04        0-2       O-O
                                        c   o-6       0*2       o-i       o-o
                                        d   o-i       0-3       0-7       o-o


T h i s matrix, for example, expresses the observations that state d will
only change to state a, whereas state c may go with varying frequency
to states b, c, d and state c cannot be transformed into state a - given
conditions R i for this system.
      However, our real situations still differ from this strict Markov
system in that the transformations of our entities are likely to have
probabilities of transition that do depend on the previous states or
trajectory of the component attributes or systems. Furthermore, the
matrix of transition probabilities should ideally vary with varying
conditions and we cannot guarantee that the ratio expressing the
relative proportion of alternative transformations is exactly constant.
Our problem systems are apparently stochastic but not fully Marko-
vian in expression; let us therefore call them Semi-Markovian for the
moment.
       Now, fortunately it is possible to modify the strict Markovian
 model to accommodate most of these peculiar requirements. In the
first place it is usually possible to re-code such a Semi-Markovian
system in a Markov form by treating each state not as a single value
but as a vector expressing that state's previous change trajectory.
 Instead of individual states a, b, c, d, we can take the transition
sequences as our entities, thus: (a-b), (b-c), (c-d), etc., and providing
                                         C u l t u r e systems - the model   65

the system is found to produce trajectories in which some transition
probabilities depend on what states preceded the present ones, then
although not Markovian in its original form it can often be re-written
in vector form as a Semi-Markovian system (Ashby 1956, p. 1 7 1 ) .
    When such Semi-Markovian systems have transformations linked
or limited by preceding sequences of transformations the whole
system appears to be acting 'in the light o f its previous history - such
systems are said to appear to have a 'memory' (fig. 9, left). T h i s again
amounts to an anthropomorphic view of systems. In order to express
this capacity of our systems to have modified outcomes according to
past trajectories we can integrate some of the observations scattered in
the preceding text. T h e matrix of possible transformations or
'responses' expresses the limits of the set of possible outcomes under
varying conditions (fig. 10) - it is a summary of observable data. T h i s
table is the same table of possible outcomes or responses that we
portrayed in the section on regulation and control as ' T ' (fig. 6). In
that section we saw how the actual outcome of the table could be
modified or controlled by subsystem ' R ' which regulated the eventual
state of the system ' S ' in the light of the operating conditions 'E'. If in




   Memory store                                                  Outcome
   of prior                                                      system
   trayectoria*                                                  state
   and states




                             system

                                               t
                                        Environmental or
                                      context system state

     Fig. 9 A simple system with a controlling 'R' and a controlling
     'memory' store '.Zs' - the future transformations of the system will
     be limited by the previous trajectory of the system.
66    Analytical Archaeology

addition we now feed stored information on the systems' past tra-
jectory '.Zs' into the regulator then that aspect will also be expected to
further constrain the particular outcome from the table of possible
outcomes "T" (fig. 9).

                                     I        a         b          c           d
     Transformations of
       system(s) a, b, c, d,         a       o-o       01         o-o         I -O
       under conditions              b                 0-4        0-2         o-o
                                     c      o-6        0-2        O- I        o-o
                                     d      o-1        0-3        0-7         o-o
                                     b       05        o-1        I 0         01
                               Rz
                                     c       03        03         o-o         0-5
                                     d       o-1       0-4        o-o         0-4
                                     e       o- I      0-2        o-o         o-o
                                     c       09        O- I       o-o         03
                                     d       o-o       0-4        0-2         o-7
                               R3    e       01        04         0-7         o-o
                                     i       o-o       o-i        O- I        o-o
                                     d       o-o       o-o        O-O         o-o
                                     e       0-2       0-3        0-4         o-o
                               R+                                             0-6
                                     f       0-3       0-4        0-5
                                     e       0-5       03         o- I        04
                                    Assume that the transformations of
                                    e, /, g, remain e, f , g, respectively.

     Fig. 10 Table 'T' - expressing the probabilities or frequencies of
     alternative transitions for a simple system or systems a,b,c, d, under
     varying conditions. See 'T' in figs. 6, 9, 11.

    T h i s table or canonical model (fig. 10) remains a lifeless lay-figure
since it refers to no particular real situation and it is still arbitrarily
simplified. Nevertheless we have introduced multi-value or multi-state
transformations according to varying conditions and with varying
probabilities. However, the conditions and the states are still limited
to a mere handful and we have not discussed the problem of defining
these continuously changing states, nor have we attempted to express
the a, b, c, d states as vectors. Despite these objections the grossly
simplified model can begin to help us understand some of the inherent
difficulties and properties of cultural systems.


GAME T H E O R Y

One development of this model is that we can resume our analogy
between 'cultural systems' and their 'environmental context' as
                                    Culture systems - the model           67

complex two-player games with various strategies and equilibrium
trajectories (Neumann and Morgenstern 1947). T h e table of trans-
formations (fig. 10), does not refer to a real system nor the conditions
R 1 - R 4 to real conditions - they have been constructed as a temporary
and simple analogue model. T a k e n in this light we can use the
canonical table as though it were the list of permitted moves in a game
between system or systems a, b, c, d, and changing conditions R i , R 2 ,
R 3 , R4 - conditions which we can either consider changing in geo-
graphical space, R i in this area, R 2 in that, or we can consider them
changing sequentially in time R i to R4. T h i s dimensionless approach
to system transformations helps to underline the characteristics of
system variation in space shared with system variation in time. We can
now play through a few transformations and consider the possible
outcome of real and more complex situations. In the next chapter game
theory will provide us with real and predictive models for real situa-
tions.
     Let us first of all play through the most probable and the least
probable outcomes starting in each case with two identical systems a,
b, c, d, and with conditions changing successively from R i to R 2 to R 3
to R4 as though these conditions were a time sequence, then according
to our model, fig. 1 0 :
                                    I    a   b   c   d   Initial system
    Example    (/)
                                                         state
    Most probable outcome system    Ri   c   b   d   a
    a, b, c, d, under conditions    Rz   b   d   c   b
                                    R3   d   d   e   d
                                    r4   f   i   e   (

    Example    (2)
                                    1    a   b   c   d   Initial system
    Least probable outcome system                        state
    a, b, c, d, under conditions    Ri   d   a   c   a
                                    Rz   b   e   b   d
    From model                      R3   f   e   c   c
    table, fig. 10                  R4   f   e   g   e

    These two examples show how very diverse are the multilinear
trajectories and system states that can develop from identical systems
changing under identical conditions. If left to these transformations all
examples of the system a, b, c, d would eventually yield systems
composed entirely of combinations of e, /, g, since we stipulated that
the transformation of these would give themselves (e to e, f to f , g to
g). T h e system would in this sense ultimately change into another
68    Analytical Archaeology
system or systems, from one formerly composed of a, b, c,ds to others
composed of e, f , gs - new states which successively and cumulatively
appear under the sequence of conditions. These systems of e, f , gs are
immutable under the rules stipulated here and therefore constitute
stable equilibria for this system. From an examination of just these
two possible trajectories of the changing system a, b, c, d we can
understand that the development of classes of such systems must
always be multilinear with some particular trajectories diverging
towards novel patterns and others converging upon stable equilibrium
basins, often by oscillating trajectories (column trajectories c-d-c-e and
c-b-c-g in each example under attribute c).
      The transformation of system a, b, c, d into another, e, f , g, also
draws our attention to the 'birth' and 'death' of systems. We see that
the cumulative and successive introduction of new states or attributes
can gradually transform the whole system. In our two examples the
first glimpse of the new e, f , g pattern appears under R2 with b, e, b, d
in trajectory (2) and under R3 with d, d, e, d in (1). Although this
so-called system 'death'/'birth' transition may be abrupt, nevertheless
in the majority of cases it will be gradually accomplished by the
cumulative and successive introduction of new states. A process which
illustrates the polythetic nature of this kind of system and its changing
forms - for example, the transition from a basically a, b, c, d system to
an e
      > /> i system may be judged to have occurred when more than 50
per cent (or some other percentage) of the elements have reached
values typical of the new system; this occurs in both examples in the
transformation R 3 to R4 but in other trajectories of this same system
could occur R2 to R 3 - multilinear change across a threshold is not
usually sudden or contemporaneous.
      Another aspect of this same polythetic process reproduces the
'threshold' phenomenon discussed earlier under kinds of equilibria.
The 50 per cent threshold separating system a, b, c, d from new
system e, f , g is approached under trajectory (1) by transition from
 0 - 2 5 - 1 0 0 per cent ( R 2 - R 3 - R 4 ) of new elements, and in trajectory (2)
 by transition from 0—25-50-100 per cent ( R 1 - R 2 - R 3 - R 4 ) . Here we
are observing the cumulative and successive introduction of new states
which do not change the overall system network immediately and
 independently but which build up by cumulative effect to a threshold
 of metastable equilibrium. At this crucial point the introduction of a
 single new element precipitates the system into a new pattern and in
 this case a new stable equilibrium region. We can understand that
                                          Culture systems - the model                           69
cumulative effect building up to a threshold is especially characteristic
of our sorts of polythetic system. T h e 'death' and 'birth' of our systems
is no more than their reformation by cumulative transformation.
    In a final look at our canonical model (fig. 10) we might usefully
consider the three following trajectories of three a, b, c, d, systems,
leading from identical state (a, b, c, d) to another identical state (g, g, g,
g) under identical conditions ( R i , R2, R 3 , R4) but by very different
trajectories:

                                                                Trajectories
Example nos                                         (3)             (4)                 (S)
                                      I     a   b     c d   i   a   b   c d     I   a   b   c   d
Various possible outcomes of system
a, b, c, d, under conditions          Ri    d a       c a       c   b d     a       b a     b a
                                      R2    d c       b c       b   d b     b       d c     d b
From model                            R3    c d       d d       d   d d     d       c d     c d
table, fig. 10                        R4    g   g     g g       g g     g   g       g   g   g g

    These trajectories remind us that regularities in our changing
systems can be caused by correlated constraint in a variety of initial
states, terminal states, field conditions, or trajectories, and they can
arise from any one or any combination of these four classes of variety.
In this particular example we have a regularity involving the same
initial states (a, b, c, d), terminal states (g, g, g, g) and the same field
conditions ( R 1 - R 4 ) but brought about by differing individual tra-
jectories (Examples (3) (4) (5)). If we take the R i stage of these three
systems - (3) d, a, c, a (4) c, b, d, a (5) b, a, b, a and imagine that we
knew only these phases as the 'initial states' then the example equally
shows how three different systems can run to the same terminal state.
If, as we assert, regularities arise as the noticeable association of
constraint in one variety of attribute with constraint in another
variety, then with four classes of variety - initial state, terminal state,
field conditions, and trajectories (sequences) - we have in outline at
least eleven kinds of regularity linking correlated constraint in sets of:

      (1) initial states/terminal states
      (2) initial states/field conditions
      (3) initial states/trajectories
      (4) terminal states/field conditions
      (5) terminal states/trajectories
      (6) field conditions/trajectories
      (7) initial states/terminal states/field conditions
      (8) initial states/terminal states/trajectories
70    Analytical Archaeology
        (9) terminal states/field conditions/trajectories
     (10) field conditions/trajectories/initial states
     ( 1 1 ) initial states/terminal states/field conditions/trajectories.

     T h i s list emphasizes the number of different kinds of regularity
which might exist in data documenting systems of the kind under
investigation. T h e difficulties involved in isolating and defining
suitable 'essential variables' and their relevant states together with
the difficulty of deciding upon the class of regularity operating -
coincide with the difficulty of expressing cultural data in determinate
models.
     We have noted that the three system trajectories (3), (4), (5), in the
last examples share their initial states and their directive correlation
towards the stable equilibrium state g, g, g, g. T h e number of possible
trajectories taking systems a, b, c, d, to state g, g, g, g, is the measure of
this directive correlation and can be expressed as the number of routes
that can be traced from a, b, c, d, to g, g, g, g, through the lattice given
below, from our arbitrary table of possibilities (fig. 10).
     At each stage of the system trajectories a, b, c, d to g, g, g, g, the
states of the systems must fall within a limited set in order to reach
their ultimate 'goal' (fig. 10a). It is the size of these successive sets that
determines the degree of directive correlation and defines the essential
variables for the changes being studied. When such a set is closely
constrained, allowing very few routes through the set, then the set
amounts to a threshold which the various system states must approach
and enter before moving on into the stable region of the 'goal'. Such a
constrained set is Set 4 in the lattice (fig. 10a), with only two possible
states c and d admitting access to a final state of g - the most
constrained set may of course come at any point in the trajectory. This
form of constraint in the transformations of a set or of a single
attribute acts as a funnel - channelling and constricting the trajectories
of change. Such a constraint is illustrated not only by Set 4 in our
example but also by the effect of the single-value transformation of
state d under R i in which d can only go to a.
     These observations allow us to think of the attributes of the
 changing systems as roughly belonging to three categories, according
 to the frame of reference of the study:

       (i) Inessential attributes (variables, parameters, etc.)
      (ii) Essential attributes (variables, parameters, etc.)
     (iii) Key attributes (variables, parameters, etc.)
                                        C u l t u r e systems - the model        71
                                                                     d   Set t


        RI


                                                                         Set 2


        R2


                                                                         Set 3


        R3


                                                                         Set 4


       R4


                                                                         Set 5
                         o, 6, c, d,g, — system ent ity states
                    R1, R 2 , R 3 , R4-successive field conditions
                                    Fig. 10a.

Inessential attributes include those which are not relevant to the study
in hand and which consequently do not figure in the system as defined,
and those attributes which are constant throughout. T h e essential
attributes are those 'essential variables' which are part of the system
and whose values may change as part of the changing system. T h e s e
essential variables express the 'survival' or 'continuity' of the system as
the same system format rather than as a transmutation; it is these
essential variables which an efficient regulator R must protect f r o m
transformation by blocking the flow of variety f r o m disturbances E , if
the system is to survive in its present f o r m (fig. 9).
   Finally, the key attributes may be regarded as those essential attri-
butes in the system whose successive transformation values are
covarying in some specific relationship with successive values of other
similar attributes. T h e values or states of key attributes not only
change as part of the changing system but change in a correlated and
non-random fashion - either as successive transitions in a continuous
trend or covarying in specific correlation with a cluster of similar
attributes. T h e continued joint covariation of these key attributes
expresses the survival of a particular inner 'pattern' or 'structure'
peculiar to this system format and part of its identity. In contrast,
some essential attributes may vary quite independently of one another
72    Analytical Archaeology

and in a random or spasmodic fashion, whilst the clusters of key
attributes are found correlated in a certain sort of relationship one to
another, whatever the transformation of their particular values.
Amongst the key attributes will usually be found those which
comprise the maximally constrained set in the system's trajectory
towards some specified state - the funnel through which all the
permissible trajectories must pass. In this set the attributes define the
threshold and the height of the threshold separating the system from
some alternative state.


II   A tentative general model

In the concluding section of the preceding chapter we proposed three
general models or frameworks as potentially useful in developing
neglected archaeological theory (section VI):

     (a) A model for archaeological procedure (fig. 2).
     (b) A polythetic model for archaeological entities (fig. 3).
     (c) A systems model for archaeological processes.

    T h e systems model for archaeological processes was not further
developed in that chapter. T h e reasons for this rest upon the obser-
vation that such a model should preferably be of greater power than
merely another vague analogy of no predictive value, the model should
be a general model of cultural dynamics in an attempt to carry validity
at several cultural levels and as compatible with modern anthro-
pological thought as possible. In order to accommodate these ambi-
tious aims the construction of the model has been deferred so that this
preparatory outline sketch of systems theory could be attempted.
    We have now reached the state where a general model for analysing
archaeological processes on a systems framework can be diffidently
approached. It would be naive to pretend that the model that we are
going to develop fulfils our high intentions but, however inadequate it
may prove, in attempting the problem, it may make somewhat clearer
the areas of imprecision, as well as raising hope that such an approach
may one day be successfully accomplished.
    T h e model is expressed in two parts. One part, the diagram fig. 1 1 ,
is an endeavour to represent the organizational categories of 'essential
variables' coupled together both inside and outside our entities or
systems. It is important to realize that this is not yet an attempt to
analyse and express the internal components within a particular
                                    Culture systems - the model           73

     ^                 S,               s,,             ^        s,.


          System
         trajectory




                                   system state

    Fig. 11 General model (c) - A model for archaeological processes.
    A model suggesting that archaeological entities, at several levels,
    change as special kinds of dynamic systems coupled with environing
    or contextual systems.


system and their networked relationship. T h e sketch merely tries to
approach an isomorphic representation connecting some aspects of
some of the variables concerned, in order to explain some of the
relationships noted in the second part of the model. T h e structure of
the system in the figure can recognizably be seen to integrate as
components some of the various kinds of subsystem whose
'behaviour' has been sketched earlier (fig. 1 1 , compare figs 4, 5, 6, 9).
T h e second part of the model comprises a tentative summary of the
inherent 'behaviour' of the system in the diagram under a series of
condensed observations. T h e s e observations amount to very tentative
postulates on which depend some hypotheses of predictive value - at
74        Analytical Archaeology
least, that w o u l d be the case if our model were well devised. T h e s e
hypotheses, such as they are, will be considered under the discussion
and the chapters following the model.

T h e elements in the model are:
     S       a continuous system,         with     a trajectory    whose     successive
             overall states are S^. . . S„ Sh, S , 2 . . .             where t0 . . . t, tu
             tz. . . tH are successive       and    infinitesimally      small    intervals
             along a time-trajectory (which can alternatively be considered
             as a geographical space territory at one given time - with the
             system v a r y i n g contemporaneously over an area).
     Sf,    then represents the state of system S at point f , ; S,2 at tz, etc.
     E       is the environmental system or external context coupled to
             and containing system S.
     Eu      is then the state of the environmental or context system at
             point 11; Eh   at tz, etc.
     T       is a matrix or table s u m m a r i z i n g the observed frequencies or
             probabilities of the possible set of outcomes or responses by
             S, under given conditions.
     T,,     is then the state of the table T         at point 11, giving the prob-
             abilities of certain states of S occurring.
     R       is the regulating subsystem            which     blocks and      filters   the
             extreme range of external         fluctuations    by constraining their
             variety and keeping the outcomes in table T                 within certain
             limits.
     J£s     expresses the set of past conditions or prior states of the
             essential variables, through w h i c h the trajectory of the system
             has passed, up to the point in question - the ' m e m o r y ' store.

     The     diagram    (fig.   n)    is intended     to convey      the   relationship
between these organizational elements as it w o u l d operate in defining
the state of the system at point />, state S,2. T h e state of the system S,,
being the outcome of the elements operating on the table T,, at point
fi, an infinitely small time (or distance) antecedent to t?.



THE TENTATIVE               G E N E R A L M O D E L (fig. I l )

C o n s i d e r a class of S e m i - M a r k o v i a n system S (fig. 1 1 ) , comprising an
incompletely recorded and only partially observable network of attri-
butes or entities forming subsystems within a complex whole. T h i s
general      class of system         is coupled    to an    external    svstem     E    (an
                                                            C u l t u r e s y s t e m s - the m o d e l               75

e n v i r o n m e n t or c o n t e x t ) so that t h e i n p u t of t h e g e n e r a l s y s t e m is t h e
o u t p u t of t h e e x t e r n a l s y s t e m a n d v i c e v e r s a .


POSTULATES

( 1 ) Continuously             changing          system.        The     system         S    is d y n a m i c        and
c o n t i n u o u s , w i t h t h e a t t r i b u t e s or e n t i t i e s h a v i n g s p e c i f i c v a l u e s o r
states w h i c h c h a n g e b y infinitesimal transformations.
(2) Constraint           of variety        hence regularities.           T h e v a r i e t y of k n o w n s t a t e s
or v a l u e s of t h e s y s t e m ' s c o m p o n e n t s             is l i m i t e d    functionally            and
i d i o s y n c r a t i c a l l y . F u n c t i o n a l l y , b y t h e l i m i t e d set of s t a b l e or d y n a m i c
e q u i l i b r i u m states f o r t h e s y s t e m as a w h o l e . I d i o s y n c r a t i c a l l y ,             by
v i r t u e of t h e s e l e c t i v e c h o i c e of t h e s y s t e m ' s g e n e r a t o r s .
(3) Inessential,           essential,       and      key attributes          or components.             It is c o n -
venient to distinguish b e t w e e n inessential, essential and key attributes
or v a r i a b l e s w i t h i n the c h a n g i n g s y s t e m S :
      Inessential        a t t r i b u t e s or v a r i a b l e s - t h o s e w h i c h are not r e l e v a n t t o
      the s t u d y in h a n d a n d w h i c h c o n s e q u e n t l y d o not                      figure       in t h e
      s y s t e m as d e f i n e d , a n d t h o s e a t t r i b u t e s w h i c h r e m a i n u n c h a n g e d
      throughout.
      Essential        a t t r i b u t e s or v a r i a b l e s - t h o s e w h o s e v a l u e s or s t a t e s
      c h a n g e as p a r t of the c h a n g i n g s y s t e m .
      Key      a t t r i b u t e s or c o m p o n e n t s - t h o s e w h o s e v a l u e s or states n o t
      o n l y c h a n g e as part of t h e c h a n g i n g s y s t e m b u t w h i c h c h a n g e in a
      correlated and n o n - r a n d o m                   fashion -        e i t h e r as s u c c e s s i v e    tran-
      s i t i o n s in a c o n t i n u o u s t r e n d or c o v a r y i n g in s p e c i f i c c o r r e l a t i o n
      w i t h a c l u s t e r of s i m i l a r a t t r i b u t e s .

      T h e i n e s s e n t i a l , essential a n d k e y a t t r i b u t e s or c o m p o n e n t s in a
c h a n g i n g s y s t e m d e p e n d u p o n t h e f r a m e of r e f e r e n c e of t h e s t u d y a n d
u p o n t h e t r a j e c t o r i e s of t h e a t t r i b u t e s w i t h i n t h e c h a n g i n g         system;
t h e y d o not n e c e s s a r i l y a p p l y to o t h e r s t u d i e s of t h e s a m e e n t i t y in
w h i c h t h e s a m e a t t r i b u t e s m a y b e n e t w o r k e d in a l t e r n a t i v e s y s t e m s
(fig. 8).
(4) Format          stability       - the state of equilibrium.                 T h i s p a r t i c u l a r class of
s y s t e m h a s a l i m i t e d b u t v e r y large set of e q u i l i b r i u m states (basins) in
w h i c h t h e state of t h e s y s t e m as a w h o l e m a y r e m a i n u n c h a n g e d in
s p i t e of s o m e t r a n s f o r m a t i o n s a f f e c t i n g s o m e c o m p o n e n t a t t r i b u t e s o r
entities.
(5) Dynamic             equilibrium.          Since the input f r o m the external                           coupled
s y s t e m , e n v i r o n m e n t or c o n t e x t E is c o n t i n u o u s l y c h a n g i n g , t h e n t h e
76   Analytical Archaeology
accompanying continuously changing, successively measurable states
of S will constitute a dynamic equilibrium.
(6) Adaptive response. Change in the coupled system E may lead to
new states in the component attributes or entities of system S, or
correspondingly modify the transition probabilities T of future trans-
formations or sequences of transformations (trajectories). Such a
change, in that it represents a system 'response' to an external stimulus,
may be designated an 'adaptive response' by the system S.
(7) Displacement of equilibrium. If the equilibrium of such a system S
is dislocated, it adapts itself to the stimulus which causes the dis-
location, in such a manner that the said stimulus continually
diminishes in effect until finally the original or a new equilibrium is
again established.
(8) Cumulative effect displacing metastable equilibrium at a threshold.
New states or values successively introduced into the system S may
cumulatively approach a threshold beyond which the system cannot
continue unchanged.
(9) Control and regulation based on feedback. The states of the
components in S, change not by single-valued closed transformations
alone, but by a limited matrix of transition probabilities T whose
values vary partly as a function of the past and present states of the
system, and its context E - thus constituting a feedback loop. Every
event in the system S is thus controlled by the whole previous state of
 the system together with the causally relevant factors in the system's
 environment or field E.
 (10) Homeostasis - oscillation around and towards stable states (goals).
 Since the feedback loop regulates the matrix of transition probabilities
 T and controls future states of the system S, and since the set of stable
 system states is limited - the system will tend to oscillate around
 (hunt) and converge upon (seek) successive stable states.
 ( 1 1 ) Oscillation. Oscillation is a common phenomenon in systems and
 components of this class of system S. Oscillations may occur:

     (a) as oscillations induced by oscillations in the coupled en-
         vironment or context system (lag and lead phenomena),
     (b) as oscillations towards or away from stable equilibria (hunt
         and seek),
     (c) as oscillations within the permissive boundaries of a stable set
         or basin, allowing many trajectories (multilinear stochastic
         development).
                                     C u l t u r e s y s t e m s - the m o d e l   77

Furthermore, oscillations may occur at any or all of three network
levels:
        (i) between system S and containing environment or context E,
       (ii) Between system S and a component subsystem,
      (iii) between component subsystems within S.

(12) Directive correlation. Such systems S have a sequence of past
states, a present state, and a future state; in that we believe the future
state to be a function of the past and present states and the causally
relevant external field conditions E, the system can be said to be
directively correlated in respect of a future state.
(13) Regularities due to constraint in possible trajectories. Given a present
state S, and a future state S,2 of the system S , there are a limited set of
field conditions E that will produce S,2 from state S,. T h e range or set
of field conditions will limit and constrain any particular causal chain
S, -* S,2 but several alternative trajectories or chains may link S, -> S,2,
each trajectory having its specific constraining conditions; although in
the limiting case there may be only one possible trajectory or sequence
of transformations leading S, -* S,2.
(14) Constrained sets and directive correlation. T h e future state S,2 of
system S is attainable only if some of the system's component attri-
bute or entity states fall within a particular set in the past, set tu, and in
the present set /, in which respect the sets at t0 and t can be said to be
directively correlated toward future state S,2.
(15) Degree and order of directive correlation. T h e range of permissible
variation in the set of past and present states set t0 and set t, to attain
the future state S,2 may be taken as a measure of the degree of the
directive correlation. T h e number of permissible trajectories or routes
through these sets may be taken as the order of that correlation.
(16) Correlated     regularities and predictive      capacity.   Regularities
consequent upon constraint in the variety in the system states and
trajectories should allow low-level predictive synthesis in which
observed correlations between constraints in initial states, terminal
states, field conditions, and trajectories can be expressed.


Ill    Discussion

We have already observed that these tentative postulates amount to a
set of low-level predictive hypotheses about how systems of this
particular kind S can 'behave'. One could, if one wished, rewrite these
78   Analytical Archaeology
postulates as a list of hypotheses to be tested against the real
'behaviour' of real systems and certainly such a testing of the postu-
lates is highly desirable. H o w e v e r , some of the postulates are still so
general in scope as to tell us very little about how to tackle real systems
of this class. S o m e of the other more promising postulates are
correspondingly vague about the essential terms which give them
predictive power - such terms as equilibrium again fall within this
category. Rather than enumerate all the hypotheses with specific
instances it may be more useful to select and discuss the more prom-
ising postulates and develop their potential as hypotheses for practical
application.
     T h e first group of postulates we can consider are those that suggest
that cultural systems and their components are in dynamic equilib-
rium and will proceed from one equilibrium state to another. S u r e l y , if
we know a great deal about a system and its conditions we ought by
these means to be able to say which particular equilibrium state it will
 next run to? T h e problem here is to define the relevant aspects of the
entity's systems - at which level one is working, and then to define
what is meant by equilibrium in terms of those kinds of attribute. H o w
does one define equilibrium amongst social, religious, economic or
psychological attributes? Clearly, w e have the old problem of there
being many sorts of subsystem, each with its own kind of equilibria,
each operating in different networks of the same overall system and
 variously in equilibrium one with another (fig. 8). It is apparent that
 this problem cannot be approached at so general a level, one must take
 specific cases and explain what is meant. Consequently, all that we can
 do at this stage is to reiterate these equilibrium postulates ((2), (4), (5),
 (7), (10)) until we have elaborated the equilibrium concept and in the
 meanwhile to speculate that our various kinds of equilibrium occur
 when certain functions of the variable factors in the system are jointly
 minimized. We have yet to define in each case which variable factors
 are jointly minimized, how this is brought about, and how this
 information can be used.
    Let us quickly move to some more easily developed postulates and
try and show some positive rewards for these efforts. We can perhaps
make some immediate progress with multiple causes and cumulative
effect (8) and in later chapters with directive correlation and essential
variables (14) and ( 1 5 ) , and with correlation between regularities (16).
    It appears that new states, or values, successively introduced into a
system of this kind ( S ) , may cumulatively approach a threshold be-
                                      C u l t u r e s y s t e m s - the model   79

yond which the system cannot continue unchanged (consider tra-
jectory examples nos (1) (2) system a, b, c, d, to systems of e, /, g). T h i s
observation suggests that many cultural system changes cannot be
considered as the consequence of a single attribute or entity trans-
formation, or of a single environmental change; it does not rule out
that this may be so but makes it a limiting case. T h i s might lead us to
specify that 'neither too few, nor simply single factor causes are to be
assumed to be necessary to account for single cultural system trans-
formations'. T h i s hypothesis is deliberately phrased to point out that it
surprisingly appears to contradict William of Occam's famous axiom
that 'neither more, nor more complex, causes are to be assumed than
are necessary to account for the phenomena'. T h e more surprising
since Occam's Razor - 'entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter neces-
sitatem' is the foundation for many important systems of hypotheses
and his work as a whole, 1 2 8 0 - 1 3 4 9 , part of the kindling Renaissance.
    However, a brief consideration of the Occam and the Converse-
Occam axioms will show that they are not only compatible but jointly
powerful in a helpful way which sharpens the original postulate (8).
One can see that Occam's Razor encompasses both approaches by the
use of the word 'necessitatem' but the Razor is intent upon taking a
multiplicity of possible causes and whittling them down to the fewest
necessary, comprehensive, key components (fig. 12). However, with
situations in which a few key components may well outline 'most' of
the system behaviour it is still desirable to search for the minor but
essential components that specify the residual system characteristics.
Occam already assumes that more than enough factors have already
been cited and that reduction is the prime requirement.
    T h e Converse-Occam is developed here as a consequence of the
behaviour of the complex systems which we are investigating. It is
simply a control procedure to prevent the over-vigorous use of the
Razor. T h e Converse-Occam simply suggests that it is sometimes
useful as a procedure to take the suggested causes or factors, to think
hard and add to them any additional factors which might be operable
until a network of interacting factors has been devised which does
account for the situation under investigation. T h e Converse-Occam
suggests that large numbers of complex factors may well be involved
in changes in cultural Systems and that to invoke barely sufficient or
single causes may be mistaken.
    However, from the kinematic graph of these two procedures in
action (fig. 12) we can see that there will usually be a saddle-point at
80      Analytical Archaeology




<s>
tr
o                                                        Fig. 12 The
t-
u
<                                                        hypothesis of
                                                         multiple factors
                                                         and cumulative
a.
S                                                        effect for
                                                         changes in
                                                         complex
                                                         systems, as
                                                         controlled by
                                                         the Occam's
                                                         Razor and
                                                         Converse
                                                         Occam
     Too few                              Too many
     factors                                 factors     qualifications.


which both lines of argument are satisfied. It follows that we should
use these two approaches jointly to try and arrive at a more accurate
understanding of the nature of change in the kinds of system that we
are studying.
    Nevertheless, it is not sufficient to say simply that such an event
had 'many contributory causes' as a replacement for 'this factor caused
that event'. T h e point of jointly harnessing both approaches to the
saddle-point is to enumerate, define, test and assess the relevance,
power and range of the factors involved. T h i s having been done, the
network of cumulative interaction between these factors should be
made explicit and their joint trajectory towards the threshold carefully
defined in terms of the system as a whole.
    One of the purposes of a general model is to employ its predictive
framework to simulate developmental change at the many different
levels of cultural process. T h e system S that we have discussed in
abstract can be materialized as a system of attributes within a popu-
lation of artefacts, a system of artefacts within a changing cultural
assemblage, or a system of social attributes within a changing society
and so on. If the general model has any validity it is to these kinds of
system and their problems that hypotheses based on the model should
                                                   C u l t u r e s y s t e m s - the m o d e l         81

be applied - such problems as the transformations which bring about
the 'birth' or 'death' of an artefact type, a cultural assemblage, a
social system, a kinship system, or an economic system. If we are
asked to account for the 'death' or transmutation of the Roman
Empire in the West in terms of climatic decline, increased barbarian
invasion, overstretched military commitments, monetary devaluation,
agricultural decline, decrease in birth-rate, over-taxation, waste,
shrinking resources, and so forth, one might usefully employ the
methods sketched above, which depend on general observations about
change in complex systems of this kind.
    If such a general model can be made substantially adequate, then
hypotheses developed from its postulates should be helpful. T h e first
tentative development from this basis is the hypothesis of multiple
factors and cumulative effect, as controlled by the Occam and Con-
verse-Occam qualifications.


H Y P O T H E S I S OF M U L T I P L E F A C T O R S , A N D C U M U L A T I V E              EFFECT

(1) Single attributes or factors, successively introduced into a system,
may cumulatively approach a threshold beyond which the system
cannot survive unchanged.
(2) Neither more, nor more complex, attributes or factors are to be
assumed than are necessary to account for the phenomena.
(3) Neither too few, nor simply single-component, attributes or
factors are to be assumed than are necessary to account for the
phenomena.
    This hypothesis is intended for application in situations in which
many variables are, or are said to be operating, in order that the
essential variables directively correlated towards some event may be
defined and their cumulative interaction within the system evaluated.



Notes
      ( 1 ) Regularities in distribution areas o c c u r at e v e r y level of archaeological
organization f r o m attribute to artefact-type, a s s e m b l a g e , culture, culture-
g r o u p and t e c h n o c o m p l e x . I n all these cases, the analyst is c o n c e r n e d w i t h an
entity area, apparently a solid natural unit, but in fact usually an area defined
by a polythetic array of intersecting sets, whilst it is itself a c o m p o s i t e mosaic
of principal c o m p o n e n t sets and their intersection (fig. 1 3 ) . T h e factors
defining these intersecting sets may be ecological, sociocultural, or indeed any
                                                                 /


(i) Vennland as an entity




                                                              (n) A s an entity defined by a polythetic array
                                                              of intersecting sets




(in) As an entity com-                       (it;) Lathe-form, an his-                     (t;) Quadrat-form,      an
posed   of   intersecting                    torical   subdivision   of                    historic subdivision of
sets in three principal                      Vennland       in    which                    Vennland in which dis-
components 1 , 2 , 3                         boundaries reflect the                        tribution 'B' was critical
                                             descending hierarchy of                       and in which sets 1 and 3
                                             sets 3, 2, 1 and wherein                      were     principal   com-
                                             distribution ' A ' was cri-                   ponents.
                                             tical.



Fig. 13             V e n n l a n d - a s c h e m a t i c i l l u s t r a t i o n of a C u l t u r e A r e a as the p r o d u c t
of i n t e r s e c t i n g s e t s ( e c o l o g i c a l o r o t h e r w i s e ) a n d t h e i r fluctuating r e l a t i v e
s i g n i f i c a n c e f o r t h e C u l t u r e in o c c u p a t i o n - w h e r e t h e area w h o l e is b o t h an
i d i o s y n c r a t i c s u b s e t of l a r g e r sets a n d t h e s u m of s e l e c t e d p a r t s w i t h i n that
subset.
                                        Culture systems - the model               83

combination of factors relevant to the system represented by the distribution
area vector for the particular entity. It is the persistence of these intersecting
sets of factors which provide the continuing, although modifying constraint
which gives rise to the sporadic reappearance of former territorial patterns.
    The mathematical study of sets and their intersection and partition
developments is clearly relevant to these practical problems (Green 1965;
Haggett 1965, pp. 243-4). This same approach is also pertinent to the
abstract problems of the kinds of archaeological entities defined by polythetic
sets of components (chapter i, vi; B and figs 67, 72) as well as to the
correlation and intersection of the various levels of the hierarchical sets
defining social, linguistic, racial and archaeological classifications (figs 75,76).
    The basic procedure in set theory uses symbolic models of the concepts
and distributions under investigation - these models are sometimes known as
Venn diagrams and are discussed in terms of an axiomatic and symbolic
calculus (Green 1965). In fig. i 3 i a n imaginary culture occupies an area which
we will call 'Vennland'. A close scrutiny of Vennlandish culture reveals that
the cultural assemblage is a polythetic set of elements with overlapping but
differently orientated distribution areas (fig. i3ii). At the same time it is noted
that although Vennland is a 'natural area' bounded by 'natural' boundaries, its
existence is really defined by the intersection pattern of a number of
environmental sets (fig. 13H) and by the identity given this intersect by its
own characteristic compound of yet smaller sets (fig. i3iii). By using a single
diagram to express both environmental and cultural polythetic sets, we are
also reminded that their distribution patterns may in fact be partly intercor-
related.
    Vennland is also compounded of three principal components represented
by the intersecting sets 1, 2, 3 (fig. 13iii), which may be either environmental
subdivisions or sociocultural subcultures, or a combination of both.
Apparently the history of Vennland over the last thousand years has shown a
tendency towards the reappearance of two modal kinds of pattern, the lathe-
form (fig. i3iv) and the quadrat-form (fig. 13V). This would have involved
various integrations and reintegrations of both macro- (fig. 13») and micro-
divisions (fig. i3iii) of Vennland. In these historical fluctuations it is likely
that the distributions of factor A (fig. 1 3 a , A is I plus IV) and factor B (ii, IV
plus III) were important elements, possibly representing certain resources or
sociocultural groups or both, whose significance was a variable through time.
The complexity of this oversimplified example reminds us that practical
complexity need not mean chaotic lack of order and that order and regularity
do not necessarily imply simplicity.
    Practical examples of the application of set theory to archaeological data
have been limited in number, but a good introduction is given by Litvak King
and Garcia Moll (1972) and a further study by Serra Puche (1976).
3     Cultural morphology and cultural
      ecology - the setting

      C o m m u n i c a t i o n is the discriminatory response of an
      organism to s t i m u l u s ,
      S. S. S T E V E N S 1 9 5 0 ,
      ' I n t r o d u c t i o n : A Definition of C o m m u n i c a t i o n ' ,
                                  /. Acoust, Soc. Am., 2 2 , no. 6
      . . . communities are c o m p o s e d of recognizable population
      elements and evolutionary ecology d e p e n d s upon
      population s y s t e m s , since population s y s t e m s b e c o m e
      adapted to their e n v i r o n m e n t s to a greater degree than the
      individual,
                                                         A L L E E et al. 1 9 5 0 , p. 6



One of the main reasons for the premature attempt at a general model
for cultural processes is the need to emphasize that the systems of
relationships investigated by archaeologists are but special manifes-
tations of much more comprehensive systems that once existed. T h e
striking similarities in the structure, complexity, and inherent
'behaviour' of archaeological and anthropological data stems from
their joint generation as products of the same kinds of system - human
societies. One of the distinctive attributes of such societies is culture -
the communication system of acquired beliefs which increasingly
supplements instinctive behaviour in man. Regardless of their specific
outward form, all cultural systems consist of learned modes of
behaviour and its material manifestations, socially transmitted from
one society or individual to another. A cultural system is therefore an
organized structure integrating amongst others, social, religious, psy-
chological, linguistic, economic and material culture subsystems.
 T h e s e subsystems are the equilibrium networks within any particular
cultural system, coupled one with another and with the external
environing system. In order to understand the many possible mean-
ings of the regularities that he discovers, the archaeologist must be
 aware of the complex connections between his subsystem's input and
output and that of the other interconnected subsystems networking
 the overall system. H o w else can the archaeologist hope to interpret
       C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y and cultural e c o l o g y - the setting                   85

the social, religious, e c o n o m i c , and other kindred aspects of his
material ?
       A f t e r a p r e l i m i n a r y look at the essential nature of cultural s y s t e m s
it is o u r intention to analyse b r i e f l y the c o u p l i n g and connections of
the v a r i o u s s u b s y s t e m s within the general s y s t e m S - thus p r o v i d i n g
the b e g i n n i n g s of a setting w i t h i n w h i c h to e x a m i n e particular
archaeological cultures. T h e internal setting of s u b s y s t e m s within the
s y s t e m constitutes w h a t w e intend b y 'cultural m o r p h o l o g y ' ; the
external setting of the integrated s y s t e m then c o m p r i s e s 'cultural
e c o l o g y ' - the m u t u a l relationships b e t w e e n s u c h s y s t e m s and their
e n v i r o n m e n t , and the a d a p t i v e c h a n g e s of these s y s t e m s w i t h time and
space. T h e time has also c o m e w h e n we m u s t be m o r e specific about
the nature and m e c h a n i s m s of the cultural s y s t e m as an entity and of
the c o m p o n e n t s u b s y s t e m s , if w e are u s e f u l l y to d e v e l o p the equilib-
r i u m postulates and h y p o t h e s e s p r o m i s e d by the general m o d e l .
U n f o r t u n a t e l y , this m u s t m e a n the repeated reiteration in particular
contexts and levels of the relationships o b s e r v e d as inherent in culture
s y s t e m s in general, as integrated in the general m o d e l .


1   The nature of cultural systems
A r c h a e o l o g i s t s and anthropologists are most o f t e n dealing w i t h
cultural data relating either to artefacts or to activities and there is a
t e n d e n c y to r e g a r d these aspects as the f u n d a m e n t a l elements of
culture s y s t e m s . In an earlier discussion on artefacts h o w e v e r , it w a s
pointed out that e v e r y attribute on an artefact is equivalent to a
fossilized action, e v e r y artefact is a solidified s e q u e n c e of actions or
activities, and w h o l e a s s e m b l a g e s of a r t e f a c t s are t a n t a m o u n t to w h o l e
patterns of b e h a v i o u r . If w e d i s r e g a r d the material or non-material
i m p l e m e n t a t i o n of the acts then w e can u n d e r s t a n d artefacts as s i m p l y
'solid' b e h a v i o u r , in w h i c h a r o u g h e q u i v a l e n c e can be struck b e t w e e n :


Action                     Anthropology               Archaeology


an action                  an attribute               an attribute
a cluster of               an activity                an artefact
   actions
repeated clusters          behaviour                  assemblages
  of actions                                            of artefacts
86   Analytical Archaeology
     This remains meaningful so long as care is taken to keep the
terminology defined and in use at the same level - as long as a social
'activity' is not confused with its basic 'attributes'. If the levels are to
be maintained for comparative purposes and interpretation then the
'sun dance' or the 'initiation ceremony' are cultural artefacts or
assemblages of artefacts, not attributes. In essence, it seems that both
artefacts and activities can be reduced to behaviour composed of
actions on the part of the system's generators.
     This argument might lead to the assumption that cultural systems
are behaviour systems which can be completely described in terms of
the behaviour observed. However, the elementary discussion of simple
systems illustrated just how much system 'behaviour' may be inherent
in the structure of the system and in any case this discussion of
cultural artefacts and activities has neglected to deal with the even
 more fundamental aspect of cultural 'beliefs'. Living societies are
 represented by corporate groups of people, and their culture systems
by the relationships explicitly or tacitly inferred by their repeated
 patterns of activities, artefacts, and beliefs. T h e basic attributes of
 such culture systems are consequently activities, artefacts, and beliefs,
 not in their own guise but as 'information' controlling and regulating
 these three derivative expressions of cultural tradition. Culture is an
 information system, wherein the messages are accumulated survival
 information plus miscellaneous and random noise peculiar to each
 system and its past trajectory (Xs in fig. 11).
     Now, it has been suggested that the significant difference between
 the ape-like ancestors of man and the ape-like ancestors of the modern
 apes lay in the difference between strongly social large 'apes' and the
 less social large pongid 'apes'. T h e early hominids were social animals
 before they were bearers of material or non-material culture. It was
 possibly this social and co-operative behaviour of 'man' the bipedal
 ground-ape that led to the early hominid preservation of an unspeci-
 alized physique, a decreasing level of instinctive behaviour and the
 advantageous development of elaborate intercommunication by
 speech and other means. Whereas the survival of other species centred
 around the inheritance of a large body of instinctive behaviour, the
 survival of the early hominids is likely to have been increasingly
 dependent upon their co-operative activities in social groups. In this
 sense, then, co-operative social activities in the early hominids were a
 partial alternative to increasingly specialized instinctive behaviour.
  Consequently, man is unusually dependent on behaviour information
 communicated by seniors and contemporaries in his social group; one
     C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y a n d c u l t u r a l e c o l o g y - the s e t t i n g   87

of the prime functions of that clustered group being to ' i n f o r m ' the
young hominid how to survive in the given conditions.
     Before speech had fully developed man had a social organization
and probably simple artefacts, and at this stage the material and
non-material culture of the g r o u p may have played the vital role in
transmitting and communicating survival information to the
immature and defenceless hominid. In an important sense cultural
systems are the continuous transmission systems of cumulatively
acquired information, supplementing instinctive behaviour in man.
T h e y are information systems of signs and s y m b o l s of great advantage
in the face of natural selection and perhaps even the coded forerunners
of true speech. In any event, the efficiency of the particular culture
system clearly depends on the amount of information that it can store
and convey, by whatever means, at a conscious or unconscious level.
    Elaborate formal teaching in the modern sense is usually but
slightly developed in primitive societies, although by no means
entirely absent. S u c h teaching is essentially supplementary to the
information received by the individual f r o m the earliest days of
infancy in the various codes of artefacts and their attributes, speech
and signs, activities and ceremonies. T h e mere recognition and
definition of an activity by the production of a concomitant set of
artefacts constitutes the transmission of information or a message - the
ordered selection of a set of attributes f r o m amongst the infinite
variety of possible cultural expressions. A child brought up amongst
motor-cars and skyscrapers is differently informed to another child
born amongst stone axes and pig hunts - irrespective of any q u a l i f y i n g
verbal elaboration.
     T h e y o u n g learn to survive first of all within their particular
culture system and later within its external environment, by the
conscious and subconscious assimilation of the social, religious,
economic, artefactual, and psychological patterns of their culture.
T h e s e patterns of behaviour are the code for survival imprinted on the
individual by his g r o w i n g - u p within and through them, as surely as an
external pattern is imprinted on a substance expanding within a
mould. T h a t imprint is not the infinitely complex impression of the
'real and total' environment but that intermediate approximation
selectively perceived and reflected in the particular social tradition.
   S u r v i v a l is all that really matters to a species and this means
survival of the fittest species. T h e fittest are biologically defined as
those with an increasing rate of progeny survival, as opposed to a static
or declining rate. Consequently, any system that can continuously
88    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

convey complex survival information, based on many experiences of
many past environments, to very young progeny, teaching them to
survive by subconscious imprint even before they are capable of
conscious comprehension, any such system must be of infinite value in
increasing the biological 'fitness' of the species. A s cumulative
systems, culture systems have become cumulatively more efficient in
their role of enabling the hominid species to survive, multiply and
spread across the globe. A s survival information systems they have
become cumulatively more efficient in transmitting information -
speech has been perfected, international languages and communi-
cations fostered, writing and printing developed, wireless and tele-
vision flourish. It follows that there is an accompanying increase in the
scope for the transmission of misleading, mistaken or mutually
contradictory information with a concurrent increase in the social
ambiguity and dislocation that this must cause.


ii   Culture as an information system

If cultural systems are information systems carrying information on
cultural values and cultural norms in terms of cross-referencing
images, codes, beliefs, fables and myths then how do they work and how
can their anomalies be explained?
    T h e transmission of information is essentially brought about
whenever constraint restricts the variety of outcomes in a coupled
system - when only a limited set of variety is transmitted. A message
in these terms constitutes an ordered selection f r o m an agreed set of
selected variety. Disturbances which do not represent any part of the
'essential message' f r o m the source are termed 'noise' in information
theory. T h i s concept of 'noise' is very useful in the analysis of
information systems - the relationship between 'noise' and 'informa-
tion' is simply that they are in no way intrinsically distinguishable one
from the other as categories of variety - except that noise is the variety
not essential to the source's message. One can see that this relationship
is closely similar to that between the inessential and essential attri-
butes or variables in a system. Now that we understand our cultural
systems as in essence kinds of information systems, then the 'essential
attributes' are the 'information' in the system and the inessential
attributes are the 'noise' - much of it introduced by the nature of the
system and its past trajectory (Ashby 1 9 5 6 , pp. 121—60; C h e r r y 1957,
PP- 303-7)-
       C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y and c u l t u r a l e c o l o g y - the setting                   89

    This outlines the background of the earlier statement that culture
is an information system, where the messages are accumulated
survival information, plus miscellaneous and idiosyncratic noise
peculiar to each system and its past trajectory ( ¿ s in fig. 11). As we
shall see, this concept is applicable to real data and enables the analyst
to separate the essential and key variables from the inessential vari-
ables in artefact assemblages.
    Information enters cultural systems either as the communication
of constraint in the variety of outcomes with external systems (fig. 11,
E -* S) including other cultural systems, or as a similar set of selected
variety generated within the internal subsystems of S. T h e first cate-
gory of information corresponds to the 'adaptive' and discriminatory
response of the culture system to its environment, including the
capacity to accept information diffused by communication from other
cultural systems, thereby increasing the system's own information
variety from external sources. T h e second category of internally
generated variety corresponds to internal invention or innovation -
usually as part of the minor re-networking of components producing
surprising, newly 'emergent' variety in component properties (see
above p. 60).
    By and large fresh information or new variety affects the cultural
information system in a limited number of ways. T h e system may
either accept or reject the new set of variety - where the conditions for
acceptance or rejection will be discussed shortly. If the message or set
of variety is accepted, then it will be in one of four relationships to
existing variety in the attributes of the culture system : the new variety
will be wholly new, or it may be additional but alternative to that
already existing in the system, or it may flatly contradict and destroy
existing system information, or finally it may confirm and be identical
with existing information. T h i s flow of kinds of new information and
their effects can be displayed as follows:

Invention                                  Rejection            »


Internil
informati«                                                      1. N e w v a r i e t y (gain)
                          S y s t e m S^                        2. A l t e r n a t i v e v a r i e t y
External
information
                                      X    Acceptance
                                                                   (disjunction)
                                                                3. C o n t r a d i c t i v e v a r i e t y
                                                                     (equivocation)
Diffusion                                                       4. C o n f i r m a t i v e v a r i e t y
                                                                     (redundant)
go   Analytical Archaeology
T h e terms in brackets express the nearest information theory
equivalents to our terms 1 - 4 (Cherry 1957, pp. 303-7).
     It is important to grasp that the variety in information which we
are discussing in general terms can be quite specifically demonstrated
as new, alternative, contradictive, or confirmative in the spheres of the
material culture, social, religious, psychological, linguistic or
economic value subsystems. T h e significance of these concepts is that
they enable us to come to grips with the meaning of equilibrium in
cultural system contexts, other than at the gross level of numerical or
mechanical equilibrium.
     As a dangerous but ultimately advantageous move it may be help-
ful to use the information theory version of the terms 1 - 4 - gain,
disjunction, equivocation and redundancy - whilst fully realizing that
these terms are rather more narrowly constrained than accurately fits
our purpose. Gain can be defined as the increase in system information
resulting from the receipt of a message (Ashby 1956, p. 178). Dis-
junction occurs when information presents alternative variety to the
set already held — presenting various alternative choices and tra-
jectories. Equivocation occurs when the incoming information
presents a partially or totally contradictory and therefore mutually
incompatible set of variety to that already held ; since only variety can
destroy variety, some of the system's variety in information will then
be destroyed and produce uncertainty about the information as a
whole. Redundancy occurs when the incoming information presents
the identical set of variety to that already held by the system - thereby
confirming that set and increasing consistency but not increasing the
system's information variety.
      It will be noticed that gain and disjunction will increase the variety
 of information in the system and therefore the new variety they
 provide increases the regulatory capacity of the system in that it now
 holds larger reserves of variety at R to counter variety from the
 environment E (figs 6, 9, 1 1 ) . Consequently, we can define a more
 'sophisticated' or complex culture system, or subsystem, as one in
 which more activities or more artefacts are produced, implying a
 greater information content or variety available for regulatory 'insula-
 tion'. One is reminded here of the information system implications of
 Steward's comparison between the 500,000 different artefact-types
 landed by the United States military forces at Casablanca during
 World War II and the 3,000-6,000 total variety of artefact-types
 produced by Californian Indian tribes (Steward 1955, p. 81). Here we
     Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting            91

have a clear measure of the comparative regulatory or insulatory
capacity of two culture systems based on artefact-type counts and
underlying information theory - a technique which we will explore
later (fig. 24).
     Even at this stage it would seem likely that a culture system's
capacity as a regulator or insulator cannot exceed its capacity as a
communication system, since only variety in culture can force down
variety in the outcomes. Information cannot be transmitted in larger
quantity than the system's variety allows and the greater the number
of connecting channels or networks, the greater the number of coded
means of intercommunication (artefacts, activities, speech, writing,
etc.), the greater the regulatory potential of the system as a whole.
     Redundancy, on the other hand, is not accompanied by any change
in the system's variety. Redundant information confirms the existing
consensus of the system's communication channels, strengthening the
system in its existing state in spite of all the factors of uncertainty
acting against its continuity - noise, disjunction, equivocation and so
on. T h e capacity of a system transmitting information to continue or
survive as the same system depends on the maintenance of the essen-
tial attributes or information being conveyed. However, the fluctuat-
ing variety within the system is not inviolate, the greater the changes
in variety introduced, the greater the number of possible trajectories
and the lower the chances of the consistent communication of the
system's syntax in the same general format. T h e complex syntactical
rules of culture systems represent a set of constraints marking the
thresholds defining the systems as individual entities. There exist,
therefore, thresholds marking the survival capacity of that particular
information system beyond which it becomes transformed into other
systems (trajectory examples (1 )—(5), chapter 2). Redundancy is the
vital factor which makes for consistency and continuity, preserving the
system in its present general format. Redundancy is tantamount to
conformity of behaviour information, a high rate of redundancy from
all the channels in a culture system means little or no change. In this
way redundancy can help to combat noise or other kinds of variety
tending to distort the system's distinctive information format.
    T h e three broad categories of oscillation postulated as inherent in
cultural systems are significantly connected with the transmission of
information (postulate 1 1 , general model p. 76). Information feedback
exists whenever the system or subsystem to which the culture system
is coupled gives rise to an output which causes the culture system to
92   Analytical Archaeology

modify its own output - either positively or negatively - thereby
influencing the other system's transformations (fig. 4). Oscillations in
the environing system will therefore bring about oscillations in the
coupled cultural system (postulate 11 a). Alternatively, internal oscil-
lations towards stable equilibria often occur amongst the system's
subsystems, usually with lag and lead phenomena and by the same
feedback process (postulate 11b). Time lag arises when information
bringing about a transformation takes a definable time after its
appearance and before the consequent system change. Time lead
occurs when a system's past trajectory is such that certain future
transformations can be anticipated and give rise to other prescient
changes.
     In the general model diagram (fig. 11) 'lag' is illustrated by the
time taken for the environmental conditions Eh at time f, to affect the
system S, not as S,, but as S,2. In the same figure, 'lead' is illustrated by
the constrained set of possible system outcomes under conditions E,2
influencing the table of probable responses at f,. A culture system
demonstrates 'lag' when, for example, centuries of increasing defores-
tation finally brings about a reluctant change in hunting techniques.
Such a culture system shows 'lead' when it acts in the light of religious
beliefs forecasting the end of the world, or when it shifts its fields in
order not to exhaust the fertility of the land. Given a high gain in
information variety, alternative variety based on disjunctions, or
uncertainty stemming from equivocations, then oscillation amongst
the system attributes or components must often occur. Especially if
these increases in variety are part of lag or lead situations when the
 present or retrospective changes may turn out to be over-drastic or
 underestimated and need compensation in the manner of the error-
 controlled regulator. Even amongst coupled systems in dynamic
 equilibrium, stability is never completely achieved because the
 environment is continually changing and integration takes time.
 Consequently, there is always a lag in the implementation of regulated
 control transformations and the feedback will set up oscillations
 'hunting' about a satisfactory strategy (fig. 11, circuit E, R, T , S, E).
     T h e third kind of oscillation is not connected directly with
 movement towards a stable consensus but is the aimless stochastic
 oscillation that can occur when the permissive boundaries of the stable
 sets of component values allow many equally probable trajectories
 (postulate 11c). T h i s aimless wandering among attribute values may
 be advantageous to the system in that the multiplicity of aimlessly
     Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting             93

oscillating aspects may chance upon an arrangement with emergent
and latent potentialities. T h i s leads to exploitative development by
retaining the advantageous changes and oscillating neutral ones;
fashion fluctuations of this kind may be thought of as 'scanning'
through variety 'in search o f useful transformations - an efficient
inherent tendency in this kind of system, maximizing random dis-
covery (figs 44, 45).
    Earlier in this chapter the three major levels of dynamic equilib-
rium within cultural systems were noted as actively moving towards:

     (i) equilibrium within each subsystem - including the social,
         economic, religious subsystems, etc.,
    (ii) equilibrium between the outputs of the various component
         subsystems,
   (iii) equilibrium between the system as a whole and its environ-
         ment.

    T h i s activity has been portrayed as a continuous three level game,
or a ceaseless three level 'debate'. T h i s arises from the moves to
reconcile the variety of information flowing through the system. By
these means the information reaching any single node in the generat-
ing network from the various systems and subsystems is made less
mutually contradictory and self-destructive so as not to imperil the
consistent communication of the system's syntactical format. If the
information variety is contradictory, then some variety is destroyed
and beyond a certain threshold the capacity of the system to continue
in its existing format is unavoidably impaired.
    Now one way of reconciling mutually contradictory information,
or destructive variety following equivocation, is to generate fresh
variety making both sets mutually tolerable and thus not reducing the
valuable variety in the system as a whole. T h i s 'blending' strategy
subsumes and reconciles the two former sets of contradictory variety
within a new and more comprehensive set. T h i s is a procedure often
observed in 'new' economic strategies blending formerly independent
components, in 'new' mythologies or religions blending formerly alien
components, and in 'new' social patterns integrating components from
several sources. T h i s bleifding strategy as a move towards maintaining
equilibrium is therefore revealed as a very important stimulus for the
production of 'new' patterns in sociocultural subsystems.
    T h e three level debate, or equilibrium game, ceaselessly presents the
sociocultural system with a limited variety of alternative transitions
94   Analytical Archaeology
in its component values and attributes. We have already seen how
these alternative transitions can be treated 'as if' the culture is
selecting certain strategies in order to satisfy the limiting conditions of
the transformations and to ensure an equilibrium outcome; in this
context we have noted the mixed or randomizing strategy advan-
tageously underlying multilinear development and now a mixed strat-
egy creatively blending components in 'new' patterns. In order to
appreciate the many different kinds of strategy which might be sought
for in cultural system trajectories and in order to state in general terms
much of specific value to us later on we might briefly look at the
concept of strategy in game theory (Braithwaite i960, pp. 200-50).
     T h e first point to emphasize is that of course the culture systems
are not choosing strategies and playing games but on the contrary we
are trying to closely approximate the observed input/output regulari-
ties of these Black Box systems by fitting or comparing them with
homomorphic models based on game theory. Bearing this in mind it is
convenient to divide strategies into two classes - the optimizer strat-
egies and the satisficer strategies (Simon 1 9 5 7 , pp. 195-200). Crudely
speaking the optimizer strategies include all strategies which attempt
to optimize the desirable outcomes in a series of situations involving
alternative trajectories - optimizer strategies try to get the best possi-
ble results given the conditions. Satisficer strategies, on the contrary,
 rank all the relevant alternative trajectories in order of preference and
 then select from this set a prudent trajectory that satisfies the system's
 tolerances without it being the best possible - satisficer strategies are
 satisfactory and safe, without being optimal. In the light of hindsight
 and fully documented conditions it is often difficult to understand why
 certain systems did not take the optimal trajectories but in real life it is
 rarely the case that complete information is available to the system
 before the alternative transitions must occur. Rather than risk all on an
 optimizer strategy societies often follow some kind of satisficer strat-
 egy - usually of the mixed kind.
    Wolpert (1964) has used linear programming and regression
analysis to contrast the actual productivity of the Swedish Mellans-
verige district and the potential optimum productivity estimated for
the area. Less than half the district had outputs of more than 70 per
cent of the optimum and in some cases the output was regularly as low
as 40 per cent of the possible optimum. T h e local Swedish farmer was
not aiming at optimum productivity, but rather at a safe, low risk,
satisficer yield. In addition it appeared that one factor in this parti-
     C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y a n d c u l t u r a l e c o l o g y - the s e t t i n g   95

cular case was a regional 'uncertainty' about the most prudent live-
stock and cereal mixes in the face of the contemporary fluctuations in
local conditions, market prices, crop and stock diseases and other
changing factors. T h i s situation can be interpreted as part of an
oscillating trajectory moving away from a former metastable state,
towards some new future equilibrium strategy suitable for the
temporarily stabilized conditions of that future time.
    T w o kinds of strategy are frequently employed as satisficer strat-
egies when optimizer versions seem too risky, these are the mixed or
randomized strategy and the minimax strategy. We have already
encountered the mixed strategy in which a number of different specific
strategies are blended according to the prevailing conditions, and the
randomized version where the blending of the basic strategies is
stochastically arranged to 'search' the outcomes for advantages. T h e
mixed or randomized strategy rests on the assumption that it might be
better not to employ the same strategy all the time but sometimes to
use one and sometimes another in succession - or alternatively, to use
a single simultaneous blend of strategies.
    T h e minimax, maximin, or 'most prudent' kind of strategy, aims at
maximizing the m i n i m u m outcome (maximin), or put another way, on
minimizing the m a x i m u m risk (minimax). Now the system or subsys-
tem's ultimate trajectory depends on the successive values of a table of
transformations expressing the distribution of probabilities around the
various alternative transitions. T h e r e f o r e in order to pursue a pru-
dential or minimax policy the system must take those successive values
which are the most 'prudent' of the non-optimal outcomes in the light
of possible countermoves (lead). In this way the prudential trajectory
takes successive values such that whatever the subsequent alternatives
in the successive stages of the developing situation, the system always
takes those values which will ensure the best of the non-optimum
outcomes that can be forced upon it. T h i s strategy ensures that
however well the 'opponent' plays, however bad conditions may
become, the outcome is the best that could be achieved in the circum-
stances (Braithwaite i 9 6 0 , pp. 238-46). T h e drawback of this policy
being that frequently conditions turn out not to be as bad as they
might have been and yet the system is already committed to a non-
optimal stance - prepared to make the best of the worst situation.
    In the context in which we are examining these various kinds of
strategy, the 'prudent* outcome is that state or value which most
satisfactorily approaches dynamic equilibrium in terms of total
96   Analytical Archaeology
information variety. W e can venture to suggest that in such a system
( S ) , pursuing such a strategy (minimax), those successive transitions,
and that trajectory will be adopted which minimize the m a x i m u m
amount of information variety destroyed by contradiction and dis-
location within the system. T h e principle of minimizing the m a x i m u m
amount of change necessary for survival, in the light of the systems'
past and present values, suggests a means for defining the concept of
equilibrium in such information systems which w e will now pursue.
    Let us take the commonly used term 'dislocation' and define it as
meaning, for our purposes - the relationship existing between coupled
systems or subsystems when their information variety outputs are in
some part mutually contradictory, thereby destroying variety in the
system as a whole and ultimately imperilling the survival of that
system in that form. T h e state of equilibrium in such systems and
subsystems then becomes the state in which dislocation is jointly
minimized - or the state in which the rate of destruction of informa-
tion variety is minimized. T h i s is the vital meaning of equilibrium in
the original postulates 1 - 1 6 of the general model and this meaning
now enables us to give those postulates predictive 'teeth'. It is very
important in this context not to confuse the term 'dislocation' with the
earlier term 'disjunction' expressing alternative variety; especially
since it is not 'disjunction' but 'equivocation' - contradictive and
therefore destructive variety which is most frequently involved in
system dislocation.
    T h i s concept of dislocation enables us to grasp a fresh compre-
hension not only of the equilibrium postulates but also of such other
aspects as the acceptance or rejection of information by culture
systems, the nature of the thresholds defining the survival capacity of
such systems, and the focusing of innovation in successive areas of the
cultural system network. T h i s fresh approach can best be made clear
from a consideration of the role of the individual in the sociocultural
system - an approach which has been unavoidably postponed until
this late stage.
    E v e r y man is part of a society, a generator and a receiver, and is
influenced by his society's sociocultural system in many subtle and
constraining ways. E v e r y activity of such a man is a vector of several
simultaneous factors (biological, psychological, religious, social,
economic or other components). T h e act may not be uniquely
'determined' but it will be very closely 'constrained'. T h e act is a node
at which the network of cultural and personal subsystems converge
     Cultural m o r p h o l o g y a n d cultural ecology - the setting   97

with information on the set of variety allowed the act - some actions
having few relevant components and great freedom of variation, others
may have many bonds and the more components there are, the more
restricted the prescribed resultant (fig. 7). A so-called simple culture
may not itself recognize or designate these component subsystems
bearing on the act but this does not mean that the subsystems are not
acting - just as they are in more elaborate cultures which have arbi-
trarily formalized and recognized their own social, religious, and
economic spheres.
    T h e ideal is for the man to act without dislocation because dis-
location, as opposed to permissive disjunction, results in an act which
communicates a set of contradictory values - capable of causing con-
fusion, loss of cohesion and ultimately social anarchy. Such an act may
be accepted only if dislocation is minimal, only if it can be accom-
modated as a valid alternative, as a disjunction within the tolerance
thresholds of the system. T h i s immediately brings us to a fresh view of
the process of diffusion of material and non-material artefacts - both
representing messages with information.
    Diffusion has three phases: (1) the presentation of the new ele-
ment; (2) the acceptance; (3) the integration and frequently the
modification of the element. T h e optimal presentation of new variety
may be gained by increasing the number and capacity of outside
communication channels, which if maximized will maximize in turn
the input of new variety advantageous to the system regulation and
control - one may recollect for example, the rise of the Renaissance in
the wake of the fresh channels developed by the Venetian, Pisan,
Genoan and Florentine merchant explorers. However, the crucial
phase is acceptance, for if rejected the information is as if it had never
existed as far as that culture is concerned. Why do some cultural
systems accept some diffusing innovations and yet reject others? T h e
answer can only be proposed in detail for each specific case but the
general syntax is the same. New variety will not be accepted if its
concomitant dislocation cannot be minimized to vanishing point - it
must be variety which does not contradict and destroy any of the
essential attributes concerned with the continuity of the system.
   This tells us why such new information variety may be rejected
but what causes acceptance? In the same manner, parts of the system
or subsystems may be oscillating in an unstable equilibrium or
in minor dislocation, consequently any convenient new variety
communicated to the system and capable of bringing this localized
98   Analytical Archaeology
disequilibrium to stability will immediately be accepted and integrated.
Since the systems and subsystems are dynamic, there is constant
disequilibrium or dislocation of a minor kind but quite sufficient to
attract new variety and its unforeseen consequences. Here again we
have lag and lead, oscillation towards equilibrium and apparent goal-
seeking in our systems. In such circumstances a diffusing attribute may
be accepted and integrated if its immediate capacity for diminishing
serious dislocations already existing in the system are greater than any
small dislocations which its integration may cause.
     Culture systems continuously vary in their complexity and in their
stability or lack of dislocation. Consequently, the network of conver-
ging information bearing on a given act will vary from culture to
culture in the number of channels involved and in the 'tolerance'
within the boundaries of the set of stable variants. In a highly institu-
tionalized system with rather rigid and narrow limits defining stable
transformations the ability to assimilate and integrate diffusing variety
will be impaired; the system has become in certain respects 'non-
adaptive' and may ultimately collapse if the tolerance threshold of the
system as a whole is overwhelmed by severe contradiction and dis-
location. T h i s situation reveals the dangers of certain kinds of over-
elaborate cultural complexity (cf. Flannery 1972, p. 423), possibly
over-adapted to peculiar contexts and unable to cope with fresh
variety of a different kind. In contrast, a less specialized culture
system although lacking such large resources of system variety, may be
 less vulnerable in the broader limits of the stable sets comprising its
 essential variables.
     It seems that overspecialization is another phenomenon shared by
 cultural and organic living systems, with cultural dinosaurs just as
 vulnerable as animal ones. As an example one might reflect on the
 accumulating evidence that the incipient food producing cultures
 appear not out of the ranks of the most sophisticated hunter-fisher-
 gatherers but from the not so complex and rather unspecialized
 peripheral systems in more marginal and increasingly trying
 environments (e.g. Binford 1968b) - environments stimulating
 increasing disjunction and equivocation - demanding 'new' variety
 development.
     A combination of flexibility and sufficient complexity seems to be
 the requirement best able to maintain a given system intact in a great
 variety of contexts or environments. T h e collapse of such a sociocul-
 tural system does not usually or necessarily depend on or coincide
    Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting             99
with, the wholesale destruction of the system's generators or their
entire way of life. T h e 'death' of a sociocultural system is usually the
'birth' of a new alternative, quite irrespective of the generator's popu-
lation fluctuation. T h e 'death' of the system amounts to no more than
the collapse of the syntax defining the format of the essential attributes
and the bursting of the thresholds of the key sets of constrained
variety. T h e 'birth' of a new system is usually accompanied by the
survival of large parts of the old subsystems' values which are re-
networked in novel ways, with newly 'emergent' potential consequent
upon this change, together with the integration of fresh variety in
attributes diffused from without. Similarly, the 'death' or collapse of
such systems can result from serious dislocation within or between
subsystems, or between the system as a whole and its environment.
T h e great inherent tolerance of such systems has already suggested
that, with rare exceptions, such apparently dramatic transformations
are most often gradual, cumulative, and multifocused.
     An earlier part of this discussion described the concept of distinct
and definable development foci within particular systems at particular
times, located in particular parts of the system's networked
components - foci for innovation and the acceptance of fresh variety.
T h e archaeologist detects such foci in aspects of changing artefact-
types and material culture assemblages, the anthropologist recognizes
similar foci in changing aspects of social structure and in both cases
the distinctive mark is the greatly accelerated rate of change in these
foci as opposed to the steadier rate of change elsewhere in the systems.
An important development of this concept is the bite which it can be
given by taxonomic methods capable of measuring 'rate of change'.
     At any one time there usually appears to be one or more major
foci of accelerated change in the subsystems of sociocultural systems.
These foci will often tend to be areas focusing the variety of effects of
multiple environmental stimuli new to the culture upon incompatible
variety in the existing system. It follows that these foci of development
will tend to move around and through the different subsystem
networks in a continuous cycle of growth and renewal. On occasions
the foci will shift away from areas of once intense development to new
fields, old foci may partially revert to a simple or generalized pattern
last seen in a pre-elaboration phase providing an interesting sequence
of apparently cyclical oscillation from simple to complex to simple
forms again (fig. 38). T h i s oscillation is found in material and non-
material culture but we will be particularly interested in its material
ioo   Analytical Archaeology
artefact manifestations. As brief examples one might cite the return of
some Late African Acheulean and Sangoan handaxe types to forms
closely resembling Early Acheulean simple forms; or the Neolithic
shift of focus from many aspects of the flint assemblages to other areas
such as pottery elaboration, with a concomitant reversion of burin and
scraper types to 'early' simple and unelaborate forms in many
instances. Of course this reversion or 'dis-elaboration' inevitably
reflects changes in connected aspects of the societies' other subsys-
tems; in these examples and in the main such changes in material
culture are usually correlated with economic and environmental
fluctuations, although religious and social foci are almost as frequently
so reflected. One aspect which can be informative is the correlation
between reversion or dis-elaboration in one locus and the shift of the
foci or change to new fields of concentration, thus pointing out the
successive sequence of areas of system dislocation and perhaps
suggesting their causes.
     The fundamental elements of sociocultural systems - activities,
artefacts, and traditions - are all in essence forms of information. The
continuous rhythm of repeated activity sequences, day by day, month
by month, season by season, and year by year generate a distinctive
information code idiosyncratic to that particular cultural system. The
continuous output of solid activities - the artefacts - convey dis-
criminatory response and intention; not a response to everything but a
peculiarly discrete response to the partial environment perceived
through the cultural system's 'sensory' organs. This constrained and
continuous response embodies in material artefact form, sets of trans-
 formations converting information from one representation into
 another - an ordered selection from a limited set of signs - in short, a
 coded message. The conversation, beliefs, legends, myths, fables and
 traditions are even more directly comprehended as coded information
 on socially acceptable norms, their boundaries and the consequent
 taboos. The individuals generating the changing sociocultural
 information system move through their personal cycles of age- and
 sex-graded activities - the individual's actions vary irregularly, but
 overall the continuous, redundant rhythm of patterned activity
 continues, changing slowly but perceptibly in a man's lifetime. A
 rhythmic intimation of survival information and idiosyncratic noise on
 a comprehensive scale, ensuring the survival of the young within the
 group and the group within its changing environment, with the
 minimum of disruption. The accumulative continuity of the cultural
      Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting           101

information system represents the aspect most advantageous to its
generators.



Ill    Culture as a system with subsystems
T h e internal setting of subsystems within the general system consti-
tutes 'cultural morphology' as opposed to the external setting of the
system in its environment, comprising 'cultural ecology'. Both of these
fields are sufficient to fill several books with discussion and elaboration
but the intention here is merely to sketch in two successive sections
the implications of the developing general model for these specialist
fields. If the model is well constructed it should be possible to say
succinctly and in general what should prove to be the case in particular
instances. Since the subsystems within culture are the subject of
highly-specialized studies we are here only interested in seeing them
in a particular light in preparation for their use as a setting for
archaeological data.
     It is, of course, quite as arbitrary and dangerous to describe a
sociocultural system as having component subsystems as to describe
any unitary and highly complex system in terms of a number of its
component circuits, for the self-same reasons (fig. 5). Not only are the
subsystems really different aspects of the same system (fig. 8) but even
could we define them adequately in terms of content and boundaries
one would still not have defined the system containing them. Such
complex systems cannot be treated as an interlaced set of more or less
independent subsystems since, as we have seen, the 'behaviour' of
such a unit is more complex than simply the expression of the sum of
its components' 'behaviours' (fig. 5). Nevertheless, as long as we
continue to realize the arbitrary nature of this kind of component
description it will perhaps serve to partially describe an otherwise
extremely complex reality. In the full realization that where we arbi-
trarily describe say five component subsystems the system generators
may have conceptualized only one, or possibly three, or perhaps sixty
- but as long as we are consistent this arbitrariness will temporarily
serve our purpose.
    In the arbitrary setting devised here it is intended to distinguish
five subsystems within which we will imagine the information in
sociocultural systems to be more richly interconnected than externally
networked within the system as a whole:
io2      Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

      ( 1 ) Social subsystem. T h e hierarchical network of inferred personal
            relationships, including kinship and rank status.
      (2) Religious subsystem. T h e structure of mutually adjusted beliefs
            relating to the supernatural, as expressed in a body of doctrine
            and a sequence of rituals, which together interpret the
            environment to the society in terms of its own percepta.
      (3) Psychological subsystem. T h e integrated system of supra-
          personal subconscious beliefs induced upon the individuals in
          a society by their culture, their environment and their
          language; essentially the subconscious system of comparative
          values.
      (4) Economic subsystem. T h e integrated strategy of component
          subsistence methods and extraction processes which feed and
          equip the society.
      (5) Material culture subsystem. T h e patterned constellations of
          artefacts which outline the behaviour patterns of the system as
          a whole and e m b o d y that system's technology.

    T h e s e five subsystem headings are transparently based on the
prejudices of current opinion, underlining their arbitrary nature. Even
by the standards of this biased basis, m a n y will find them unsatis-
factory and will wish to reorganize them accordingly (e.g. R e n f r e w
(1972) distinguishes 'social', 'projective/symbolic',      'subsistence',
'technological'     and    'trade   and   communications'   subsystems).
H o w e v e r , we will arbitrarily conceptualize cultural systems as
integrating these five main information subsystems as a coherent
ensemble in d y n a m i c equilibrium at the three levels:

        (i) within each subsystem,
       (ii) between the subsystem outputs,
      (iii) between the whole system and its environment (fig. 14).

E q u i l i b r i u m being defined in terms of the information concepts earlier
discussed - minimizing immediate system dislocation. T h e s e rela-
tionships can be crudely s u m m e d up in a diagram, first in a static
background (fig. 14), and then against a changing background (fig. 15).
In these diagrams the entity simply labelled system S or S, in previous
figures is expanded in terms of these arbitrary components (figs 9, 1 1 ) .
T h i s setting will now enable us to discuss very briefly the relevance of
the earlier postulates and the general model to these particular
subsystem spheres.
   C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y a n d c u l t u r a l e c o l o g y - the s e t t i n g   103

                                          ENVIRONMENT




           Fig. 14 A static model representing the dynamic equilib-
           rium between the subsystem networks of a sociocultural
           system and its environment. The psychological subsystem
           may be envisaged as centrally encased by the other
           subsystems - a genetic inheritance modified by an induced
           field; see fig. 23.


SOCIAL     SUBSYSTEM

T h e attributes integrated in this subsystem are conceptual ideas or
information about the relationships between the individuals within a
system. Although these concepts and this information may be partially
equated with lines of genetic relationship this is by no means the rule
of organization for social subsystems. Rank, status and obligation
often operate on other bases than genetic relationship (e.g. Service
1962 ; Fried 1967) and even kinship itself is an arbitrary concept which
may ignore one side of the family completely for some purposes and
yet link remarkably distant blood relations in some other direction.
T h e social subsystem 'does not consist of the objective ties by descent
or consanguinity that obtain among individuals; it exists only in
io4   Analytical Archaeology
                    ENVIRONMENT




Fig. 15 A schematic model suggesting the oscillating subsystem states and
values in the networks of a sociocultural system in dynamic equilibrium with
the oscillating states of its coupled environment.


human consciousness, it is an arbitrary system of ideas, not the spon-
taneous development of a factual situation' (Lévi-Strauss 1945). T h i s
commonly held information causes the individuals in a group to
repeatedly act according to an explicit or tacit pattern. On the basis of
these ideational patterns human groups are everywhere networked by
an intersecting w e b of exclusive or non-exclusive divisions which are
orientated towards proscribed sets of activities within the system.
T h e s e segments include such sets as elite groups, education groups,
age groups, ceremonial, military, recreational, religious and political
groupings. Within these groupings different individuals are variously
linked with various neighbours in a great intercommunicating network
    Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting                  105

(fig. 8). T h e social cohesion of a group depends on the intensity of
internal reticulation within this network, as opposed to the compara-
tively sparse connections running beyond the society to other
societies. T h e social subsystem is an idiosyncratic and multipurpose
network generated by a set of acquired ideas or information. T h e
successive replication of itself, by conscious and subconscious imprint,
is not the least function of the social subsystem - continuity is over-
whelmingly advantageous in the maintenance of variety.
       T h e information in the social subsystem, as in the other subsys-
tems, seems mainly concerned with expressing the accepted rules of
behaviour and their range of tolerance as comprehensive sets. When
the observed social norm differs from the socially communicated
conceptual rule, as is often the case, then disjunction or equivocation
results, usually followed by oscillation around a 'new' rule subsuming
the former aberrations. T h i s lag or lead in social norms reaching
compatible equilibrium with the existing social rule constitutes an
unstable feedback system depending on the perceptible time that
values and attitudes take to diffuse throughout the social network - the
resulting oscillation is often characterized as action/reaction within the
system.
       T h i s latter class of oscillation represents oscillation towards stable
equilibrium within the subsystem (postulate 1 1 b ) . T h e two other
general classes of oscillation are also detectable in changing social
subsystem values - oscillation induced by coupled contextual oscil-
lation ( n a ) , and oscillation within the sets of alternative stable values
( 1 1 c ) . Oscillation induced by fluctuations in coupled systems or
subsystems may be illustrated by the centuries of oscillation in Euro-
pean moral codes between the puritan and the liberal ideals or the
interesting social reversion to nuclear family units in modern urban
societies - both oscillations being coupled with fluctuations in other
cultural subsystems. Oscillation within the sets of stable values is
everywhere demonstrated by the multilinear trajectories and values of
the dispersed component groups within the same broad, polythetic,
sociocultural system.
     Similarly, new states or values successively introduced into the
social subsystem do cumulatively approach a threshold beyond which
the system cannot continue unchanged (postulate 8). T h e contem-
porary fluctuation of many African social subsystems and their
gradual transmutation to newly emergent formats reflects the tran-
sitions across the thresholds of the old tribal patterns. T h e former
io6      Analytical Archaeology
systems could no longer function without serious dislocation by reason
of the growing number of incompatible European ideals steadily
integrated within them. Very similar processes operated in the
accelerated detribalization of Europe between AD 500 and 1000 and
the rise of emergent and more complex social and political units.
Acculturation, or saturating diffusion brought about by the intricate
interpénétration of different cultural systems is repeatedly but not
invariably followed by cumulative integration and eventually system
transmutation. In all these social processes detailed study reveals
certain essential attributes involved in the subsystem's trajectory and
amongst these the key attributes which express the characteristic
syntax of that system; these are the attributes cumulatively contradic-
ted by the successively accepted external variety. If several loosely
related sociocultural systems are cumulatively integrating the same set
of diffusing attributes these systems may become convergently similar
and represent a gross entity closely related to the archaeological
culture group (chapter 7).
    An important claim made in the postulates of the general model
was that the states of the components in the subsystem change not by
single-valued, closed transformations alone, but as a limited matrix of
transitions whose probabilities vary partly as a function of the past and
the present state of the system as a whole (postulate 9). Because these
systems have this Semi-Markovian form it was claimed that there are
usually several trajectories by which any given state may be reached
 (postulate 13). Modern studies in social subsystems illustrate these
points particularly well, especially the analytical cross-cultural studies
of Murdock based upon a statistical analysis of hundreds of societies
and their social structures (Murdock 1949).
    It is impossible to discuss the full scope and relevance of
Murdock's work in such a confined context but it is hoped that some of
its implications can be usefully conveyed. In the section that best
illustrates this discussion Murdock takes two hundred and fifty
societies from around the world and on the basis of his analyses
describes forty-seven main structural sub-types - claimed as cross-
cultural regularities in social subsystem structure. A study of the
evidence suggested the probable and possible trajectories by means of
which each particular structural sub-type could be attained, thus:
Structural sub-type   Probable and possible   derivations

Normal                Patri-Eskimo, Neo-Yuman, Neo-Fox, Neo-Hawaiian,        (Neo-
Eskimo       «-       Guinea), (Neo-Nankanse), (Matri-Eskimo), (Bi-Eskimo)
    Cultural m o r p h o l o g y and cultural ecology - the setting           107

- the order of the possible derivations indicating the rough order of
probability, the improbable but possible derivations in parentheses
(Murdock 1949, pp. 3 2 3 - 6 ) .
      T h e source of M u r d o c k ' s sample, his methods of analysis and his
resulting typology may of course be held in question 1 but that the
results obtained indicate the general nature of the data can hardly be
doubted. In short, M u r d o c k ' s table of social structure derivations
amounts to the construction of a model matrix of transition prob-
abilities for social subsystems - a real example of the arbitrary T a b l e
' T ' used in our earlier general discussion (figs 9, 10, 1 1 ) . In order to
convey an impression of this attempt at a canonical representation of
social-subsystem trajectories M u r d o c k ' s table is schematically
reproduced here in matrix f o r m (fig. 16).
    T h e salient points emerging f r o m this and similar analyses are the
presence of constraint in social variety and therefore discernible
regularities in cross-cultural social structure - the clues resting in the
comprehensive analysis of large quantities of examples of input/output
data and its sifting for directively correlated essential variables - a
classic Black Box operation. T h e analysis clearly shows that unique
trajectories leading to particular social structures are very unusual but
on the other hand the number of viable trajectories directively cor-
related to one state is severely limited - between one and nine tra-
jectories linking any pair of states (fig. 16). T h e constraining or
'funnelling' role of some social structures as opposed to the axial and
'radiating' role of others is repeatedly emphasized in trajectories traced
through this table (fig. 16). T h e shifting foci of dislocation and
consequent change within social subsystems are particularly well
brought out by M u r d o c k ' s investigations - which quite apart f r o m
specific reservations is an excellent example of the p o w e r f u l new
developments in the experimental spheres of both archaeology and
anthropology (fig. 2) ( M u r d o c k 1949, chapters 8, 9, 1 0 , 1 1 ) .
    An equally perceptive study of the correlated constraint in variety
and the consequent regularities in social subsystems is developed in
the work of Steward ( 1 9 5 5 , pp. 1 0 1 - 7 2 ) . In a search for cross-cultural
regularities linking ecology and social structure S t e w a r d convincingly
demonstrates several striking modes of clustering social and economic
subsystem components. In one example a clear relationship is
demonstrated between patrilineal, patrilocal, exogamous multifamily
band organization and the constraint imposed by territories with
limited and scattered food resources, mainly small game in very small
                                     S                                                                                 s                         §|            .       „»

®SL Îîl|l|!PfH-a ¡»JllIsAplfHlIlPllpI.ul
     subtypes        c    "V B T x * ô |                          2 S g ^ t a '5 o â i o ô ? <7? ô E o g g § z 2                                                           g         S 7 B 3 EÙo «
                     ElS-è-i E = i i                               I e £ z I i E « Ì É â I Ecn i E O I 6 ë z I I ~ E                                                               I J. Î Ë c i î i l ;
                     t i
                     ZfflSaz2Z[LZ0      l ^ o t t I O LT I oi- i O i- i O i- 3 t G 4|D0
                                   5ZZIB5ZllZCDZ2lDZ2£DZZCDZ2<lDQZa2               O ^ 20.2<tlI10Zll
                                                                                        3 , oO~ £ 3 IO O
                     \•   ••
                      \ • • J•-
Normal Eskimo
Bi-Eskimo            •
M a t r i - Eskimo   1 s     J                        •                       •
Patri - Eskimo           s I                                  •                            •
Normal Hawaiian                      \
Matri - Hawaiian         •       •                                                             •                                                           •
Neo-Hawaiian         •                        \           1• * •
Patri-Hawaiian                                 s                                           •
Normal Yuman                 •                1 \                             •
Bi-Yuman                                                  s
Matri-Yuman                                                   \1                           •
Neo-Yuman                                 •       •       •                                    S                                                                           •
Normal Fox                                                            \•               -   • •
Bi-Fox                   •                        •                    S           ft
                                                                                   •       •
Matri-Fox                                                             *       s
N e o - Fox                      •                        •           •         s •
Patri-Fox                                                                                  \l
Normal Guinea                                                             •        •                                                                                                       •       •
Bi-Guinea                                                                                          s•I
Neo-Guinea                                                                                          M
Norma! Dakota                •                                                                     •   •                            1            • •               •
Bi-Dakota                                                                                                      S
Neo-Dakota                                                                                                      vi
Normal Sudanese              •                                                                             • •     •
                                                                                                                              1                  • •               •
Bi-Sudanese                                                                                                                s •1
Neo-Sudanese
Normal Omaha                                          •           •                                        •           •   •   •
                                                                                                                                             1*                                    •
Bi-Omaha                                                                                           •           •           •             s I
Neo-Omaha                                                                                              •           •           •           \1
Normal Nankanse                                                       •        •                                                         • •                                           1       •
Avuncu-Nankanse      •       1                                                                                                                s                    •
Bi-Nankanse              •                                                                         I           •                                       s• • •
Duo-Nankanse                              •                                                                                                  •           s k•                              1       *
Neo-Nankanse                     •                                                                     1           •                                     • N
Pàtri-Nankanse       •                                                                                     •           •                               •      s                  •             *
Normal Iroquois                                   •                                                                        1                                           s•      • •
Avuncu-Iroquois                                                   •                                                                                        •           • s •               •       #
Bi-Iroquois                                               •                                                                                                              • s •
Duo-Iroquois                                  •                                                                                     •                              • •             \   •       •
Neo-Iroquois                                                          •                                                                                                                 •• 1
Patri-Iroquois                                                                                                                                                                         1 \• •
Normal Crow                                                                                    •                                                                                          \1
Avuncu-Crow                                                                        •                                                         •                 •               •       1 •s •
Bi-Crow                                                               •                                                                                                                       s• 1
Duo-Crow                                                                                                                                                                                        Jl
Neo-Crow                                                                                                                                                                                      • R\
 Patri-Crow                                                               •                                                              •             •               •                •     • S
                                     Most probable antecedent                                                                      (j)       -    Matri* of transition probabilities
                                 •   social subtype state                                                                                         ——           :       —-—-       —
                                                                                                                                                  latticing various antecedent social
                                 (•¡Probable antecedent states                                                                                    structure subtype states to the
                                                                                                                                                  subtype in question (selected
                                 •       Possible antecedent                  slates                                                               from the left-hand column)


Fig. 16 T h e social structure game. A schematic representation of Murdock's
table of social structure derivations (1949, pp. 324-6) as a retrospective matrix
of transition probabilities'T' for tracing the past trajectories of particular social
subtypes. T o play, select any subtype ' S ' in the left-hand column, trace most
probable and probable antecedent states in its horizontal row, then repeat this
procedure for the antecedent states of each antecedent and so on. Note that
some structures allow many possible antecedent trajectories (nine for normal
Dakota type) and provide 'radiating' nodes in the lattice, whilst others offer
constraint and allow only one or two approach lines (two for Neo-Sudanese).
   C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y and cultural ecology - the setting   109

 groups, and a hunting-gathering economy based on simple tech-
 nology. In another case the correlation between hunting-gathering
economies based on large migratory herds of big herbivores is linked
with more complex societies organized in composite bands. In no case
does the environment and its resources force a single variety of viable
economic sub-system strategy or a single variety of coupled social
subsystem but varying degrees of constraint to restrict the variety of
subsystem but varying degrees of constraint do restrict the variety of
ted in detail. Such limiting regularities linking social organization,
economy and environment are particularly vital for the archaeologist
who wishes to know something of the possible range of social
organizations behind his data. T h e real data and the general model
show that, given the detailed economic and ecological background, the
archaeologist cannot reconstruct the social subsystem pattern behind
his material but it becomes increasingly possible for him to narrowly
define the limited range of possible variety this pattern might have
taken.
    Perhaps the most significant results of these and other studies are
their implications for the selection and analysis of the varying input-
output attributes in the search for correlated regularities. All these
studies are unanimous in emphasizing that it is not possible, with
precision, to separate out the inessential, essential and key attributes
before the analysis; which attributes fall in which category depends on
the particular study and on the results following the analysis. Other-
wise, circularity may be introduced by the acceptance of intuitive
'type-markers' or 'type-fossils' said to be 'typical(P)' of the set and thus
prejudicing its definition, boundaries and contents - a point already
elaborated in chapter 1 .
    T h e same studies raise again the problem of seeking the relevant
level for characterizing the components amongst which correlated
regularities are believed to exist. If we take the Steward analysis of
hunting tribes it can be seen that no significant correlation would
probably result from the sifting of hundreds of social structures shar-
ing economies based on specifically hunting, say - kangaroo, or
gazelle, or wild goat, or buffalo, for example. However, if these traits
had been tested for under societies based on hunting migratory large
herd herbivores as one category, and dispersed small game as another,
the useful regularity might be observed. Characterized as sharing
'hunting game' is too general, characterized as 'hunting kangaroo' is
too specific - 'hunting dispersed small game' and 'hunting large herd
no         Analytical Archaeology

h e r b i v o r e s ' is t h e c h a r a c t e r i z a t i o n w h i c h is m o s t i n f o r m a t i v e .         This
specification          problem           is    the     single        greatest        barrier        in    detecting
significant        correlations            between          regularities           in   archaeological              and
anthropological analyses - every entity and even a given attribute has
m a n y l e v e l s of c h a r a c t e r i z a t i o n a n d c a n t a k e a P r o t e a n v a r i e t y               of
forms.


RELIGIOUS             SUBSYSTEM

The      artificial       separation           of    the      religious        from        the     psychological
s u b s y s t e m m e r e l y u n d e r l i n e s t h e e s s e n t i a l l y a r b i t r a r y n a t u r e of t h i s
s c h e m e . U n d e r t h e d e f i n i t i o n f o l l o w e d h e r e t h i s is a d e v i c e to isolate
t h e b o d y of i n f o r m a t i o n f o r m i n g ' t h e s t r u c t u r e of m u t u a l l y a d j u s t e d
b e l i e f s r e l a t i n g to t h e s u p e r n a t u r a l , as e x p r e s s e d in a b o d y of d o c t r i n e
a n d a s e q u e n c e of r i t u a l s w h i c h t o g e t h e r i n t e r p r e t the e n v i r o n m e n t to
t h e s o c i e t y in t e r m s of its o w n p e r c e p t a ' . W e are i n t e n t m a i n l y o n
s h o w i n g in t h e b r i e f e s t w a y that t h i s s u b s y s t e m is also an i n f o r m a t i o n
v a r i e t y s y s t e m w i t h m a n y of t h e g e n e r a l c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s a l r e a d y d i s -
cussed (postulates 1 - 1 6 , c h a p t e r 2).
      It is c o m m o n p l a c e           to o b s e r v e      that     religious concepts,                 in     the
b r o a d e s t s e n s e , p l a y an a c t i v e p a r t in c o n s t r a i n i n g the a c t i v i t i e s of
i n d i v i d u a l s in m o s t s o c i e t i e s . R e l i g i o u s b e l i e f s are u s u a l l y e x p r e s s e d as
a b o d y of d o c t r i n e c o m m u n i c a t e d b y s t o r i e s , p a r a b l e s , m y t h s , l e g e n d s ,
or f a b l e s e x p r e s s i n g the 'ideal' rules f o r certain b e h a v i o u r .                     Religious
rituals provide a f u r t h e r c o m m u n i c a t i o n system redundantly reinforc-
i n g the c h a n n e l s f o r p a s s i n g r e l i g i o u s i n f o r m a t i o n - this t i m e in t h e
coded       f o r m of       celebrations,            feasts, holy           days,      dances, games                and
c e r e m o n i e s of all k i n d s .
       Information            circulates         within        the     subsystem,             with       continuous
r e a d j u s t m e n t a t t e m p t i n g to m i n i m i z e d i s l o c a t i o n w h i c h w o u l d i m p a i r
 t h e c o n t i n u i t y of t h e s y s t e m . T h e c o l l a p s e of s u c h a r e l i g i o u s s u b s y s -
t e m a n d its s u b s e q u e n t t r a n s m u t a t i o n is a p t l y r e f l e c t e d in t h e E u r o -
 pean      Reformation.               The       cumulative             build-up          of    alternative           and
 c o n t r a d i c t i v e i n f o r m a t i o n b r e a c h e d t h e t h r e s h o l d d e f i n i n g the         Old
 C a t h o l i c i s m of p a r t s of s i x t e e n t h - c e n t u r y E u r o p e - b u t s i g n i f i c a n t l y
 not in o t h e r p a r t s . M o s t of t h i s c o n t r a d i c t i v e a n d a l t e r n a t i v e v a r i e t y
 clearly arose f r o m the rapidly ' m o d e r n i z i n g ' technology and e c o n o m y
 of n o r t h - w e s t E u r o p e in t h e p e r i o d c. 1 5 0 0 - 1 6 0 0 . T h e n e e d to es-
 t a b l i s h e q u i l i b r i u m b e t w e e n t h e t e n e t s of t h e e x p a n d i n g             capitalist
 e c o n o m y a n d t h e C a t h o l i c ' r u l e ' c o n d e m n i n g u s u r y is w e l l d o c u m e n -
    Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting                     111

ted in the development of capitalism and the rise of the Protestant
religion (Green 1959). E v e n at the present time we can observe the
oscillations of the Catholic D o g m a in the face of the contradictory
information about birth control - a momentary dislocation which will
doubtless be neutralized by a comprehensive 'new' doctrine, es-
tablishing equilibrium over this matter as over so many others in the
past. T h e s e equivocations and dislocations are not confined to any one
religious subsystem or to any one period, they are a continuous
process in all such systems.
    T h e cumulative encrustation and elaboration of the cycles of re-
ligious myths provide yet more excellent examples of the continuously
moving equilibrium process of minimizing the m a x i m u m religious
dislocation by the generation or acceptance of 'new' doctrine adjusting
the old and the new information. T h e ramifications of the changing
relationships of the G r a e c o - R o m a n gods and goddesses effectively
express a coded fossil of the states of belief at successive intervals in
space and time. T h e same cumulative complexity is f o u n d in similar
systems f r o m the changing Norse pantheon to the accretions of the
Old T e s t a m e n t . T h e s e religious cycles share this continuous read-
justment to minimize dislocation within the religious subsystem and
between that subsystem and its context, frequently with the three
kinds of oscillating variation already noted (postulate 1 1 ) . C u m u l a t i v e
change to thresholds, transmutation to new syntactical formats, foci of
rapid and concentrated change, dynamic equilibrium in information
variety - these are all general characteristics of religious subsystems.
     If we wish to speculate how knowledge of these inherent charac-
teristics can help the archaeologist in reconstruction we can see that, as
with the other subsystems, observed constraint and correlated
regularity can help to limit the possible interpretations. With historical
aid, for example, one can observe the subtle cumulative changes in the
religious doctrine of the patriarchal tribes of nomad H e b r e w pastoral-
ists f r o m the third millennium BC onwards. T h e oscillating transition
from a primitive and comprehensive monotheism under a tribal Baal,
with standing stone altars, sheep sacrifices and the tented A r k , to the
culminating complex J u d a i s m of a sophisticated urban society with
far-flung commercial connections communicating a great variety of
new information - splendidly assimilated in the continuing simple
format. In such a case sufficient data survives to trace the changing
trajectory of the religious subsystem in terms of the constraints and
variety associated with its successive transitions.
ii2     Analytical Archaeology
    I n purely archaeological contexts the interpretation of religious
data must be more speculative and broad by the very nature of the
paucity and complexity of the surviving record (e.g. Flannery's
attempt ( 1 9 7 6 , pp. 3 3 3 - 4 5 ) to distinguish public, household/sodality
and personal rituals in Formative villages in the Oaxaca valley,
M e x i c o ; G i m b u t a s ' ( 1 9 7 4 ) interpretation of the religious beliefs
expressed in figurines, models etc. in south-east E u r o p e f r o m 7000 to
3500 BC). Indeed it is for this reason that a general inductive model
sketching the general relationships between religious subsystems and
the other more tangible subsystems may help to throw light upon how
the archaeologist might converge upon some interpretation of re-
ligious artefacts. T h e general model suggests that sociocultural
systems tend to preserve vestigial 'memories' of their f o r m e r tra-
jectories and environments in both material and social configurations,
as well as in oral traditions (J£s and L a g , fig. 1 1 ) .
    L o n g after the situations that prompted specific adaptations have
passed they may survive in such systems - especially e m b a l m e d within
the conservative m e m o r y of the religious subsystem. It is very tempt-
ing to suspect that the Minoan Cretan fixation with the wild bull and
his horns represents a ' m e m o r y ' of a time and place when the herds of
giant wild cattle were an integrated and living part of an economic and
religious equilibrium. It is tempting to see the later Minoan idealized
bull cult and related components, as a relic of a long and multilinear
history of development centred around the massive wild cattle of the
Western Anatolian grasslands. Cattle, which together with their leo-
pard predators, were of fundamental contemporary significance to the
early Neolithic cultures of that area (Mellaart 1967). T h e fossilized
vestiges f r o m the continuous, complex and dynamic interaction of the
economic, religious, and artistic subsystems in former system states
are firmly portrayed in many prehistoric cultures.


PSYCHOLOGICAL.         SUBSYSTEM

Anthropologists, sociologists and psychologists agree that the differing
kinds, quantity, reticulation and organization of information variety
within sociocultural systems f o r m s one important component imprin-
ted on the individual personality. T h e s e four dimensions of variety are
differently filled in different cultures whilst being largely shared
within each culture. Consequently, it is hardly surprising that popu-
lations of sufficient multitude polythetically share certain general
   C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y and cultural ecology - the setting   113
personality attributes which are intuitively summed-up, with varying
accuracy, in 'national character' and even in attempts at the psy-
chological taxonomy of 'tribal character' (Kroeber 1948, pp. 3 2 1 - 6 ,
594-7). It would seem that cultures induce a broad psychological
pattern on their generators, with considerable personal variation and
are extremely difficult to express in a rigorous fashion. T h e pattern
takes the form of a subsystem of supra-personai subconscious concepts
and values induced upon the individuals in society by their culture,
their environment but above all by their language — the channel
linking the immature mind, almost from birth, with adult minds and
the cumulative coded information of former generations (Xs, fig. 1 1 ) .
    Language has emotive as well as symbolic power and the act of
learning a language which may recognize and differentiate one
hundred categories of seal or six thousand attributes of camels, or
twenty categories of greenstone for axes - differently orientates the
perception of the immature Eskimo, Arab and Maori. T h e differing
emphasis and the comparative scale of values underlying the variety of
information circulating within the system, from every form of com-
munication, constitutes the culture's psychological subsystem. In an
important sense this induced system of values and orientation, the
psychological subsystem, represents a canonical model of the socio-
cultural system as a whole, in that it is capable of generating the
transformations characterizing that system if communicated to that
system's individuals from birth. It is on the basis of constraint and
regularity in the environment that constraint and regularity appear in
the variety of cultural systems - and it is this quality which makes such
systems highly efficient teaching devices capable of communicating
survival information and noise to individuals within the group, from
the individual's earliest hours, by a multiplicity of coded channels
(Ashby 1956, pp. 130-4).
     T h e psychological subsystem as defined here equates roughly with
the 'psychological field space' of the psychologists, the psychological
environment within which the individual personality must operate.
T h e psychologist is primarily interested in the dynamic equilibrium at
this lowest level, between the individual personality and the psy-
chological subsystem of his sociocultural system (Lewin 1936, p. 6).
However, the subsystem must equally maintain stability with the
information in the other cultural subsystems and with the whole
system and its environment - the three general levels of dynamic
equilibrium, oscillation and 'debate' minimizing             dislocation.
ii4    Analytical Archaeology

Dislocation or disequilibrium at the lowest level represents the personal
stresses, strains and conflicts arising from contradictory information at
the interface between the individual personality and the psychological
subsystem of the culture - frequently the outcome of contradiction
between personal instinctive behaviour and the socializing process. T h e
general terms alternative, contradictive and redundant variety equate
with the psychologist's low conflict, high conflict and neutral stimuli -
their disequilibria and barriers equating roughly with our dislocations
and thresholds. Against this background it is interesting to note that at
the lowest level contradictive information may initiate discordant and
mutually interfering processes in the central nervous system - and thus
that dislocation or disequilibrium arising f r o m the integration of
inconsistent information is now judged the main factor in stimulating
the learning process to nullify and stabilize the system. In other words,
such dislocation in the individual's subsystem must be minimized by
the acquisition or generation of new and comprehensive variety - by
learning (Berlyne 1966, pp. 8 2 - 7 ) .


ECONOMIC      SUBSYSTEM

At first sight the fundamental attributes of a culture's economic
subsystem might be assumed to be a set of artefacts and a set of
resources and indeed this is the case at a superficial level. However, a
very brief acquaintance with the economic patterns of prehistoric and
historic societies quickly reveals that these subsystems do not exploit
all the varied resources of their environment, but on the contrary are
marked by idiosyncratic selections of favourite staples - even failing to
gain an optimal yield on occasions when this is possible. A m o n g
hunter-fisher-gatherer societies we may note the examples of the
T u l u a q m i u t band of the Nunamiut Eskimos, to whom only 1 2 out of
149 edible plant species are of dietary importance (Campbell 1968).
T h e satisficer strategies employed by Swedish farmers in obtaining
outputs of 4 0 - 7 0 per cent of optimal yields have already been demon-
strated by Wolpert (above pp. 94-5). Furthermore taboos and religious
constraint arbitrarily reduce the variety of resources, sometimes even
engendering unnecessary death and starvation - the Arabs will not eat
pork, the aboriginal Tasmanians would not eat scaled fish, the Chinese
will not drink milk and the English will not eat horse.
     T h u s it seems that a society's economy is a highly peculiar, selec-
 tive and apparently irrational compound of extractive processes f r o m
   Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting                    115

within the broad variety of possible stable subsistence techniques. T h e
economic subsystem comprises a set of information about the
resources of a territory and conveys a strategy indicating, within broad
limits, an arbitrary scale of importance of the various resources, as well
as apportioning and co-ordinating the amount of time devoted to each
process and deciding the organization and distribution of the output.
     T h e economic subsystem provides information patterned in an
elaborate mixture of strategies based on the cumulative register of past
conditions and upon an extrapolated estimation of future contin-
gencies (Is and lead, fig. 1 1 ) . T h e more complex or sophisticated the
culture, the greater the variety of strategies in its economic array. T h e
strategy of this subsystem, as in other subsystems, rests on the
continuous effort of the generators to maintain the format and syntax
of the subsystem by continually minimizing serious dislocation
between all the varying component states in its trajectory. Strategy is
our formal recognition of the subsystem's continuous co-ordination of
fluctuating, new, alternative, contradictive and confirmative informa-
tion variety concerning resources and their exploitation.
   Once again the subsystem illustrates three basic levels of dynamic
equilibrium:

      (i) within the subsystem, between its attributes,
     (ii) between this subsystem and the other subsystem components,
    (iii) between this part of the whole system and the environment.

At the lowest level stability must be maintained between the compet-
ing demands of the subsystem's attributes, in this case the perceived
resources. These are simply those resources which the system's tech-
nology is capable of recognizing, thus making clear the 'sensory' role of
the material culture subsystem. T h e strategy at this level is concerned
with the division of time and labour, the allocation of roles, resources,
distribution, control and regulation. T h e quality of 'lead' or 'foresight'
is all-important; the estimation of future contingencies includes such
vital and mundane things as how much seed to reserve, how many
domestic animals to keep or slaughter, how much output to trade as
surplus, how effort should be apportioned between hunting, fishing or
gathering and which combinations of species are to be exploited. All
these decisions are made in advance, in the light of past experience and
they affect the system before the events they cater for have occurred
( ' T ' affected by Is and S,2 at ,,, fig. 1 1 ) . T h o m a s (1972, p. 691) has
noted the possibility that the prehistoric Shoshoneans could have
n6    Analytical Archaeology
predicted the relative yields of pinon nuts two years before the actual
crop by simple macroscopic inspection. Strategies for resource
exploitation and population distribution could then have been planned
in advance, especially in the event of a predicted crop failure.
    T h e dynamic equilibrium between the economic subsystem and
the other subsystems is stabilized by continually adjusting the mutual
values and states of these networks. T h e economy must be kept as
nearly as possible in equilibrium with the information on and con-
straint from taboos, social organization and division of labour by age
and sex, individual personalities, and the available capacity or range of
variety of material culture. 'Lag' can be seen in the response of the
economic subsystem to changes in demography and settlement
patterns (e.g. Washburn 1974, p. 325; Brose 1976, p. 18).
     At the highest level the economic subsystem must keep the whole
system in a stable relationship with the environment. Resources must
not be over-exploited, changing combinations of crops and animals
must be tried in the face of changing conditions, new variety from
penetrating the thresholds of new ecological niches (e.g. desert and
steppe fringes) can be exploited and must be accommodated. Among
 hunter-fisher-gatherers resource scheduling and seasonal site occupa-
tion are important factors, whilst among agricultural communities,
crop rotation, manuring, length of fallow periods and settlement rota-
tion may be crucial factors in maintaining this stable relationship with
the environment. Where economic crisis threatens the survival of the
 system as a whole, then regulatory control or fresh and powerful
 variety must be interposed ('R* in fig. 1 1 ) , or the system as a whole
 must change.
     At each of these three levels of 'continuous debate' between
 coupled systems, an adequate blend of information variety (i.e. an
 adequate mixed strategy) must be pursued. New, contradictive, alter-
 native and confirmative economic variety must be balanced in a mov-
 ing and frequently oscillating equilibrium, minimizing the maximum
 immediate dislocation in the system's trajectory. T h e three general
 categories of system oscillation are particularly marked in economic
 subsystems and have been the subject of intensive modern research
 (Tustin 1954). Oscillation induced in the equilibrium of the subsys-
 tem as a whole is found in the 'trial and error' adjustment of primitive
 economies as well as in modern business cycles, wheat price fluctua-
 tions and pig-iron output oscillations (Ellsworth Huntington 1964, pp.
 466-73). Internal oscillation readjusting the attributes within the
   C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y a n d c u l t u r a l e c o l o g y - the s e t t i n g   117

subsystem frequently occurs when new information, resources or
techniques are developed or introduced: the dislocations caused by the
new variety are gradually countered by error-controlled regulation.
T h e third class of 'aimless' oscillation, within the boundaries of broad,
permissive sets, is often detectable in the fluctuating 'fashions' in the
blends of secondary economic processes - the staple processes
continuing in broader oscillations of lower frequency.
     T h e concepts of moving foci of development and directive cor-
relation are particularly useful in the analysis of economic subsystem
trajectories. Areas within the economic structure are continually in the
process of readjustment and the inevitable dislocations are the foci for
minimizing action by the development or acquisition of new variety.
T h e artefacts in the archaeological record provide an invaluable trace
of the foci of accelerated development to meet the new economic
contingencies successively affecting ancient cultures. Directive cor-
relation enables one to isolate early on in the multilinear sequences
those key attributes which subsequently integrate into crucial new
system formats with dramatic emergent properties. In this manner the
directive correlation of such features as plant and animal domesti-
cation, polished stone axes, pottery, 'permanent' settlement can be
studied converging and coalescing in a stable and coherent 'new'
economy of immense potential (cf. fig. 68).
    Enough has probably been covered to sketch the relevance of the
general model to economic subsystems (postulates 1 - 1 6 and fig. 1 1 ,
chapter 2). T h e strategy concept has been used increasingly in
anthropological and archaeological analysis of subsistence, especially
in tracing the trajectory of the successive equilibria of economic
subsystems. T h e archaeologist can isolate and model the two main,
related categories of strategy (i.e. subsistence organization and site
location) within economic subsystems and it is to examples of these
that we now turn.


(1) Subsistence organization strategies

Economic subsystems are characterized by the particular way in which
combinations of resource staples are integrated in a stable mixed
strategy. A s an example of this from a contemporary society w e may
take Gould's (1963) study of the village of Jantilla in western Ghana.
T h e local climate fluctuates between very wet and very dry years and
the yields of the five staple crops (yams, maize, cassava, millet and
118     Analytical Archaeology

(a) Crop yields under alternative environmental strategies

          Environmental   strategies :        Wet year              Dry   year

          Crop yields per unit of area:
            Yams                              82                    11
            Maize                             61                    49
            Cassava                           12                    38
            Millet                            43                    32
            Hill-rice                         30                    71


(b) Stages in the determination of the optimum crop mix for a Ghanaian
village by game-theory analysis

                                 90                           90r



                                 70




                                 50




                                 30                           30 t-              \     -



                                 (0                           10E
         Wet               Dry    Wet                   Dry    Wet                    Dry

                                  Environmental   strategy


(c) Computation of optimum counter strategy.

Alternative    crops :                        Maize                       Hill-rice

Yield under alternative environmental
     strategy:
  Wet year                            61                                  30
  Dry year                            49                                  71
Difference in yield                                                       41
                                                    1
                                                 4
                                                                1-4                    = 0-4
Proportional difference                        12—41                       12 —41
                                              77%
Optimum counter-strategy                                                  23%

Fig. 17a, b, c An analysis and model of the subsistence strategy of the
Ghanaian village of Jantilla.
Source: Haggett, after Gould 1963, p. 293.
    Cultural m o r p h o l o g y and cultural ecology - the setting               119

hill-rice) vary accordingly (fig. 17a). T h e            problem faced by the
villagers, as in all economies is

    (a) whether to pursue a mainly high-yield but high-risk mixture of
        staples,
    (b) whether to pursue a safe, low-risk but low-yield mixture,
    (c) whether to pursue a prudential, intermediate strategy using
        the culture store of information on probable events and
        conditions (fig. 1 1 ) .

First, given the two by five variables, G o u l d estimated the most
prudential mixed crop strategy in the light of the conditions. A graph
of crop yield was plotted for each crop against a scale running f r o m
extremely wet to extremely dry conditions - the resulting line sloping
according to the trend of the crop towards high output in either wet or
dry conditions. T h e superimposed output lines for the various crops
intersect at several points but by following the highest-yield inter-
sections, which f o r m a concave curve (fig. 1 7 b ) , it is possible to locate
the s a d d l e - p o i n t ' S ' representing the best crop combination. T h i s crop
strategy gives that combination of staples which will yield on average
the highest returns in a sequence of good and bad years - this is a
prudent and minimax solution.
      T h e proportional share of each crop in the minimax strategy is
computed by comparing the yields of the crops in pairs of wet and dry
years; then the wet and dry year difference for each crop is transferred
to the other, which divided by the comparative difference between the
crop pair gives indices (1-4 and 0 4) representing the proportional
share of each crop in the array of crops (fig. 17c). In the Jantilla
experiment the comparison of maize and hill-rice planting suggested a
minimax strategy using 77 per cent maize and 23 per cent hill-rice
which approximates the actual planting strategy used by the villagers.
T h i s example produced a hypothetical model for the most prudent
agrarian strategy and then showed that this closely fitted the strategy
in use - thus confirming our understanding of the basis of this mixture
of crops and illustrating a case of a prudent satisficer strategy pursued
when risky optimal, or less effective, satisficer blends might have been
used. T h i s raises the question of how such a mixed strategy would
arise without a knowledge of calculation and m i n i m a x theory? Here
again we have a clear indication of the decades of oscillating multi-
linear trial and error combinations, with a continuous feedback of
output observations which have gradually converged upon the most
practical solution (fig. 1 1 ) (Gould 1 9 6 3 ; Haggett 1 9 6 5 , pp. 1 7 3 - 4 ) .
                                              Kurdshul
                          Sivand


                  Marvdasht


                 Shiraz




                                         Sarvestan



                                         Khafr




                                                   Jahrom



                                                                     oMansurabad




   PERSIANS-
       GULF


Ftg. 1 8       T h e part of F a r s p r o v i n c e , S o u t h P e r s i a , in w h i c h the
Basseri tribe m i g r a t e s . R o u t e s h o w n b y d o t t e d line. L i g h t e r
s h a d i n g - a b o v e 5 , 0 0 0 f t ; d a r k e r s h a d i n g - a b o v e 8 , 0 0 0 ft
altitude.
S o u r c e : B a r t h 1 9 5 9 , p. 4.
   C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y and cultural e c o l o g y - t h e setting   121
     Studies of other contemporary small-scale agricultural com-
munities illustrate some of the general points already made about
economic subsystems. These include the three basic levels of dynamic
equilibrium (e.g. Freeman 1 9 5 5 ; Conklin 1957) and the occurrence of
annual oscillation in crop yields, which among slash-and-burn agri-
cultural tribes can be quite drastic in effect (e.g. yields down by 50 per
cent per acre among the Iban of Sarawak - Freeman 1955).
     Another good example of a minimax strategy can be seen in the
migratory cycle of the Arab pastoral nomads in South Persia (Barth
1959). This cycle of successive occupation of different pastures
through an area of the greatest possible ecological diversity enables the
Arabs to compensate for the poor resources of the desert and to avoid
the extreme range of climatic variation found in that area. T h e
markedly seasonal pastures are successively exploited by the nomads'
flocks in a strict but flexible rotation - each tribe moving through a
series of territories in its 'il-rah', or 'tribal road', covering a continuous
strip from the low deserts in the south to the high mountains in the
north (fig. 18). In any one locality there is a succession of occupants
through the seasons and very few areas are ever unoccupied by anyone
(fig. 19). T h e individual il-rah is therefore a rota or schedule of
traditional rights to resources at certain places and times and the
successive occupation of a given area by different tribes allows the full
exploitation of the scanty resources, with short periods of rejuvenation
and fallow in between. By this means the population capacity of the
area as a whole may approach the carrying capacity of the individual
component areas at the season of maximum, not minimum, pro-
ductivity, a result of the rotational strategy which would be quite
impossible if one tribe stayed at one locus for most of the year. Similar
reasoning may be applied to agricultural economies which contain a
mobile element associated with stock-breeding, particularly in areas of
marked ecological diversity and constraints such as the Mediterranean
(e.g. Barker 1972).
    Mobility among extant hunter-fisher-gatherers is inextricably
interrelated with the uneven distribution of economic resources
through the year and across individual territories. Population aggre-
gation and dispersion vary in frequency, range and scale in different
societies but the most prudent general strategy is to maintain popu-
lation levels below those supportable by optimal yields of food
resources. This seems to be the long-term result of the need to
maintain the equilibrium between the economic subsystem and the
122        Analytical Archaeology

Kuh-I-Bul


Pulvar
 Valley

 Upper Kur
  Valley

 Kurdshul


 Sivand Mts


 Marvdasht


 Sarvestan


 Khafr


 Jahron


 Mansurabad


 Lar




 Fig. 19 A n analysis and model of the subsistence strategy of the Basseri
 nomads over an annual cycle in w h i c h a succession of different tribal
 groups sequentially o c c u p y the same chain of pastures; for localities see
 fig. 18. Solid line - schedule and route of the Basseri; heavy dashed line -
 Kurdshuli tribe; thin dashed lines - A r a b tribes; w a v y lines - other
 shepherds; small arrows - place and time where other tribes enter or leave
 the Basseri strip.
 S o u r c e : Barth 1959, p. 6.



environment            in t h e      face    of    resource        oscillations,        especially         those
unpredictable            p e r i o d s of m i n i m a l ,    disastrous yields which                   last for
m o r e t h a n a s e a s o n o r a s i n g l e y e a r (cf. C l a r k e 1 9 7 2 , fig. 1 . 1 5 ) .         Two
contrasting          s t u d i e s of   resource        types     and      distribution,          population
a g g r e g a t i o n a n d s e a s o n a l m o b i l i t y m a y b e s e e n in t h o s e of the T u l u -
a q m i u t E s k i m o s ( C a m p b e l l 1968) and the D o b e ! K u n g B u s h m e n (Lee
1969).
       P e r h a p s t h e n e a r e s t a r c h a e o l o g i c a l s t u d y c o m p a r a b l e to G o u l d ' s
g a m e t h e o r y a n a l y s i s of a s u b s i s t e n c e s t r a t e g y is b y J o c h i m       (1976),
w h o a t t e m p t s to d e r i v e a p r e d i c t i v e m o d e l of h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r
economies           from generalizations                based       on    ethnographic            data.      The
                M   A   M   J       A   S   O   N




Fig. 20 A comparison of the predicted (top) and actual
(bottom) resource use schedule of the Round Lake Ojibwa
hunter-fisher-trappers of northern Ontario.
Source: Jochim 1976, pp. 43, 44.
124    Analytical Archaeology
author is trying to model the decision-making processes involved in
deciding on a suitable strategy, which he assumes among other things
will be non-maximizing and mixed. Subsistence and settlement are
regarded as a system with three subsystems: resource use schedule,
site placement and demographic arrangement. The resource use
schedule is based on the availability of resources (i.e. their seasonal
and spatial variation, their aggregation, weight, density, mobility, fat
content and non-food yields) and is thought to 'precede and condition
the site placements and demographic arrangements of a hunter-
gatherer group' (op. cit., p. 12). A preliminary test of the model is run
on an ethnographic group of hunter-fisher-trappers, the Round Lake
Ojibwa of northern Ontario. The resource use schedule predicted for
this group compared well with the actual pattern of utilization, with
the exception of a few informative discrepancies (fig. 20; Jochim 1976,
pp. 42-5). Similar close comparisons are noted for the actual and
predicted site location and demographic patterns. The model is then
applied to Mesolithic sites in the Danube valley in south-west
Germany. This approach to subsistence strategies clearly has great
potential, although from a methodological view it should be noted that
the Mesolithic data in this analysis were not gathered to test this
specific model.


(2) Site location strategies
The strategy of location relates the constraint and regularities in the
location of human settlements and analyses these regularities in the
light of site contents and the distribution of resources and other
settlements across the landscape. When prehistoric communities sited
their settlements (whether permanent and multi-purpose or seasonal
and special-purpose), they were taking into account the multiplicity of
requirements necessary for their optimal location. Many of these
requirements will have been partly contradictory and therefore some
compromise or blending strategy must have been employed. The
solution to this problem will usually have involved a stochastic selec-
tion from amongst a set of equally desirable sites. This enables the
archaeologist to study the regularity of site distribution and to try and
define the particular constraints operating and their correlation with
the sites.
    This approach opens up such problems as the location of Neolithic
sites in relation to soils, water, woodland and other resources, the
    Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting                    125

dispersion of hunting camps at different seasons within limited ter-
ritories, the relationships between open sites and cave sites - these are
all susceptible to analysis in terms of a mixed strategy locational
model. At the level of the individual site, the method of 'site-catch-
ment analysis' has been developed to relate the subsistence practised
to the resources available within an exploitable distance f r o m the site.
Vita-Finzi and H i g g s ( 1 9 7 0 , p. 7) argue that 'the further the area is
from the site, the less it is likely to be exploited, and the less rewarding
is its exploitation (unless it is peculiarly productive) since the energy
consumed in movement to and f r o m the site will tend to cancel out
that derived from the resource*. T h i s principle is derived ultimately
from the concentric ring model of land use developed by von T h i i n e n
in the last century and pursued in more detail over wider areas by
Chisholm (1962). Chisholm's conclusions, as well as a number of
ethnographic observations, lead Vita-Finzi and H i g g s to propose that
the exploitation territories of sedentary communities will lie within
5 km or an hour's walk f r o m their sites and those of mobile h u n t e r -
gatherers within 10 km or two hours' walking distance (see also Higgs
and Vita-Finzi 1972). Within these territories the resources available
to prehistoric communities are defined in terms of land use categories
(fig. 2 1 ) , whose relative importance is taken as evidence for the subsis-
tence strategy practised f r o m individual sites. T h e analysis is then
taken a step further in the reconstruction of economic exploitation
systems linking a number of seasonally occupied sites (fig. 2 1 ; Barker
1972).
    T h i s method for the analysis of site location strategies has not
escaped criticism of its basic assumptions and procedures. It would be
useful to present a short s u m m a r y of these to put the method into
perspective.

     (a) T h e basic von T h u n e n / C h i s h o l m model of concentric exploi-
tation zones needs further testing in the light of contemporary obser-
vations f r o m rural A f r i c a (Hodder and Orton 1 9 7 6 , p. 233).
     (b) C h a n g e s in the local environment (e.g. deforestation, erosion,
lowering of the water-table) over hundreds or, more often, thousands
of years may negate the use of modern land use categories in the
analysis of site territories (Hodder and Orton 1 9 7 6 , p. 233). A more
optimistic method could be to reconstruct the prehistoric environment
as fully as possible and still hope to identify economic constraints on
site location (Flannery 1 9 7 6 , p. 95).
 r r r ]   land over                     I      I land over       .. d e c i d u o u s
                                                                 ¡¿J w o o d l a n d
           2 0 0 metres                  '"     » 4 0 0 metres

«•'        * • • e x t e n t of o n e h o u r   territory        3    pasture and
                                                                      rough grazing
O                                        5
                   kms
   Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting                 127

    (c) T h e relative importance of land use categories within a site
territory does not necessarily correlate directly with the importance of
animal or cereal exploitation at a particular site. If 'arable' land consti-
tutes less than 10 per cent of the site territory, does this mean that the
subsistence was non-agricultural? Flannery (1976, pp. 92—4) points out
that many agricultural Pueblo sites in the American south-west have
less than 10 per cent arable land within their 5 km territories. Given
modern cereal yields in both Mesoamerica and the Near East, com-
munities of up to fifty families could support themselves on the
harvests from only 1 per cent of their total territories. Flannery argues
that we should always consider the population which could have been
supported at a specific site and that estimates should be made of the
frequency of arable land within a site territory compared with that in
the region as a whole. T h i s last point has been developed by Zarky
(1976) and Green ( 1 9 7 3 ) who both use statistical (i.e. Chi-square,
binomial and 't') tests to assess the significance of site location in
relation to resource distribution. In this context the locations which
were not chosen for settlement may provide the archaeologist with
important 'negative' evidence.
    (d) Related to (c) is the fact that different resource areas may have
wide variations in productivity (Cassels 1972a). Site catchment analy-
sis provides 'a qualitative description of arbitrary habitat types that are
available around the site' but does not attempt to measure their
'extractive value' in terms of the relationship between primary and
secondary productivity and the 'extractive efficiency* of the human
cultural system (Foley 1 9 7 7 , p. 164).
    (e) T h e specific location of individual sites may be determined by
the relative mobility and security of resources rather than by those
resources which are most important to the occupants of these sites


Fig. 21     An example of site catchment analysis. Top. Topography and
modern land use plotted for the one hour and 5 km territories of the Eneoli-
thic and Bronze Age site of Luni sul Mignone in central Etruria. Bottom. A
reconstruction of three of the economic exploitation systems in the Bronze
Age of southern Etruria and the Upper Velino, marked as (2), (3) and (4).
Each consists of complementary resources in the coastal zone and the Apen-
nine mountains, which are linked together by modern droveroads ('tratturo').
    Open circles - Eneolithic burials; open squares - Eneolithic and Bronze
Age settlement sites; closed squares - Bronze A g e settlement sites. Number 1
is the site of Luni sul Mignone.
Source: Barker 1 9 7 2 , pp. 186, 194.
128    Analytical Archaeology
(Cassels 1972b, pp. 2 1 8 - 1 9 ; Jochim 1976, pp. 52-60). Generalizations
from ethnography suggest that there may be three 'levels' or 'zones' of
spatial organization around a hunter-gatherer site, a one-mile territory
of non-mobile resources (e.g. water, wood, shelter, view), a five-mile
territory of low mobility and relatively high security resources (e.g.
vegetal foods, small game) and a fifteen-mile territory of high mobility
resources (i.e. big game), so that while big game may be the most
important resource to a site it will not determine its specific location
(Jochim op. cit.).
     (f) Lastly, site catchment analysis disregards the importance of
non-subsistence factors in site location. Even considering subsistence
it can be objected that published studies place too much emphasis on
land use categories and not enough on such factors as shelter, topo-
graphy and water supply (see Sullivan 1976): the last factor may be
critical in agriculturally-marginal areas. T h e significance of rivers and
streams for transport should not be underestimated (Cassels 1972b;
Green 1973) and the availability of resources such as clays for pottery,
salt, ores, flint and igneous stone is often neglected (but see Clarke
 1972a, fig. 2 1 . 7 ; Flannery 1976, fig. 4.6). What also of the social ties
 between communities? In areas where there is regularity in site spac-
 ing but an irregular distribution of resources between the sites, one
 might argue for the greater importance of social factors in site location
 (Flannery 1976, p. 177 and fig. 6.9). If we accept the basic point
 outlined above that site location should be analysed in terms of mixed
 strategy models, then clearly site catchment analysis as originally
 conceived gives us only a partial insight into the general problem of
 settlement location and distribution.

    T h i s last point leads us conveniently into the analysis of settlement
patterns and site location strategies in terms of factors such as markets,
transport and administration - in short the provision of services. This
is a field of archaeological analysis which has been revolutionized by
the introduction of methods and concepts from plant ecology and
geography. This involves the archaeologist in the analysis of settle-
ment distributions to define different types of patterns (e.g. nearest-
neighbour analysis) and then the application of models (e.g. Central-
Place theory) in order to interpret these patterns. In this way the
archaeologist can hope to relate site location to such factors as social
and political hierarchies, trade and markets and resource localization
(see Hodder and Orton 1976 for a full discussion and illustration of
these studies). Only when we can interpret site location strategies
    Cultural morphology and cultural e c o l o g y - t h e setting          129

within this broad framework, as well as in terms of specific resource
constraints, will our understanding of the economic subsystem
increase to a more productive level.


MATERIAL CULTURE           SUBSYSTEM

Material culture constitutes an information subsystem of patterned
constellations of artefacts which outline the behaviour patterns of a
sociocultural system and embody that system's technology. It is
pattern, or coherent structure, which passes the information and
pattern is s y n o n y m o u s with correlated attributes.
    T h e complexity of material culture as an information subsystem
stems f r o m its hierarchy of entities and their variety of information. It
is helpful to think in terms of new, alternative, contradictive and
redundant attributes, artefacts, assemblages and cultures, when
focusing a study on any of these equilibrium interfaces involving any
of these coupled entities. Attributes may be mutually incompatible, or
alternatives, or redundant when clustered in certain artefacts. T h e func-
tional cutting blade of a bronze dagger is incompatible with plastic
ornament along its edge, but the dagger may have either punched
or alternatively incised blade ornament, and its hilt may redundantly
show rivets and binding notches. Similarly, at the artefact-type/artefact-
type level it is apparent that the six-inch dagger is incompatible against
the contradictive variety of the three-foot long rapier, or clothing pins
may contradict fibulae and both may contradict buttons, the musket
contradicts the variety of armour and so on. T h i s essential need to
reconcile conflicting variety is usually characterized by the analogy of
stimulus and response - particularly well demonstrated in the moving
equilibrium between offensive and defensive weapons, as studied, for
example, by Y a d i n in Palestinian warfare from 3 0 0 0 - 5 0 0 BC ( Y a d i n
1963, pp. 1—31). T h i s oscillating equilibrium is a fine example of an
unstable d y n a m i c equilibrium based on a feedback circuit connecting
the aggressor and defender. Sometimes a stable equilibrium basin is
reached even in armament - the armoured chariot and warrior of the
Palestinian Bronze Age could only be countered by a similar array,
likewise for a while the medieval knight and the World War I I battle-
tank could best be countered only by the same equipment. Noticeably,
such saddle-points or metastable equilibria persist only as long as
developing technology will allow. Quite apart from armament studies,
the analysis of subsystems of coupled artefacts or attributes can best be
set out in terms of the interaction of variety.
130    Analytical Archaeology
    Feedback in the material culture subsystem usually results f r o m
the coupling existing within sociocultural systems and, like the other
subsystems,     feedback and          complex   feedback 'behaviour'   is
consequently inherent in the system and subsystems. T h e artefact
population or population of types which one generation of a system
used is its output and the input fed back into the phenotypic constitu-
tion of the next generation. In this way the attributes of the type
population constantly adjust to the environment over successive
generations - in the light of, or on the basis of, the former system
trajectory (.£s, fig. 1 1 ) . T h i s inherent property accounts for the
'memory-like' capacity of sociocultural systems.
     T h e material culture subsystem operates at the same three general
levels and with the same variety of oscillating 'behaviour' as the other
subsystems in the network. Dislocation between the subsystem and
the environing system, between the various component subsystems,
and between the attributes in the artefact subsystem is kept within the
'tolerance' of the whole sociocultural system by taking those tran-
sitions which appear to minimize the m a x i m u m amount of immediate
contradiction and dislocation. Oscillating equilibrium at the highest
level - between the whole material culture subsystem and the
environing system — is often associated with 'response' to coupled
climatic or similar environmental oscillations. T h e glacial/interglacial
and tundra/forest oscillations of prehistory provide numerous exam-
ples of correlated changes in the material culture of the coupled
cultural systems. A t the middle level, oscillating equilibrium between
the artefact subsystem and other subsystems occurs as induced feed-
back 'response' to fluctuations in the religious, psychological, social
 and economic subsystems. F o r example the 'trial and error' or 'hunt
and seek' oscillations set up by the trajectory of the economic subsys-
 tem towards a suitable minimax strategy will often be accompanied by
oscillating manifestations amongst the material culture. At the lowest
 level, the continuous stochastic fashion oscillations within the margins
 of the successive stable sets of transition possibilities is a very familiar
 quality f o u n d in most artefact-types, f r o m women's fashions to grand-
 father clocks and gravestones (figs 38, 39, 47). T h e important role of
 all these oscillations 'scanning and searching' for advantageous variety
 and its subsequent incorporation in innovating and emergent
 arrangements has already been stressed.
    Invention or innovation appears as the deliberate or accidental
integration of networks of attributes exhibiting 'new' emergent prop-
   Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting           131

erties, often by simply re-networking long existing system attributes.
A n alternative way of generating new variety capable of reconciling
contradictive variety and dislocation is to borrow from the constant
flow of diffusing variety reaching the system from without. Since the
pooled innovation output of groups of cultures is correspondingly
greater than the invention rate of an individual culture it follows that
integration and modification of new variety f r o m diffusion provides
the great bulk of a culture system's variety, cumulatively gathered to
minimize dislocations. In terms of strategy we can view the number of
artefact-types and the relative percentage of each type produced as
marking a particular mixed strategy blend to meet the total system
requirements. T o characterize a culture's sites by the constant recur-
rence of an assemblage varying around - 10 per cent burins, 20 per
cent scrapers, 30 per cent blades, 30 per cent points and 10 per cent
microliths - reflects a strategy adopted by that system in a given
situation and reached by a limited but multilinear bundle of tra-
jectories.
    In the more detailed studies that follow the continuous movement
and cycle of foci of accelerated change through the cultural sub-
systems will be confirmed in the preserved form of the material
culture subsystem. T h e s e fossilized foci, or grouped foci forming
nodes of change, are particularly important in defining the
boundary or threshold between one type and another - at the
artefact, assemblage and culture level. Thresholds separating one
polythetic type from another polythetic type are cumulatively
reached in the characteristic way by successively supplanting the
essential and key attributes by newly integrated variants (examples
(1) and (2), chapter 2). Birth and death in artefact-type systems,
assemblage systems and culture systems amounts to no more
than the anthropocentric view of cumulative change to successive
thresholds separating polythetic systems of successive 'types' or
syntactical formats. It is not possible to characterize whole cultures
as inherently 'innovating' or 'conserving' when the foci of develop-
ment in all cultural systems are constantly moving through some
aspects of their framework. However, the concept of directive correla-
tion enables us with hindsight to isolate those essential variables con-
cerned in a system and more particularly those key variables that
subsequently integrate from converging trajectories cumulatively
to form a network of important emergent properties and potential (figs
26, 68).
132    Analytical Archaeology
iv    Environment as a system with subsystems
T h e aim of this final section is to continue the perspective view of the
material culture subsystem as merely one network aspect, or
component, within sociocultural systems coupled with environing
systems. Once again, a study of environment as a system with subsys-
tems would be sufficient to fill many individual works but here we are
interested simply in showing that environment is a system with
subsystems and relating our special archaeological interest to it. Our
particular interest is centred around the concept of environment and
culture as systems with inherent properties and particularly with the
model portraying this relationship as a complex two-player game with
inherent rules and permitting a variety of strategies.
     Throughout the general discussion and the framing of the general
model and its postulates we have used the term 'environment' in its
broadest sense - sometimes amplified a little by coupling with it the
term 'context'. T h e intention has been to convey simultaneously, in
single statements, observations about systems within and coupled with
environments, whether they be sociocultural systems and the envelo-
ping physical environment, or artefacts and their assemblage context.
T h e special case of artefact systems within material culture subsystem
contexts is the special obsession of the archaeologist and is further
developed in the chapters that follow, but it should not be forgotten
 that this is a special case within the general model. Similarly, the
 external environment of cultural systems is taken as including other
 cultural systems besides the category under study and in addition to
 the flora, fauna, geology and climate. Our use of the term environment
 implies total environment, including other sociocultural systems and
 also including those segments of reality not perceived or understood
 by the culture englobed. We are concerned therefore, with 'open'
 systems in which matter, energy and/or information is exchanged with
 the environment (Hall and Fagan 1956; Trigger 1971).
    A great deal of space has so far been allocated to the discussion of
cultural morphology and the sociocultural subsystems. However, in
the earlier discussion of the three basic levels of equilibrium and
oscillation found in the subsystems, the highest level was that between
the subsystems and the environing system - that sector of the outer
face of the whole system which especially communicated variety
affecting particular subsystems. Remember, of course, that our
divided model is an arbitrary view of particular aspects or circuit
networks connecting a unitary entity (fig. 8). It therefore turns out
   Cultural m o r p h o l o g y and cultural ecology - the setting        133

that the highest level equilibrium in each subsystem is merely a
particular aspect of the d y n a m i c equilibrium coupling the whole
system and the environing system - merely aspects of cultural ecology.
Cultural ecology f o r m s a useful f r a m e for the study of whole sociocul-
tural systems, the mutual relations between such systems and their
environments, and the 'adaptive' changes of these s y s t e m s ; neverthe-
less, cultural ecology is inseparable f r o m cultural morphology and the
study of the subsystem attributes. Cultural ecology and cultural
morphology are the outer and inner surfaces of the same sphere and
constraint and regularity in the structure of one will be coupled with
constraint and regularity in the other.
     T h e environment of a culture system expresses the attributes
external to that system and their varying and successive states in time
and space. T h e s e environmental attributes may be partly perceived by
the enclosed culture and partly not; f r o m the culture's point of view
some environmental attributes are inessential, some essential, and
some are key attributes for that culture system. Conventionally, we
organize the external environment under many headings but these can
be roughly s u b s u m e d under - other sociocultural systems, fauna,
flora, climate and g e o l o g y ; taking these terms in their broadest sense
so that for example geography and topography are mere manifes-




                                                    Fig. 22 A static and
                                                    schematic model of the
                                                    'environmental system'
                                                    of a sociocultural system
                                                    which is excluded from
                                                    the diagram. Sn here
                                                    represents the
                                                    summation of the effects
                                                    of other alien
                                                    sociocultural systems
                                                    within the same
                        Time                        interconnected territory.
Fig. 23 A static and schematic model of the dynamic equilibrium between the
subsystem networks of a single sociocultural system and its total environment
system. Sn represents the summation of the effects of alien sociocultural
systems connected to S by cultural 'coactions' (dashed lines) and to the
environment by 'interactions' (solid lines). T o set the model in motion all the
components must oscillate randomly along intercorrelated trending tra-
jectories.
   Cultural morphology and cultural e c o l o g y - t h e setting      135

tations of geology. T h e s e five subsystems are taken as interconnected
networks of attributes forming complex wholes and themselves an
ensemble within the environmental system (fig. 22). If we were to
approach a rigorous treatment of the environmental system then each
subsystem would merit a section portraying the nature of its attri-
butes, the networking of those elements, the inherent properties of
each subsystem and more besides; this task will not be attempted here.
    S o far we have artificially conceptualized sociocultural systems as
five component subsystems coupled in a moving equilibrium with a
five component environmental system (fig. 23). One way of crudely
summing-up the dynamic equilibrium between sociocultural system S
and environmental system E would be to express one as a function of
the other 'buffered' by some expression (k) - S being a function of E if
a change in E may produce a change in S and vice versa. T h i s might
simply be expressed as

                               E^t(k)    .S
T h e 'buffer' (k) in this expression would then represent the degree to
which S is 'insulated' from changes in E, and conversely E from S.
Now, in an earlier section it was suggested that the regulatory or
insulatory capacity of a culture system is proportional to its variety
and its capacity as a communication system - since only variety in
cultural attributes can force down variety in outcomes in the
environmental 'game'. It was therefore further suggested that a rough
relative measure of the regulatory or insulatory control capacity of a
culture system would be the number of differentiable artefact-types
made by that system. Of course, allowances would have to be made for
the archaeological loss of the organic artefacts and great care taken to
use justifiable samples. Nevertheless, if the variety of types produced
is a crude measure of the degree to which S is insulated from E then it
is crudely an expression of (k) - which can now be conceptualized as a
rough indicator of the 'degree of insulation' or 'degree of sophisti-
cation' based on a culture's technological level and variety in artefact-
types. T h u s (k) is related to the interposed regulator R and the size of
the set of transition probabilities or degrees of freedom of the table of
outcomes T (figs 6, 9, 1 1 ) . Making allowances for the percentage of
lost organic artefact-types, the archaeologist can still construct a very
approximate picture of the cumulative increase in (k) - albeit by a
fluctuating trajectory of which we are selecting only the successively
most complex cultures (fig. 24).
136     Analytical Archaeology
              VARIETY




                     Palaeolithic      Neolithic   Bronze   Iron   Industrial


  Fig. 24 A schematic diagram of the increased regulatory capacity 'R' of
  successively later culture systems, where 'R' is proportional to the
  cultures' variety content. The area between the two curves suggests the
  range of variety variation that might be expected in different examples of
  a given technocomplex configuration.

     A more detailed version of the Palaeolithic parts of the curves in
fig. 18 has been published by Isaac (1972a) and is reproduced here in
fig. 25. It shows the increase in artefact-type categories used to
characterize Palaeolithic stone industries in Atlantic Europe and Sub-
Saharan Africa. Isaac also notes an increase in standardization of tool
forms and in the numbers of distinct stone industries during the
Pleistocene (e.g. 1972a, fig. 6 for African industries). Putting these
observations together, he draws the following conclusion about
regulation and communication in Palaeolithic cultural systems:

      It is suspected that the acceleration in the rate of change, the extent
      of local differentiation and the degree of artefact standardization
      can be considered together as symptomatic of a great increase in
   Cultural morphology and cultural e c o l o g y - t h e setting       137

                                               Upper Palaeolithic —
                                                (Pvrqord)
                                                                       •60
ATLANTIC EUROPE
                                                                        50
                                  Late Acheulian and Mousterian*
                                            (Periçord)                  40

                                                                        30


                                                                 J-     20


                                           » Middle Acheulian s >V     *10


                                        106

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

                                                                         25
                                                L a i « Stone Age*—      20
                                              Middle Stone A g e — T i i 15
                                                                3

                                                                         10
                                                                         5

          2*10®                         106                      0*1*10'
Fig. 25 The increased regularity capacity 'R' of successively later culture
systems - a practical example. The increase in categories of artefact-types
during the Palaeolithic in Atlantic Europe and Sub-Saharan Africa.
Source: Isaac 1972a, p. 394.


   the complexity of cultural rule systems, and since the complexity
   of rule systems is liable to have been limited in large measure by
   the efficacy of the communication system, these changes imply
   that during the U p p e r Pleistocene, language crossed a critical
   threshold in its information capacity and precision of expression
   (1972a, pp. 395-6).

    Another statistic which may become available from the great
increase in archaeological data is some approximate estimate of the
average number of individuals maintained in a culture's dispersed
components throughout most of the year - excluding special and
138      Analytical Archaeology
temporary gatherings. T h i s w o u l d in effect be an average m i n i m u m
measure of the m a x i m u m g r o u p size maintainable throughout the year
and would express a vector of the cultural m o r p h o l o g y and ecology.
T h i s m i n i m a x statistic w o u l d also be roughly related to (k) as a
measure of 'sophistication' or rather 'complexity of organization'. With
the great increase in data it might even be possible to combine these
two facets of (k) to express comparative levels of socioeconomic
complexity, perhaps in the f o r m ( S t e w a r d 1 9 5 5 , pp. 4 3 - 6 3 )

  Socioeconomic level = v M i n i m a x g r o u p size. A r t e f a c t - t y p e variety

      T o conclude this section on environment as a system with subsys-
tems, we can observe that the physical e n v i r o n m e n t itself is a complex
system in a m o v i n g equilibrium. T h e e q u i l i b r i u m of the whole
environing system and its parts is subject to the same kind of oscillat-
ing fluctuations (e.g. f o r a model of food resource oscillation see Clarke
1 9 7 2 , fig. 1 . 1 5 ) , dislocations and foci of accelerated change as the
sociocultural systems that reside within it. I n d e e d we can understand
that the coupling of cultural systems within their environing system is
such as to require the cultural systems to change in accordance with
these environing fluctuations, to a degree dependent on the variety
within the sociocultural system (e.g. M c B u r n e y ' s ( 1 9 6 8 ) correlations
between variations in stone tool frequencies and in animal resources
during the late Pleistocene occupation of the Ali T a p p e h cave in I r a n ;
and the association of changes in e c o n o m y , population levels, settle-
ment patterns and social integration with climatic and vegetational
change and soil erosion in the A m e r i c a n south-west c. AD 1 1 0 0 - 1 3 0 0 ,
summarized in Hill 1 9 7 0 , pp. 8 2 - 9 6 ) . T h u s in so far as a culture is an
adaptation to a specific environment, a change in the environment may
produce changes in the culture to maintain e q u i l i b r i u m inversely
proportional to the culture's technological level. 4


Notes
    ( 1 ) N e e d h a m ( 1 9 7 5 , pp. 3 5 9 - 6 0 ) accepts the possibility of the evolution of
social s u b s y s t e m s b y regular t r a n s f o r m a t i o n s , as in the S e m i - M a r k o v i a n
model developed here b y the author. But in considering M u r d o c k ' s m e t h o d s
of analysis, N e e d h a m notes that 'by the introduction of an additional dis-
criminating feature (viz. prescriptive alliance) that M u r d o c k did not take into
account, it can be s h o w n that a n u m b e r of societies in the sample can be
placed in quite d i f f e r e n t relative positions f r o m those which they occupy on
M u r d o c k ' s premisses'.
   Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting                     139

    (2) An influential study of regularities in social organization, which
became more popular after the first publication of this volume, was Service's
Primitive Social Organisation (1962). In this he defined an evolutionary
sequence of increasingly complex types of social organization, from the
hunting-and-gathering 'band' through the agricultural 'tribe' and 'chiefdom'
to the 'state'. Although Service later recanted on this general model of social
organization (1971 ), it has been applied in both the New World (e.g. Sanders
and Price 1968) and the Old World (e.g. Renfrew 1972). Chiefdoms have
attracted particular attention and Renfrew has attempted to identify the main
features of this model in Neolithic Wessex (1973a), prehistoric Malta (1973b)
and Mycenaean Greece (1972). He has even recognized a distinction between
'group-oriented' (Wessex, Malta) and 'individualizing' (e.g. Greece, Bronze
Age Central Europe) chiefdoms (1974). Critics of this approach to prehistoric
social organization (e.g. Tringham in Renfrew 1974) have emphasized the
disparity between the model itself and the archaeological contexts to which it
has been applied and the apparent 'invisibility' of many traits of anthro-
pological chiefdoms in the archaeological record. In its defence it can be
argued that, like Fried's (1967) study, it does enable the archaeologist to think
about 'the possible range of social organizations behind his data' (above, p.
 109). After all the 'correlated constraint in variety' (p. 107) which led to
regularities in contemporary small-scale societies may have led also to anal-
ogous regularities in the past.
     In addition to this analogue model, archaeologists have attempted to
analyse prehistoric social organization by using two complementary data-sets.
First a number of American archaeologists have been instrumental in analys-
ing settlements and trying to test models of residence and descent patterns
derived from anthropological studies. The basic assumption involved is that
patterning in human behaviour which results from the existence of residence,
descent or other special purpose groups, will be reflected in the patterning
which the archaeologist can detect in the artefacts he studies from excavated
settlements (Deetz 1968). Given this position, the appropriate analyses have
to be computer-processed and statistically tested in order to define patterns of
association (e.g. use of the Chi-square statistic) and covariation (use of factor
analysis) among the artefacts. The resulting artefactual patterns are then
 assessed, residence units isolated and sometimes even descent groups infer-
 red. Such analyses have been pursued between phases of a site's occupation
 (Deetz 1965), within occupation phases (Longacre 1968, 1970; Hill 1968,
 1970) and through time between different sites in a localized area (Whallon
 1968).
     While these studies have been cumulatively stimulating, their underlying
 theory has been open to increasing criticism. As far as residence and descent
 groups are concerned, Allen and Richardson (1971) stress the difference
 between the 'ideal' rules and the actual operation of societies: thus choices are
 made by individuals as to where they wish to reside after marriage and these
 choices may be influenced by such variables as economics and property
140     Analytical Archaeology
ownership. Similarly they doubt whether completely discrete descent groups
can be recognized. On these grounds the interpretations of two localized
matrilineal descent groups at the Carter Ranch Pueblo (Longacre, see above)
and five localized uxorilocal residence units at Broken K Pueblo (Hill, see
above) can be laid open to doubt. T h e effect of rebuilding, rubbish disposal,
complex patterns of ceramic motif transmission between communities and
generations and social mobility upon within-site artefact patterning has been
discussed by Stanislawski ( 1 9 7 3 , 1974). He argues that 'the localization of
ceramic types in prehistoric and modern Pueblos is more likely to be a matter
of the localization of "ad hoc" work groups of neighbours and friends,
including both kin and non-kin, than clan residences or descent localization'
( J 973> P- 1 2 1 ) . T a k i n g all these criticisms into consideration, it seems clear
that the assumptions and theory underlying 'social' analyses of prehistoric
and historic settlements need rethinking and further testing if the stimulus of
the original pioneering studies is to be fulfilled.
      T h e second broad approach to social organization in the past has been by
the analysis of patterning in burial practices. T h e assumption which is basic
to this approach is that a society will practise several different methods of
disposing of its dead and that the forms which these methods take will be
correlated, in some measurable way, with the status of the deceased indi-
viduals. T h i s assumption is derived from cross-cultural anthropological
observations (Saxe 1 9 7 0 ; Binford 1 9 7 1 ) and focuses attention upon the
covariation of such features as population structure (e.g. age and sex dis-
tributions), grave goods (e.g. spatial variability in deposition of 'exotic' raw
 materials) and burial methods (e.g. relative energy expenditure, spatial
 patterning). A review of examples of this approach can be found in Chapman
 (1977). Recent studies have also introduced a more complex systemic
 approach to the use of burial data for measuring changes in social structure
 and organization in the past (Tainter 1977).
      As with 'social' studies of settlements, this is another expanding research
 area within archaeology and as such it has again attracted criticism. T h e
 confidence with which archaeologists can associate burial practices with social
 status has been attacked on ethnographic grounds (Ucko 1969). Clearly also
 the interpretation of complex patterns of association and covariation within
 burial data in terms of particular anthropologically-recorded patterns of
 social organization is a field mined with potentially circular arguments. But
 coupled with data derived from settlement excavation, there seems room for
 optimism that the social analysis of burial data will expand into productive
 new areas within the next decade. In this context it would seem that the
 spatial analysis of burials within cemeteries and cemeteries related to settle-
 ments and other variables (e.g. topography, economy) is an open research
 field.

   (3) In this discussion the author followed the predominant thought of the
time in equating religion solely with 'beliefs relating to the supernatural'.
    C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y and cultural e c o l o g y - the setting   141

However, more recent anthropological research by Rappaport (1968, 1971a,
1 9 7 1 b ) among the Tsembaga group of the Maring speaking peoples of New
Guinea has stressed the relationship of religion and ritual in general to other
subsystems and the local environment. Rappaport does not argue against the
partly psychological or sociological functions of rituals in giving security to
human populations who are unable to control all the events and processes of
their environment (1968, p. 2). Like the author he also views rituals in terms
of information communication and in this respect there is a great similarity
between animal and human behaviour: rituals, after all, are only 'con-
ventionalized acts of display' ( 1 9 7 1 a , p. 63). But where he differs is in his
interpretation of rituals as regulating mechanisms (chapter 2, pp. 52-4) within
an ecosystem. T h u s he argues that among other things the ritual cycles of the
Tsembaga help to distribute surpluses of pork through local and regional
populations, to regulate the consumption of non-domesticated animals, toenable
inter-group trading or exchange, to maintain the local environment and to
regulate the frequency of local fighting or warfare (e.g. 1968, pp. 3 - 4 ; 1971a).
      Rappaport notes an alternating cycle of periods of local warfare and peace,
with the latter being marked by a ritual ('Kaiko') in which the ancestors are
thanked for their aid during the fighting. While the Tsembaga themselves
may see these rituals solely in terms of the propitiation of their ancestors'
spirits, their function as regulatory mechanisms is also argued by Rappaport.
Fighting is forbidden during these rituals, so in this way the frequency of
warfare is controlled. Furthermore the slaughter of pigs which takes place
during the ritual period (ten years on average) helps to regulate the size of pig
populations, reduce local tension (caused by the damage done by increasing
numbers of pigs to fences, gardens etc.), preserve the local environment,
distribute food supplies and reduce population pressure and competition for
land (cf. Reichel-Dolmatoff's (1976) study of spirits and cosmology among
the Tukano Indians of Columbia: note especially the belief that the spirits of
game animals cause sickness - another example of a regulator acting on the
exploitation of local fauna).
      In discussing communication, Rappaport also distinguishes religious
from other types of ritual. T h e essential distinction as he sees it, is that
religious rituals are endowed with sanctity: 'the quality of unquestionable
truthfulness imputed by the faithful to unverifiable propositions' ( 1 9 7 1 a , p.
69). T o put it another way 'to sanctify sentences is to certify them' ( 1 9 7 1 b , p.
29). Since religious messages are accepted as 'true', they contribute to the
maintenance of order within human societies (1971a, p. 69), especially by
reducing the conflict between the needs and desires of the individual and
those of society ( 1 9 7 1 b , p. 36).
     Attempts to apply Rappaport's theoretical framework to the analysis of
religion in prehistoric societies have so far been rare. In one study Drennan
(1976) has linked the development of religious rituals as a mechanism for
securing the acceptance of social conventions with the evolution of complex
societies in Formative Mesoamerica.
142      Analytical Archaeology
     At the same time it should be noted that Rappaport has been criticized by
other anthropologists for being too 'materialistic' or 'functionalist' in his
interpretations. Friedman (1974, pp. 459-60) doubts whether the T s e m b a g a
ritual cycle acts as a regulator since both human and pig populations were
well below carrying capacity when Rappaport studied the 'Kaiko'. Friedman
prefers to emphasize the part played by social relationships (e.g. prestigious
exchange) in the frequency and scale of pig sacrifices. Similarly McArthur
(1974) views the pig sacrifices in terms of the prestige gained by the posses-
sion of large herds which can be given to other individuals or groups to cancel
existing exchange obligations. As for Rappaport's interpretation of the ritual
being a means of preventing pigs from damaging the local environment and
increasing tension between social groups, McArthur points out that it is the
deliberate accumulation of the pig herds during the years leading up to the
'Kaiko' ceremony that creates this situation. Indeed large amounts of pork
consumed at the ritual are nutritionally wasted and thus the redistribution
function seems less convincing. Finally it is noted that in cases where fighting
has led to refugee groups arriving in a new area soon after the beginning of a
ritual cycle, there may be 10-20 years of over-population and possible
environmental damage in that area. T h i s is one example of a disadvantageous
result of the ritual. In spite of these criticisms, Rappaport's study still offers
the archaeologist a source of stimulus in his study of prehistoric societies in
terms of dynamic systems, with all the characteristics given in chapter 2.

     (4) T h e 'systemic approach' to cultural change has enjoyed special popu-
larity among American archaeologists during the last decade. T h e compara-
tive lack of systemic studies and the more hostile reception within British
archaeology may be explained partly in terms of the different ways in which
the concepts of systems theory and cybernetics have been introduced into the
subject. In America the main impetus was provided by Lewis Binford (e.g.
1962, 1965), who developed the view that culture should be studied as a
whole system and that its primary function was an adaptive one:
      . . . as archaeologists we are faced with the methodological task of iso-
      lating extinct sociocultural systems as the most appropriate unit for the
      study of the evolutionary processes which result in cultural similarities
      and differences. If we view culture as man's extrasomatic means of
      adaptation, we must isolate and define the ecological setting of any given
      sociocultural system, not only with respect to the points of articulation
      with the physical and biological environment, but also with the points of
      articulation with the sociocultural environment. It is suggested that
      changes in the ecological setting of any given systems are the prime
      causative situations activating processes of cultural change (Binford
       1964, reprinted in Binford 1972, pp. 159-60).

T h e main roots of this approach lay in the evolutionary anthropology of
Leslie White, as Binford has acknowledged (1972). T h e increasing popularity
of Whitean anthropology, to which archaeological students were exposed as
   C u l t u r a l m o r p h o l o g y and cultural e c o l o g y - the setting   143

part of their university education, coupled with Binford's dynamic impact in
the 1960s has ensured the 'success' of the systemic approach within American
archaeology. In Britain, the anthropological perspective has been largely
absent from general archaeological work and university syllabus. It can be
argued that the more abstract presentation of systems theory given by David
Clarke in 1968, with its detailed discussion of concepts such as equilibrium,
homeostasis and adaptation (chapters 2 and 3), was less well received in
Britain because of the lack of this reinforcing anthropological theory: without
it the systems approach may have seemed too 'distant' from the archaeolo-
gist's concern with the study of human behaviour in the past.
    One soon becomes aware of this differential popularity and application of
systems theory in America and Britain when examining the results of a
decade of research within archaeology. We must ask how concepts and
models derived from systems theory and cybernetics have been applied to
archaeological problems. At the same time criticisms of specific applications
or concepts (e.g. homeostasis, adaptation), or indeed of the general concept of
systems analysis, must be considered so that the subject may be put in
perspective. T h e remaining part of this note will illustrate and discuss these
issues, so that the theory and concepts presented in chapters 2 and 3 can be
considered within the context of subsequent research.
    In a recent review article, Plog (1975) has discussed five ways in which
systems theory has been used in archaeology: as a theory of archaeology, as a
source of concepts, models and propositions/principles and as an approach to
explanation. It is instructive to use this framework and consider each of these
ways in turn, along with reference to specific examples of research (not all of
which are present in Plog's publication).

    (a) A theory of archaeology. T h e need for a central theory of archaeology,
expressed in systemic terms and concerned with isolating regularities in
archaeological data, is the aim of Analytical Archaeology (e.g. see above pp.
xv-xvii).
    (b) A source of concepts. As Plog indicates (1975, p. 2 1 3 ) the use of
concepts such as homeostasis, feedback and adaptation in archaeological
research has been associated with an underlying concern to isolate processes of
change in the past. T h e emphasis is now on generalizing rather than parti-
cularistic studies and on relationships between important variables rather
than simply their individual attributes. In this context systems analysis has
enabled archaeologists to reconceptualize old problems and look at them in
new ways (cf. Doran 1970, p. 294). Increasing familiarity with demographic,
ethnographic, ethnological and agricultural studies has led the archaeologist to
become more aware of the role of population as an important variable in
cultural change. Homeostatic controls on the size of animal populations in
relation to the local carrying capacity of resources are already widely known
(Wynne-Edwards 1962). Studies of hunter-gatherer groups have extended
our knowledge of cultural means of regulating population sizes (Hayden
1972) and Boserup's (1965) study of agricultural growth has established the
144     Analytical Archaeology
view that population acts as an independent variable, rather than one which is
dependent on developments in agricultural techniques. T h i s new perspective
on population was one of the bases of Binford's (1968b) reanalysis of the
origins of food production in the Near East. In this he argued that population
growth occurred in that area as a by-product of increased sedentism based on
the exploitation of more nucleated animal resources. Sedentism was held to
be responsible for the reduced necessity for cultural means of regulating
population size. T h u s the regulatory controls had broken down and the
population-natural resources equilibrium was disturbed. Excess population
from sedentary areas would 'bud off' into more marginal zones with less
favourable resources, thus maintaining equilibrium in the optimal areas but
creating population pressure beyond them. T h e result of this pressure was
the emergence of methods of food production which would raise the carrying
capacity of the marginal areas and enable them to support the higher popu-
lation levels. In a more recent paper Binford and Chasko (1976) have
examined the relationship of increased fertility, sedentism and dietary
changes among the Nunamiut Eskimos.
      In another study of the development of food production, this time in
 Mesoamerica, Flannery (1968) has used the concept of positive feedback, or
 more specifically 'deviation-amplifying mutual causal processes', to explain
 the emergence of maize and bean cultivation. T h e same author (1972) has
 also analysed the evolution of civilizations, and more particularly the state, in
 terms of two systemic processes: segregation (i.e. differentiation and speci-
 alization of subsystems) and centralization (i.e. the degree of linkage between
 subsystems). These processes are argued to be universal in state evolution, as
 are the mechanisms by which they take place (i.e. 'promotion' and 'lineariza-
 tion'), but the actual socio-environmental stresses (e.g. warfare, trade, popu-
 lation growth, irrigation) that set these mechanisms in action are held to be
 local in origin. Once again emphasis has been placed on general processes
 rather than particular developments in an attempt to understand regularities
 in cultural change.
      T h e concepts of information theory which David Clarke derived from
 Ashby's work (1956) and applied in his model of culture as a system have
 been little developed in subsequent research. However the concepts of
 'variety' and 'constraint' have been used by Rathje (1973) in analysing
  Lowland Classic Maya cultural change.
      (c) A source of models. Under this heading Plog (1975, pp. 2 1 6 - 1 8 )
 includes the use of flow charts and simulation models, whose usage has
 accompanied systems theory into archaeological research. Flow charts are, of
 course, a by-product of the impact of computers on archaeology. T h e y
 represent sets of relationships between different variables and can be used at
  various scales, with varying degrees of specificity and with a range of qualita-
  tive to fully quantitative data. In addition they can be efficient methods of
  reducing a vast amount of information or a complicated interpretation into a
  readily comprehensible form. Excellent examples of this quality can be found
    Cultural m o r p h o l o g y and cultural e c o l o g y - t h e setting      145

in Newcomb's model of a Danish medieval parish, Kemp's chart showing the
quantified flow of energy in an Eskimo hunting society (both reproduced in
Clarke 1972, figs 1 . 1 0 and 1 . 1 1 ) and Thomas's (1972, fig. 17.3) model of the
Shoshonean economic cycle based upon data derived from earlier work by
Julian Steward. In the terminology of Chorley and Kennedy (1971) New-
comb's work is an example of a morphological system (i.e. specifying the
structural relationship« between the different components/variables) while
Kemp's flow chart represents a cascading system (i.e. a quantitative analysis
of energy exchanges or the flow of information). Archaeologists have also
used flow charts to represent processes of classification or interpretation, for
example Clarke's (1972, fig. 1 . 1 4 ) model for his classification of British beaker
pottery and Schiffer's (1976, figs 9.4-9.8) models for his classification of
chipped stone artefacts from the Joint site in Hay Hollow valley, Arizona. In
addition Schiffer (1976, figs. 4.1-4.2) has used flow charts to represent the
general processes through which material culture is incorporated in the
archaeological record.
    Thomas' (1972) model of the Shoshonean economic cycle leads us con-
veniently into the field of simulation studies. These form a growing research
area in which certain variables (e.g. economy, population statistics) are
specified in a computer programme which produces a simulated behavioural
pattern to be compared with actual archaeological data. Thomas states that
his model, BASIN I, is 'designed to simulate deposition of archaeological
artefacts resulting from a posited ethnographic pattern'. He views the
Shoshonean settlement pattern as a system which has two properties: struc-
ture and behaviour. T h e structure is represented in the flow chart mentioned
above as a 'functioning system in statistical equilibrium'. In considering the
system's behaviour, Thomas follows David Clarke's distinction (this volume,
pp. 70-2) between 'inessential', 'essential' and 'key' attributes or variables in
looking at different resource subsystems (e.g. piñón nuts, jack rabbits,
antelope) and uses a Markov chain model (this volume pp. 63-6) to simulate
temporal and spatial variation in the yields of piñón nuts. This variation is
then related to variation in Shoshonean subsistence strategies. T h e simula-
tion was found to compare well with Steward's previously untested model of
the Shoshonean economic cycle. A Markovian model has also been used by
Reynolds (1976) in studying Pre-Classic settlements in a 40-mile stretch of
the Upper Grijalva River in Chiapas state, Mexico. A more ambitious simu-
lation study within a fully systemic framework has been published by Wobst
(1974): in this he uses Monte Carlo techniques to analyse Pleistocene popu-
lation units, simulating up to 400 years of population variation by means of
specified age, sex, fertility and mortality variation. In particular he is inter-
ested in the effects of such factors as monogamy, polygyny, incest taboos and
exogamy on equilibrium sizes in Palaeolithic human populations. T h e ulti-
mate aim of this study is to predict the size and longevity of Palaeolithic social
units and to develop appropriate sampling models for the archaeological
investigation of Palaeolithic sites in given areas. Finally Plog (1975, pp.
146     Analytical Archaeology
217-18) outlines Zubrow's simulation model relating population and carrying
capacity, which are used in his research in the Hay Hollow valley, Arizona
(e.g. Zubrow 1 9 7 1 , 1 9 7 5 ; see below pp. 444-6).
      Markovian simulations are, of course, part of a wider series of stochastic
models (Clarke 1972, pp. 1 9 - 2 9 ; Doran and Hodson 1975, pp. 295-8) which
do not necessarily have to be explicitly formulated within a systemic frame-
work. We will return to these types of simulation when considering arte-
fact/settlement distribution patterns in chapter 10.
      (d) A source of propositions/principles.   Some archaeologists have preferred
to look at archaeological problems from a general systemic perspective:
 instead of breaking their systems down into analytical subsystems
 ('economic', 'social' etc.) they have analysed their data in terms of general
 propositions or principles. T h u s Flannery (1972) has looked at the origins of
 the state in terms of segregation and centralization processes and Plog (1974)
 has constructed a dynamic equilibrium model of cultural growth in the
 Basketmaker-Pueblo transition in Arizona in terms of changes in the rela-
 tionships between population, system differentiation and integration (cf.
 Flannery) and energy exchanges. Tainter (1977) has also recently applied
 general systemic principles in the analysis of Woodland burial practices.
      (e) An approach to explanation. This last category of systemic research in
 archaeology overlaps with (b) the use of systems concepts. Both the Binford
 (1968b) and Flannery (1968, 1972) papers mentioned above are attempts to
 explain such complex problems as the origins of agriculture and civilization
 in terms of systemic processes. Similarly Renfrew (1972) has used the
 concepts of systems theory to construct an explanation for the local
 development of the Bronze Age civilization in the Aegean. After presenting
 the main cultural sequences in each local area he analyses changes from c.
 6 0 0 0 - 1 0 0 0 BC in terms of five subsystems (subsistence, technological, social,
 projective/symbolic and trade/communication - 1972, pp. 2 2 5 - 4 7 5 ) . Inter-
 actions between these subsystems are then specified and the emergence of
 civilization explained in terms of the operation of the 'multiplier effect', a
 special type of positive feedback (1972, pp. 476-504).

     T h e range of systemic applications in archaeology which have been
presented here should not be allowed to obscure disagreement over their
current success and potential. T h e more realistic proponents of the systemic
approach themselves recognize that much of the research outlined above is
still at a preliminary, experimental stage (Plog 1975, p. 220). Even among
those researching in general systems theory there are reservations about the
practicality of its application in other subjects, as it is claimed that there is
still much intensive research to be undertaken (Klir, quoted in Doran and
Hodson 1975, p. 337). Critics within archaeology have argued that systemic
concepts are not as revolutionary as has been claimed (Higgs and Jarman
I 97S> P- 3) a n d that there is a disparity between these concepts and the

empirical data of archaeology. Either there is supposed to be insufficient data
   Cultural morphology and cultural ecology - the setting                     147

to reconstruct, for example, social organization or religious subsystems or, to
put it another way, 'archaeological data are insufficient for the mathematics of
systems theory to be made to work' (Doran and Hod son 1975, p. 339; cf.
Steiger 1971, p. 69). This then reduces systems theory to the status of a
general analogy, a method for clearer thinking rather than an incisive analy-
tical tool (cf. von Bertalanffy's (1962) criticism of systemic research in biology
and psychology). On the other hand it cannot be denied that the systemic
approach has enabled archaeologists to reconceptualize old problems and in
particular to emphasize relationships and processes of change rather than
preoccupying themselves with linear causality and particularistic artefactual
studies.
     The two concepts in systemic archaeological research which have been
most criticized are homeostasis and adaptation. Wood and Matson (1973)
have distinguished two models of sociocultural systems, the homeottatic and
complex adaptive systems. The latter is derived from such systems theorists as
Buckley (1967), von Bertalanffy (1962) and Maruyama (1963). It is defined as
an open system exhibiting continuous (though varying rates of) change, the
source of which may be both within and outside the system as a whole. This
change may not only be counteracted by negative feedback mechanisms, thus
restoring the system's equilibrium, but it may also be amplified by positive
feedback (e.g. Flannery 1968; Renfrew 1972). In contrast the homeostatic
model (Ashby 1956) emphasizes the part played by regulatory mechanisms
(i.e. negative feedback) in maintaining system stability. Positive feedback will
only occur when these regulatory mechanisms fail and a new equilibrium
level will be reached. Thus periods of change alternate with periods of
stability (the latter being the 'normal' condition) and the source of change is
held to be external to the system (see Hill 1971). Wood and Matson comment
that this homeostatic model is functionalist in origin, unsuitable in dealing
with positive feedback processes and 'if we insist that change comes from
outside of the system, we then run the risk of a self-fulfilling prophecy; that
is, if we look hard enough for a changing environmental variable, we shall
surely find one* (1973, pp. 681-2).
     In a similar vein, Bennett (1975, 1976) has argued that the homeostatic
model is inappropriate for sociocultural systems characterized by long-term
and sometimes more dynamic changes. Thus he writes that
   the persistent developmental or exponential tendency in human
   behaviour, visible wherever the time span observed is long enough,
   should be evidence that the regularity and return to preexisting states
   characteristic of homeostatic movement are temporary phenomena that
   are useful in analysing limited sequences but not for understanding the
   basics of species behaviour (1976, p. 848).
    The homeostatic model has been based, Bennett argues, on short-term
observation by anthropologists among 'the relatively isolated, relatively slow
to change, low-energy society' (1975, p. 296) and is an inappropriate model
148      Analytical Archaeology
for periods of more rapid and complex cultural changes. However, current
archaeological thinking (e.g. Isaac 1972b, p. 186) would seem to support the
existence of fairly stable cultural traditions associated with low population
densities and a low frequency of social interaction over much of the early
Pleistocene period. In this case the application of a homeostatic model seems
to be supported by the archaeological evidence. Indeed it could be suggested
that the homeostatic model is more appropriate to studies of early Pleistocene
cultural evolution and the complex adaptive model of greater relevance to the
rapid increase in social and cultural complexity of the late and post-Pleisto-
cene periods.
    Adaptation has been a key concept in archaeological and anthropological
systemic research. Binford (1962), following Leslie White, defined culture as
'man's extrasomatic means of adaptation' and most systemic archaeologists
have used the concept, either specifically or loosely in their work. More
recently, doubts have been raised about its usage. For example, Burnham
(1973) supports the general point that culture can be adaptive, citing the case
of the Eskimos, but he then raises a number of important questions:
      It is only at a finer level of analysis that difficulties arise in discussing
      culture as man's adaptive dimension. Is all of culture positively adaptive
      or are there maladaptive traits? How would one assess and measure the
      adaptive advantages and disadvantages of a particular trait in a particular
      culture? (1973. P- 93)
He further argues that in order for the concept of adaptation to be meaning-
ful, it is the responsibility of archaeologists and anthropologists to specify the
exact cultural mechanism(s) which are 'realistic "equivalent(s) of natural
selection" or, for that matter, equivalents to any of the other key components
of the biological evolutionary process' (1973, p. 94; cf. Plog 1974, p. 48).
    T h e questions asked of the use of concepts such as homeostasis and
adaptation in cultural studies will undoubtedly continue, as will the debate
over the types of systems model which best approximate our archaeological
data. This is a healthy debate and archaeologists' own knowledge of systems
theory has been greatly extended since the first publication of this volume. As
I have tried to illustrate above, the range of systemic studies has increased,
but the key problem which faces workers in this field at the present is whether
they can, or need to, extend systems theory beyond the stage of being a useful
vehicle for reconceptualizing archaeological problems. With its emphasis on
processes and complex interrelationships it has enabled archaeologists to
postulate mechanisms of change which no longer rely upon single explana-
tions such as 'invasion' or 'diffusion'. But is this sufficient for significant
progress to be made in our knowledge of human behaviour in the past? This
is the challenge facing proponents of systems theory in contemporary
archaeology.
4     Material culture systems
      - attribute and artefact
      T h e classes or sets of attributes that are employed in cluster
      analysis to codify formal variation within a specific group of
      artefacts constitute what is here termed an attribute system,
                             J A M E S R. S A C K E T T 1 9 6 6 , p. 3 5 9




I   Introduction

T h e preceding chapters have attempted to introduce some ideas and
models which might be advantageously integrated in the discipline of
analytical archaeology. T h e annual output of archaeological data and
the advent of techniques with novel and fundamental incisive powers
make it quite apparent that archaeological interpretation is entering
new, exciting and difficult dimensions. It is equally apparent that the
use of these new techniques demands a more coherent and rigorous
framework of general conceptual scaffolding than that which the
archaeologist has hitherto bothered to erect. T h i s contemporary situ-
ation healthily forces the archaeologist's attention to focus on the
neglected general theory that underlies his discipline and its pro-
cedures. It is time for archaeology to move from the status of an
intuitively acquired craft towards that of an explicit discipline.
     T h e brief scrutiny of the history of archaeology introduced many
of the elementary plagues which still beset the struggles of the embryo
discipline - the diversity of opinions, aims, definitions, and
terminology, and the pseudo-problems which arise from these ail-
ments. In an attempt to remedy this situation and at the same time to
rise to the challenge of the new methodology we have spent some time
developing general models-including a model for archaeological pro-
cedure (fig. 2), a polythetic model for archaeological entities (fig. 3),
and a system model for archaeological processes (fig. 1 1 ) . In parti-
cular, emphasis has been centred upon cultural systems as quite
specific and peculiar kinds of system with certain inherent qualities
and innate 'behaviour' dependent upon their common structure,
rather than the customary emphasis upon particular cultures with
ISO   Analytical Archaeology
particular attribute values. Part of this procedure has involved a
conception of sociocultural systems as elaborate behavioural informa-
tion systems.
    Since each sociocultural system is a unitary whole, and because the
sub-division of such an entity into component subsystems is merely an
arbitrary conceptualization of different aspects of the same network, it
appears that the same set of general postulates may be relevant in each
arbitrary subsystem. Material culture as a structured hierarchy of
micro-systems is merely one such arbitrary aspect or subsystem, and it
therefore displays the same set of inherent qualities. Archaeology, as a
discipline concerned with the recovery, systematic description and
study of ancient material culture can accordingly be expected to detect
traces of this same inherent 'behaviour' defined in the postulates of the
general model (postulates 1 - 1 6 , chapter 2). It was the intention of the
preceding chapters to attempt an outline of this 'behaviour' in order
that we might now proceed to investigate its archaeological counter-
part and its capacity for the analysis of data, the synthesis of informa-
tion, and the prediction of results.
    T h e succeeding chapters extend the archaeological part of the
earlier general discussion. In each chapter that follows, successively
higher levels of archaeological entities are defined in terms of the lower
level components already isolated. This will enable us to gradually
erect a developing series of definitions and a hierarchy of archaeologi-
cal entities defined by archaeological attributes in archaeological
material. Every one of these archaeological entities is composed of
aggregates of lower-level components and as such they can be treated
as micro-systems coupled within particular sociocultural systems.
    One important corollary of the aggregate or composite nature of
archaeological entities is that such populations exhibit their own
specific 'behavioural' characteristics which are more complex than the
simple sum of the characteristics of the components and more pre-
dictable than that of the individual components. One of the main tasks
therefore, is to detect and trace these persistent regularity patterns in
archaeological data and to use these predictable regularities as tests for
real data. If the real data displays the regularity predicted then it
should fulfil some already established conditions. If the real data
departs from the predicted pattern then some conditions are not
fulfilled and the nature of the discrepancy may suggest the divergent
conditions responsible for the anomaly.
     In the preliminary discussion of the aims of archaeology a set of
 tentative objectives was put forward as being compatible with the
           Material culture systems - attribute and artefact            151

nature of archaeological data and the nature of the discipline (chapter
1 , section IV). T h e s e objectives suggested that there were fundamental
entities and processes that pervade the diverse material and that these
must be defined and explored before any of the higher aims could be
approached legitimately. T h e s e entities exist at increasingly higher
levels of organization, with an increasing value in terms of the
information that they can predict about the items put in them. We will
start, therefore, with the definition of an archaeological attribute and
then proceed to integrate that in the higher concept of the artefact.
T h e successive stages will take us from the attribute to the artefact, the
type, the assemblage, the culture, the culture group and the tech-
nocomplex. At each level we must define the entity involved and
laboriously investigate the implications of the definitions. With the
entities thus defined one can investigate the main processes which act
upon them and their resulting transformation patterns. In this way we
can hope to gain some knowledge of the general 'behaviour' of our
material in order both to be able to predict general patterning and to
learn from significant deviations from that patterning.
     Although the various entities include such diverse categories as
artefacts at one level and culture groups at another, it will increasingly
emerge that the relationships between adjacent entity levels are strik-
ingly regular. T h i s regularity in the syntax of entity relationships
arises partly from the unity of material culture systems as mere aspects
of sociocultural systems and partly f r o m the aggregate or population
quality of entities clustering lower-level components.
     It will be found that entities composed of populations of
components exhibit general properties shared by many other popu-
lation systems, including:

   (1) T h e population entity is a unit system of components coupled
       in some environmental context.
   (2) Emergent characteristics may appear in the overall system
       which are not found in the individual components forming the
       population.
   (3) A definite structure and composition, stipulated for a given
       moment but varying with changing space and time.
   (4) T h e population entity is ontogenetic. It may exhibit -
        (i) the quantitative growth and oscillation in numbers of
             components, from a few into myriads, ultimately followed
             by a decline in numbers to disappearance - giving the
             analogy of birth, maturity and death;
152     Analytical Archaeology

           (ii) the quantitative growth and oscillation in numbers of the
                entity itself - again giving the impression of the birth,
                maturity and death of a population;
          (iii) the entity system may manifest a quite different, qualita-
                tive ontogeny in terms of a change trajectory in which the
                components are successively replaced in such a way as to
                eventually transform the whole system from state to
                state - suggesting the birth, maturity and death of a given
                system state with limiting thresholds.
      (5) T h e population entity has a ' h e r e d i t y ' - an antecedent tra-
          jectory. We may distinguish between the trajectory of the
          whole, fully coherent entity and the pre-existing bundle of
          trajectories of the components directively correlated towards
           the subsequent formation of the entity.
      (6) An important characteristic of the population entity, as
           opposed to a single element, is that of numerical distribution
           in space and time - dispersion. Dispersion and the pattern of
           the dispersion is a group attribute of very great importance,
           since by altering the network of dispersed components the
           inherent characteristics of the whole system may be modified.
           Dispersion may affect the population of the entity itself, or the
           components within the entity, or both (Allee et al. 1950).


11    Attribute and artefact systems
O u r immediate concern is directed towards the definition and
investigation of the lowest levels of entity recognized by the
archaeologist - the attribute and the artefact. T h e most tangible pro-
duct of hominid behaviour is the material artefact - any object
modified by a set of humanly imposed attributes. T h i s gives us our
first archaeological definition and brings us face to face with the raw
material underlying the study of prehistory - the artefacts. However,
the definition has already introduced us to an even more fundamental
or lower-level entity - the set of attributes, traits, or characteristics
that represent the particular modification imposed by hominid action.
Although the artefact is the most common form in which the solid
results of hominid activity are fossilized it is itself a compound of
lower-level entities - the attributes, in this respect resembling the
structure of everyday substances - elaborate chemical compounds the
elements of which rarely, if ever, occur naturally in an independent
state.
            Material culture systems - attribute and artefact                153

    T h e behavioural significance of artefacts and their attributes can
be appreciated if we conceptualize the individual artefact as occupying
the common focus of two cones of directed activities or behaviour (fig.
26). In this figure the artefact is the focused result, directively cor-

                                  Specific




    Fig.  26 T h e behavioural significance of specific artefact-type
    populations as the sum of a specific set of fabrication behaviour and
    of a specific usage behaviour implied by the design. T h e fabrication
    behaviour selectively and directively correlates the set of attributes
    and their ranges which together define the artefact-type.



relating a whole set of actions, sequences of actions, or behaviour
necessary to materialize the abstract conception in the maker's mind.
T h e very manufacture of the artefact directively correlates sets of
actions and their resultant attributes and these complexes of attributes
will remain so correlated as long as the artefact survives intact (Som-
merhoff 1950, p. 187). At the same time, the artefact and its attributes
are so constituted by the maker that they are patterned to perform and
consequently imply yet another sequence of intended behaviour,
integrating the artefact in other repeated actions and sequences of
actions.
     Each and every artefact therefore embodies a set of behaviour
necessary for its fabrication and another set of behaviour implied by
its fabrication - its usage. T h e artefact's attribute variety is
consequently severely constrained by these percepta in the maker's
mind and populations of the same kinds of artefact necessarily exhibit
the regularities of repeatedly correlated clusters of attributes. Such
clusters of selected and correlated attributes constitute a 'message'
which still conveys information about the intentions of the fabricator.
T h e 'noise' is apparent in those uncorrected attributes not essen-
tial to the purposes of the artefact maker and which consequently vary
154    Analytical Archaeology
in an irregular and uncoordinated manner within that artefact
population (fig. 62). Once again we recognize the hierarchy of
inessential, essential and key attributes which partly depend on
the reference frame of the study and to which we must repeatedly
return.
     It will be noticed that we are now confining the use of the term
attribute to those components of artefacts (e.g. types of retouch or
decorative motif) which roughly equate with elements of human
activity. Sometimes the attribute is the result of a single action - a
single hammer blow, sometimes the attribute results from the multiple
repetition of a single a c t i o n - s u c h as pressure-flaking; yet again, the
attribute may result from a micro-sequence of repeated actions - the
four strokes bounding a decorative lozenge motif. Clearly, the ideal of
'one attribute - one action' becomes 'one attribute category - one kind
of action, or micro-sequence of actions'. Attributes, as we shall see, are
not of precisely the same level of complexity when compared one with
another; they are not quite such elementally pure units as one would
like.
     However, what we are attempting to do is to define attribute
entities in such a way that they are analytically useful and equate
 roughly at the same broad level of implied behaviour complexity. T h e
real basis of objectivity is to be arbitrary in a narrowly confined and
defined manner; to restrict the inevitable error to a finer range than
will imperil the desired accuracy of the analysis. Our attributes may
 not be entities of precisely the same level of complexity one with
 another but they will all congregate about a mean level of complexity
quite unlike the level implied for such entities as 'artefact-types'. From
 this point onwards we will restrict the use of the term 'attribute' to
 fossil behavioural elements of the level of single kinds of actions, or
 micro-sequences of actions. Henceforth such 'attributes' are the
 basis for our arbitrarily defined e n t i t y - t h e 'archaeological attribute',
 shortened to 'attribute' for convenience, with the wider use of the term
 attribute as a system component at any level replaced by such terms as
 'trait' or 'character'.
    In this gradual construction of a viable definition for archaeologi-
cal attributes we have still some elements to bond together. For if we
are to construct our hierarchy of definitions with care and precision we
must not fail to secure this foundation. Fortunately, most of the
necessary components have been discussed at length in earlier
sections. T h e s e earlier sections have already pointed out that:
            Material culture systems - attribute and artefact          155

     (1) Every artefact, indeed every material object, contains an
          infinity of attributes or variables and therefore of possible
          systems networking these attributes (Ashby 1956, p. 39).
     (2) It is therefore necessary to select the particular attributes and
          the particular system that we wish to study - given the prob-
          lem that we are investigating.
     (3) Our definitions of 'artefact* and 'archaeology' tell us that the
          archaeologist is primarily concerned with those specific and
          contextual attributes imposed or selected-for by hominid
          action (see above pp. 1 4 - 1 5 ) . On occasions only an unbiased
          analysis will show whether border-line attributes were selec-
          ted-for but the majority of relevant attributes will be obvious.
     (4) In order to avoid confusion and to maintain an homogeneous
           level of complexity the relevant attributes should be broken
          down into logically irreducible and independent variables.
          These attributes should be 'epistemically independent'
           (Sommerhoff 1950, p. 86).
     (5) Preliminary analysis will separate the artefact attributes into:
          (a) inessential attributes - those which are not relevant to the
               study in hand and which consequently do not figure in the
               system as defined, and those attributes which are constant
               throughout;
          (b) essential attributes - those variables which are part of the
               relevant system and whose values or states may change as
               part of the changing system. Detailed analysis of the
               essential or relevant attributes may then isolate certain -
          (c) key attributes - those correlated clusters of attributes in
               the system whose successive values or states co-vary in
               some specific relationship with successive values of other
               similar attributes.
     It is crucial to observe that the selection of attributes is to some
extent arbitrary, that at least a preliminary analysis is needed to
determine which are the essential and inessential attributes, and above
all, that the key attributes cannot be accurately defined until after
detailed analysis of the data. T h e intuitive and arbitrary 'spotting' of
key attributes in a system, before proper analysis, leads to the arbitrary
definition of group boundaries based on 'type-fossils'. Such set
markers may be ultimately established but the 'typical' or the key
attributes must be the terminal result of the analysis - not the premise
of the opening gambit. 2
156   Analytical Archaeology
    Given the restricted level at which we wish to use the entity we can
now approximately define an archaeological attribute as - a logically
irreducible character of two or more states, acting as an independent
variable urithin a specific frame of reference. T h e frame of reference
being in this case an arbitrarily specified system of artefact characters.
Such a definition includes all the behavioural attributes of an artefact
whether they are specific or contextual, natural or artificial. T h e
specific attributes refer to physical qualities of the artefact and the
contextual attributes to the artefact's stratigraphic and geographic
location and associations - in so far as these may have been humanly
imposed. It must be remembered however, that a behavioural attri-
bute can be imposed as much by the careful selection of natural raw
material as by direct hominid alteration. T h e preferential selection of
certain limited pebble sizes, shapes, and materials for the manufacture
of handaxes and the deliberately selective preservation of the natural
cortex on the butts of some of these tools - all of these attributes reflect
hominid behaviour but themselves remain natural features.
     Each attribute then is equivalent to a piece of premeditated and
deliberate hominid behaviour - the behaviour being deliberate even
should the attribute or the artefact be an accidental by-product.
     It is important that our properly defined attribute should be
'logically irreducible' since this precaution ensures that we are
comparing entities of a similar level of complexity and that our so-
called attribute is. not simply a manifestation of several component
characters subsumed within it. In this respect it would be incorrect to
register as fundamental attributes the shape, size, volume, weight, and
 material of handaxes say, since the volume is a function of the size
 and shape, and the weight a function of the volume and material. This
 case is absurdly obvious but such errors may more easily creep in if
quantitative ratios are being used and the denominator or numerator
 are unwittingly repeated (Roe 1964, fig. 15). T h e attributes should be
 independent variables and not varying as the direct mathematical
 function of other attributes already noted. Similarly, when analysing
 the decorative art styles of pottery, metalwork, or other materials one
 must be careful to separate the essential motif attributes from other
 attributes noting the relative positions of the motifs; otherwise one
 would fail to note that two different art styles might have a similar
 range of motifs but quite different systems of arranging them.
  T h e second feature of the definition of an archaeological attribute
emphasized that it should be a character of two or more states in
            Material culture systems - attribute and artefact           157

relation to the artefact system under analysis. Most attributes can be
reduced to characters of two states in relation to their system - the
attribute may be either present or absent. However, archaeologists do
not generally recognize that there are several other varieties of attri-
bute and attribute state, which must vitally affect the comparison of
artefacts and the assessment of their degree of similarity. If one
artefact is imperfect, or damaged in such a way as to remove an
attribute then this artefact must be noted for comparative purposes as
having a state of No Comparison (NC) for this character; it must be
realized that is not the same state as either the attribute being absent
or present but rather a special state of its own - with different impli-
cations (Sokal and Sneath 1963, p. 74).
    T h e attribute definition also caters specifically for an attribute
having 'two or more' states. T w o states are immediately necessary to
allow for presence/absence comparisons but the 'or more' aspect
reveals that attributes may sometimes be treated as loci at which
several alternative attribute-states may be found. This may occur if
the attribute is a size dimension and the measurement - say the arte-
fact length - can be given as falling within any bracket, each bracket
forming a possible state at that locus. T h i s means that the particular
artefact can have a variety of particular attribute states within the
entity of that attribute, as though the attribute itself was composed of
alternative sub-characters. This kind of attribute is referred to as a
multistate attribute or character and if measurement is involved it
becomes a quantitative multistate attribute. Alternatively, there also exist
qualitative multistate characters such that several alternative qualitative
states of the same attribute could be present. It could be noted, for
example, that retouch was present or absent from a certain artefact
locus; if retouch was present it could be coarse retouch, soft-hammer
retouch, pressure-flake retouch, scraper retouch, blunting retouch and
so on - these would all constitute possible states of the multistate
attribute 'retouch at locus X ' of which only one state can be present at
the locus X of each artefact. Examples of quantitative multistate
attributes include measurements like - handaxe length, flint blade
thickness, the height of a pot, or the length of a sword blade. Qualita-
tive multistate attributes include the categories of flint retouch, the
permissible shapes of an artefact edge, the location of decoration on
artefacts, or the catalogue of alternative motifs used in a given art-
style. Quantitative and qualitative attributes also raise the difficult
problem of the correct statistical procedure for handling 'discrete
158   Analytical Archaeology
variables' with quite separate and distinct value categories, like the
number of rivets in a sword hilt, as opposed to 'continuous variables'
which may take any mathematical value, including a fractional one,
such as the length of an artefact. There is thus a basic difference
between discrete and continuous attributes but for many purposes this
can be avoided by chopping the continuous attribute range into dis-
crete sub-ranges.

    Examples. An attribute list for Aurignacian flint blade end-scrapers
from an assemblage in the Abri Castanet (Dordogne) has been pub-
lished by Sackett (1966), who defined eight multistate attributes, both
quantitative and qualitative, discrete and continuous (fig. 27). In
dealing with British Beaker pottery Clarke (1962) compiled an attri-
bute list of twenty-one multistate attribute headings, containing a total
of thirty-nine attributes, as the basis for a computer classification into
chronological and regional types.

    The main work of an archaeologist hinges on his ability to compare
numbers of artefacts or assemblages and to assess their relative degrees
of similarity one with another. In this work the artefact attributes are
of fundamental importance. We now see that when comparing one
artefact with another the archaeologist is intuitively comparing their
respective attribute assemblages; we further realize that this is not
simply a presence/absence matter. The attribute can be absent from
artefact A and present in artefact B, or vice-versa, or it can be present
in both A and B, or absent in both A and B. Alternatively, the
attribute can be Not Comparable in A, in B, or in both, because of
damage or loss. Yet again, the attribute may take a multiplicity of
states within a quantitative or qualitative multistate range - taking one
alternative state in A and the same attribute but a different state in B.
Altogether it can be appreciated that there are not only a great variety
of kinds of attribute state but that these can be combined to give a
confusingly large range of kinds of similarity, even between pairs of
artefacts. This same problem recurs at every level of our hierarchy of
entities, from the comparison of type with type, assemblage with
assemblage, culture with culture, and so on ; at all these levels we must
seek solutions in the explicit methods of numerical taxonomy which
underlie the intuitive methods that archaeologists usually apply.
    Clusters of repeatedly and closely intercorrelated attributes can
often be noted as recurrent 'attribute complexes'. These attribute
complexes form an entity of a higher level of complexity than the
                                                      ( a ) Miasunug       ttandard     end-icrafitr        front    contour*.

I. Front contour       (above)        5         Aaymmetnc medium                      11. Front contour             modifier       IV     ft«i      width
   :    Round                         6         Shallow                                   I   Typical                                    i       i o cm      6    3 5 cm
  a     A a y m m e t r i e round     7         A a y m m e t n c shallow                 a   Atypical                                   a       i - j cm    7    4*0 c m
  3     Elongated round               8         Rounded «hallow                            3       Limited                               3       i o cm      8    4 5 cm
  4     Medium                        9         Broken                                     4       Damaged                               4       I'jcrii      9    joctn
                                                                                                                                         5       3'Ocm       »o   5-5 c m
                                                                                    I I I . Front height
                                                                                            i   Low
                                                                                                                                    V. Blank         clot,
                                                                                            a   Sub-high
                                                                                                                                         i       Blade (o $o ratio)
                                                                                            3   High
                                                                                                                                         a       Flake-blade (0-50-0-7$ r a t i o )
                                                                                                                                         3       Flake (0*75 ratio)




                                                                                                                               Heavy
                                                                                                                            convergence




                                                                     (6) Measuring        lonvet     gence.

VI.   Body contour                   VII.        Marginal      retouch                                                  7    Light retouched/Aurignacvan retouched
         Parallel                           1      Unretouched/Unretouched                                              8 H e a v y r e t o u c h e d / H e a v y retouched
         Light divergent                    a      U n r e t o u c h e d / L i g h t retouched                          q Heavy r e t o u c h e d / A u n g retouched
         H e a v y divergent                3      U n r e t o u c h c d / H c a v y retouched                         10 Aurignacian r e t o u c h e d / A u r i g retouched
         Light convergent                   4     U n r e t o u c h e d / A u n g n a c i a n retouched               . Tooi    combination
         Heavy c o n v e r g e n t          5      Light re touched/Light retouched                                     1      Unique
                                            6      Light retouched/Heavy retouched                                      a      Scraper
                                                                                                                        3      Burin




                    Unretouched                                   Light                                   Heavy                          Aurignacian
                                                                         (<•) Marginal           retouch.

Fig. 27 Attribute list for U p p e r Palaeolithic blade end-scrapers under eight
multistate headings.
S o u r c e : Sackett 1966, pp. 362-4.
160    Analytical Archaeology
component attributes but not yet an entity of the 'artefact' or 'type'
level. A s examples of attribute complexes one might cite - the
repeated complexes of some copper and bronze alloys, the repeated
clusters of shape attributes defining parts of certain artefact-types, and
similarly repeated clusters of decorative motifs and motif styles. One
of the significances of such attribute complexes is that they may be
jointly transferred f r o m one artefact or g r o u p of artefacts to another,
suggesting cultural and chronological implications. T h e decorative
motif complex of a g r o u p of pins may be f o u n d on a certain group of
sword blades, the angular shape and rivet boss complex of metal
vessels may be skeuomorphically transferred to pottery, or the retouch
and flaking technique developed for certain tool types of particular
raw material may be detected as a complex in an otherwise alien
system. T h e attribute complex may shift independently as a coherent
entity transferred f r o m one artefact vehicle to another. Indeed
repeated observation suggests that most attributes diffuse f r o m
cultural system to cultural system as complexes rather than as single
attributes or ideas. T h e attribute c o m p l e x f o r m s an interesting and
important intermediate-level entity and we will meet syntactically
similar entities in the 'type complex', and 'assemblage complex' and
the 'culture complex'.
    Returning to the problems of artefact classification, it is essential to
understand that all attributes are initially of equal importance, equal
weight, and equal rank to all other attributes when it comes to cluster-
ing them and defining artefact taxa - that is assuming the attributes to
have been properly defined. We have repeatedly stressed that the only
valid preliminary step in classification is the arbitrary separation of the
relevant system of essential attributes f r o m the inessential attribute
systems of the same entity. T h e key attributes, which can ultimately
be treated as to some extent 'typical' of the system, may not be
properly and objectively defined until after detailed analysis and even
then the key attributes of one population may not be assumed to be the
key attributes of another population; however close the relationship,
this must be demonstrated.
    Nevertheless, it is possible to see that every archaeological attri-
bute has two aspects - one aspect expresses the set of functional
constraints necessary for the artefact's usage - the other reciprocal
aspect expresses the possible range of unrestrained variety or attribute
states within that set. T h e s e components can be summarized as the
functional and idiosyncratic degrees of f r e e d o m of the attribute. Even
           Material culture systems - attribute and artefact            161

the most functional attribute has some idiosyncratic degree of
freedom; an axe blade must vary between certain limits in respect of
its length, breadth, thickness, and weight attributes, but within these
limits there is freedom of choice. Likewise, even the most idiosyncratic
attribute has some functional restrictions; the decoration on pottery
provides a very wide field for idiosyncratic choice but still falls within
functional limits. We can, if we wish, simplify the real situation and
polarize our attributes between functional attributes at one extreme
and idiosyncratic attributes at the other; this would be a dangerous
procedure but it may on occasions serve as a shorthand notation for
the real position (compare Isaac's ( 1 9 7 2 b , pp. 1 7 6 - 7 ) distinction
between the roles of 'function' and 'tradition' in stone tool production).
T h e great importance of these attribute aspects for the prehistorian is
the different quality of information provided by clusterings of
functional attributes qn one hand and clusterings of idiosyncratic
attributes on another. T h e accuracy and incisiveness of the archaeolo-
gist's interpretation of artefact patterns in social terms depends on a
proper understanding of this partial polarity.
    At the moment we must concern ourselves with the fact that
attributes have no existence independent of the artefact and always
exist in correlated clusters. T h i s clustered nature of the attributes
defining artefacts provides us with an important analytical tool-kit, a
methodology not only useful at this level, but at every succeeding level
in the entity hierarchy outlined in this volume. T h e opening section of
this chapter showed that an important characteristic of population
entities is the numerical distribution in space and time of their
components - their dispersion pattern (section 1, 6). T h e proper tech-
nique for the analysis of populations and their numerical distribution
is of course statistical methodology (Doran and Hodson 1975).
    T h e main concern of this section has been directed towards the
definition and investigation of the lowest levels of entity recognized by
the archaeologist - the attribute and the artefact. It has emerged that
we can usefully define and visualize four successively more complex
entity levels: the attribute state, attribute, attribute complex and
artefact. T h e s e entities will now enable us to integrate populations of
such units in the meaningful definition of yet higher level entities,
each successive level disclosing more emergent information about the
inherent 'behaviour' and implications of such entity systems. At the
low level at which we have been currently working, the return in terms
of unexpected information or patterning must be expected to be
162    Analytical Archaeology
equally low - but more will follow. For the moment we will turn to the
'behaviour' of artefact attribute systems from homogeneous and
contemporary spatial phases and then to the 'behaviour' of the same
systems in time-depth trajectories.


in    Phase pattern regularities
T h e archaeologist can rarely, if ever, date excavated strata and their
assemblages to precise points in time - all archaeological dates are
relative, even the so-called absolute isotope decay datings. Not only
are these archaeological dates relative but they also have variable
probability ranges and even these loose 'fixed points' are not widely
available to locate most artefact assemblages securely in time. T o add
to these complications, there is also rarely any possibility for dis-
criminating between an assemblage laid down in a six-inch stratum
over fifty years and an assemblage laid down in another six-inch
stratum over three hundred years - without circularly appealing to the
taxonomy of the artefacts themselves.
     It follows from these observations that a spatially contem-
poraneous assemblage is very rare in archaeology - the excavated
assemblage unit is almost always a time-trajectory segment in which
time change is always a contaminating factor (fig. 61). T h e nearest
approach to a unit segment that can be achieved is to take the set of
taxonomically near-homogeneous assemblage states which have a
higher mutual affinity within the unit than with any one assemblage
beyond that cluster's borders. T h i s arbitrary and unequal unit
represents the thinnest recognizable slice of an artefact or assemblage
time-trajectory, a compressed and distorted unit which we will call a
'phase' (Willey and Phillips 1958, p. 22).
     A phase within an artefact or assemblage time-trajectory is thus an
archaeological unit constituting the smallest taxonomically homo-
geneous set of entity states which may be distinguished within a
minimal time-slice of that entity's system continuum. T h e key and
essential variable states will distinguish such a unit from earlier and
 later manifestations of that entity's system trajectory and from those of
other similar systems. T h e phase unit is applicable to the system
trajectory of every level of archaeological entity - from the attribute to
 the culture group - representing as it does a space of even rate of
 change between nodes of accelerated change in the system variables.
 Entity time-depth trajectories will then be composed of stacked and
           Material culture systems - attribute and artefact          163
multilinear phase units - most of which will be unknown and where
the units themselves must be assumed to be tilted time plane discs
rather than the horizontal discs that we usually conceptualize (fig. 61).
T h i s has the important corollary that the phase population will be
graded fractions of successive horizon populations drawn unequally
from the entity continuum, with some elements from early horizons,
many from a contemporary set and a few from late horizons - a
sampling factor which may account for some skew distribution curves
for phase assemblage elements (fig. 30).
      In this study we will therefore recognize two major archaeological
dimensions - the phase and the tradition; these dimensions are the
nearest archaeological equivalents to contemporary space and time
respectively but they are not identical equivalents and may not be
interchanged without considerable care. T h e tradition unit is the
multilinear time-trajectory of any level of archaeological entity system
and is not here restricted to the time depth of cultural assemblages.
T h e phase and tradition units may be applied to the attribute, artefact,
type, assemblage, culture, culture group and technocomplex entity
levels.
      It can be assumed, then, that in any analysis of archaeological
entities the dimensions of time and space will both be present, with
their differing implications for the orientation of the data. For this
reason horizontal or contemporary spatial classification in prehistoric
cultural situations is often an illusory aim, except in so far as one can
attempt to take a negligibly thick horizon or an infinitely small time
segment - and in most cases this is likely to reflect a century or more of
compressed development. T h e idea of primarily classifying the data in
different vertical traditions seems a more appropriate primary aim,
although secondarily these traditions may be internally sub-divided
into oblique phases of changing levels of similarity. T h e archaeological
entity should first of all be attributed by the affinity of its essential
format to a particular vertical time-trajectory or tradition - and then to
a particular phase, on the joint basis of chronology and internal
affinity.
     From the point of view of the archaeologist the classification of the
changing phenomena would therefore seem best expressed by a verti-
cal time-depth classification, based on an objectively established
chronological and affinity framework. Otherwise the archaeologist
tends to forget that his distribution maps of artefacts and cultures
represent fragmentary and distorted palimpsests of hundreds of years
  Fig. 28a The tree of organic phy-           Fig. 28b The tree of cultural phy-
  togeny with its characteristic forking      logeny with its characteristic reti-
  branch pattern.                             culated branch pattern.
  Source: Kroeber 1948, p. 260.               Source: Kroeber 1948, p. 260.




Fig. 28c A section of an organic phylo-       Fig. 28d A section of a cultural phy-
genetic tree in three dimensions, one of      logenetic tree in three dimensions, one
time and two of phenetic dissimilarity.       of time and two of phenetic dis-
The 'shadow' of the tree on the base          similarity. The 'shadow' of the tree on
indicates the purely phenetic relationships   the base indicates the purely phenetic
of the branches.                              relationships of the branches.
Source: Sokal and Sneath 1963, p. 234.
           Material culture systems - attribute and artefact          165

of successively changing distribution areas - histograms and dis-
tribution maps are time-compressed composites; indeed some
Palaeolithic distributions are probably composites of tens of thousands
of years.
    T h e taxonomic assessment of affinity between entities will suggest
the limited number of possible transformation trajectories which
might link the network of particular entities in passing time. Great
care must then be taken to avoid the danger of interpreting affinity
relationships simply as descent relationships - a condition further
complicated by the peculiar nature of branch convergence and fusion
found in cultural phylogeny (fig. 28). T h i s problem can only be
controlled by providing an adequate chronological frame and by
postulating multiple alternative hypotheses of development to link the
established degree of affinity between sets of the entities under
investigation (chapter 1 1 , 11).
    Having established that what we mean by phase is in reality space
with a little bit of time, as opposed to space with a great deal of
successive time - we may return to the problem of how attributes
behave in large numbers in a given phase population. If we take a large
number of artefacts of one type from one homogeneous assemblage,
limited in time and space, and if we study the pattern of dispersion of
individual attributes in that series of artefacts, we usually find a skew,
or normal, unimodal scatter pattern (figs 29, 30). T h e pattern is
unimodal because there were repeated attempts to reproduce a com-
monly-held concept of a desired artefact form. Because these attemp-
ted facsimiles were randomly deflected in various attribute values by a
large number of divergent factors, e.g. intractability of the raw
material, its lack of homogeneity, the distributions should in theory
express normal probability curves, and in practice approximations to
the normal curve do occur (fig. 30). However, there are a number of
overriding factors which individually, or as a group, conspire to make
skew curves more frequent in 'real' data and this raises certain prob-
lems in interpretation and analytical treatment (fig. 30).
    Distribution curves may vary from the 'normal curve' in three
main features - skewness, kurtosis, and multimodality. A skew curve
is one in which the peak, or mode, is displaced to right or left of the
centre, piling-up the values at one end of the scale and thus modifying
the bilateral symmetry of the normal curve (fig. 29). Kurtosis occurs
when the curve is excessively flattened, depressing the curve from the
normal distribution pattern. Finally, a multimodal curve simply has
166      Analytical Archaeology


                                      • • • •
                                      • • • •




                          •       • • • • • • • • • •       • •
                          •       ••••••••••                • •




               * * * * * * *'* • • • • • • • • • •          ••••••••••»                          Entities
                          " I "
              Archaic         j         Modal           ,         Prototypical                    States




                                                                                                  Entities




               Archaic                   Modal                    Prototypical                    States

      Fig. 29 A u n i m o d a l s k e w d i s t r i b u t i o n of artefact or attribute states
      w i t h i n a phase a s s e m b l a g e - t w o alternative portrayals of the same
      data. T h e s u b d i v i s i o n of the d i s t r i b u t i o n into archaic, m o d a l , pro-
      totypical sections is only valid in cases w h e r e a m o v i n g m o d e may be
      t r a c e d ; see figs 4 1 , 47.



m a n y separate peaks, f r o m t w o u p w a r d s , and usually indicates                                  the
p r e s e n c e o f m o r e t h a n o n e p o p u l a t i o n of a t t r i b u t e s e a c h w i t h its o w n
m o d e (fig. 32). D i s t r i b u t i o n c u r v e s that d i f f e r s i g n i f i c a n t l y f r o m t h e
'normal       probability          curve' occur quite              frequently         in    archaeological
s t u d i e s u n d e r c e r t a i n c o n d i t i o n s . A n u n d e r s t a n d i n g of t h e s e   condi-
tions will therefore help reveal or predict the particular factors operat-
            Material culture systems - attribute and artefact             167

ing in a particular case. At the moment we are preoccupied with the
conditions which give rise to skew curves instead of normal ones in the
problem already cited (fig. 30).
    T h e r e are four factors that may singly or jointly give rise to a skew
curve for an homogeneous population of a given attribute.

    Illusory skewness - sometimes the initial and intuitive assessment
of a curve's skew shape may be modified when careful testing shows
that its departure from the 'normal' is not statistically significant. T h i s
happens most frequently with curves having too few class intervals or
from a false impression of skewness induced by the stepped histogram,
or angular polygon outline. M a n y archaeological skew curves may be
found not to depart significantly from the normal distribution upon
adequate testing (fig. 30).
    Sampling errors arise very frequently and from various causes. T h e
obvious sampling errors are: too small a sample, a non-random sample
accidentally emphasizing some population aspect too strongly, a
non-homogeneous sample accidentally drawing from more than one




                                       Fig. 30a Diagram plotting the
                                       dispersion of Hungarian Mousterian
                                       flint leaf-points in terms of the
                                       angle of the edge retouch.
                                       Source: Vertes i960, p. 42.
168          Analytical Archaeology

                   SCRAPERS: Breadth                          SCRAPERS: Length
      40 -

      30 -                 Peacock's Farm Ju                               Peacock's Farm   i.
                           Plantation Farm AA                              Plantation Farm AA
      20

      10 -

      40

      30 -                       Hurst Fen —
 c
 <v                                            A*
 (J
      20 -
 (V
CL
      10 -

      40-

      30 -                    Hurst Fen — X .
                             Windmill H i l l - ^                                                •A.
      20 -

      10 -

       0-


        0     10   20   30 4 0   50   60    70      0    10   20   30 40     50   6 0 7C 8 0     9 0 100
                                                    mm

Fig. 30b Diagram illustrating varying dimensions of flake scrapers from
different British Neolithic flint industries.
Source: Clark i960, p. 219.

discrete population (fig. 3 1 ) , or an over-homogeneous sample with
identical values (approximating a rectangular distribution). With
archaeological samples the randomness is often in doubt and the
unavoidable lack of homogeneity due to phase sample distortion and
compression has already been noted. An archaeological example of the
effect of sample size on artefact assemblages is given by comparison of
the frequency of racloirs in French Mousterian assemblages in 1953
and when the assemblage sample size had nearly doubled in 1970: the
suggested bimodality in the original analysis is no longer distinctly
visible (Doran and Hodson 1 9 7 5 , p. 127 and fig. 5 . 1 4 , after Bordes and
de Sonneville-Bordes).
    Scale errors arise if the range or the units of the scale against which
the population is plotted are unsuitable. If the scale is cut off too early
at either end the values will inevitably pile into the terminal classes
with a resulting asymmetry (Roe 1964, fig. 6). If the scale units are
unequal or if the scale of units involves a discrete and qualitative set of
            Material culture systems - attribute and artefact            169




                                Weight, grammes

Fig. 30c Diagram plotting the dispersion of 320 Breton Late Bronze Age
socketed axes from two hoards (la Belliere and Saint-Bugan) in terms of their
weight.
Source: Briard 1965, p. 273.


attributes, skewness may arise from the unit inequality or from
unsuitable scale sequences of qualitative values.
    Special factors arise f r o m conditions that peculiarly affect the
attribute population in question. It has been suggested, for example,
that human error may repeatedly stray in one direction rather than in a
truly random fashion. For instance, populations of pressure-flaked
projectile heads often show a larger number of points thicker than the
mean rather than thinner - possibly suggesting that there might be a
better accidental probability of making the points too thick than too
thin - when they would break-up in manufacture. Alternatively it is
conceivable that a craftsman may skew his error in the more desirable
of two directions - it often being preferable to make things too thick,
too strong, or too large rather than the converse.
lyo    Analytical Archaeology




                                                                      15-16




 3 - 4 | 5 - 6 I 7 - 8 | 9-10 | 11-12
      4-5     6-7     8 - 9 10-11 12-13   4-5   6-7   8-9   10-11
                mm

Fig. 3od Thickness ranges and frequencies: Rim-sherds in various styles of
Irish Neolithic pottery.
Source: Case 1961, p. 179.

    Since any one, or combinations, of these error categories may
affect the archaeological sample it is hardly surprising that many
examples are skew (figs 30, 34). However, skew curves can be trans-
formed to fit a normal distribution - by plotting on logarithmic scales
and by similar devices (e.g. Vertes 1 9 6 5 ) - o r the skew curve can be
approximated by one of the many other distribution curves with
known properties such as - G a m m a , Chi-square, Student's t, Snede-
cor's F, Binomial, or Poisson distributions. T h e s e curves are suitable
for very specific cases, some for discrete attributes and others for
continuous attributes and this must be kept in mind ( K r u m b e i n and
Graybill 1965, pp. 6 1 - 1 1 5 ) . But quite apart from these devices to
express the population's qualities it is important to differentiate
between 'skew distributions that would have been normal but for
handling errors' i.e. whose original population was normal in dis-
            Material culture s y s t e m s - attribute and artefact   171

tribution, as opposed to 'skew distributions deriving from distinctly
non-normal attribute distributions' due to special factors (fig. 31). At
the moment we will concern ourselves with the former cases.




                                                         Fig- 3i
                                                         Skewness
                                                         resulting from
                                                         the combination
                                                         of groups with
                                                         different means
                                                         and ranges.
                                                         Source: Anastasi
                  Two groups combined                    1965. P- 35-

    T o reiterate our original finding then, if we take a large number of
artefacts of one type, from one homogeneous assemblage, limited in
time and space and if we study the distribution of individual attributes
in that assemblage we usually find a unimodal pattern approximating
to a normal probability distribution - or capable of being made to fit
that model. This simple observation about the distribution curves
produced by attributes clustering about a mean is really a very
fundamental regularity - our first step towards a simple predictive
principle. Given the specified conditions of large numbers of a single
artefact-type from one cultural assemblage, limited in time and space,
one would now expect an attribute by attribute analysis to produce in
every case a unimodal curve approximating the normal distribution.
When the reality departs from this model we know that the specified
conditions are not being fulfilled by this particular sample. In other
words we can detect the interfering influence of a sample mistakenly
embracing several concealed artefact-types or populations, possibly
from several unrelated assemblages, or possibly from populations too
widely separated in space and time to share a common mean, mode
and median. Minor humps and bumps may well be attributable to the
172   Analytical Archaeology




      Fig. 32 Bimodality resulting from the combination of two
      groups with widely separated means.
      Source: Anastasi 1965, p. 35.


nature and size of the sample and whether these can be ignored or not
can be tested for by simple statistical techniques. If these extra peaks
cannot be disregarded then we can predict that the sample departs
from the basic conditions and probably conceals a mixture of popu-
lations or entities.

    Example. T h e data in this case was a quantitative and qualitative
study of the attributes defining 192 flint axes from the graves of the
Swedish Neolithic 'Battle-Axe' culture of around the end of the third
millennium BC (Maimer 1962, pp. 3 5 1 - 7 1 ) - T h e sample is rather
small, but Maimer found that the histogram of the range of variation
of the tapering butt angle gave an asymmetric and bimodal dis-
tribution curve (fig. 33). T h e distribution differed sufficiently from the
normal as to suggest the possible presence of two axe 'populations' -
one with practically parallel sides and the other form with acutely
tapering sides converging towards the butt. In the study of the other
attributes of the same axe sample Maimer discovered that the dis-
tribution of the axes' greatest width also exhibited a bimodal dis-
tribution (fig. 34). Here again there seemed to be two populations of
axe forms, one with a range of cutting-edge of small dimensions and
              Material culture s y s t e m s - attribute and artefact                173

another centre of dispersion around a markedly broader cutting edge
mean. Naturally, M a i m e r guessed that these bimodal distributions in
the attributes of the same axe sample might be connected and in order
to test this a correlation diagram w a s prepared plotting the butt angle
of each axe against the greatest blade breadth (fig. 35). T h i s cor-
relation diagram immediately shows that indeed it is the flint axes w i t h
nearly parallel sides that also have the n a r r o w e r blades and c o n v e r s e l y ,
the axes with tapering sides that have the broader blades. In fact the
s a m e appears to show a bimodal division into chisel-like i m p l e m e n t s
and heavier, w e d g e - s h a p e d a x e s ; this w o u l d accord with the w o o d -
w o r k i n g requirements of the Neolithic e c o n o m y . T h e correlation




    fig. 33 T h e basic proportions of flint axes from the Swedish Battle-
    Axe culture; see figs 34, 35.
    Source: Maimer 1962, p. 360.
174        Analytical Archaeology
      BUTT    ANGLE

      0°                                    19°

                       1
                    11 è1 1        i
       2 : 3 113 24 51 49 21 7 [ 4 18
           : i
                         (a)



      GREATEST       BREADTH
      1 8cm                                     V//                                       7 1 cm
                          rrr^M      y//.    m
                                                %       Im
       2 i 0 I 0 1 | 2 | 5 | 8 11712 15 17 8 18 19 16 14 | 7 | 4 | 4 | 10 I 2 f e ^ T ] 1     2
                                                            (b)
Fig. 34 (a) T h e bimodal distribution of Swedish Neolithic flint axes in terms of
their butt angle of taper; 192 examples.
Source: Maimer 1962, p. 371.
(b) T h e bimodal distribution of the same flint axe sample in terms of their
greatest blade breadth.
Source: Maimer 1962, p. 371.


d i a g r a m f u r t h e r s u g g e s t s that t h e r e m i g h t e v e n b e s u b - v a r i e t i e s w i t h i n
the h e a v y a x e p o p u l a t i o n a n d also p e r h a p s w i t h i n t h e c h i s e l s - b u t t h e
s a m p l e size r u l e s o u t any c o n f i r m a t i o n of s u c h a s u p e r f i c i a l a s s e s s m e n t
( M a i m e r 1962, fig. 83).

      In t h i s s i m p l e e x a m p l e it w a s p o s s i b l e to s p o t that t h e t w o attri-
b u t e s ' b u t t a n g l e ' a n d 'axe b r e a d t h ' w e r e d i s t r i b u t e d in c o r r e l a t e d
b i m o d a l d i s t r i b u t i o n s c o n s i s t e n t w i t h t w o p o p u l a t i o n s of a r t e f a c t s . In
p r a c t i c e h o w e v e r , t h e d i s c r e p a n t a n d a d d i t i o n a l m o d e of these dis-
t r i b u t i o n s m i g h t h a v e c o r r e l a t e d w i t h a n y o n e o u t of p e r h a p s fifty or
m o r e a t t r i b u t e s also v a r y i n g in t h e s a m e s a m p l e p o p u l a t i o n - i n c l u d -
i n g q u a l i t a t i v e m u l t i s t a t e a t t r i b u t e s . T h i s is t h e k i n d of p r o b l e m that
w o u l d call for m o r e p o w e r f u l m e t h o d s t h a n p l o t t i n g e v e r y a t t r i b u t e
d i s t r i b u t i o n w i t h e v e r y o t h e r a t t r i b u t e d i s t r i b u t i o n , on s c o r e s of suc-
cessive h i s t o g r a m s . N o t o n l y is t h i s a t i r e s o m e s o l u t i o n b u t it d o e s not
express succinctly                 the correlated             c l u s t e r s of    perhaps         half-a-dozen
a t t r i b u t e s that are s i g n i f i c a n t l y c o v a r y i n g o n e w i t h a n o t h e r .
       In the c o n d e n s e d          discussion          about       the       variation       of    attributes
w i t h i n a r t e f a c t s w e h a v e c o n s i d e r e d o n l y o n e of f o u r classes of varia-
tion :
          Material culture systems - attribute and artefact                            175

( 1 ) P o p u l a t i o n s of one attribute in one a r t e f a c t - t y p e population.
(2) Populations of several different attributes in one a r t e f a c t - t y p e
     population.


                            DI ITT   AMm   C




         Fig. 35 Isarithmic correlation diagram of the
         greatest blade breadth and butt angle measure-
         ments from 192 flint axes of the Swedish Neolithic
         Battle-Axe culture.
         Source: Maimer 1962, p. 371.
176      Analytical Archaeology

      (3) P o p u l a t i o n s of one attribute in several d i f f e r e n t artefact-type
          populations.
      (4) P o p u l a t i o n s of several d i f f e r e n t attributes in several d i f f e r e n t
          a r t e f a c t - t y p e populations.

S o far o n l y the first of these possibilities has been p r o b e d but the
implications of the other classes of variation can b e assessed using the
i n f o r m a t i o n already d e v e l o p e d .
      Populations of several d i f f e r e n t attributes in one artefact-type
present the p r o b l e m noted u n d e r the flint axe e x a m p l e . E a c h d i f f e r e n t
attribute s h o u l d a p p r o x i m a t e to a n o r m a l distribution curve if the
sample is h o m o g e n e o u s . A n artificial conceptualization of all the
normal d i s t r i b u t i o n s of all the attributes can then be visualized in the
f o r m of a solid bell c u r v e integrating intersecting distributions
arranged radially a r o u n d the centralizing v a l u e s (fig. 36). H o w e v e r ,
this latter model is of little utility since it is i m p o s s i b l e to locate a
single point within it to represent s i m u l t a n e o u s l y all the attribute
values of a single artefact - there are insufficient dimensions. If one
can i m a g i n e an « - d i m e n s i o n a l model to e x p r e s s n-attribute scales then
the attribute clusters of individual a r t e f a c t s can be located in this

                                                       Mean



                                                  /               S


                                                                      \




                      Attribute 1 3

  Fig. 36 T h e artificial conceptualization of a specific artefact-type popu-
  lation as the intersecting distributions of all its attributes.
           Material culture systems - attribute and artefact           177

multidimensional hyper-space - with relative distance measuring the
degree of correlation; the clusters of attributes representing the cor-
related and covarying galaxies of attributes will express the overall
dispersion and patterning of attribute complexes within the sample. It
may be impossible to draw an undistorted model of these conceptual
distribution diagrams but it is now within the capacity of modern
methodology to analyse data in terms of these dimensions and to
express the results in a comprehensive manner (figs 5 1 , 53, 54).
    T o return from what is methodologically possible, to what is
possibly required, brings us back to populations of one attribute in
several different artefact-type populations. Distribution curves for
such an attribute should show each artefact-type population with its
own normal dispersion centred around its own mean values - probably
in the form of a row of adjacent normal curves with their skirts
overlapping to some extent to produce a multimodal curve (fig. 32). It
should be pointed out however, that it is not impossible for otherwise
quite dissimilar artefact populations to share a mean, mode and
median for the distribution of one or more attributes - their
differences as populations lying in all the other unplotted attribute
distributions. Consequently, the proof of identity in attribute dis-
tribution in individual attribute cases does not serve to prove the
identity of the populations from which they have been drawn — not, at
least, until all or most of the other attribute distributions have been
matched. T h i s may seem quite obvious yet archaeological literature
has produced cases where the matching distribution of single attri-
butes in several artefact populations has been used as the sole support
for claiming their virtual identity - despite the possibility of the
samples being totally unalike in every respect other than the one
tested.
     Finally, there is the case of populations of several different attri-
butes in several different artefact-types. Here again one would expect a
multimodal distribution of each attribute in turn but the warning
expressed in the previous case applies once more. Several different
artefact-type populations may turn out to share identical distributions
and centres of distribution in respect of particular attributes. Indeed,
if the artefact-types happen to share a common attribute complex as
part of their format then the distribution of attributes in this complex
may well be identical, although serious artefact-type differences may
reside in the remaining attributes. A s a practical example, one might
expect that several different types of Bronze Age sword, with quite
178     Analytical Archaeology
different blade attributes, may nevertheless share a closely similar
range of hilt attributes and values, which may form part of an
independent attribute complex f o u n d f r o m type to type.
    T h u s far the investigation has dealt with the first part of our
project - with attributes and their behaviour in large n u m b e r s in
artefact populations f r o m a narrow and homogeneous time horizon or
phase. Several w i d e l y applicable and useful observations and
regularities have emerged f r o m this s t u d y :

      ( 1 ) Variation is inevitable, even amongst the most u n i f o r m arte-
            fact-types and their attributes. T h i s variation stems partly
            f r o m human w h i m and partly f r o m human inability to
            reproduce repeatedly and exactly a given set of conditions,
            even when exact replication is strongly desired. A s a further
            revealing example w e might note Isaac's (1969, p. 19) analysis
            of variation in artefact morphology at the Acheulean sites of
            Isimila and Olorgesailie (East Africa), where 'individual tradi-
            tions may have oscillated at random within certain limits,
            giving innumerable minor but real variants of artefact assem-
            blages' (fig. 37). T h i s stochastic variation should not be con-
            f u s e d with activity/functional variation (Isaac 1 9 7 2 b , pp. 1 7 7 -
            8) and through time it may produce the apparently aimless
            fluctuations     in artefact-types which are mentioned below
             (chapter 4, IV; cf. Binford 1 9 6 3 ; White and T h o m a s 1 9 7 2 , pp.
            299-304).
      (2) T h i s inevitable population variation is the basis of develop-
          mental change, providing the mechanism by means of which
          one artefact-type or assemblage develops into another.
      (3) It appears that within the homogeneous population of a single
          artefact-type, f r o m a short phase in time, that the variable
          multistate attributes each cluster in a unimodal dispersion
          approximated by a curve varying between the normal and a
          skew distribution (fig. 30).
      (4) It is the correlation between the dispersion patterns of the
          attributes within each artefact-type population which jointly
          express the 'personality' of that particular artefact-type.

    T h i s inquiry has given us a static impression of attribute variation
within artefact populations. Now, it is time to pursue the dynamic
'behaviour' of these entities in passing time-depth. Once again our
purpose is the isolation of generally applicable observations and
      centim«tr»j
Fig. 37 Examples of stochastic variation in all the bifacial tools (A) and the
handaxes alone (B) from penecontemporaneous sites at Olorgesailie (East
Africa).
Source: Isaac 1969, p. 14.
180     Analytical Archaeology
regularities which depend upon the severe constraints operating in
these kinds of system.


iv    Time pattern regularities

In the early part of this chapter we discussed certain inherent prop-
erties common to entities made up of populations of components
(section I, 1-6). Amongst these properties was the commonly noted
quality which we refer to by anthropomorphic analogy as the ontogeny
of the entity - its 'birth', 'maturity', and 'death'. This crude analogue
model conceals at least three levels of information about the inherent
'behaviour' of such complex entities - a confusion quite evident in the
customary discussions of the 'birth', 'mature development' and 'death'
of such diverse archaeological entities as attributes, artefacts, types,
assemblages, cultures and culture groups. In an attempt to make these
concealed levels of meaning more explicit we postulated (section I, 4, i,
ii, iii) that the population entity is ontogenetic in that it may exhibit:

        (i) the quantitative change and oscillation in numbers of
            components,
       (ii) the quantitative change and oscillation in numbers of the
            entity itself -
      (iii) the qualitative change and oscillation of the entity system as a
            structured system, manifesting an ontogeny in terms of the
            successive and cumulative introduction of essential and key
            attributes directively correlated towards the eventually
            integrated system, which then appears as an entity 'born' at a
            given threshold. The entity system disintegrates by the
            reverse process in which the attributes are successively
            replaced in such a way as to cumulatively transform the
            polythetic system across the threshold and into another and
            different system format (fig. 68). The 'birth', 'maturity', and
             'death' of the system as a system.

    A brief consideration of these observations and the familiar pattern
of the population entity structure should be sufficient to disclose the
identity with our general model structure and its three general levels
of equilibrium oscillation (postulate 1 1 ) :

        (i) equilibrium oscillation within the subsystem components ;
       (ii) equilibrium oscillation between the subsystems in the system;
           Material culture s y s t e m s - attribute and artefact    181

    (iii) equilibrium oscillation of the whole system as an integrated
          system.
    At the specific plane of this chapter we can equate the 'system' with
an homogeneous artefact-type population, the 'subsystems' with the
artefacts in these populations, and the subsystem 'components' with
the attributes networked within each artefact. Rewritten at this level
the immediate problem is to discover any time pattern regularities
expressed in the ontogeny or time-depth trajectory generated by:

     (i) the quantitative growth and oscillation in kind and numbers
         of attributes within homogeneous artefact populations (types)
         changing with time.
    (ii) the quantitative growth and oscillation in kind and number of
         artefact-types within diverse artefact populations (assem-
         blages) changing with time.
   (iii) the qualitative growth and oscillation of the artefact-type
         population system as a structured system of inessential,
         essential and key attributes - the directive correlation of suc-
         cessively introduced attributes towards the formative
         threshold, mature coherence, and ultimately the disintegrat-
         ing transformation of the artefact-type.

    Since the level of this chapter is arbitrarily restricted to the
regularities shown in the relationships between attributes within
general artefact systems, only the first of the listed aspects will be
covered in this section. T h e other aspects, (ii) and (iii), involve the
characteristics of artefact-types and assemblages, higher level entities
that we have not yet defined and which must therefore be left over for
the next stage of the hierarchical model (chapter 5, iv). T h e time
patterning of these various oscillating and multilinear system tra-
jectories tends to be artificially complicated by the confusion of their
several levels of operation. It is in order to try and avoid this compli-
cation that we will treat each level independently, beginning with the
lowest, (i).

    First let us clarify our intentions - our purpose is to discuss this
level of time change and then on this basis to propose models which
might be predictively used in relation to real data. T h e problem has
already been defined as the nature of the quantitative growth and
oscillation in kind and numbers of attributes within artefact-type
populations changing with time. T h e problem then immediately
182   Analytical Archaeology
presents two separate but not uncorrelated aspects - the distribution
or dispersion of the attributes in terms of each artefact, and the dis-
tribution or dispersion of the artefact population in terms of each
attribute.
     T h e attributes found on artefacts within a certain population can
be expressed as a polythetic list or set within which the attributes of
every artefact in that population may be noted. Quantitatively, the
system can change by increasing or decreasing the number of attri-
butes in the polythetic set, by fluctuating the number of attributes per
artefact, or by both processes jointly. T h e additional problem of an
increasing or decreasing output of artefacts during the system's time-
trajectory is a separate aspect at a separate level (ii).
     If the number of attributes in the polythetic set defining the
population is increasing or decreasing but the number of attributes per
artefact remains roughly constant - then the only change is in the
dispersion or distribution of the population about the range of attri-
butes (fig. 41). However, it is also possible for the system to acquire
and integrate new attributes in such a way as to change the size of the
polythetic set and also to change the number of attributes to be found
on each artefact in the population. T h e artefacts may become increas-
ingly or decreasingly elaborate in terms of the number of modifying
 attributes that they carry - a change in the 'sophistication' of the
 artefacts. It is important to differentiate the implications of quan-
 titatively changing the polythetic set of the system's attributes, chang-
 ing the number of attributes per artefact, or changing both simul-
 taneously. T o return to the case of a quantitative increase or decrease
 in attributes per artefact it is apparent that this reflects the cumulative
 increase or decrease in the attribute variety, or the degree of elabora-
 tion of the artefact-type. T h i s change may or may not be accompanied
 by an increase or decrease in the number of attributes in the overall
 polythetic set and the relationship operating between these separate
 trends may reveal considerable information about the circumstances
 of the changes.
    One kind of quantitative change that may be expected in an
artefact system time-trajectory is therefore equivalent to a changing
degree of artefact elaboration within successive phases - and this may
or may not co-ordinate with an increasing or decreasing range of
attribute variation within the successive populations. There are
broadly speaking four categories of quantitative attribute change on
this basis:
              Material culture s y s t e m s - attribute and artefact    183

       Nos of different   Nos of different
       attributes in      attributes per
       population's       artefact in the
       polythetic set     population         Implications

(I)    Decrease           Increase           Increasing artefact elaboration
                                               with a decreasing range of
                                               artefact variation

(2)    Increase           Increase           Increasing artefact elaboration
                                               with an increasing range of
                                               artefact variation

(3)    Decrease           Decrease           Decreasing artefact elaboration
                                               with a decreasing range of
                                               artefact variation

(4)    Increase           Decrease           Decreasing artefact elaboration
                                               with an increasing range of
                                               artefact variation




    T h e detailed implications of these categories of change depend a
great deal upon the particular kinds of functional or idiosyncratic
attributes that are quantitatively changing with time, as well as
depending upon the numbers changing, the rate of change, and above
all the degree of correlation between the changes in the individual
attribute trajectories. Nevertheless, it appears that the successive
transformation of an artefact-type from threshold to threshold and
from type-state to type-state has many of the characteristics of the
sequence roughly sketched by the transitions given above a s : . . . 4/1-
2-3-4/1-2 . . . and so on. These changes are not themselves responsible
for separating one artefact state from another but it does seem that
they accompany such changes somewhat in the manner suggested.

      Phase (o) - pre-formative threshold, decreasing artefact elabora-
         tion with an increasing range of artefact variation within the
         population of type S0 with key attributes A0.
      Phase (1) - formative, increasing elaboration of each artefact but a
         decreasing range of variation within the population of new
         formative types S i - t h e new format becoming coherent with
         key attributes A\.
184     Analytical Archaeology
      Phase (2) - coherent, increasing artefact elaboration with an
         increasing range of artefact variation - a great regional variety
         of artefacts and attributes within the population of type S i .
      Phase (3) - post-coherent, decreasing artefact elaboration, a
         decreasing range of artefact variety within the population of
         type Si.
      Phase (o) - pre-formative threshold, decreasing artefact elabora-
         tion - an increasing range of variation, allowing great freedom
         for individual divergence within the population of type S , / S 2 .
         T h e phase in which the attribute format A2 of type S 2 first
         becomes apparent in the increasing directive correlation of
         certain new key attribute trajectories.

     It must be very strongly emphasized that these are not the changes
which are responsible for forming and defining the thresholds between
type-states but merely changes which frequently combine with the
threshold changes. Neither is this cycle of change the simple sequence
just expressed - the number of attributes defining the population, and
each artefact in it, are capriciously oscillating with time - but it is the
broad correlation of the separate trends and their correlation in turn
with yet other trends, which together mark the thresholds.
     T h e increasing or decreasing numbers of attributes per artefact in
the trajectory of a type population changing with time may take the
form of steadily trending gradients towards the poles of elaboration or
simplicity, or they may exhibit irregular oscillation from one pole to
another (figs 38, 39). T h i s oscillation in the degree of artefact elabora-
tion may be connected with functional development and foci of
innovation in the system, or it may equally frequently exist as the
apparently aimless fluctuation in numbers of decorative or idiosyn-
cratic attributes within the stable set of possibilities. However, there is
usually a cumulative and overall trend towards the increasing physical
elaboration of the artefact-type up to a certain point, beyond which the
trend towards simplicity and fewer attributes sets in (figs 38, 39). Only
an examination of the attributes and the system would reveal the
 particular operating circumstances - but the idiosyncratic and least
constrained attributes, such as decorative motifs, are particularly
 susceptible to this kind of cumulative development, as many pre-
 historic sequences show. Good examples of this kind of trajectory are
 the oscillating fluctuations in attributes per artefact - from austere
 simplicity, to baroque elaboration, and back again - that we can
0
m
 1
O
c
00




      1           y        \
     It

     r            S        J
          ,   H




                      m t            •f   r-        CD CM
                      CM -           OJ        Oi   CO        CM
                      CM -           ro CO CO - CO CO
                      -        o     -  U3    00 (T> <3-
                      in       t     in   zz   co co
                      c-       00         in   -         CM
                      <x> -          co        O         -    «J-
                               <T>        m    -    CM CM in




                                                                    Ü   «




                                                                        i in
186       Analytical Archaeology




                                                                    39 Oscillation in the
                                                               degree of artefact-type
                                                               elaboration by the fluctuation of
                                                               the number of morphological
                                                               attributes. In this example the
                                                               gravestones carved by the
                                                               Lamson family of Charlesdown,
                                                               Massachusetts, show a successive
                                                               reduction in design attributes
                                                               and complexity from 1720 to
                                                               1760, a-c.
                                                               Source: Dethlefsen and Deetz
                                                               1966, p. 507.



d o c u m e n t in s u c h d i v e r s e artefacts as g r a n d f a t h e r clocks, d r i n k i n g
m u g s , and g r a v e s t o n e s (figs 38, 39, 47).
      Prehistoric          artefacts        show        similar       patterning,           especially          in
s e q u e n c e s in w h i c h the foci of c h a n g e m o v e e l s e w h e r e in the o v e r a l l
s y s t e m . P r e h i s t o r i c pottery f a s h i o n s o f t e n s h o w a c u m u l a t i v e e l a b o r a -
tion in n u m b e r s of decorative-attributes                          f o l l o w e d by a r e t u r n        to
s i m p l i c i t y . In a similar f a s h i o n the same c a t e g o r y of c h a n g e can be
detected in the return of Late A c h e u l e a n S a n g o a n h a n d a x e t y p e s to
' s i m p l e ' f o r m s , or the return of painted p o t t e r y styles to q u a n t i t a t i v e l y
u n e l a b o r a t e or s i m p l e f o r m s after a p r e c e d i n g cycle of                cumulative
elaboration. A study of the f u n c t i o n a l or idiosyncratic nature of the
attributes i n v o l v e d s h o u l d indicate the nature of the s t i m u l i b e h i n d
such changes.
           Material culture systems - attribute and artefact          187

    S o far we have considered the time pattern regularities of the
quantitative changes in numbers of attributes in the time-trajectory of
an artefact-type population - the distribution or dispersion of the
attributes in terms of the population and the artefact. We have been
careful to separate the implications resulting from fluctuations in the
polythetic set of the population's attributes and fluctuations in the
numbers of attributes per artefact. T h e result of these speculations has
been to confirm the oscillating nature of these variables and to suggest
a connection between their broad and combined trends and the
thresholds between successive artefact-type states. We must now turn
to another aspect of the same kind of population trajectory and
examine its implications - the time changes in the distribution or
dispersion of the artefact population in terms of each attribute. Our
objective, as before is the search for an 'organization' of the data that
will consistently yield a definable regularity, which in turn may then
be used as a controlled model for real data organized in the same
arbitrary way.
    T h e distribution of the successive phase populations of an artefact-
type in terms of each attribute is the converse of the aspect just
completed. T h i s kind of fluctuation need reflect no change in the
absolute numbers of attributes per artefact - no necessary change in
the total variety of the polythetic attribute list. Instead there may be
oscillations or trends in the successive states of the population dis-
tribution within the existing range of states in multistate attributes -
successive changes in the artefact population dispersion in respect of
an individual or several attributes (fig. 42). On many occasions all of
these three separate categories of change may be operating - change in
the polythetic attribute set, change in the numbers of attributes per
artefact, and change in the distribution of the artefact population in
terms of its component attributes. For the time being we will consider
these changes independently and the last category in particular.
    In order to elaborate this model we must return to the unimodal
distribution expressing the centralizing values or states within a
population exhibiting a given range of states at a particular population
phase in time (fig. 29). Now, a population and consequently its dis-
tribution curve may not only change its mean, mode and median
values with changing time but it may also change its standard devia-
tion and its range spread, separately or jointly (figs 40, 4 1 , 42).
Whereas the standard deviation measures the degree of the centraliz-
ing tendency, the 'peakedness' of the curve, and the number of
188     Analytical Archaeology

artefacts piled on the central values, the spread of the curve expresses
the permissible range of states or values of a particular attribute found
in a particular artefact population.
    On the basis of our earlier static phase model of the distribution of
an artefact type population in respect of a given attribute we can now




      Fig. 40a Distributions with the same mean, but different standard
      deviations.
      Source: Moroney 1957, p. 112.




                                          V   y=ix
                                    • X
                                  -*-y


         M<xJe                ^
         Median
         Mean

 Fig. 40b Mean, Median and Mode in moderately skew cases. For
 moderately skew distributions we have the simple approximate relation:
 Mean - Mode = 3(Mean - Median). For a perfectly symmetrical dis-
 tribution they all coincide.
 Source: Moroney 1957, p. 48.
Fig. 41 A schematic model of the successive distributions of a specific
artefact-type population in respect of a given attribute - with a shifting mode
and spread.




Fig. 42 A schematic model of the successive distributions of a specific
artefact-type population in respect of a given attribute - with a shifting mode
and spread, and a changing centralizing tendency or standard deviation.
190     Analytical Archaeology

construct a series of alternative trajectory models for such a population
changing with time:

       (i) a model with a successive shifting mode and spread (fig. 41).
      (ii) a model -with a successively shifting mode and spread, and a
           changing centralizing tendency or standard deviation (fig. 42).

T h e s e models provide us with an elementary 'ideal' with which to
compare real data. T h e 'ideal' would be greatly improved if, for
example, we could express the increasingly severe central tendency
and narrowing spread of a cluster of different attributes, or conversely

                                   Attribute       state
                                    3                4




                             • •   • • •
                             • •   • • •
                             • •   • • •




                                           \
                                               \
                                   • ••                        «•(
                                   « I•            •••••••     •• 4
                                                           \




                                                                       \
                                                                      The\
                                                                      moving^
                                                                      mode
       Fig. 43 Hypothetical 'ideal' model for a continuous sequence of
       successively dominant attribute state modes and ranges for a
       single multistate attribute in successive phase populations of a
       single specific artefact-type trajectory. T h e 'ideal' double lenti-
       cular distribution model - lenticular in vertical tradition ontogeny
       and lenticular in horizontal phase distribution (archaic, modal,
       prototypical states) - a distribution which may be sought-for in
       suitable data (see figs 46, 47).
                     Material culture systems - attribute and artefact                                                             191
 DATE
        1788 92 961800 04 0 8 12 16 20 24 28 . 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76 80 84 88 92 961900 04 08 12 16 20 24 28 32 36


  i
  I      ' .




   Fig. 44 The oscillating modal state of multistate attributes within
   successive phase populations of an artefact-type - women's day dresses
   1788-1936, length of skirt (graph 2), height of waist (graph 3), height of
   decolletage (graph 4). Lines, five-year moving averages; dots means for
   years.
   Source: Kroeber and Richardson 1940, p. 114.


the increasing slackness and increasingly wide dispersion and spread-
ing range of a changing artefact-type - concepts that have a great deal
in common with the intuitive ideas of artefact-types growing in
coherence and definition and artefact-types slackening and losing their
distinct format.
    Now we must turn to the time-trajectories of real artefact popu-
lations and see how they match the regularities of our models. One
well-documented example is the oscillating trajectory of dress attri-
butes in women's fashions - an example that has extended the term
'fashion changes' to the general category of oscillating change tra-
jectories (figs 44, 45). Fashion oscillations in this sense represent
the sequence of successively dominant modes and ranges in attri-
bute distributions which trend between the arbitrary or functional
192     Analytical Archaeology
 OSTE




     45 The oscillating modal state of multistate attributes within successive
phase populations of an artefact-type - women's day dresses 1788-1936,
width of skirt (graph 5), width of waist (graph 7), width of decolletage (graph
8). Lines, five-year moving averages; dots means for years.
Source: Kroeber and Richardson 1940, p. 1 1 5 .

boundaries of their stable sets of values. Such stochastic fashion
oscillations have been very well documented from historic and pre-
historic artefact trajectories through time (fig. 47). We may compare
with the models, for example, the marked double lenticular trend in
vertical traditions and horizontal phase populations of the beaker
example - with an overall diagonal trend of modal values in decorative
styles (fig. 46).
    A brief evaluation would suggest that the two simplified models of
the way in which attribute populations in artefact-types change with
time are reasonably useful and predictive of an expected pattern.
Deviations from such a pattern are to be anticipated in practice and
emphasized by fitting to the expected curve. Common deviations from
this pattern could be minor irregularities caused by too small samples,
by sequences that were not homogeneous or continuous and other
           Material culture s y s t e m s - attribute and artefact    193

customary statistical requirements which if not fulfilled may serve to
obliterate or fragment the patterning. Larger and more deliberate
deviations are the kind that this technique is designed to highlight and
isolate for their information value. T h e trajectory may perhaps show
discrepancies caused by divergent multilinear development giving rise
to two or more isolated and divergent contemporary populations,
stemming from a common basis. Just such a divergence is illustrated
by the beaker diagram (fig. 46) where the separate development of
contemporary Northern British ( N i , N2, N3, N4) and Southern Bri-
tish ( S i , S2, S 3 , S4) beaker subcultures is neatly shown by the
dislocation and overlapping symmetry of the diagram ( S i , S2, S 3 ,
stylistically equate with N2, N3, N4). T h i s is the kind of discrepancy
which a prognosticated model can powerfully illuminate despite the
necessarily simple form the model might take. Such models can be
made increasingly close approximations to a specific patterning, until
the data are fully 'explained' in the terms of the model.
     Retrospectively, it seems that we can conceptually divide the
unimodal attribute dispersion of a phase population into three sub-
ranges in respect of each attribute - an 'archaic', 'modal' or 'typical',
and a 'prototypical' range (figs 29, 46). T h e archaic range represents
the continuity in an artefact population of some of the attribute values
or states that were once modal in earlier population states in the
trajectory - a conservative minority preserving a 'memory' of previous
system states (£s, fig. 9). However, the great bulk of the artefacts in a
phase sample will be exhibiting a distinctive contemporary set of
values for this attribute - the modal or 'typical* values for that popu-
lation at that phase in time - values developed from among the 'pro-
totypical' fringe of earlier states. Even this sample will itself have an
extreme set of 'prototypical* values, some of which express the values
to be developed as modal or 'typical' in the succeeding phase states of
the population trajectory (figs 43, 46).
     In this way the time-trajectory of the modal values or states
expresses a kind of progressive cycle in which attribute states move
from prototypical to typical and to archaic frequencies in time, whilst
they are simultaneously part of successive phase populations in which
the other prototypical, typical or archaic values are also reflected - a
double lenticular pattern of population distribution (fig. 46).
However, the complications arise when it is realized that the artefacts
in a phase population are never uniformly prototypical, typical or
archaic in all their attribute states. T h e polythetic reality shows that
                  STYLE
   GROUP           o (i)    a              b                   c             d             e           o (.i)
                   L •
                   1        i1           —r1 -       -     • -1r             11            r1          r1 •
     AOC
c 2000 B.C.
                           ••••
                  •••
                  • ••     •• ••
                            ••••           •••
     E            •••      ••••
                           • •           ••••
                                          •••••

     W/MR          ••      •••         ••••••                 ••

                                         • •     •
                    •      •• •• •         •••
     N/MR                  • • ••          •• •• ••

                           ••
                           ••           ••••
                                        ••••                 • t• •          •«•         ••
                                                                                         • ••
                                                                                            •
                           ••           ••                                               •• •
     N/NR                               • ••
                                           •••                  •••           ••
                *t«1                      •••
                • • • •    • •           • • •                • • •
     EANG       • • • •    • •             • • •
                ••••                       ••
                                         •••
                  1
                  •••       ••           ••••
                                          •••                   •             «                 Di scon for mity
     BW
                           •             •••
     Nl/D                  ••            •••
                                         •••                  ••• •

                           • •       • • • • • • •         • • • • • •     • • • •
     N2                     ••       ••• •it«
                                     •••••••               ••••(•
                                                           ••••••          ••••
                                                                           ••••            •
                                     • • • • • • •         • • • • • •     • • • •


                                     • • • • • •         • • • • • • • •   • • • • • •
                                     • • • • • •         • • • • • • • •   • • • • • •   •••
     N3                              • • • • • •         • • • • • • • •   • • • • • •   •••
                                         • •             • • • • • • • •     • • • •
                                                             •••
                                                             •••
     N4                                  •• •                ••
                                                             • ••
                                                                •                 •      • • • Disconformity

     51                    • •         • • • •               • • •         • • • • • •    ••



     52

                                                                                         •••

     53


     S4                                  ••                     •           •• •

 c. 1500 B.C.
                                         •• •                               •
                                                                            ••••         •
                                                                                         ••  *
                                                                                             ••          •••••
     SH                                                                                  • •
                                                                                           ••  •
                                                                                               •          •
                           One dot equate one restoraWe beaker

Fig. 46 T h e double lenticular attribute trend in vertical style traditions and
horizontal phase populations of an artefact-type; in this example, the roughly
successive phase populations of British Late Neolithic beaker pottery in terms
of their distribution across seven successive 'position-of-decoration' styles
(o(i)-o(ii)). The disconformities represent departures from the 'ideal' model
and confirm the regional nature of the development - thus the Northern
British groups overlap the Southern British groups chronologically (N2, N3,
N4 equate with S i , S2, S3, S4).
            Material culture systems - attribute and artefact             195

most artefacts have prototypical values for some of their attributes,
modal values for others, and archaic values for the remainder.
    In conclusion it appears that artefact-type populations of attributes
produce four repeatedly recognizable regularities in their time-
trajectories :

      (i) an osicillating variation in the numbers of different attributes
          defining the polythetic set of each successive population
          phase;
     (ii) an oscillating variation in the numbers of different attributes
          per artefact in the successive population phases;
    (iii) a tentative impression that correlations between these two
          irregularly oscillating variations may jointly co-vary with
          other factors to define the boundaries or thresholds between
          one artefact-type state and another;
    (iv) an oscillating variation in the successive modes that rise to
          prominence in an interesting double lenticular pattern:
          Lenticular in horizontal population distribution - with
             archaic, modal and prototypical attribute states.
          Lenticular in vertical distribution - with the successive
             introduction, modal dominance, archaic decline and
             disappearance of each attribute state in the time-trajectory
             of the type.

   These regularities provide some useful models of expected time
change patterns which can be cautiously used to illuminate real data -
providing the necessary statistical safeguards are observed. T h e
regularities in entity 'behaviour' allow the development of prediction
from discrepancies.


v   System pattern regularities
T h e main text of this discussion about artefacts in terms of their
component attributes has made little reference to the general model
earlier proposed for archaeological processes (fig. 1 1 , postulates 1 - 1 6 ,
chapter 2). T h i s omission was deliberately permitted in order that the
particular changes, processes and regularities being studied might
independently verify in detail much that the model had covered in
general. However, it is the intention of this section to draw attention to
the particular ways in which the system model applies to this
particular level of entity - attributes within artefacts.
196   Analytical Archaeology
     We have identified the system that this chapter has been discussing
as the system of attributes within artefacts - which themselves are
merely subsystems of the cultural assemblage system and ultimately of
the sociocultural system and its environmental setting. At the lower
level the artefact system is set in the immediate context of an assem-
blage of other artefact systems - the artefact system is immediately
coupled as a component in the assemblage system. Fluctuations in the
assemblage system may therefore be expected to correlate with
changes in particular artefact systems on occasions.
     In the analysis of any artefact-type it is always useful to sketch the
specific categories of attributes and the system networking their
interconnection. T h e system model must be given the structure of the
particular artefact under investigation. Not only does this express the
obvious relationships between the artefact's attributes but it may draw
attention to surprising connections and it will certainly clarify the
processes of the artefact system's possible trajectories. T h e system
model for a particular artefact, or indeed for any archaeological entity,
emphasizes the interconnected and highly integrated nature of
cultural entities and their change processes. Such models prevent the
undiscerning concentration on variation in a single aspect which can
never be unconnected with variation in many other system aspects
 (fig-5)-
     T h e preliminary outline of material culture as merely one socio-
 cultural aspect or subsystem has already anticipated the view that the
 analysis of systems of networked artefacts or attributes can best be set
 out in terms of the interaction of variety (chapter 3, III). Variety under
 the relative categories of new variety (gain), alternative variety (dis-
 junction), contradictive variety (equivocation) and confirmative
 variety (redundant) - variety which at this level means variety in
 attributes. We have already noted that new attribute variety can only
 impinge on an artefact/attribute system as external variety diffused
 from neighbouring systems of all levels, or as internal variety
 generated within the same sociocultural system by innovating
 accident, play, or invention - with the chance development of emer-
 gent qualities which may appear simply on re-networking old
 components. Invention and diffusion provide two of the major pro-
 cesses relevant to this level of archaeological entity but neither can be
 manifested without the third process of acceptance and integration.
  Integration of new variety depends on the system being able to
 'reconcile' all the myriad coupled values in the gross system by mini-
           Material culture systems - attribute and artefact          197

mizing the maximum amount of system dislocation, in order to ensure
continuity.
    Against this background new attribute variety may take the form
of a new kind of flint retouch, the idea of a tool-kit made on blades
instead of flakes, or simply the idea of putting a notch or a rivet where
there had never been one before. Most of this new variety will simply
be alternative or disjunctive and the new attribute may be assimilated
in the artefact population as an alternative state under a multistate
attribute - a quantitative increase in the number of attribute states.
Indeed, all the states of a multistate attribute are simply alternative or
disjunctive variety. Sometimes of course, the 'new' variety diffusing to
the system through its coupling channels will merely be redundant or
confirmative in that the particular system already has that particular
attribute.
    T h e more interesting variety is contradictive variety, when equi-
vocation may give rise to oscillating instability. Contradictive attri-
butes take the form of attributes that conflict with some of the pre-
viously existing variety of attributes in the artefact structure. T h e
normal course is for the sociocultural system to reject such contradic-
tive variety in which case no change or problem arises, but on
occasions it sometimes occurs that one piece of contradictive variety
may minimize a whole group of serious dislocations pre-existing in the
system. In which case a minor equivocation and dislocation will be
acceptable as a solution to a major disconformity - thus minimizing
the maximum amount of system dislocation. It follows that the
integration of contradictive variety must be accompanied by other
system repercussions and readjustments - often generating a
comprehensive new set of variety for this purpose — sometimes with
unforeseen and subsequently emergent results.
     Contradictive attribute variety could arise from the need to
integrate the attributes of a slashing sword-edge with the shape and
capacity for rapier thrusting. These contradictive requirements were
settled in the Bronze Age Keszthely-Boiu rapier (Cowen 1966) and the
Carp's-tongue sword (Hencken 1956) by 'new' and comprehensive
blade shapes offering a compromise or blending strategy. T h e halberd
is just such a 'new' artefact variety arising from the attempt to employ
a dagger-blade at long-range and in a battle-axe manner; the spear
presents an alternative solution to the same problem compatible with a
rapier thrusting technique. Artefact hafting has always been a major
source of contradictive variety and its reconciliation. A stone missile
198   Analytical Archaeology
head must be thin and unobstructed for maximal penetration, and yet
it must be rigidly held in the end of a relatively thick shaft: a tang is
clearly one of the best solutions.
    Contradictive attribute variety is particularly important to the
archaeologist because it is often instrumental in the generation of 'new'
varieties of artefact and attribute, these may frequently be unstable
and short-lived compromise solutions with oscillating states or values,
but equally some of the new variety may have significant emergent
potential. In all these cases a strategy combining the attributes in the
system may adopt a mixed, random, optimizer, satisficer, or minimax
solution. T h e strategy of attribute blending adopted throws additional
light on the dislocations and their foci within the artefact system, as
well as helping to define the key attributes.
     Equilibrium in an artefact system is therefore largely a matter of
keeping all the variations in all the attributes in the system compatible
with the purposes for which the artefact was intended and with the
sociocultural system that made it. Equilibrium occurs at the charac-
teristic three levels - between the attributes, between the attributes
and the artefact, and between the artefact system and its total context.
Unstable oscillation and aimless stochastic oscillation within stable
 multistate attribute sets occur normally and we have illustrated
several actual examples of such oscillating change trajectories (figs
44-7). T h e role of oscillating and aimless 'random walk' variation in
 invention and the chance production of emergent system qualities
should not be overlooked (Isaac 1969, p. 19). Needless to say, as in all
these entity systems it is the human generators who fulfil the inter-
 connecting loops and channels by means of which attribute is linked
 with attribute and artefact with artefact (fig. 48). It is the artefact
 maker who feeds back into the phenotypic constitution of the next
 generation of artefacts the modified characteristics of the preceding
 populations of artefacts (.£s, fig. 9), and it is in this way that the
 artefact population has continuity in its trajectory and yet is continu-
 ously shifting its attribute format and dispersion (figs 46, 48).
    T h e phenomenon of lag is represented by the gap between the
eventual artefact population being modified and the first appearance of
the dislocation requiring the change; the lead is the gap between the
modifications which anticipate certain events and the time when the
events would have occurred - the anticipation commonly removing
the danger of the events. A long time lag or lead are often pre-
conditions for oscillating instability in an artefact system causing the
   Cambridge
              Death's Head           Cherub            Urn 4 Willow        Portrait

  1830-39
    20-29
    10-19
  1800-09
    90-99




  Concord
         Osatb's Head        Raman            Cherub          Urli Wliow      Portrait




  Plymouth
        Oeitk's Hud      Heart-Moutk          •eduu            Cherub       UriiHIIot




Fig. 47 T h e double lenticular attribute trend in
vertical  style   traditions  (infrequent,   frequent,
infrequent) and horizontal phase populations (archaic,
modal, prototypical) of an artefact-type; in this case
New England gravestones from three areas in terms of
seven motif attributes. Note the moving mode, from
bottom left to top right 1700—1830, in each case.
Source: Dethlefsen and Deetz 1966, p. 505.
   Fig. 48 How the pattern gets into the system. The constraints of a
   common raw material, the constraints of a common environment 'E'
   and common cultural percepta, concepta, and designata, rigorously
   limit the range of selected and directively correlated attributes which
   define the artefact-type population. See also figs 1 1 1 , 112.

system to appear to 'hunt' about a stable equilibrium solution - usually
by oscillating its attribute population in a number of different ways
(figs 44, 45). T h i s instability in an artefact's attribute configuration
frequently characterizes 'new' comprehensive formats attempting to
blend contradictive variety within the system. T h e early developments
of a new artefact-type consequently often display a wide variety of
short-lived variants which steadily die away leaving one or two stable
variants as modal forms. T h i s initial variety within a single artefact-
type in a single assemblage should not be confused with the
subsequent variety in the same type based on contemporary regional
            Material culture systems - attribute and artefact          201

variants - each of which is modal and stable for its own territory and
assemblage.
     Any population of artefacts can be defined by the systemic struc-
ture of the polythetic set listing their attributes. Any artefact within
such a population will have a particular subset of attributes from
within the range of the polythetic set. We have already seen the several
different ways in which the subset of attributes defining an artefact
may fluctuate both quantitatively and qualitatively, both absolutely
and relatively to the overall polythetic set. Every artefact is in a sense
the embodiment of a small-scale strategy devised by its fabricator in
order to satisfy and blend the requirements of its fabrication, its
context and its intended usage. T h e particular artefact therefore
represents a particular micro-strategy expressed as a particular mix-
ture and proportion of specific attributes and attribute states - a
population of such artefacts represents a set of similar strategies or
minimax solutions to a particular array of competing and even
conflicting environmental problems. T h e analysis of a population of
artefacts within a single type category can usefully be set up to
investigate the artefacts as attribute systems adopting a certain strat-
egy in relation to their fabrication and usage.
     T h e identification and role of inessential, essential and key attri-
butes within an artefact-type's attribute system and its trajectory has
already been discussed at length. In broad outline we have seen that it
is the essential attributes which map the format of the relevant system,
distinguishing the artefact's 'archaeological' system from its natural
characteristics. It is the essential attributes that express the
'continuity' of the system as the same system rather than as a trans-
mutation. T h e key attributes are detectable as those essential attri-
butes that not only change with the changing system but which change
in a tightly correlated and covarying pattern of relationships. It is this
pattern of relationships that give that particular artefact-type its
coherent identity despite its range of variation in component attributes
and their states. T h e inessential, essential and key attributes within an
artefact population depend on the frame of reference of the enquiry
but once this is established the particular category of particular attri-
butes within the system may be statistically defined (e.g. Judge, 1970).
    It is the successive and cumulative introduction of the key and
essential attributes into the system's time-trajectory that define the
thresholds at which the specific artefact format is first recognizable as
an integral whole, and the terminal threshold when it is last
202   Analytical Archaeology
identifiable within the limits of this same format. Retrospectively, and
in light of a specific attribute format, these essential and key attributes
can be viewed as directively correlated towards the formation and
subsequently the successive transformation of the particular artefact
system of attributes. This apparent 'birth' and 'death' of an artefact
format is one of the system qualities anthropomorphized under those
ontogenetic terms. T h e concept of artefact 'birth', 'maturity' and
'death' confuses the three levels of - the changing degree of artefact
elaboration, the changing numbers of artefact produced, and the
changing artefact format and its transformation from state to state.
Thus the 'death' of an artefact population may reflect simply its return
to a simple, unelaborate format, the total cessation of its production by
a given culture, or its continuation in a transformation state radically
different from that arbitrary range of states regarded as limiting the
'type' format. T h e same confusion operates in relation to higher
system entities with the same and increasingly serious consequences
for analysis and interpretation.
     In conclusion we may perceive that the postulates of the general
niodel suggest that archaeological entities can be viewed as dynamic
systems of attributes. T h e equilibrium or stability of such systems
seem best set out in terms of the interaction of attribute variety -
whether new, alternative, contradictive, or redundant to the system
 format. This kind of system should show oscillating equilibrium at the
 three main levels of coupling - between attributes, between subsys-
 tems of attributes and between the system and its context. T h e
 concepts of inessential, essential and key attributes, directive cor-
 relation, cumulative approach to thresholds, and apparent ontogeny
 should also be demonstrated by the kind of system modelled in the
 postulates. In this chapter we have attempted to show that just these
 very aspects can be found in the 'behaviour' of attributes within
 artefact populations and their trajectories. T h e general model may
 well be imperfect in a number of features but it appears to promise a
 capacity for more powerful development and at least a temporary
 utility.


Notes

   ( i ) T h e author's concept of the relationship between 'percepta in the
maker's m i n d ' and the artefact and its attributes is one e x a m p l e of the
metaphysical position w h e r e b y the archaeologist gears his typological
             Material culture systems - attribute and artefact                 203

methods to the definition of 'real' artefact-types. These are thought to have
been those specifically produced by their makers with a clear function in
mind ('each attribute . . . is equivalent to a piece of premeditated and delib-
erate hominid behaviour', above p. 156). T h e regularities observed by the
archaeologist in artefact-types (e.g. size, shape) are the direct result of 'mental
templates' or 'type concepts' among the historic or prehistoric population that
fabricated them. This model for typology is referred to as 'empiricist' by Hill
and Evans (1972) in a provocative study containing many useful examples of
archaeologists' approaches to 'types' and typology. They argue that types are
real (i.e. non-random clusters of attributes) but that a variety of these may be
defined according to the problem or hypothesis under investigation.
Furthermore the people that produced these types need not necessarily have
been aware of them. T h e pottery types defined by Longacre (1970) and Hill
(1970) in their analyses of social organization in Pueblo settlements are a case
in point: 'although the individual manufacturers of the pottery undoubtedly
had things in mind, and knew what they were trying to paint on the vessels,
they were not necessarily aware of the minute attribute differences taken into
consideration in these studies' (Hill and Evans 1972, pp. 256-7). The exis-
tence of distinctions between 'folk taxonomies' and archaeological
classifications has been rarely studied. Birmingham (1975) and Gould (1974)
both note the existence of native classifications of pottery and flint tools based
upon function rather than form, while White and Thomas (1972) have
concluded that the New Guinea highlanders today 'do not regard their flaked
stone tools as a series of formal or single-functional types, but as pieces of
stone, parts of which may be used to perform certain activities' (p. 278).
Their observations on inter-community variation of type sizes suggest the
existence of a 'template' or 'type concept', although it is not explicitly recog-
nized by the local population. This is an important point and supports the
argument that there may be archaeologically detectable regularity in artefact
'types' which was the result of 'covert' rather than consciously 'cognized'
constraints among prehistoric populations (White and Thomas 1972, p. 298).
    (2) Doran and Hodson (1975, pp. 1 6 1 - 2 ) follow Childe in distinguishing
the types that comprise an assemblage or culture and those that distinguish this
entity from others of a similar rank. These latter types were referred to by
Childe as 'type-fossils' and are presumably to be recognized, as Clarke argues
here, after a full analysis. However, this does not remove the need for caution
in using the word 'typical' in this sense, as its ambiguity (e.g. when non-
quantified) can lead to confusion and misinterpretation (see above, chapter 1,
v).

   (3) The argument that the attribute is 'logically irreducible' is disputed
by Steiger (1971, p. 67), who claims that if taken literally this definition
would restrict the attribute to the world's four major dimensions: length,
time, mass and electric charge. In a similar vein, Hill and Evans (1972, p.
265) write that all attributes are divisible and are not 'immutable natural
204    Analytical Archaeology
units of observation'. T h e r e is an element of semantic quibbling in Steiger's
criticism, but it can be argued that there are 'levels' of attribute definition, the
lowest most general and least archaeologically useful of which would be the
'logically irreducible' one defined in this chapter (Doran and Hodson 1975,
pp. 1 0 1 - 2 ) . At the same time Hill and Evans take no note of the flexibility
inherent in the author's distinction of quantitative and qualitative attribute
states (see above pp. 156—8).
5      Artefact and type

       Archaeological phenomena can be grouped together as
       types just because results of private experience, of
       individual trial and error, have been communicated to
       other members of a society and adopted and replicated by
       them,
                             V. G O R D O N   C H I L D E » 9 5 6 , p. 8




1   Introduction
U s i n g the broad foundations outlined in the preceding chapters it is
now possible to clamber a little higher up the framework of our
hierarchical model of archaeological entities (fig. 49). Archaeological
attributes exist in clusters as components of artefacts. T h e archaeolo-
gist and prehistorian usually subdivide the vast array of artefacts into
'artefact-types' or 'families' on an intuitive basis that subtly blends an
unconscious assessment of similarities in sets of attributes with a swift
guess at a common usage pattern for the artefacts as a group. It is this
unspecified blending of empirical observation with                intuitive
experience which has given rise to so m u c h debate about the real or
imaginary nature of the 'type' concept. Clearly, we must pause to
analyse the basis of the 'type' concept in terms of our existing
definitions and in the ultimate hope of producing a viable definition
for this fundamental entity.
    T h e importance of developing an adequate definition for artefact-
types and then applying the definition with all possible rigour cannot
be overestimated. M a n y contemporary studies, particularly in the
Palaeolithic field, make great play about variations f r o m artefact
assemblage to assemblage of the relative percentages of given artefact-
types. S o m e of the most elegant and p o w e r f u l of modern methods
such as factor analysis and principal component analysis have been
applied to this kind of data (Binford and Binford 1 9 6 6 ; Doran and
Hodson 1966). H o w e v e r , hardly any of these studies define their unit
artefact-types on other than an intuitive and arbitrary basis of very
debatable adequacy, and one which is certainly not sufficiently
2O6      Analytical Archaeology
                                     CULTURE
                                     A polythetic set of specific and comprehensive artefact-
                                     type categories which consistently recur together in
                                     assemblages within a limited geographical area. L e v e l s :
                                     culture group, culture, subculture.
        C U L T U R E GROUP
        A family of transform                ASSEMBLAGE
        cultures; collateral cul-            A n associated set of contemporary artefact-types.
        tures characterized by
        sharing       a polythetic                 TYPE
        range       but   differing                Specific artefact-type; an         homogeneous
        states     of   the   same                 population of artefacts w h i c h share a consis-
        specific multistate arte-                  tently recurrent range of attribute states
        fact-types.                                within a given polythetic set. L e v e l s : type
                                                   group, specific type, subtype.
TECHNOCOMPLEX
A g r o u p of cultures characterized by                   ARTEFACT
assemblages sharing a polythetic                           A n y object modified by a set               of
range but differing specific types of                      humanly imposed attributes.
the same general families of artefact-
types, shared as a widely d i f f u s e d and                       ATTRIBUTE
interlinked     response   to c o m m o n                          A logically irreducible charac-
factors in environment, economy and                                ter of two or more states, acting
technology. T h e material manifesta-                              as an independent           variable
tion of cultural convergence within a                              within a specific artefact s y s t e m ,
c o m m o n stable environmental strat-                            An epistemically independent
egy.                                                               variable.

Fig. 49 A schematic hierarchical model of the major archaeological entities
arranged in ascending order of system complexity. T h e higher the entity in
the classificatory scheme, the greater its predictive information content.

c o m p r e h e n s i v e in application or accurately defined in t e r m s of attri-
b u t e s . T h e c o n s e q u e n t d a n g e r is that an alternative or c o n f l i c t i n g
definition of the a r t e f a c t - t y p e s w i t h i n s u c h a s s e m b l a g e s w o u l d rad-
ically alter the m u c h d i s c u s s e d relative percentages a n d c o r r e s p o n d -
ingly     alter     their     meaningful          interpretation.          Such       a        procedure
i m m e d i a t e l y u n d e r m i n e s the p o w e r and elegance of the t e c h n i q u e s
used in the analysis and most of the objective virtues of the h i s t o g r a m s
and c u m u l a t i v e c u r v e s of s u c h intuitive t y p e s . 1
      S u r e l y , it is i n c o n g r u o u s to use p o w e r f u l and m o d e r n t e c h n i q u e s
to b u i l d u p an i m p r e s s i o n of the u p p e r levels of prehistoric entities
w h e n the l o w e r levels and f o u n d a t i o n s are certainly i n a d e q u a t e and
u n s a f e - one cannot b u i l d s o u n d s t r u c t u r e s f r o m s h o d d y c o m p o n e n t s .
If elaborate t e c h n i q u e s are to be used in the higher levels of inter-
pretation then the entities of the lowest level must                                      be    similarly
d e f i n e d . T h e distaste g e n e r a t e d b y the t h o u g h t of h a v i n g to so define
                                                      Artefact and type           207

each of the main type categories must be swallowed if undue haste is
not to spoil the quality of the results of much time-consuming and
expensive analysis.


11   Artefact-type systems

It is frequently assumed that artefact-types are self-evident groups of
artefacts intended for a specific usage (e.g. projectile points, axes,
swords, burins or scrapers). Now although it is clear that the concept
of an artefact-type often coincides with a group of artefacts sharing a
common purpose this does not necessarily mean that usage pattern is
both the sufficient and necessary feature for the definition of artefact-
types. On the contrary, there are many different types of artefact
which share a common usage and many single artefact-types which
have multiple and diverse purposes in different sociocultural contexts.
Furthermore, prehistorians are often completely at a loss to define the
precise use of many artefacts but this does not prevent artefacts of
unknown purpose being sorted into types. T h e linkage between arte-
fact usage and artefact type is simply that artefacts intended for a
given purpose will also necessarily possess a large number of
functional attributes and constraints in common.
    Analysis would seem to show that artefact-types are conceived in
terms of detailed sets of similarities between numbers of artefacts such
that the degree of similarity between artefacts within the type g r o u p is
greater than any similarity between artefacts in separate type groups.
One can imagine a similarity gradient falling-off exponentially towards
yet other groups of internally similar type groups. Evidently the
boundary between type clusters conceived in this way will be rather
arbitrary in precise location. Furthermore, the type concept seems to
express some relationship linking a population of artefacts with a
structured or patterned population of attributes.
      U n d e r the older, tacit models of the type entity, the sceptics were
quick to notice that unfortunately no two artefacts, even within the
same artefact-type, ever possess completely identical attribute assem-
blages or sets. T h i s would seem to prevent the archaeologist f r o m
usefully defining the type categories simply as those separate popu-
lations of artefacts respectively carrying attributes 1 - 5 0 - t y p e 1 ,
5 1 - 1 0 0 - t y p e 2, 1 0 1 - 1 5 0 - t y p e 3, and so on in neat, rigid, mutually
exclusive attribute clusters. Unfortunately instead of openly recogniz-
ing the fact that archaeological groups are not of this nature, most
208    Analytical Archaeology
prehistorians have continued to pretend that the concepts of types,
cultures, and culture groups were monothetic in nature. T h i s violence
to the real situation has served to obscure one of the most interesting
and significant characteristics of archaeological g r o u p concepts -
namely, that most of these groupings are polythetic (fig. 3).
     N o single property or attribute is necessary for the membership of
a polythetic g r o u p , although nothing denies or warrants the possibility
that some property in the set may be sufficient for membership within
the aggregate. A s it turns out, both natural taxa and archaeological
taxa are not always f u l l y polythetic since some attributes may be
c o m m o n to all m e m b e r s of the taxon. For example - all flint scrapers
have retouch, all burins have burin-blow scars, all pottery is made of
clay and so on. It has already been observed that one of the vital
aspects to be investigated in the future should be the definition of the
different structural categories of polythetic groups f o u n d amongst the
particular levels of archaeological entities and the investigation of
precisely how this structure influences their 'behaviour' characteris-
tics. S u c h an investigation must clearly await the accumulation of
analysed instances.
    T o return to the immediate problem, w e appear to have accumu-
lated a certain amount of data about the necessary properties of an
archaeological artefact-type. S o far it has been noted that artefacts are
defined by their component clusters of attributes. T h e s e attributes are
of all kinds and states, reflecting aspects of raw material, shape, size,
detail, and location of detail. We are now concerned not with the static
phase pattern of a single attribute within a population but with the
clusters of tens or hundreds of different attributes that integrate to
define artefacts as complete entities. It w o u l d seem that artefact-types
are populations of artefacts that are richly cross-connected amongst
themselves in terms of affinity between their sets of attributes. T h e
artefact-type cluster represents a comprehensive population of arte-
facts internally b o u n d by a high level of similarity between the
individual sets of attributes, even though these sets may share attri-
butes with other type clusters and even though the artefacts within the
population vary amongst themselves within a polythetic pattern.
Artefact-types, so it appears, are not usually f u l l y polythetic, because
certain attributes may be shared by all m e m b e r s of the group.
    T h e problem is to attempt to distil f r o m all these preceding
observations a concise and viable definition of an artefact-type or
'type'. A s a tentative attempt along these lines it may be suggested that
                                                 Artefact and type       209
an artefact-type is - an homogeneous population of artefacts which share a
consistently recurrent range of attribute states within a given polythetic set.


HI   Phase pattern regularities
One curious corollary of the type concept is that the term 'type' is a
collective noun expressing the attributes of a population of artefacts
varying between certain limits, although the word 'type' may some-
times be used in a singular sense for a hypothetical 'mean' artefact-
type about which the population of artefacts can be said to vary. If this
latter sense of the word 'type' is understood merely as a symbolic
shorthand for the defined population of artefacts and their constel-
lation of dispersed attributes then this usage is acceptable but
dangerous. Very few real artefacts in such a population will closely
resemble the hypothetical 'mean artefact' incorporating all the mean or
modal attributes - the majority of the artefacts display some archaic,
some prototypical and only a proportion of modal or mean attribute
values. Any archaeologist who has faced the task of attempting to
select one real artefact from a sample population to illustrate all the
'typical' characteristics of that population has realized how atypical
such an artefact is.
     It would seem worthwhile to investigate the patterning of the
constellations of different attributes that cluster to define an artefact-
type under our definition. This approach, however, is made difficult
by the absence of any number of exhaustive analyses of prehistoric
artefact-types in terms of their component attributes. Indeed, all the
properties of the higher archaeological entities, from types to cultures
and culture groups, are artificially clouded by the absence of
sufficiently detailed analyses or experiments. Prehistorians all too
often fall back upon a few vague and undefined opinions expressed in
an expansive way over a pipe of tobacco, with the warm conviction
that these concepts will always remain elusive wraiths - which of
course they will unless they do something about it. One suspects that
the drudgery of an attribute by attribute analysis of hundreds of
artefacts is the thought which really deters the intrepid prehistorian.
In such a situation one can at the moment do no more than make the
most of the few available analyses and combine these with speculative
and necessarily dangerous hypotheses.
    From analyses, it appears that amongst the set of attributes
combined to define a population of artefacts some few attributes may
210   Analytical Archaeology
be present on every example - these we have noted as inessential
attributes in the sense of being inessential to the changing system,
although they may be far from inessential to the artefact-type's
function. These inessential system attributes are for example the
characteristics that all handaxes are made of stone, all daggers or
swords of a certain type have riveted hilts, all pots of a certain type
may have the same form of rim, and so on. These very few inessential
attributes shared by all the examples of the type are usually the
nucleus of mainly functional attributes which prevent the attribute set
for the population being fully polythetic. Since they are present in
every example of the population it is clear that such attributes would
have a 100 per cent coefficient of correlation within the type, each of
these attributes always occurring with the others. Such universal
attributes are obviously exceptional in comparison with their less
universal attribute associates; most of the other attributes in the
population will occur together frequently, but not on 100 per cent of
the artefacts. These latter form the majority of the system's essential
attributes with usually a more balanced functional and idiosyncratic
aspect, perhaps having an optimum correlation of 60 per cent or so
with some other attributes in the type population. Finally, there is the
extreme fringe or penumbra of the range of attributes, characters
which do occur together on this type of artefact but only at a mutually
sporadic level. Many attributes with a high idiosyncratic and low
functional aspect fall into this general category of exotic and occasional
characters. Such attributes may have less than a 10 per cent level of
correlation with any other attributes in the artefact-type population.
    It is particularly important to grasp that we are discussing the
structuring of the population's attributes in terms of the correlation or
frequency of mutual occurrence one with another and not simply their
individual frequency in the population. An attribute may be
absolutely rare in overall occurrence within the population - perhaps
only occurring ten times in ten thousand artefacts - but on every
artefact that this attribute does appear, it may always be joined by
another equally rare attribute. In such a case the frequency of these
attributes' occurrences in the artefact population may only be of the
order of 10/10,000 but their mutual correlation would be 100 per cent.
Nevertheless, since they are so infrequent in overall occurrence their
correlation with other more numerous and common attributes would
be very low - in fact, o • 1 per cent with any attribute occurring on all
of the 10,000 artefacts. We can expect therefore a constellation of
•                 * 0                                            Fig. 50 Hypothetical 'ideal' model
                                                                 representing a single specific
                                                                 artefact-type population as the
                  I* £           j           ^                    nucleated constellation of its
                  V.®- ®          1                              intercorrelated attributes. Each dot
    •                           ^ ^                  f           represents an attribute, the
                    .                                            encircled nucleus reflecting the
                                                                 essential multistate attributes of the
                            0                                    system; the whole distorted from
                                                                 multidimensional to two
                                                                 dimensional space.




                                                                          ' ' 21              (F)
                                                                                         \U
                                                                  ;          •     «12       1
              1                                                                  ®25          i*8
          /lO                            \                            \                  /
                                                                                            # 9
 ®        !        13®      ™              L                                  /""V28
                                35
                                          / *                                 23®     ®36 \
                                                                          #3i   2 2 .  .19
    3,#
                                         *7                               .5 \        »24,/
                                                                          * ,2       — "

                                      /       16 #       \                   v a^/



                            ®                                P:)
                    4                                    [
                        *            !                                /"mF^


                                                             \



                                                                      ©
Fig. 51 A practical analysis computing a two-dimensional
configuration of attribute intercorrelations from a multidimen-
sional scaling procedure. The population in this example - a
multi-subtype specific artefact-type population (760 pots) over c.
¡00 years - British Beaker pottery defined by thirty-nine basic
attributes. External evidence shows the developmental trajec-
tories proceeding A - B - D (AOC,E,W/MR,BW,E.Ang) and A - C -
E - F (E,NI-4,SI-4) in parallel in different regions.
212   Analytical Archaeology
attributes with distances proportional to the correlation between pairs
of attributes to have several clustered nuclei but probably with one
major nucleus of jointly correlated and clustered subnuclei. Such a
model would clearly need multidimensional hyperspace but this can
be reduced and distorted to two or three dimensions by various
practical techniques (fig. 51).
    The purpose of these observations is to emphasize the overall
impression that develops from the study of attributes clustered to
define artefact-types. In the model that emerges it appears that within
the constellation of attributes defining the type's polythetic set there
may be one or more tightly correlated core clusters of closely covary-
ing attributes, with some correlation links of 90-100 per cent. The
majority of the attributes in the polythetic set will occur together at a
less pronounced level, with some correlations with the core cluster
attributes of perhaps 60 per cent. Then there will remain a minority of
attributes, admitted sporadically as an outer penumbra of less than a
 10 per cent correlation with any other attribute (fig. 50). The impres-
sion gained is of a main nucleus or core of clustered attributes linked
by high levels of mutual correlation, with outer shells of successively
decreasingly correlated attributes. Distorted onto linear axes the
model becomes a unimodal humped distribution of attributes in terms
of their correlation coefficients (fig. 52). Every individual attribute has,
of course, a correlation measurement with every other attribute in the
system and some of these will be of the lowest level and others of much
higher levels.

    Examples. For real multidimensional models of attributes within
artefact-types, there are analyses on British Beaker pottery (fig. 51),
Hallstatt swords (fig. 53), Iron Age fibulae (fig. 54), British Acheulean
handaxes (Hodson 1 9 7 1 ; Doran and Hodson 1975, pp. 241-6) and
Australian prehistoric backed blades (Glover 1969).

    The outcome of these speculations suggests that an artefact-type
has a reality which resides in a highly correlated inner core of attri-
butes within an outer group of attributes of decreasing levels of
correlation. Each type may be represented by a nucleus cluster and its
penumbra although closely related types will inevitably share attri-
butes in their constellation shells whilst retaining distinctive and
peculiar nucleus clusters and overall correlation structuring. In an
analysis of the relationships between several different but related type
                                        Beaker attributes 1 - 3 9

Fig. 52 A representation of the distribution of the product-moment cor-
relation coefficients between 39 ceramic attributes in a population (760) of
British Late Neolithic Beaker vessels (c. 2000-1400 BC). A multi-subtype
specific artefact-type population.



                •          • -Ha
                       o     /
            .     ••   0    S °
            Eb. S 9 J
                           00

                                                                         Ha

                                                                              -Fe
                                                                    Ha
 ?
 E
•c
 H
o




                                   Discriminant function 1

Fig. 53 A k = cluster analysis of sixty-five Hallstatt C swords described by
19 attributes and plotted on a two-dimensional scatter diagram. Open circles
- continental swords; filled circles - British swords; Ha = Hallstatt; Eb =
Ebberston, Yorks; Fe = iron sword from Court-St-Etienne, Belgium.
Source: Doran and Hodson 1975, p. 241.
214   Analytical Archaeology

         Computed order, two dimensions



                                B2                 °           P°7
                   e                          o5               27
                                                                              O
                   25                         28
                                                                              6
                        O                    © 1199®
                                                   22
                                                     „
                        4             m    20 e    22                                             ©
                                      16 e    23                                                  30
                                                       ©
                                         17 ®          3
                                      15®
                                      15
                                          •     i 6 ®13
                                                ®                   •
                                                                   12,                            S
          H                          ©    1 0 e 11                    •                   «
                                     24     18 ©                      *                © 1
                                                 14                                2
                                                                              Strain 0 0047


         Computed order, on« dimension


          I    /       ^    /    ^    /   /   /        /   /   W     ^    ^    ^   x    \     I       I]
          h ooBoooo©©ee©e«©©©©e©«©©©o© • • •
              25           4      5 16 23 17 10 20 11 14 3 9 2      21
                   8            27 28 24 15 22 19 2618 13 12 6     1 30
                                                      Strain 0-0085
        Fig. 54 Computed proximities of the Iron Age fibulae by
        multidimensional scaling, in two dimensional distortion (top)
        and in one dimensional distortion (below).
        Source: Hodson, Sneath and Doran 1966, p. 320.


populations it is the arrangement and interval b e t w e e n the constel-
lations that express the interrelation b e t w e e n the artefact-types.
     T h e overall importance of this study has been to point out yet
again that despite the irregularities of individual elements, populations
of attributes have definable relationships and a coherent structure.
T h e model developed in this section is a tentative attempt to sketch
the regularities and constraint in the clustering of attributes within
artefact-type populations. O n c e again it is possible that this or a better
model will p r o v i d e us w i t h a testable low-level predictive model by
means of w h i c h w e can detect and isolate artefact-types or investigate
the pattern of their deviation f r o m the e x p e c t e d ideal.
    O n e side-effect of this analysis t h r o w s some light on the confusion
arising f r o m the use of the term 'type' at different levels of complexity
and meaning (see above, p p . 27-30). T a k e the statements:
                                                   A r t e f a c t and type   215

    a flint scraper is an artefact-type
    a flint scraper flake is an artefact-type
    a flint flake side-scraper is an artefact-type

and as a parallel e x a m p l e :

    a bronze sword is an artefact-type
    a bronze flange-tanged sword is an artefact-type
    a bronze flange-tanged E r b e n h e i m sword is an artefact-type.

In these successive statements it is apparent that the word 'type' is
being used at quite different levels of complexity, linked only by being
hierarchic levels of the same general set. In these examples there are
three separate levels - the level of artefact-type         group, or general
family of function and material - such as flint scrapers and bronze
swords; the level of specific artefact-types - such as flint flake scrapers
and bronze flange-tanged swords ; and finally the level of the variant or
subtype - the flint flake side-scraper and the bronze E r b e n h e i m sword.
    However, the problem then arises - which arbitrary level in the
hierarchy is to be designated subtype, which a type, and which a type
group or f a m i l y ? D o types in such diverse artefact populations as flint
scrapers, bronze swords, cooking pots and microliths represent taxa of
precisely equivalent rank? T h e number of levels for attaching the
subtype, type, or type g r o u p labels is almost infinite and archaeologists
are completely inconsistent in their usage of the term 'type' and of the
level of entity complexity to which they attach it. T h e arbitrary nature
of the subtype, type, and type g r o u p levels is at once admitted but
confusion must result if this arbitrariness is not at least consistent.
     If we think back to our correlation model of the multidimensional
attribute constellation w e can begin to understand the basis and
difficulty of the problem. T h e nuclei or core of highly correlated and
frequently recurring attributes will include many of the highly
functional attributes c o m m o n to a utilitarian f a m i l y of artefact-types
and defining their essential 'axe-ness', 'scraper-ness' and 'sword-ness'.
T h e s e structured attribute complexes will be f o u n d in the same
general f o r m in quite different artefact-type or specific type constel-
lations - usually in the highly correlated core. H o w e v e r , if w e take the
outer shell of attributes, say with at best a 60 per cent correlation with
the core attributes, then these will include many of the less-generai
and more-specific and idiosyncratic attributes of the artefact-type -
it is this middle level which equates best with the artefact-type,
specific type, or simply the type level of c o m m o n terminology. In
2i6          Analytical Archaeology
the o u t e r m o s t shell of a m a x i m a l correlation of 10 per cent the transect
e m b r a c e s most of the m i n o r attributes and attribute c o m p l e x e s that
define the w h o l e range of s u b t y p e s or variants w i t h i n the m a i n type
population.
      O n e of the m o r e i m p o r t a n t c o n t r i b u t i o n s of n u m e r i c a l t a x o n o m y
has b e e n to s u g g e s t that the v a r i o u s internal levels of affinity and
correlation d i a g r a m s may be used as a c o m p a r a t i v e m e a s u r e of the
rank of the g r o u p s at particular transects - u s i n g a unit called the
p h e n o n (Sokal and S n e a t h 1963) (fig. 55). S u c h a t e c h n i q u e w o u l d

                       1 2 5 9          3 6 7 10           4 6
           100
                                                LI

             90


       I eo                                                                - 8 0 % phenon line
       u
                                                                           " 7 5 % phenon line
       *70
                                                                           *65%phenon line
       160
       </>                                                                 - 5 5 % phenon line
             50


             40


                   55 Dendrogram to show the formation of phenons.
               Source: Sokal and Sneath 1963, p. 252.


enable the archaeologist to c o m p a r e the rank of artefact-types and
s u b t y p e s in a m o r e o b j e c t i v e w a y and p r o v i d e a basis for a gradually
more s t a n d a r d i z e d t e r m i n o l o g y . U s i n g this kind of s u b d i v i s i o n the 80
per cent level of the affinity or correlation d i a g r a m w o u l d be the 80
p h e n o n level, the 60 per cent the 60 p h e n o n , and the 10 per cent the 10
p h e n o n level. It w o u l d s e e m ultimately possible on the basis of a large
n u m b e r of detailed studies of this kind to g r a d u a l l y establish the best
arbitrary levels for the c o m p a r a t i v e ranks of the s u b t y p e , t y p e and
t y p e g r o u p labels. U n t i l s u c h a time arrives some effort s h o u l d be
m a d e to keep the use of these terms, w i t h their d i f f e r i n g implications,
to consistent levels of c o m p l e x i t y and content.
      A t this point s o m e a t t e m p t m a y be m a d e to gather t o g e t h e r the
general i n f o r m a t i o n a b o u t the a r t e f a c t - t y p e c o n c e p t as an entity.
                                                Artefact and type       217
     (1) Artefacts belong at one and the same time to three broad
         categories or intersecting sets - to a type group, a specific type,
         and a subtype.
     (2) Type group - the artefact-type group or family ; a group of
         affinally related, collateral artefact-types characterized by a
         common component subset of attributes which define a
         complex constraining functional usage and raw material. A
         low-level affinity, perhaps less than 30 per cent, uniting the
         group as a whole.
     (3) Type - specific artefact-type; an homogeneous population of
         artefacts which share a consistently recurrent range of attri-
         bute states within a given polythetic set. No two artefacts
         within the type need be exactly alike in any single attribute
         and no artefact need possess all of the attributes in the set - an
         intermediate-level affinity or perhaps 30-60 per cent uniting
         the population as a whole.
     (4) Subtype - artefact subtype or variant; an homogeneous sub-
         population of artefacts which share a given subset within an
         artefact-type's polythetic set of attributes. A sub-population
         with a high-level of affinity, perhaps 60-90 per cent, uniting
         the individuals within the whole.
     (s) The artefact-type can be represented in terms of a nucleated
         constellation of attributes defining the polythetic set and
         arranged in terms of their correlation one with another in
         multidimensional space.
     (6) T h e artefact subtype populations should be represented as
         secondary nuclei or clusters of highly correlated attributes
         within the overall constellation of the artefact-type.
     (7) T h e presence of several distinct artefact-type populations
         within a sample population should be represented by multiple
         and separate nuclei within the overall galaxy of attributes.


iv   T i m e pattern regularities

An earlier section of the preceding chapter briefly discussed the three
main categories of change within changing artefact-type populations
and proceeded to elaborate the simplest of these (chapter 4, IV i).
T o recapitulate, the three categories included

      (i) the quantitative change and oscillation in numbers of attri-
          butes,
218     Analytical Archaeology

            (a) as variation in the number of different attributes defining
                the polythetic set of successive population phases;
            (b) as variation in the number of different attributes per
                artefact in successive phases;
            (c) as variations in both of the above aspects jointly, in a
                variety of combining trends;
       (ii) the quantitative change and oscillation in numbers of the
            artefact-type population itself, in successive phases,
      (iii) the qualitative change and oscillation of the artefact-type
            system as a structured system.

    T h e more complex aspects (ii) and (iii) were deliberately left-over
until this section since they are intimately bound-up with the ontog-
eny of artefact-types. It will be remembered that the organic and
ontogenetic analogue of birth, growth, maturity, and death, appeared
to confuse or remain inexplicit about the levels of change involved and
the meaning of the analogy. We can now resume the study of these
remaining processes and pursue the implications of the analogy.
    Once again the main purpose is to scan the time-trajectory of these
general categories of change for any useful regularities that might be
employed in analysis. T h e grossest change and oscillation involving
artefacts and attributes is change in the relative numbers of an arte-
fact-type being made in the successive phases of the type's time-
trajectory. T h i s quantitative change and oscillation is gross because it
overshadows and cuts across all other attribute fluctuations - a given
attribute cannot exist and fluctuate independently if it is unique to an
artefact-type no longer in production.
    T h e output of a given artefact-type at successive intervals in time
is usually expressed in relation to the output of other types in each
sample - artefact-type A formed 25 per cent of a sample assemblage.
Obviously this expression must be made in the light of proper sample
precautions and sampling procedures. However, given these pre-
cautions the relative output of particular artefact-types within a
cultural assemblage reflects a particular strategy on the part of the
society reconciling the competing demands for working time and its
deployment against the anticipated dislocating variety of the environ-
ment (lead, fig. 1 1 ) . In this sense the percentages of different artefact-
types in an assemblage represent the partial expression of a blending
or mixed strategy towards aspects of the environmental and sociocul-
tural situation. Particular sociocultural systems are characterized by
                                               Artefact and type       219
 particular overall strategies and consequently by their physical
 implementation in artefact form.
     Quantitative oscillation in the relative output of given artefact-
types therefore represents successive readjustments or changes in a
cultural strategy - some insignificant and others dramatic. Neverthe-
less, although these gross oscillations cut across and perhaps terminate
some attribute trends they do not necessarily co-ordinate in a simple
way with one the function of the other. It is conceivable that a given
artefact-type may have an increasing number of attributes per artefact
and in its overall set whilst the artefact system is gradually transform-
ing from one homeomorphic type-state to another - yet simul-
taneously the culture may suddenly cease the manufacture of the type.
An artefact-type may be in the middle of a development towards an
increasingly sophisticated and elaborate form and yet at the same time
the culture may decide to cease its manufacture. T h e trend in
numbers of attributes and attribute states may operate independently
of the trend in total output and overall-system state. For obvious
reasons it would be unusual for a culture to be systematically develop-
ing the elaboration of an artefact's format at the same time as it was
decreasing its production. Accordingly, the three separate trends
frequently, but not universally, reinforce one another with a decline in
production accompanying a decline in elaboration and system state
development.
    Once again we have a situation in which three broad groups of
trends may operate in various relationships one to another and assum-
ing that each trend has the alternative states - increase, steady,
decrease - these offer a bewildering variety of twenty-seven crude
trend combinations in practice. An archaeological analysis of these
three aspects of an artefact-type changing with time may be parti-
cularly informative if these three trends are isolated and then studied
in relation to one another.
    T h e quantitative increase or decrease in absolute numbers of an
artefact-type may be part of a fashion oscillation but rather more
frequently it reflects changes in the sociocultural system and especi-
ally, but not uniquely, changes in the economic strategy. T h e manner
in which particular artefact-types oscillate in numbers with passing
time often takes a familiar pattern - the double-lenticular pattern
already seen in the modal trends of attribute states (fig. 56). Just as one
particular attribute state is increasingly selected, becoming a modal
state, only to be gradually replaced by another attribute state of
220    Analytical Archaeology
                      Specific artefact-type categories
                1        2           3         4          5    6




      Fig. 56 Hypothetical 'ideal' model for a continuous sequence
      of successively dominant specific artefact-type states (1-6) and
      ranges for a single multistate artefact-type in successive phase
      populations of a single cultural assemblage trajectory. The
      'ideal' double lenticular distribution model - lenticular in
      vertical tradition ontogeny and lenticular in horizontal phase
      distribution (archaic, modal, prototypical states) - a dis-
      tribution which may be sought-for in suitable data (see figs
       57-60).


formerly infrequent occurrence - so we find artefact-types appearing
for the first time, becoming quantitatively common and widespread,
until eventually replaced by a more efficient artefact, or itself develop-
ing into a more efficient artefact, or until the purpose for which it was
employed is abandoned (fig. 57). It is important to grasp that this
familiar pattern occurs for largely independent bnt similar reasons in
both attributes within artefact-types and in artefact-types within
                                                             Artefact and type          221

assemblages. T h e pattern in not the same in both cases simply because
the artefact-type is an integration of attributes changing in this way,
but because artefact-types and attributes oscillate in the same way for
closely similar reasons - namely, the continuous cultural process of
selecting and developing successive aspects from the inevitable and
broad range of attributes and artefact-types available. Nevertheless,
the importance of this double-lenticular dispersion and its moving
mode is the same for assemblage/type studies as for artefact-
type/attribute studies — the pattern provides a crude predictive


                  PERCENTAGE      DIFFERENCES    IN    POTTERY    TYPES


                                     CHALAN      PIAO

            Marianas plain        Marianas red        Mar. red-variant    Lime-filled
 Surface
 level i
        2
        3
        4
        5
        6
        7
        8
        9
       10




                             LAULAU      ROCK     SHELTER

                 Marianas plain        Marianas red        Mar. red-variant    Lime-filled
      Surface
      level 1
            2
            3
            4
            5
            6




                                       S c a l e ® 10%


      57a Examples of the double lenticular ontogeny curves for specific
 artefact-types within successive assemblage phases. In this case pottery
 types stratified in rock shelters in the Mariana Islands, Micronesia, c. AD
 800-1400.
 Source: Spoehr 1957, p. 123.
* I

                I   I




I     I


                                                                      w
                                                                      rt u o
                                                                          a> M1 'o
                                                                      o 'ö' O a
                                                                          u   O
                                                                      C a. oo u    a
                                                                    ju V
                                                                          co û >>
                                                                      <u c«         i
                                                                          o e c
                                                                    3 CO
                                                                      3      13 u
                                                                      O       C «>
                                                                    -o c 1—   1
                                                                               1
                                                                         1— 1 o          d
                                                                      u
                                                                    •Ä CO «u S     o    vO
                        .   i   i     i C E Ï Ï i                         a>       UH    U";
                                                                    M-4 CO"rt     It*    a
                                                                                         M
                                                                      0 •C eu C
                        • • i l l       1
                                                                      V   O. >>    0
                                                                              aj ^      .O
                                                                    'S« V M "M co
                                                                                         u
                                                                      S J2         C
                                                                      CS 3 > «
                                                                      X
                                                                      u S U     i     4> C
                                                                            «>
                                                                              u
                                                                                      ö «
                                                                       c
                I   I                                                < «              O T3
                                                                                      a o
                                                                           « g ü "gli
                                                                              « ó
                                                                                      S u
                                                                           u C        2 o
                                                                        . O C
                                S B ¿2,10 3ilS NISV9 XDlMXDld   •    .ÛjD U Ö « u     3 O
                                                                                         3
      I   É I   É É                                                  ^ co E-1 -a en
                                                       Artefact and type            223

principle or model such that agreement with, or deviation from the
model will provide information about the situation being examined.
    As evidence for the real nature of this patterning and in order to
show how it may be sought for and used we can take several practical
examples. It is essential to distinguish between actual stratified
examples of this double-lenticular pattern (figs 5 7 - 9 ) and those
examples of material which have been ordered using this model and its
assumptions (fig. 60). T h e kinds of information that can be looked for
in such studies are the phases in which whole groups of artefact-types
show terminal or initial appearances, grouped nodes of change which
often mark the replacement of one assemblage or type complex by
another. On occasions it is sometimes possible to separate the
smoothly trending patterns of whole groups of indigenous artefact-
types from the fragmentary and irregular patterns sometimes asso-
ciated with sporadically imported or traded items.




             m mm m
              Round toppad   Plain round   Plat tops      Notched tops   Total




             m
              combs with          tops
                                                                         co
                  knobs                                                       ™§5




     Fig. 58 An example of the double lenticular ontogeny curves
     for specific artefact-types within successive assemblage phases.
     In this case carved wooden Maori combs stratified at Kauri
     Point, New Zealand c. AD 1600-1800 (the curve irregularities
     in this case are largely due to the imposition of an arbitrary
     depth stratigraphy in a strata-less swamp).
     Source: Shawcross 1964, p. 391.
224      Analytical Archaeology

                                                       BOURDEILLES               LATER                     SOLUTREAN

                                                                       Line-fossil
                                                     Double            Soiutrean                      Laurel            Willow         Shoulder
      SITES              Grattoir                    Grattoir    Borers types                         leaf               leaf           Sol. pt.            ASSP
                                                                                                                           1
                           «                                                                                              • 1
                          11 \
                                                         A           1 ' »            1                «
                                                                                                                          1 1
   Bourdeilles                                          1( \         1 1 •
                                                                     * < 1
                                                                                      1
                                                                                      1
                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                       M                  « 1                          11                  !
   Fourneau du           i \                                 \       1 ' 1            t               1 t                 1 1
   Oiable H I            1 \                                         ' ' 1
                                                                     I ' l
                                                                                      1
                                                                                      1
                                                                                                        ' I
                                                                                                       ' 1                t 1
                                                                                                                                   \\                  ' 1!
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                           1'
                                                                                                                                                                           1
                          1  1                                                                                                     *                  ' •                  t
   Fd. D upper          » \\                                                                                                                              1
                                                11                                                                                     \\
                                                                     M l              f                |    i                  1
   terrace H         /!        \                                     l i t            1           t \                          1
                                                                                                                                                        \
                                                                                                                                                     t/ \ 1
   Fd. D upper
                     /              \                                l i t            l           1             l              1        \        >            \        ,

                 '                  1                                                                                      11               \ 1                   11
   terrace I     >                      1                            11           ;           i                 1           1               \\ 1t                 11

   Fd. 0 lower   1                      1   I                        h       1   1            1                     1      !!                                     ii

   terrace                                                       1    «      t 1          1                         1
                                                                                                                           »
                                                                                                                                             1                     1
                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                     t       ::           1                   >            t                                       1




  Fig. 59 An example of the lenticular ontogeny curves for specific
  artefact-types within successive assemblage phases. In this case flint
  artefact-types are stratified at the Fourneau du Diable shelter in the
  Bourdeilles region of France - an Upper Palaeolithic site of the Solu-
  trean technocomplex.
  Source: Collins 1965, p. 932.

    F r o m this evidence it is clear that artefact-types have a quantitative
ontogeny in the sense that they appear for the first time, become
frequent, and subsequently cease to be made. A l t h o u g h the growth
curve need not be unimodal or smooth it does roughly fulfil these
conditions in a surprising number of test cases (figs 57-60). A great
deal of comparative work has yet to be done on the collection and
comparative evaluation of categories of frequency growth curves for
artefact-types within assemblages. H o w e v e r , quite apart from a gross
quantitative ontogeny, the artefact-type population exhibits the same
properties in a quite different respect in relation to the qualitative
change and oscillation of the entity's system of correlated attributes as
a structured constellation changing w i t h time. It is this dynamic
version of the earlier static phase model w h i c h one must develop
further in any examination of the time-trajectory 'behaviour' of arte-
fact-type systems.
    T h e qualitative change of the artefact-type system as a structured
system simply represents the time-trajectory of the correlation model
and another way of looking at the manifestation of the kinds of
changes already discussed. It is often useful to use several alternative
models of even a single dynamic process in order that their useful
regularities might supplement one another and in this case because the
several models are tacitly employed with some confusion in studies of
artefact and assemblage ontogeny.
                                                                                                                                                             Artefact and type                                                              225
    Thus far we have a static model expressing the structure of an
artefact-type population as a nucleated constellation of attributes
arranged in clustered complexes and secondary nuclei in terms of the
attribute intercorrelation in ra-dimensional space (see above, pp. 210 ff).
We now wish to develop some model of the 'behaviour' of successive
generations or phase populations of these artefacts - the phenetic
output of one phase being the input of the succeeding phase. In
reality, of course, the successive developments of an artefact-type take
place in many dispersed but interlinked settlement sites, with differing
yet related sequences and lines of development. Nevertheless, the
dynamic system trajectory of the developing artefact-type population
may be arbitrarily expressed as a single overall integration of such
subsystems and lineages within a single multilinear and mosaic

                                                                                                                 VEZERE                       AURIGNACIAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                      Strangulated
                                                            Grattoirs              Nosed Carinates                       Aurignacian Other                                      Aurignac                 Blodes                       Buskates
    SITES                         Burins                    Bushoids                Ail Carinates                          Retouch Buskoids                                      Blades                 Buskoids                      Buskoids
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                              1                    1                                                                                          \                                       A                               A                    1
 Faurelie
                                                                                                                                                          /       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¡*\
                                                                 1 1                       1                         1                    1    «         /                                                                       <l           1
 Cellier-Ruth
                Upper C           1            1
                                                                                                                                                         i                '          1 1                                          (          I
                                                                                                                                       1           \
 Belcay r e - R e n n e                                          —
                                                                                               1                 1                    <             i        1        '
                                                                                                                                        1           1                                                             1 1
 Lartet    Gorge                                             1       «                                                                t•            1j                                    1
                d'Enfer                                                                        1             1
 Belcay r e - Meta ¡rie                                                                        i             1                         '            1                                                                                 1 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              »              t
 Cellier Sower A                                           f — -         v                                                        /                           1       1                                                                  1
                                                                              *                1             1                f                               »       1          1                \                                   1 1
 Castonet upper C
                                          •            /
                                                                                                             •           11                              1 11         1 j                     '                                       M
                                      V        ' «                                 \                                                                     1            1                               >           t                   1 1
 Castanet lower A                                                                  —               «     1               1                               11           ( 1                                                             11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >V /             U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                   1 »                   •                               ii               i i



                                                                 •1          1 1                                                              1                                       »
 Chonlat upper            '                        *                                   *                             /                                                                                                yt                          •J
                                                                                                                                            f-1
                                                                                                             /                                 1                           11
 Dufour                                                          •            «                                                                                                                                       w
                                                                                                                                                          1      1        n
                          v               [[       /             •1          ' »                             CORREZE                              A U R I 1G N A 1C I A N                                                              IJ
 Chanlat lower                                                                                                                                                            hJ                                      w
                                                                                                   1 1             1                               1                      1 1                             1
 Font Yves                    y—7                                                                  H                                  ;            ;                                 • 1     '  1                                      Î
                                                                        1                                                                                                                 1
                                                                     Scaled                                                                                                          Dufour and
                                                                     pieces                                                                                                          Font Yves


Fig. 60 Two examples of the lenticular ontogeny curves for specific artefact-
types within successive assemblage phases. In these examples flint artefact-
types, or their relative frequencies, are seriated for sites in very restricted
territories - Aurignacian sites in the Vezere valley and Correze valley,
Dordogne, France. Although the assemblages are from the Aurignacian
technocomplex these regional seriation lines provide evidence of component
cultural entities.
Source: Collins 1965, p. 932.
226   Analytical Archaeology
development. T h e archaeological record provides sporadic and suc-
cessive sections of strands within this continuous cable of develop-
ment and it is the relative ordering of these sample phase sections in
relation to the orientation of the tradition cable that most exercises the
archaeologist's researches.
     In the dynamic model the nucleated constellation of attributes is
continuously changing. New attributes join the system, old ones leave;
attributes move from outer correlation shells into positions within the
nuclei; new secondary nuclei slowly emerge as correlated attribute
complexes and former secondary nuclei defining innovating subtypes
within the type may move into central prominence as the modal type
expression. Although the cosmological analogy is immediately
apparent, it is the quite real and measurable intercorrelation of the
attributes within the population which give the model this dimen-
sional quality. T h e model that we shall now investigate for time-
trajectory regularities is therefore the system 'behaviour' of the clus-
ters of correlated attributes and their changing levels of intercor-
relation.
     One of the fundamental problems that the archaeologist repeatedly
encounters is the assessment of whether a set of archaeological entities
are connected by a direct cultural relationship linking their generators
or whether any affinity between the set is based on more general
grounds. T h i s problem usually takes the form of an estimation of the
degree of affinity or similarity between the entities and then an
argument as to whether these may represent a genetic and phyletic
 lineage or merely a phenetic and non-descent connected affinity. As a
 system problem the question is basically one of assessing whether one
 entity or system could be a transformation of another or whether the
 attribute systems are so different that this would be highly improb-
 able. Numerical taxonomy and system analysis cannot by themselves
 answer these kinds of problem but they provide the only basis for a
 reasonably objective assessment of affinity and the degree of trans-
 formation involved, which evidence can then be compared with
 control cases and with the time factor and other factors involved. If
 the entities can be shown to have a high level of affinity and perhaps to
 have polythetic sets with a large common intersect, then at least the
 possibility of phyletic connection can be entertained. Furthermore, if
 an analysis of the attribute correlation structures reveals common
 complexes or patterns of attribute relationships, especially between
              CULTURE X"                     CULTURE X"'




Fig. 61 A schematic illustration of the relationship uniting a
group of cultural assemblages X', X", X'" within a single culture
group X by virtue of their polythetically shared assemblages of
transform states of the same specific artefact-types, transform
types x', x", *"' in various phase states (1-4). The trajectory may
be imagined as moving from bottom to top, or vice versa, and the
divergence/convergence attributed to ecological or other field
constraints.
228   Analytical Archaeology
idiosyncratic attributes, then the case for a transformation connection
and phyletic relationship is correspondingly strengthened.
     In relation to artefact-types this problem makes it clear that the
artefact-types in an assemblage or aggregate can be thought of as
falling into two broad relationship categories:

      Transform types, which are descent related and are really suc-
cessive or multilineage type-states from a single artefact-type system
time-trajectory, separated one from another merely by thresholds.
T h i s concept would then relate many artefacts as states within a single
multistate artefact-type set in precisely the way that an attribute may
be a multistate attribute. T h e concept of multistate types and type-
states will later prove particularly useful in the definition and recog-
nition of culture groups as archaeological entities.
      Independent types, which are not connected or derived one from
another although they may be used within a single cultural assem-
blage.

    T h e recognition of these two categories of artefact-type relation-
ship may help to bring various problems into clearer perspective. I f , in
successive phases of an assemblage, a set of artefact-types go out of use
and another set appears then the interpretation of this situation will
depend on whether the types are mutually independent types or
simply transform types. If one set of independent types is replaced by
another set of independent types over a short space of time, then there
would be a case for some dislocating influence. If the sets of types were
related as type-states transformed across some threshold then a
different class of information would be revealed. Assemblages falling
within a single cultural system trajectory would be expected to share
sets of transform types but probably in differing type-states (fig. 61).
T h e subtle way in which the gradual and successive introduction of
attributes can cumulatively transform a type from state to state and
from threshold to threshold, has already been discussed and illustrated
in general terms in the hypothesis of multiple factors and cumulative
effect (chapter 2, 111).
     It is time to return from general speculation to the field in which
these kinds of change can best be studied. We now require a model of
the time-trajectory of an artefact type which is dynamic (fig. 62) rather
than static (fig. 50). Such a model can be conceptualized as a series of
successive system states at infinitesimally small intervals along a time-
                                                Artefact and type        229




  Fig. 62 A schematic model of the time-trajectory of an archaeological
  system in which successive population states are represented by the
  varyingly intercorrelated trajectories of the components comprising and
  defining the system. The model represents a series of successive system
  states, each expressed as the two-dimensional distortion of the inter-
  correlation diagram of the properties of the respective phase population
  (see figs 53, 54, 66). The system and components may be attributes
  within an artefact-type, or specific artefact-types within a changing
  cultural assemblage, or other archaeological entities.



trajectory - thus not only does the system as a whole have a time-
trajectory but so also do the attributes within the system.
    T h e dynamic artefact-type system as a system may first come into
detectable existence as the successive and cumulative integration of a
set of directively correlated essential and key attributes eventually
crossing a definable threshold marking the first integrated appearance
of a specific type format. Subsequently, the system will transform
continuously from type-state to type-state and f r o m threshold to
threshold - the successive states all being transform types within the
multi-state type. Although the model represents a unilinear system
trajectory it is of course generated by the interconnected multilinear
developments within the dispersed centres of production, a compo-
site of individual site trajectories of very complex inter-reticulation.
In the course of the whole system trajectory some component attri-
butes will fluctuate more than others; the idiosyncratic attributes will
be especially variable and the functional attributes much less so.
230     Analytical Archaeology
    Within the d y n a m i c system as a whole inessential attributes
continue throughout, or come and go without making any vital
difference. In the essential and key attributes the system continues its
core of mutually highly-correlated idiosyncratic and functional attri-
butes and the p e n u m b r a of less highly correlated attributes. T h e
arrangement although continuously maintaining some attribute clus-
ters and relationships will nevertheless show a constant oscillation and
movement of attributes in and out of the nucleus clusters and their
constant migration f r o m one level of correlation to another. A dynamic
model of constant change and transformation and yet with a m o d i c u m
of continuity - continuity that is until the type ceases to exist.
    T h u s , the termination of an artefact-type system can take place in
three w a y s :

      (1) T r a n s f o r m a t i o n . T h e successive introduction of new attri-
          butes or attribute states to f o r m a cumulatively new artefact
          f o r m a t ; simultaneously accompanied by the gradual loss of the
          key attribute syntax by the reverse process of directive cor-
          relation. If this transformation is severe and the threshold of
          the key format broken, then the transform may constitute a
          'new* type. If the transformation remains within the key
          format threshold - then we have simply a new type-state or
          variant.
      (2) Displacement. T h e physical displacement of one artefact-type
          f r o m an assemblage or locus and its replacement by a new
          alternative - the outcome of competitive disjunction or
          equivocation.
      (3) Cessation. T h e termination of the production of an artefact-
          type - its complete discontinuation without replacement,
          usually on grounds of redundancy.

    T h e phenomena of transformation and displacement will also be
discovered in the systems of the higher archaeological entities - in
assemblages, cultures, culture groups, and technocomplexes. But the
absolute and complete termination of production is characteristic only
of the lower entity systems - attributes and artefact-types; continuity
may only be simply severed at these lower levels. If transformation is
sufficiently drastic and thereby modifies the existing key attribute
format, then the artefact population may develop freshly emergent
qualities precipitating a new type format and new key variables,
constituting a genuine invention.
                                               A r t e f a c t and t y p e   231

    So far we have set up a system model and tried to understand in
general terms how it might begin, develop, and end. Particularly
important in these fluctuating changes are those that involve changes
in the correlation values relating attribute clusters or complexes within
the type - especially those relating the key attributes. T h e time-
trajectory model of the static attribute cluster can perhaps be concep-
tualized as a bundle of attribute trajectories with continuously varying
degrees of correlation between the component strands. If one attribute
in the artefact population is always accompanied by another attribute,
then together they form the basis of a tightly correlated bundle of
trajectories within the changing artefact system. If, on the other hand,
one of the attributes is accompanied by another within the complex at
some lower level of frequency - say, only once in five cases - then this
represents a trajectory less closely correlated within the bundle. There
are descending degrees of correlation from complete correlation down
to vanishing correlation and the total absence of interdependent vari-
ation. During the type system's time-trajectory the attributes within
the complexes and clusters will move into and out of various levels of
mutual correlation, continuously varying the degrees of correlation
between the component strands, thereby altering the characteriza-
tion of the type with passing time.
     A very significant impression in this context is the concept of the
'coherence' or the overall degree of integration, or mutual intercor-
relation, of attributes within types and types within cultural assem-
blages. If in successive phase populations of an artefact-type tradition
it is found that the nucleus of highly correlated attributes are steadily
decreasing their level of mutual intercorrelation then this change may
be conceptualized as a decrease in the 'coherence' of the artefact
format - possibly loosening into 'incoherence'. Conversely, increasing
levels of intercorrelation between the attributes defining an artefact-
type, in successive phases of its time-trajectory, increasingly define the
format of the type - increasing the 'coherence' of that type.
     T h e importance of the concept of 'coherence' as an expression of
the changing levels of attribute correlation within a system is that it
may be equally applied to the 'coherence' of types in terms of attri-
butes and cultural assemblages or cultures in terms of artefact-types.
T h e implications of these separate levels of organization must be
considered independently but the concept operating is the same in
both cases - another example of the same syntax operating at different
hierarchical levels. In principle it is perfectly feasible to devise a
232   Analytical Archaeology
taxonomic measure of the 'coherence', or the level of attribute inter-
correlation, of successive artefact-type populations f r o m a single type.
S u c h a measure might be in some f o r m of geometric mean for each
population phase:


              geometric mean = ^ ( x i X * 2 X x 3 x . . . x x „ )


where Xi is the product of all the positive correlation values of attri-
bute one and where n is the number of attributes in the system aspect
under study. Alternatively, the overall level of intercorrelation of
'coherence' might be better expressed by calculating the moment of
inertia of the correlation network. It may require a certain amount of
experiment to arrive at the most practicable measure of 'coherence'
but there can be little doubt that this conceptual characteristic of
successive phases of such a system trajectory can be measured on a
relative scale.
    Against this background of successive type populations with
measured levels of attribute intercorrelation, or coherence, it is possi-
ble to think in terms of measuring the fluctuating 'strength' of artefact-
type and assemblage traditions, varying from formative incoherence to
stable coherence. T h e 'strength' of the system increasing with the
increasing correlation between attributes and their decreasing devia-
tion f r o m increasingly well-defined modes. T h e 'birth' of an artefact-
type then represents the successive introduction and growing
coherence of a nucleus of directively correlated key attributes within
the polythetic set defining the system. In this sense, the type becomes
more and more coherent or integrated, more and more clearly defined,
until such time as it should be totally discontinued or the process
reverses and rapid change should shift the key attribute set to a new
format and the system to a new system-state - the 'birth' of a new
transform type. Clearly, the fluctuating levels of correlation between
the components represents one of the crucial aspects behind the
ontogenetic analogy of system 'birth', 'maturity', and 'death'.
     T o make this process more understandable it is perhaps worth-
while to speculate about a practical example. Let us imagine the
situation in beds I—II in Olduvai Gorge. T h e particular transition and
transformation that interests us here is the hypothetical case of the
first piriform handaxe types developing out of the earlier varieties of
chopper-chopping tools. In this situation we can imagine millenia of
                                               Artefact and type      233

development in which chopper-chopping tools continued in daily use
but attribute by attribute inevitable variation and experimental
modifications successively introduced new characters into the poly-
thetic set defining chopper tools. T h e attributes that retrospectively
we recognize as those that become directively correlated towards the
piriform handaxe type are thus cumulatively introduced into the
range of variation.
     At first, it may be an increasing tendency to lateral flattening to
better accommodate the chopper to the palm, then someone else may
accentuate the secondary working around the radial edge except at the
butt, other specimens may increasingly develop a pointed shape for
particular functional requirements, and so on. Gradually, within the
polythetic constellation of the ancestral artefact-type a new and grow-
ing nucleus appears, steadily increasing in content and intercorrelation
level - a consistent variant is developing. T h e polythetic set defining
the chopper-chopping tool type is consequently extended by new
attributes in novel and increasingly recurrent clusterings. Eventually
the extended set will divide on functional lines as the emergent prop-
erties of the new artefact format are increasingly appreciated, leading
to the deliberate formalization, increasing differentiation and the spec-
ialized development of divergent artefact usage patterns. T h e chop-
per-chopping tool type continues but a pointed and increasingly pre-
ferred piriform variant has been precipitated in response to functional
requirements. T h i s process may perhaps represent the kind of cumu-
lative development by means of which the handaxe type gradually
came into being. 2
     T h e process just sketched remains purely hypothetical but it illus-
trates the general idea of the steadily growing coherence of the type
and the steadily growing formation of a secondary nucleus of clustered
attributes within a population's polythetic constellation of attributes.
We know that this idea of increasing coherence reflects a quite tangible
and objective process - the increasing degree of mutual correlation
between certain attributes which were previously either absent from
the system or at best were within the low correlation level penumbra.
T h e overall importance of this model is the realization that it is
perfectly feasible to estimate and express the correlation level of
attributes within a system at successive phases in a development
sequence. As a practical example illustrating the necessary
methodology we may note the changing coherence of three successive
phases of a pottery tradition from a stratified Arikara Indian site
234   Analytical Archaeology
analysed by Deetz (196s). 3 By such techniques as these the actual
process of the 'birth' and 'death' of artefact-types can be minutely
investigated.
     It emerges that one of the most important factors involved in
defining archaeological entities and their ontogeny may be seen to be
the changing correlation relationships of the system components -
relationships that can be measured or estimated by the use of suitable
techniques. Another factor of parallel importance is the rate of change
of the system components. Between them these two factors help to
define the thresholds separating system-state from system-state and
transform type from transform type.
     If we postulate an artefact-type slowly changing as the expression
of its fluctuating attribute components over hundreds of years of
steady development, then although the dissimilarity between the
earliest examples of the type and the latest will be very considerable,
the development will have been so gradual and by such infinitesimally
small steps that the whole sequence will appear as an homogeneous
time and space artefact population, based on a single polythetic set - it
will appear as one type. Something approaching this very unusual
situation is to be seen in the one million years of development in the
 homogeneous handaxe type or type family (Isaac 1972b, fig. 4.3 and
 p. 181). However, in the developmental sequence of most artefact-
types this gradual and steady development is broken-up by phases of
greatly accelerated change interspersed with longer phases of slower
 paced change and development. T h e exceptionally rapid change of
 particular attributes or attribute complexes within artefact-type
 systems is usually to be associated with sociocultural or environmental
 changes which produce momentary dislocation foci in respect of the
 artefact and the variety of its attributes. Retrospectively, these spurts
 of development divide up the time trajectory of the artefact-type and
 since they result in a rapid shift to new modes of attribute charac-
 terization they conveniently register the development of 'new' trans-
 form types, type-states, or subtypes. It would appear that the identity
 of new types sometimes rests on homogeneous development sequences
 separated by nodes of maximized change.
    One of the problems which is raised is how different any type must
be before it can be labelled 'new' - the problem of defining the
clustered nodes of accelerated change. Unfortunately practical studies
indicate that the nodal point for one attribute changing from modal
state to modal state need not be correlated with the nodal points of
                                                                                 A r t e f a c t and type                  235
change in the other attributes. It is very rare to find a case in which all
the attributes of a system rapidly change together - rather more
commonly they change in a staggered sequence (fig. 63). It seems
sensible to take these clustered but staggered sequences of nodes of
change as representing some major response to some significant stim-
ulus and together capable of characterizing a new entity state with
some validity. Consequently, in an artefact-type changing with time


                       ENTITIES

                       A   8        C               D       E           F            G           H        I


                                                                                                              SUPRA
                                                                                         h                    ENTITY
                                                                            G
                  As       Bfi       C5      D5     E4      F4                  5            3                State i n
                                                                                              >
                                                                                                     h

      Clustered
        nodes                      , c4:                                                                  :   Transition
      of change
                                   --C3
                                                                                                     I4
                           B5
                                             D4
                  A4
                                                            F
                                                            3




     TIME                                           E3                                   H2          h        Phase
  TRAJECTORY           :   b
                               4                                    : G4                                      State H
                                     c2

                                             D3
                  A3
                                                                                                     h
                           B3                                                    ;
                                                                        G3

      Clustered
        nodes
                               )
                                             D2 :   E2
                                                                <
                                                                i   :                                         Transition
      of change        ;

                                                        :                                                     Phase
                  Ai       Bf           C,   Di     Ei      Fl              61           HI          h        State I

                   ENTITY           STATES


  Fig. 63 T h e time-trajectory of a supra-entity defined by a system of
  component entities or characters A - I . T h e successive phase states of
  the supra-entity are separated one from another by transition thresholds
  of correlated changes amongst the system components - clustered
  nodes of change. T h e supra-entity and component entities might be an
  artefact-type and its attributes, or a cultural assemblage and its site
  assemblages.
236     Analytical Archaeology
the attribute trajectory bundles can be defined at either end by clus-
tered nodes of maximal change - without ignoring the fact that all
attributes will display sporadically isolated nodes at several points
within the trajectory. T h e definition of these clustered nodes of
maximal rate of change in n u m b e r s of correlated attributes is
clearly once again a matter for careful investigation using taxonomic
methods. In practice this problem is often arbitrarily solved for the
archaeologist by the discontinuous and fragmentary samples at
his disposal - these give a false sense of 'obvious' and disconnected
type-states.
    It may help to summarize at this stage the main features of
artefact-types changing with time - repeating the earlier points and
adding those just discussed. T h e three broad and interconnected
levels of change within the population time-trajectory remain the same
but now some supplementary details can be filled in. T h e artefact-type
time-trajectory can be seen to s h o w :

        (i) the quantitative change and oscillation in n u m b e r s of attri-
            butes within the system ;
            (a) as variation in the number of different attributes defining
                 the polythetic set of successive population phases,
            (b) as variation in the number of different attributes per
                 artefact in successive phases,
            (c) as variations in both of the above aspects jointly, in a
                 variety of combining trends.
       (ii) the quantitative change and oscillation in numbers of the
            artefact-type population itself, in successive phases - the
            horizontal and vertical double lenticular patterns.
      (iii) the qualitative change and oscillation of the artefact-type
            systems as a structured system - in which individual low-level
            attribute changes may cumulatively change the whole system
            from state to state and perhaps into a quite 'new' system
            altogether;
           (a) it is useful to distinguish transform types f r o m indepen-
               dent types,
           (b) variation in correlation levels between attributes and
               within attribute complexes (system coherence) appears to
               be one of the main changes capable of altering the whole
               system state,
                                              A r t e f a c t and t y p e   237

        (c) variation in rates of change introduces the factor capable
            of marking-out and defining those phases in which
            unusually large numbers of attributes change their modal
            characterization in a staggered and connected sequence -
            phases of accelerated change.

    T h e analogy of ontogenetic 'birth', 'growth', and 'death' can be
applied with different meanings at any of these three broad levels of
change (i)-(iii) above. It now becomes apparent tftit these terms refer
either to quantitative changes in numbers of attributes or artefacts, or
they may refer to qualitative changes in an overall system state - these
various implications usually being inexplicit and jointly confused.
With respect to qualitative system changes and system ontogeny the
two most important factors involved are first, the changing intercor-
relation of attributes and second, the rate of change. It is particularly
significant that these factors are relative and not absolute factors.
There are many indications that archaeological data is on the whole
quite unsuitable for the arrival at valid conclusions about absolute
values but that it is suitable for assessing relative factors such as
correlated covariance and rates of change. Indeed, in so far as the
ontogenetic terms - birth, growth, maturity, and death - have any
archaeological or cultural meaning at all, they seem to represent an
intuitive recognition of analogies between the rates of change and
changing coherence in organic systems and sociocultural systems.



v   System pattern regularities

Once again, the main purpose of this section is to underline and bring
together the general system 'behaviour' scattered throughout this dis-
cussion of the artefact-type concept. T h e system which forms the bulk
of this chapter is the system of attributes within changing artefact-
types. Most of the regularities in the 'behaviour' of attribute systems
have already been outlined in general terms in connection with attri-
butes within artefacts in chapter 4 (section v).
    Previous discussion has emphasized the utility of thinking of
attribute variety in terms of new, alternative, contradictive and
redundant values in relation to particular artefact systems, requiring
the constant mutual readjustment of the components in order to
minimize the dislocation of the whole. Dislocation and disequilibrium
238   Analytical Archaeology

occur from time to time in the relationships between attributes within
specific attribute complexes, between complexes within the type, and
between the artefact-type and its sociocultural context. In any one
artefact-type tradition, at any one time, there are usually several
interrelated foci, detectable in successive phase populations, at which
rapid change and adjustment is being made to accommodate certain
contingencies. Such changes in attributes and attribute complexes
often take the form of oscillating instability in which the type popu-
lations show a wide range of very diverse and short-lived solutions
gradually moving towards a more stable consensus and a relatively
stable attribute format. In general it is typical of the rich inter-
connection of material culture that the matrix of transitions allows and
expresses interlinked multilinear developments of a most complex
kind - there is usually no unique and homogeneous trajectory in the
development of artefact-types.
      If the circumstances are such that there are a large number of foci
of accelerated change, involving most of the key attributes of the
artefact-type system, then these correlated and accelerated changes are
likely to transform the whole system format from one type-state to
another - or even into an emergent or altogether new type system.
T h i s process involves the successive and cumulative integration of a
new set of directively correlated attributes, which imperceptibly
diversify the variety of the system until a certain threshold is reached
and an effectively different artefact format is produced. T h e definition
of such thresholds depends on recognizing and measuring the cor-
related quantitative and qualitative changes in attributes and their
dispersion amongst the artefact population, combined with the
recognition of the short phases of unusually rapid rates of attribute
change. T h e s e grouped nodes of change mark out the thresholds and
provide some basis for the subdivision of the continuing sequence of
artefact-type states. T h e various type-states of a multistate type will
represent both successive states from the sequence and contemporary
states or variants from within the multilineage of the type trajectory.
    Changes in type-state and format raise the whole problem of
artefact-type ontogeny. We have already devoted some space to this
complicated concept and have moved towards the impression that
combinations of reinforcing and correlated trends coincide to mark the
flux from format to format. T h e s e trends may equally be detected in
space, where they reflect contemporary subtypes and variants, or in
time where they reflect successive subtypes - the subtype being
                                                                  Artefact and type                 239

merely one type-state. A l t h o u g h the trends m a y act separately f r o m
one another they are nonetheless closely interrelated and achieve their
effects b y the c u m u l a t i v e interaction of their s u p e r i m p o s e d tenden-
cies.
     T h e transition f r o m system-state to system-state is an elusive
change which can only be m a p p e d w i t h great d i f f i c u l t y in t e r m s of a
n u m b e r of arbitrary aspects. H o w e v e r , these c h a n g e s are so i m p o r t a n t
that it is perhaps w o r t h w h i l e to try and m o d e l the kinds of trend
involved in system 'birth', ' m a t u r i t y ' , and 'death' - not only at this
level of attributes w i t h i n types but later f o r types within cultures and
so on. T h i s is a particularly h a z a r d o u s and p r e c a r i o u s speculation
because of the already m o u r n e d absence of suitable studies on detailed
data, although e x p e r i m e n t s are b e g i n n i n g to fill this g a p (Clarke 1 9 6 2 ) .
It therefore follows that the model outlined here is m e r e l y intended to
sketch the variables i n v o l v e d and to p r o v o k e m o r e realistic
modifications.
    T h e principal trends that w e have been d i s c u s s i n g include

    changes in n u m b e r s of attribute states d e f i n i n g the overall poly-
      thetic set,
    changes in n u m b e r s of attributes per artefact (on average),
    changes in n u m b e r s of artefacts per attribute state (location of the
      central tendency),
    changes in the level of overall attribute                 intercorrelation
      (coherence),
    changes in the rates of c h a n g e of attributes f r o m modal state to
      modal state.

T h e s e are some of the oscillating trends that m a y m u t u a l l y reinforce
one another in an almost infinite variety of patterns of change. It is
tentatively suggested that these fluctuating c h a n g e s m a y m a r k the
thresholds in the s y s t e m ' s time-trajectory s o m e w h a t in the f o l l o w i n g
way:
   (o) Threshold -            'death!birth'
          S u c c e s s i v e p o p u l a t i o n s of an a r t e f a c t - t y p e e x h i b i t i n g -
             increasing n u m b e r s of attribute states in successive poly-
             thetic sets,
          decreasing n u m b e r s of attributes per artefact (population
            average),
          decreasing n u m b e r s of artefacts with modal attribute states -
            slackening central t e n d e n c y ,
240     Analytical Archaeology

         decreasing levels of overall intercorrelation between attributes,
         increasing rates of change of attributes from state to state.
      (1) Formative - 'growth'
         Successive populations of an artefact-type exhibiting -
           decreasing numbers of attribute states in successive poly-
           thetic sets,
         increasing numbers of attributes per artefact,
         increasing numbers of artefacts with certain key attribute
           states - an increasing and new central tendency,
         increasing level of overall intercorrelation between certain key
           attributes,
         decreasing rates of change of essential attributes from state to
           state.
      (2) Coherent - 'maturity'
          Successive populations of an artefact-type exhibiting -
            increasing numbers of attribute states in successive poly-
            thetic sets,
          increasing numbers of attributes per artefact,
          maximal central tendency of artefacts around key attribute
            states,
          maximal level of overall intercorrelation between certain
             attributes,
          minimal rates of change from state to state.

      (3) Post-coherent - 'decline'
          Successive populations of an artefact-type exhibiting - decreas-
            ing numbers of attribute states in successive polythetic sets,
          decreasing numbers of attributes per artefact,
          decreasing central tendency of artefacts around former key
            attribute states,
          decreasing level of overall intercorrelation between certain
            essential attributes,
          increasing rates of change from state to state.

      (o) Threshold - 'death!birth'
          Successive populations of an artefact-type exhibiting -
            increasing numbers of attribute states in successive poly-
            thetic sets,
          decreasing numbers of attributes per artefact,
          decreasing central tendency of artefacts around formerly
            modal attribute states,
                                              A r t e f a c t and type   241

        decreasing level of overall intercorrelation between attributes,
        increasing rates of change of attributes from state to state.

    T h i s outline emphasizes the point made earlier, that the onto-
genetic terms only take archaeological and cultural meaning from
certain repeated patterns of change found both in organic systems and
sociocultural systems. Where possible, we should strive to replace
such intuitive analogies by explicit details of the common basis - this
is the vital process by which an intuitive skill may be gradually
transformed into a discipline. T h e price that must be paid is the
repeated trials and repeated errors in the successively less naive
attempts upon these complex problems.
    It is to be assumed that the model change process sketched under
the ontogenetic headings is both highly idealized and only crudely
meaningful. T h a t there are many other combinations and permu-
tations of the various fluctuating trends has already been admitted -
other trends have probably been mistakenly omitted and some others
naively treated. For example, we have omitted to include in this
summary that gross trend which must cut across the continuous
fluctuations of the system format - the absolute quantitative pro-
duction of the artefact-type generating the system. It has already been
noted that a culture may abruptly cease to manufacture a given
artefact-type even at the very moment of increasingly developing its
attribute elaboration and coherent format - some contemporary mili-
tary aircraft have had time-trajectories of this unusual kind. In addi-
tion there are other ways of combining the trends already noted, both
one with another and with gross fluctuations in the type output. T h e
model sequence as sketched is purely a hypothetical ideal but
nonetheless remains a useful model against which the population
trajectory of say an artefact-type from a stratified site of many levels
might usefully be contrasted.
    Even with great care and much ingenuity it proves impossible to
discuss material culture changes without recourse to conceptually
'charged' terms. If we avoid the unsatisfactory extension of such
organic terms as - birth, growth, maturity, florescence, death - we still
encounter the only slightly less loaded terminology of - integration,
disintegration, transformation and so on. In using such terms to
describe material culture it is important to emphasize that these terms
carry no simple implications outside their specific frame of reference
amongst material artefacts. We are not suggesting that these changes
and processes take place in isolation, of their own accord, or that they
242     Analytical Archaeology

reflect identical changes in the non-material aspects of the cultures
concerned. On the contrary, w e are studying the manner in which
changes having their origins in unknown developments and stimuli
within the social, religious, psychological, and economic subsystems of
a society are implemented in changing the material culture exo-
skeleton. W e are simply analysing the external processes by means of
which a culture changes its skin; w h y a culture should drastically
change its external manifestation is another matter. What matters
most at this moment in the development of archaeology is that for the
first time it is not only possible to conceptualize these changes but also
to measure and express them in relative terms.



Notes

   (1) See Binford ( 1 9 7 2 , p. 248) for a reply to this criticism.

    (2) T h i s particular example requires revision in the light of the work of
Mary Leakey and others in Olduvai Gorge (summarized, for example, in
Isaac 1969, pp. 1 3 - 1 5 ) . During at least half a million years the Oldowan
industry shows no radical changes in tool typology and morphology, though
among two new tool types which appear at the top of Bed I in Olduvai is the
'proto-biface'. But it is not possible to recognize the local step-by-step
development from the Oldowan chopper tool to the handaxe which these
proto-bifaces might suggest and which traditional typologies have proposed.
On the contrary, handaxe assemblages appear suddenly in Bed II and almost
complete Oldowan assemblages continue alongside them.
    T h e reasons for this seemingly abrupt technological change have been
postulated by different authors. Mary Leakey argues that the Acheulean
handaxe assemblages at Olduvai must be intrusive and the result of more
gradual development from Oldowan assemblages elsewhere. T h i s inter-
pretation, along with David Clarke's general model of gradual systemic
change approaching important thresholds (e.g. 'a series of successive system
states at infinitesimally small intervals along a time-trajectory') has been
 vigorously criticized by Binford ( 1 9 7 2 , pp. 244-94). His concern with the
the Oldowan-Acheulean transition is with one example where the 'traditional'
archaeologist's expectations about cultural change are not met. T h u s he
summarizes the traditional model of cultural change in terms of eight state-
 ments and three expectations:

Statements
    '(1) Culture is localized in individual human beings . . .
      (2) Culture is transmitted among human beings - through learning individ-
          uals assimilate culture from other persons.
                                                    A r t e f a c t and t y p e   243

    (3) Culture is shared. . .
    (4) Culture derives from humans - it may be generated only by human acts
        of intervention.
    (5) Culture is cumulative . . .
    (6) Culture is a continuum . . . because the succession of individuals in
        generational succession is a continuum . . .
    (7) Culture is continuously changing.
    (8) Culture changes gradually. . . because individuals are replaced gradu-
        ally in human populations.'
Expectations
   '(1) . . . a continuous sequence of variability, patterning as gradual direc-
        tional changes in the relative frequencies of recognized artefact
        taxa . . .
    (2) A gradual increase in the numbers of artefact taxa recognizable if the
        isolated part of the archaeological record spans a 'sufficient' period of
        time.
    (3) Transformational sequences showing a 'development' of artefact
        forms from antecedent forms.'
                                                            (1972, pp. 2 5 1 - 2 )
     Given this model of change, Binford argues that the traditional
archaeologist is forced to conclude that 'breaks in continuity of cultural
patterning must derive from breaks in the continuity of human populations in
the area' (1972, p. 252). His counter-argument to this is that variability in
stone tool assemblages does not necessarily reflect the degree of cultural or
social interaction and/or continuity, but that it should reflect different activi-
ties carried out within the community (cf. Binford and Binford 1966). He also
proposes that variability in assemblage composition should be inversely
related to the degree that the stone tools were used for more than one purpose
(cf. White and Thomas 1972, p. 278) and/or carried around from site to site
rather than thrown away after usage. T h e effect of this 'curation' on assem-
blage composition has only been postulated in recent years (e.g. Binford 1973,
1976) and is clearly of great importance.
     Isaac's (1969, 1976) views on the Oldowan-Acheulean transition and on
cultural change in general seem to lie somewhere between those expressed by
David Clarke in this volume and by Binford above. T h u s he proposes that
there may be important 'thresholds' in stone technology 'so that certain
techniques are either present or absent and intermediate expressions are
virtually non-existent' (1969, p. 16). As an example he cites the striking of
large flakes from which handaxes and cleavers could be produced after
minimal retouch (1969, p. 16) and man's discovery of the conchoidal fracture
of flint, leading to the first Oldowan flake tools (1976, p. 41). But while Isaac
proposes these threshold models, he suggests that gradual development also
occurred over long periods of time (e.g. the Oldowan) and that these two
types of interpretation are simply the extremes in a continuum.
244   Analytical Archaeology
    Thus it can be seen that the problem of the Oldowan-Acheulean tran-
sition, which in 1968 was a good example of David Clarke's general systemic
model for culture change, has now served to bring its universal application
into question and open up an important area of debate.

   (3) But for criticism of Deetz's methods, see Doran and Hodson 1975, p.
150.
6      Assemblage and culture

      T h e culture is not an a priori category elaborated in the
      studies of philosophers and then imposed from outside
      upon working archaeologists. Cultures are observed facts,
                 'Changing methods and aims in prehistory',
           Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society for 1936, p. 3.
                               V. G O R D O N   CHILDE   1936




I   Introduction

T h u s far the discussion has slowly traversed the lower levels of the
hierarchy of archaeological entities, carefully defining the terms as
they were encountered. T h i s ascent has involved an investigation of
the nature of archaeological attributes, their combination in particular
artefacts and in the populations of artefacts called artefact-types. T h e
next stage of the climb must negotiate the difficult and obscure
formations of the assemblage and the culture (fig. 49).
     Let us start with the concept of an archaeological 'assemblage' -
one of the few entities which together with the 'artefact' shares a
reasonably established and accepted definition. T h i s does not prevent
the disturbing abuse and misuse of both terms. Archaeological usage
has established an archaeological assemblage as - an associated set of
contemporary artefact-types. T h e important aspects of an artefact
assemblage under this definition are that the artefacts may belong to
more than one type and that they occur together in definite contem-
porary association with one another. T h e occurrence of several arte-
fact-types of uncertain chronology, within the same limited geo-
graphical area, does not constitute an assemblage in the sense defined
here but rather constitutes an 'aggregate' of lesser significance and
information value (Childe 1956, p. 31). Many problems of inter-
pretation have arisen in the past through the careless extension of the
name and implications of the term 'assemblage' to loose aggregates of
the latter kind. False assemblages compounded of artefact-types never
found in contemporary association but loosely occurring in one area
and convincingly expressed by palimpsest distribution mapping have
246     Analytical Archaeology

erroneously characterized quite illusory cultures f r o m time to time.
T h e first questions to be asked of any distribution map of several
different artefact-types is how many of the types occur together in
contemporary association, in what combinations, and on how many
occasions ?
     Assemblages occur dispersed over geographical areas and these
areas can be defined by limits if assemblages containing specific types
are mapped. T a k i n g the time dimension, we have already seen that
assemblages of artefact-types will vary according to the varying
numbers of the component artefact-types and that these types in turn
will be changing as the integral of their oscillating attribute states.
     A study of particular assemblages f r o m particular areas of space
and time rapidly brings us into contact with another entity: the
'cultural assemblage' or simply the ' c u l t u r e ' - probably the most
important single concept in prehistoric studies. An archaeological
culture is expressed by a set of specific artefact-types and represented
by a group of assemblages containing some of those artefact-types.
T h e special nature of the culture is embodied in the precise relation-
ship between the group of assemblages and the comprehensive set of
types which they exhibit.
     T h e characteristics of the assemblages grouped into cultures are:

      ( 1 ) T h e component assemblages share a large number of specific
            artefact-types one with another, although each assemblage
            need not contain all the types in the shared set.
      (2) T h e artefact-types represented in the assemblages comprise a
            comprehensive selection of types f r o m most of the material
            spheres of cultural activity.
      (3) T h e same specific artefact-types occur together repeatedly in
            those component assemblages, albeit in varying combinations.
      (4) Finally, the component assemblages must come from a
            limited, defined and continuous geographical area and period
            of time.

    T h e s e are the four main characteristics that have to be compressed
into any attempt at a definition of an archaeological culture as an
entity. It would seem that two of these crucial conditions are fulfilled,
indeed can only be fulfilled, if the cultural assemblage is regarded as a
polythetic set of artefact-types. T h e s e necessary conditions are the
ones that stipulate that the various component assemblages defining
the culture must share a number of specific artefact-types from a
                                        Assemblage and culture         247

larger set such that no assemblage need contain all the types, although
the same artefact-types must repeatedly occur together in varying
combinations (fig. 3).
    T h e remaining characteristics or conditions emphasize that the
artefacts in the assemblages must be matched as specific types or
subtypes - it is not sufficient that they merely share a low-level affinity
within a type group or family. In addition there should be numbers of
different artefact-type categories involved and these should represent
as many material aspects of cultural activity as survive - not simply a
sample from a single sociocultural aspect like weapon assemblages,
bronze artefact assemblages, or pottery assemblages. T h e s e latter
assemblages are complexes of artefact-types related to special sub-
cultures within the sociocultural system and we will deal later on with
their special treatment (section II). T h e final condition, stipulating
that the assemblages must have a coherent and homogeneous time and
space distribution, is designed to ensure the reality of the group of
assemblages as the material products of a single cultural tradition or
phase.
    It is rather difficult to condense and distil these vital conditions
into a concise definition - a difficulty which has given rise to the
repeated misuse of the culture concept and a mistaken impression that
the concept has no tangible reality. An attempt at a working definition
might perhaps run as follows: an archaeological culture is a polythetic set
of specific and comprehensive artefact-types     which consistently recur
together in assemblages within a limited geographic area. T h e subsidiary
conditions about contemporaneity and physical association are con-
veniently contained within the definition of the term 'assemblage'
developed earlier on.
    T h e information value of the archaeological culture concept as a
high-level predictive category has been very seriously impaired by the
repeated misuse of the term and its confusion with other entities with
the same name in other disciplines. T h e persistent manipulation and
expression of archaeological cultures as rigid, mutually exclusive,
monothetic sets of artefacts has rightly failed to impress generations of
students. So-called cultures composed almost entirely from single
aspects of material culture have added to this disrepute. Ill-defined
and widespread methods of flint tool technology have been persis-
tently elevated to cultural status in a manner overruling the affinities
and dissimilarities of the total artefact assemblages involved. Gross
manufacturing techniques based upon core tools, flake tools, blade
248    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

tools, prepared core tools, pressure flaked tools, and others have from
time to time appeared in the literature as reflecting a core tool culture,
a flake tool culture, a blade tool culture, a Levallois culture, or a
Solutrean culture respectively, with unenlightening results. In a
complementary fashion, assemblages from Britain to China and from
Poland to Roumania have been designated part of a Tardenoisian
culture, virtually on the basis of certain geometrical microliths which
merely reflect a common technological background in a shared
environment - namely post-glacial hunting cultures using the bow in
pursuit of temperate forest game. This entity may be a valid and
interesting entity to define but it is simpler in content and larger in
dimension than a true culture (see Technocomplex, chapter 8).
     T h e later periods of prehistory have similarly contributed to the
confusion. There have been cultures defined by single pottery types in
such a manner that the domestic heavy-duty pottery has been put in
one culture and the finer wares put in another - even in the face of
persistent physical association. Witness the artificial separation of the
Bell Beaker culture from its Rusticated or Plain domestic wares, the
Corded Ware culture from its domestic Globular Amphorae, the
Proto-Sesklo painted ware from its domestic Pre-Sesklo impressed
ware, and so on. In the same way the products of segments or classes
of societies have often been elevated to full cultural status, so that a
 hundred rich graves distinguished entirely by a small set of rank and
 prestige weapons, trinkets, and gew-gaws has given us a Wessex
culture whose domestic pottery and other cultural equipment belong
within the British Collared Urn culture. Perhaps the worst abuse has
 arisen from the attempts to extend groupings based upon hoards of
 widely traded and industrially mass-produced bronze artefacts to
 cultural assemblages with which they do not entirely coincide. This
 conspires to conceal the interesting and important information that
 the European Middle and Late Bronze Age metal trade and its dis-
 tribution pattern was often supra-cultural in a significant and
 informative way. 1
     T h i s disturbing list of various and undefined usages of the term
 'culture' could be endlessly extended without even having the merit of
 consistency under particular authors. Although the continuing misuse
 of a fundamental concept must seriously damage its residual informa-
 tion value we should not fall into the error of supposing that the entity
 fails to remain a fundamental entity, or that it is impossible to define it
 adequately. We cannot hope for agreement between archaeologists
                                         A s s e m b l a g e and culture   249

about the definition of particular terms but at least we can insist that
they define what they mean by a term before using it.


II   Cultural assemblage systems

Some of the mystery and confusion surrounding the concept of an
archaeological 'culture' is immediately dispelled by giving the entity
its full title - an archaeological 'cultural assemblage'. Such a cultural
assemblage we have already discovered to be a polythetic set of arte-
fact-types variously represented in component assemblages which
share a high-level mutual affinity one with another and with the
cultural assemblage. Clearly, one of the more variable factors in the
relationship between the component assemblages is their actual and
precise level of similarity. On a previous occasion it appeared that the
isolation of several broad levels of similarity, from 100 to o per cent,
tended to help avoid confusion between the different extent and
implications of the stacked sets of individuals - leading us to dis-
tinguish the type group, type, and subtype levels of artefact sets. Now
we are encountering a precisely similar situation with a similar basis
for confusion, only this time the affinity relationship is between
assemblages within a culture or cultural assemblage. Once again the
repetitive syntax of the relationships between the entities in the
archaeological hierarchy becomes apparent - attributes within types
being congruent to types within cultures.
     It is at this stage that contention is joined by intuitive practice, for
archaeologists have long toyed with higher-level entities than the
culture and ethnologists at least have drawn attention to the material
equipment of the lower-level sub-cultural segments outlined by
sociology. Once again a varied terminology has been inconsistently
applied and rarely defined, but here largely for reasons of tradition and
symmetry the arbitrary terms culture group, culture, and subculture
will be used in further discussion. T h e symmetry in the nomenclature
is a deliberate attempt to draw attention to the symmetry in the affinity
relationships relating these parallel entities:

     type group (or family)      culture group (or family)
     type (specific type)        culture (specific culture)
     subtype (variant)           subculture (segment)
The further elaboration of this comparison and the full definition
of the archaeological culture group must await the next chapter.
250     Analytical Archaeology

Meanwhile, we may mark the parallel in structuring and the parallel
basis of this formation in the levels of affinity of sets of items. S i n c e
the culture group concept must await our gradual approach and
the culture concept has been outlined, it remains to debate the
important and archaeologically neglected role of the subculture in
material culture.
    T o place the subculture in its setting we can observe that
archaeological cultures and their component assemblages display
several kinds of variety and each category will herein be discussed in a
relevant section:

      variety in polythetic structures of the component assemblages
        (section I),
      variety in artefact-type subsystems of the component assemblages
        (section 11),
      variety in the dispersion pattern of the component assemblages
        (section III),
      variety in the numbers of the component assemblages (section iv).

Our interest at this point is focused upon subcultures as exhibiting
variety and regularity in the subsystems of type complexes within
cultural assemblages. T h e subculture has a number of different f o r m s
and roles but all of them are represented by type complexes. T h i s
latter intermediate level entity can be defined as a specific   artefact-type
complex - a polythetic set of different specific artefact-types   repeatedly
found together in assemblages within a population of assemblages; a
definition that should be compared with that relating attributes and
 attribute complexes (chapter 4). T h e detection of the component type
 complexes within cultural assemblages should play an important part in
 sociocultural analysis and the assessment of the roles played in various
 social segments and activity groups. T o some extent a sociocultural
 system can be viewed as a system of interacting subcultures or subsys-
 tems - made apparent in material culture as correlated and covarying
 type complexes within cultural assemblages.
     An archaeological subculture might therefore be defined as - an
infra-cultural segment or activity alignment characterized by a specific
type complex. S u c h subcultures and their type complexes are par-
ticularly interesting both as analytical concepts and by virtue of their
variety and semi-independent existence. S o m e subcultures are non-
exclusive social fractions, others are rigidly exclusive in the sense that
an individual may not belong to this segment and to certain others at
                                        Assemblage and culture         251

the same time. Some subcultures are interchangeable and transferable
from culture to culture; some appear to be economically parasitic and
others symbiotic with their parent sociocultural system; some sub-
cultures are marked by material equipment but many are not. As a
broad scheme one might isolate five varieties of subculture which
register in the archaeological record:

   ethnic subcultures
   regional subcultures
   occupational subcultures
   social subcultures
   sex subcultures

Each subculture format may have a type complex of its own, under
certain conditions. T h e artefact-type complex of such subcultures may
also include a distinctive linguistic vocabulary, habits, customs, clo-
thing, art styles, as well as a specific set of material equipment.
    Ethnic subcultures are genetically related and discrete minorities
existing within an 'alien' culture. Such ethnic subcultures are usually
readily distinguished for a while by their traditional attributes and
artefacts but eventually lose coherence as an identifiable entity. This
loss of identity is a particularly significant process, it depends upon the
rate of interaction and the critical mass of the group - the latter
expression denoting the population size and its dispersion pattern.
Archaeologically such ethnic groups are important in that they
frequently represent the gradual termination or 'death' of a cultural
assemblage; both the concept of critical mass and cultural disin-
tegration will be pursued later on (fig. 64). Whether the minority is a
powerful and intrusive caste or an engulfed aboriginal group does not
alter the inevitable process of integration and transformation - witness
the Norman subculture in medieval England and conversely the
various American Indian subcultures of the present day. One interes-
ting and additional feature is the capacity for almost obliterated sub-
cultural distribution patterns to reassert themselves in a new guise in
subsequent area developments. This suggests that long after any
visible material trace of an ethnic subculture has disappeared from the
archaeological record there may continue to remain vestigial social
alignments and orientations which may later fracture along primeval
lines of cleavage ; a concept that we will also meet in connection with
the repeated area formats that constitute the geographical 'personality'
of a territory.
252   Analytical Archaeology
    Example. As an archaeological example of ethnic subcultures one
might note one interpretation of the Beaker culture enclaves of Late
Neolithic Britain as intrusive immigrant minorities maintaining a full
cultural identity from c. 2000-1500 BC only to be engulfed, isolated,
and absorbed by the indigenous majority cultures (Clarke 1967, 1970).

    Regional subcultures are genetically related, semi-discrete but
continuous branches of a single culture which by virtue of poor
intercommunication and growing isolation gradually develops dis-
tinctive subcultures by divergent development pooled over local ter-
ritories. Regional divergence is the clue to regional subculture
development - frequently on the basis of spatial, topographic, genetic,
ecological and communication isolation. Sometimes this divergence
expresses a straightforward subculture specialization in the economic
exploitation of a local ecological niche; at other times the divergence
may be subtly developed by localized idiosyncratic changes in seasonal
cyclical behaviour, leading to increasing isolation and special adap-
tation. Such cyclic isolation seems to have operated amongst the later
Neolithic and Bronze Age cultures of Alpine Europe in which some
cultures developed seasonal transhumance with subcultures appro-
priate to the successive ecological zones and their cyclical exploitation;
later some of these subcultures seem to have branched off and
developed an agrarian strategy intimately integrated to single zonal
habitats - the grass pastures above the tree-line for example. T h i s
process simultaneously illustrates the regional subculture as a poten-
tial embryo culture and the significance of ecological zonation in
separating and isolating regional subculture strategies. Just as ethnic
subcultures may on occasion reflect the 'death' of former cultural
assemblages so regional subcultures have the potential to give 'birth' to
new and emergent assemblage formats of type complexes. Once again
the optimal conditions for such cultural 'birth* depend on the critical
mass - in this case a large and expanding culture area, divided into
many local groups exploiting divergent ecological niches and almost
but not quite isolated from each other (fig. 64). Such a dispersion
pattern maximizes regional subcultural variation in an increasingly
divergent manner until the subcultural units fall below the affinity
threshold emphasizing their former uniformity and the units cease to
orientate intercommunication and development on the old basis.

    Example. Regional subcultures are found in every large archaeolo-
gical culture and the development of groups of regional subcultures
                                                                              Assemblage and culture                                253




                    («')                                             (»)                                            (<«)
E x p a n s i o n of p o p u l a t i o n       T h e a d a p t i v e d i v e r g e n c e of      M u t u a l d i v e r g e n c e across
c e n t r e s of C u l t u r e X a c r o s s   a regional s u b c u l t u r e                    the t h r e s h o l d of cultural
an ecological b o u n d a r y .                w i t h i n the n e w e c o l o g i c a l         affinity and network
                                               habitat.                                          reorientation. T h e ' b i r t h ' of
                                                                                                 a new c u l t u r e




                                                  #Q • O.                                         'V»'
      3 0• •°                                                                                          #
                                                                                                           -e^   subcultures —
                                                                                                                   «           •




     •000 0 • 0                                                                                    • ®o
                                                                                                   •                          „ "
                                                                                                   Ä                                 A




                   (/)                                              (II)                                           (///)
Culture X population                           I n f i l t r a t i o n and c o n v e r g e n t   B r e a k d o w n of C u l t u r e X
centres s u r r o u n d e d b y                alienation of C u l t u r e X                     n e t w o r k , isolated X
g r o w i n g alien C u l t u r e Y .          territory b y g r o w i n g                       p o p u l a t i o n s e n g u l f e d by
                                               Culture Y.                                        growing Y populations.
                                                                                                 T h e ' d e a t h ' of C u l t u r e X .

 Fig. 64 Two schematic models illustrating the role of the cultural network
 in the maintenance of cultural identity. Model ( I ) - ( I ' H ) - the 'birth' of a new
 cultural assemblage by divergence under differential conditions. Model (/)-
 (III) - the 'death' of a cultural assemblage by network dislocation and
 subsequent isolation and loss of coherence.

within a former culture distribution area forms the basis of embryonic
culture group development - as one possible but not the exclusive
development trajectory. Interesting examples of regional subcultures
are provided by the local artefact, ceramic, dialect and architecture
groupings of Medieval Britain (Jope 1963) and by the regional group-
ings within the European Neolithic Michelsberg culture (Scollar
1959)-
   Occupational subcultures. T h e activities that groups of people
pursue together necessarily affects the network of social intercom-
254    Analytical Archaeology
munication and the transmission of social variety. T h i s is particularly
the case if an occupation is exclusively pursued by one category of
people and not followed by others in the same sociocultural system.
Such exclusive occupations create differential subcultural solidarity
within their micromeshed network when set against the looser web
and mesh of intercommunication in the whole social fabric. It is this
differing social implication which polarizes occupational subcultures
into specialized, exclusive professional groupings on one hand and
generalized, commonly-held activities on the other. In terms of their
material culture manifestations these segments generate either a
generalized tool-kit with special component type complexes for special
activities, or by contrast, one special type complex for one man all the
time. We shall distinguish the exclusive full-time professional group-
ings as 'specialist subcultures' from the generalized short-term, alter-
native group orientations of individuals as 'activity subcultures' - each
arbitrarily polarized category with its own type complexes and social
implications. As examples of activities organized in specialist sub-
cultures we might cite - the professional soldier, scribe, civil servant,
priest, the smith, and the full-time artisan. T h e s e latter specialists may
be contrasted with the activity subcultures and type complexes of the
occasional flint knapper, and the butchering, hunting, fishing and
gathering complexes of the hunter-fisher-gatherer societies.
    Cultures differ one from another in the number of their
component specialist and activity subcultural groupings, and par-
ticularly in the activities which they choose to arrange under these
respective patterns of organization. Growing specialization and
numbers of specialist subcultures will often mean decreasing homo-
geneity in the particular social system, thus allowing a greater variety
of localized social action and stimulating subcultural segmentation
around the specialist activities. When most men hunted or worked the
soil the limiting factors were in common; when some men specialized
in other full-time activities not only were the broadly uniform con-
straints removed but quite new and diverse ones were substituted. It is
for these reasons that the economic surplus consequent upon an
advantageous economic strategy has often reinforced this kind of
growth in infracultural segments and greatly increased the variety in
material culture that we see for example in post-Neolithic times.

    Example. Archaeological examples of type complexes associated
with activity subcultures are plentifully illustrated by the hunting.
                                              Assemblage and culture              255

butchering, food-preparation, and m a n u f a c t u r i n g kits which form
such a distinctive part of Palaeolithic assemblages (Binford and Bin-
ford 1966). E x a m p l e s of activity or specialist subcultures and their kits
can be documented from the personal hoards and burials of the Bronze
Age smiths and artisans (e.g. R o w l a n d s 1 9 7 1 , p. 2 1 6 ) , as well as by the
equipment of warriors, priests, and urban scribes.

     Social subcultures. T h i s rather unsatisfactory term is intended to
imply the particular subcultures and type complexes emphasizing the
various sections of particular social hierarchies — the subcultures of the
ranks, classes and elites of societies, f r o m the lowest to the highest.
T h e very wealth and variety of elite and aristocratic subcultures tends
to obscure the inevitably less elaborate but equally distinctive equip-
ment of less fortunate and p o w e r f u l subcultures, down to and includ-
ing the lowest conditions of poverty. Habits and customs, together
with their material implementation, gravitate up through social strata
almost as often as they diffuse down - we simply note the latter more
frequently.
     It seems that under certain conditions the various strata of par-
ticular societies deliberately develop the idiosyncratic insignia of their
various social classes - emphasizing and re-emphasizing their separate
corporate existence. Material artefact-type complexes and their attri-
butes then become favourite vehicles for this emphasis, arranged in
complex scales of graded prestige. In many cases the more idiosyn-
cratic, the less functional and the more condensed the 'wasted' time
that an artefact conveys, the better prestige symbol it becomes. In
many Neolithic cultures elaborate ceramics mark this prestige, but in
most Bronze Age societies expensive weaponry replaces ceramics in
this role, with a subsequent widespread decline or shift of focus
resulting in merely adequate potting standards (Clarke 1 9 7 6 , especi-
ally p. 4 7 1 ) . Clearly, one of the least functional and most idiosyncratic
means of emphasis was and is the elaboration of motifs and art styles.
In many societies various motifs and styles are exclusively reserved to
mark and emphasize the symbols and insignia of particular social
ranks, or religious regalia. T h e motifs may very well have no sensible
meaning in themselves but organized and structured in a particular
code they symbolize certain abstract notations intelligible to their
fabricators. Perhaps one archaeological example of such a notation
is marked by the approximate restriction of early L a T e n e art in
Iron Age Europe to the equipment and insignia of an aristocratic
256   Analytical Archaeology

subculture within the Celtic tribes. Certainly such decorative art often
serves to convey current ethical and psychological interpretations in a
multifacetted and ambiguous symbolism directly meaningful only to
the society producing the code.
    One particularly interesting feature of social subcultures is their
capacity for semi-independent existence and their consequent trans-
ferability from sociocultural superstructure to superstructure - once
again this is most frequently noted for aristocratic subcultures by
virtue of their more obviously extravagant trappings and political
importance. T h e Norman invasion of Saxon England truncated the
existing social hierarchy and substituted an aristocratic subculture
with its own language, religion, customs, laws, and material culture -
meanwhile the peasant continued to develop his subordinate Saxo-
Danish subculture without serious interference. T h e palace aristocrats
of Mycenaean Greece developed a palace subculture quite different
from that of their village-living, sheep-rearing subordinates, and
the insignia of their rank and prestige survive to mark this social
interface. In general therefore, social subcultures are particularly
important because they introduce new units and fields for socio-
cultural process - the displacement, truncation and substitution inter-
change of largely intact subcultural units between alien systems
(Steward 1955).

    Example. One classic example of social subculture, other than the
many historically documented examples, seems to be illustrated by the
so-called Wessex 'culture' of Early Bronze Age England. T h e assem-
blages defining this entity are quite apparently not full cultural
assemblages - on the contrary we are dealing with a hundred or so
wealthy burials marked mainly by their wealth and the particular
prestige system of expressing this wealth - gold, amber, bronze dis-
play weapons, trinkets, gew-gaws, and various clothing idiosyncrasies
(Piggott 1938). T h e absence of a distinctive and full cultural equip-
ment plus the exotic and imported nature of much of the finery and its
peculiar distribution pattern together help to deny a cultural status to
this elite subculture. T h e assemblage has been interpreted as showing
the intrusive substitution of a small aristocratic subculture, complete
with dependent artificers and trade connections (Piggott 1938, Burgess
 1974)-

    Sex subcultures. Physique and anatomy provide a fundamental
division between males and females and most societies recognize this
                                        Assemblage and culture         257
 polarity and organize the division of labour, activities, and roles in the
light of this division. Nevertheless, sociocultural systems differ
markedly in the degree and extent to which this sexual dimorphism is
emphasized and expressed in terms of cultural dimorphism. The
archaeologist can, if he wishes, compare and contrast the degree to
which this dimorphism is recognized in terms of male and female
artefact-type complexes in a number of cultural assemblages - usually
relying on funerary equipment for evidence (Shennan 1975). Such sex
subcultures or type complexes normally contain items reflecting
differences in dress and different complexes of artefacts associated
with different activities, the dimorphism may be even more
elaborately developed in differing art styles and insignia as well as
differing burial ritual and etiquette. Sociologically speaking such
differences in sex subcultures should reflect important differences in
the status of the sexes and this may be particularly enlightening when
compared with the evidence from religious and secular represen-
tational art, as well as that suggesting the economic roles within the
particular system. Unfortunately, the archaeologist is still far too
prone to extrapolate the cultural pattern of his own society in these
respects when interpreting his alien evidence. Despite repeated warn-
ings and contrary to much ethnographic data the archaeological lit-
erature is still inclined to see pottery-making, jewellery and trinket
wearing, hoe agriculture, seed-gathering and other miscellaneous
attributes as necessarily feminine, and all tool-making, building,
fighting and hunting as necessarily masculine. There is, of course, a
probability assessment in these interpretations and although contrary
examples may be rare and 'unusual' in the estimation of the
archaeologist the mere fact that they have existed is sufficient to
remove the basis for any simple conclusions - except perhaps in so far
as repeated associations with large samples of properly sexed skeletons
is concerned. Once again it is apparent that the processes generating
fluctuations in sex subcultures and their type complexes must be
rather different from those operating on the other categories of sub-
culture.

    Example. The best examples of cultural dimorphism along the
lines of sex subcultures inevitably come from cemeteries and their
grave goods - in Late Bronze Age and Iron Age Europe there is a
marked contrast in many cultures between the fibulae, bracelets, chain
girdles, knives and pottery services of female graves as opposed to the
258    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

sword, dagger, axe and tool assemblages f r o m the male graves. In the
Wessex subculture there has been claimed to be a difference in burial
rite and barrow f o r m as well - female burials under disc barrows and
male burials under bell barrows.

     T h e analysis of a full cultural assemblage into its component
subcultural segments is one of the most enlightening probes into
cultural structure - the parsing of the system into its component
subsystems. Sociocultural systems differ considerably in their degree
of subcultural segmentation and its material implementation, thus
providing a rich field for cross cultural studies. T h e various sub-
cultures may be mutually exclusive or non-exclusive categories and it
therefore follows that many groups in history and prehistory represent
multiple subcultural a s p e c t s - t h e English Normans and the Conquis-
tador Spaniards being simultaneously ethnic, regional, occupational
and social subcultures. In the same manner the type complexes
expressing subcultures f o r m a polythetic whole, with many artefacts at
one and the same time part of the paraphernalia of several subcultural
assemblages. T h e constellation of artefact-types defining the full
cultural assemblage thus reflecting an integrated artefact kit with
many crosscutting and intersecting subcultural kits. S o m e resourceful
and ingenious attempts have been made to analyse the principal
subcultural components in Palaeolithic assemblages on the basis of the
intercorrelation of artefact-types in the archaeological record (Binford
and Binford 1966). In addition there is a developing programme of
research into the cluster and multidimensional analysis of inter-
assemblage relationships, whether within successive levels of a single
site (fig. 65) or between contemporary site assemblages (fig. 66 and
 Frankel 1974). One interesting result of Azoury and Hodson's ( 1 9 7 3 )
study of U p p e r Palaeolithic assemblages f r o m K s a r Akil (Lebanon) is
their observation that the two-dimensional constellation analysis of
fifty-three types (fig. 65, C 3 ) gave no advantage in pattern detection
over that of only seventeen types (fig. 65, C i ) .
    T h e nature and degree of subcultural segmentation within a given
sociocultural system appears to mark a significant variable quality for
comparative study. F r o m the archaeological point of view the sub-
cultural type complexes provide important information about former
sociocultural structuring and make analytical interpretation more
comprehensible. T h e archaeological subcultural assemblages must be
carefully distinguished f r o m the full cultural assemblage of which they
                      C7                                          C8
Fig. 65 A constellation analysis of the Upper Palaeolithic levels 2 5 - 1 2 of the
rock shelter of Ksar Akil (Lebanon). Eight constellations are shown here
( C i - 8 ) , with special interest centred on the close similarity between C i ('short'
type list of seventeen artefact-types used to characterize each level's assem-
blage) and C3 ('long' type test of fifty-three artefact-types).
Source: Doran and Hodson 1975, p. 262.
                    Dato A (essential, modified)
                           ©


                                          ©

®
          ©
                                                   (#>       ®
            ®              ©
     <D
                          Strain    00018
                                                         ©



                          Data     B (real)




                                                         ©
                  ©                           © ©
     ©
          ©©

          ©
                          ©                        %®
                          Strain 0 0 0 2 2
                                                      ©  ^

Fig. 66 Computed two-dimensional configurations of
sixteen Mousterian assemblages: (i)—(3) Pech d'Azé
(Dordogne) levels 4, B, 7 (ref. 8); (4)—(7) Chadourne
(Dordogne) levels D, C, B, A (ref. 9); (8)-(g) Haute-Roche
(Charente), lower and middle levels (ref. 10); (10) l'Ermi-
tage (Vienne) (réf. 1 1 ) ; ( 1 1 ) Oissel (Seine-Inf.) (ref. 12);
(12) Houppeville (Seine-Inf.), série claire (ref. 12); (13)
Rigabe (Var) level G (ref. 13) ; (14) Prince (Grimaldi) foyer
E (ref. 14); (15) Kokkinopilos (Greece), surface finds (ref.
15); (16) Romani (Barcelona), levels g/ga/gb (ref. 16).
Source: Doran and Hodson 1966, p. 3.
                                        A s s e m b l a g e and culture   261

will only represent a fraction; in several cases in the past subcultural
complexes have been mistakenly given full cultural status with con-
fusing results (e.g. the Wessex culture). Similarly, although all sub-
cultural assemblages are recurrent type complexes, not all type
complexes are necessarily full subcultures - the bit, stirrup, saddle,
complex represents an activity which may be part of any subcultural
assemblage which includes horses. Perhaps the most significant
development that follows f r o m the isolation of the various subculture
entities is the full realization that the processes that act upon such
varied units are specific and peculiar to their level of complexity and
should not be confused with those other processes operating on
systems of full cultural status. For example, ethnic and regional sub-
cultures will often play very significant roles in the process of cultural
ontogeny. Occupational subcultures express the degree and nature of
the division of time and labour within the cultural strategy, where the
increase in the number of full-time specialist subcultures is intimately
connected with the g r o w t h of cultural variety. Social subcultures are
especially relevant because of their comparative independence and
interchangeability as units - the process of truncation and substitu-
tion, or even interpolation. Similarly sex subcultures reflect quite
another factor with their own process dimensions - changes in mar-
riage and kinship arrangements, cross subcultural marriage between
intrusive male elites and female indigenes, and so on. T h e recognition
and definition of a polythetic set of consistently recurrent artefact-
types in a group of assemblages represents only a preliminary
discovery - it must then be determined whether the set expresses a full
culture or some kind of subculture - when this has been determined
then the 'behaviour' and the processes acting upon the entity can be
predictively modelled.


HI   Phase pattern regularities
By definition a culture is represented by a scatter of component
assemblages dispersed over space and through time. T h e s e assem-
blages tend, in practice, to share a few artefact-types which may occur
in every assemblage in the set and thus prevent the cultural list being
fully polythetic. T h e cultural list of component artefact-types is poly-
thetic partly for reasons of differential and accidental preservation but
mainly because no single assemblage f r o m any culture ever contains,
nor ever did contain, all the artefact-types produced by that culture,
2Ó2      Analytical Archaeology

even at the time it w a s in use. N e v e r t h e l e s s , the f e w u n c h a n g i n g a n d
invariable c o m p o n e n t s , constant t h r o u g h o u t , will constitute inessen-
tial t y p e s f r o m the s y s t e m s t a n d p o i n t . M o r e i m p o r t a n t f r o m the point
of v i e w of s y s t e m analysis are the essential t y p e s w h i c h are part of the
s y s t e m b e i n g s t u d i e d and w h o s e q u a n t i t a t i v e and qualitative states
c h a n g e as part of the c h a n g i n g s y s t e m . T h e s e essential and multistate
types e x p r e s s the ' s u r v i v a l ' or ' c o n t i n u i t y ' of the s y s t e m as one s y s t e m
with a series of s y s t e m states, rather than as a c o m p l e t e t r a n s m u t a t i o n
into a d i f f e r e n t s y s t e m f o r m a t . It is these essential and key artefact-
t y p e s w h i c h e x p r e s s and f o r m an efficient insulating regulator                        (R)
preserving        the     existing      sociocultural         system        variety       from     trans-
f o r m a t i o n by b l o c k i n g the flow of variety f r o m e n v i r o n i n g         fluctuations
( E ) - u p to certain threshold levels that is (figs 6, 1 1 ) . F i n a l l y , the key
a r t e f a c t - t y p e s are d i s t i n g u i s h a b l e as those t y p e s in the culture s y s t e m
w h o s e successive t r a n s f o r m a t i o n states are c o v a r y i n g in s o m e specific
trend relationship w i t h the s u c c e s s i v e states of other similar                             key
artefact-types. T h e quantitative and qualitative states of the key arte-
f a c t - t y p e s not only c h a n g e as part of the c h a n g i n g s y s t e m but they
c h a n g e together in a correlated and n o n - r a n d o m f a s h i o n - p r e s e r v i n g
the pattern, s t r u c t u r e , or f o r m a t peculiar to this s y s t e m and hence its
quintessential identity. In contrast, the r e m a i n i n g essential types m a y
vary quite i n d e p e n d e n t l y of one another in a stochastic a n d s p a s m o d i c
manner.
      A s an entity c h a n g i n g t h r o u g h t i m e , the c o m p o n e n t a s s e m b l a g e s of
a culture together m o v e t h r o u g h s u c c e s s i v e p h a s e s distinguished by
the type-states of their c o m p o n e n t a r t e f a c t - t y p e s - the phases b e i n g
defined by nodes of co-ordinated c h a n g e w h i c h t r a n s f o r m the state of
the s y s t e m as a w h o l e , the successive phases then b e i n g successive
system-states. A t any one time, in any one phase, s u c h a cultural
a s s e m b l a g e can be c o n c e i v e d as a m u l t i d i m e n s i o n a l constellation of
artefact-types, of v a r y i n g levels of mutual intercorrelation, concen-
trated a r o u n d nuclei of h i g h l y correlated t y p e clusters. U l t i m a t e l y it
may p e r h a p s be possible to study the c o m p a r a t i v e s t r u c t u r e of attri-
bute constellations d e f i n i n g types and type constellations d e f i n i n g
cultures - p e r h a p s        it   may       even      prove       possible        to    develop         a
classification of categories of a r t e f a c t - t y p e and c u l t u r e - t y p e correlation
constellations. A r t e f a c t - t y p e s and cultures m a y p r o v e to be m o r e
directly c o m p a r a b l e in t e r m s of their s y s t e m structure and pattern
than in t e r m s of the specific e l e m e n t s patterned or s t r u c t u r e d . In any
                                                       A s s e m b l a g e and culture           263

event, the most s a t i s f a c t o r y phase model for an archaeological culture
s e e m s to be a constellation m o d e l e x p r e s s i n g the intercorrelation of the
c o m p o n e n t type-states characteristic of that particular system-state.
T h i s is closely c o m p a r a b l e with the pattern by w h i c h attributes are
integrated w i t h i n a r t e f a c t - t y p e s (chapter 5, m ) .


DISTRIBUTION             MODELS

B e f o r e m o v i n g on to the time d i m e n s i o n of this static constellation
model it w o u l d be as well to s p e n d a little time investigating the
v a r i o u s alternative interpretations of cultural artefacts dispersed in
space and their m e a n i n g in h u m a n terms. T h e first d i f f i c u l t y involves
the f u l l a p p r e c i a t i o n of the s i m p l e o b s e r v a t i o n that no single site
a s s e m b l a g e ever contains, nor ever did contain, all the a r t e f a c t - t y p e s
p r o d u c e d by its parent culture - the basis of the polythetic nature of
cultural a s s e m b l a g e s . U p to the present time t w o alternative concepts
have held the          field   as m o d e l s of cultural a s s e m b l a g e        distribution
patterns - one clearly u n t e n a b l e but nevertheless tacitly applied, the
other explicitly put f o r w a r d in honest attempts on the p r o b l e m but
r e m a i n i n g u n s a t i s f a c t o r y in detail. T h e s e alternative c o n c e p t s can be
loosely labelled the 'cultural brick t h e o r y ' and the 'radial                         contour
theory'.
     T h e cultural brick theory is the most d i s r e p u t a b l e and yet r e m a i n s
the m o d e l most o f t e n tacitly e m p l o y e d b y prehistorians. T h i s theory
implies that cultural a s s e m b l a g e s are rigid m o n o t h e t i c g r o u p s of arte-
facts w i t h identically shared distributions, cutting-off s h a r p l y at the
cultural b o u n d a r i e s c o n t i g u o u s w i t h other cultures. T h e m o d e l thus
s u g g e s t i n g that c u l t u r e s can be r e p r e s e n t e d as rather solid entities w i t h
clear b o u n d a r i e s s u c h that each culture can be c o n c e i v e d as a block or
brick s u r r o u n d e d b y other n e i g h b o u r i n g b r i c k s (fig. 67).
     T h e s e c o n d t h e o r y , the radial c o n t o u r t h e o r y , w a s d e v e l o p e d by
ethnologists in the 1 9 2 0 s , p r i n c i p a l l y by Wissler a n d b y D i x o n , in the
light of the c o n s i d e r a b l e b o d y of real ethnological data a c c u m u l a t e d b y
that time (Wissler 1 9 2 3 , D i x o n 1 9 2 8 ) . T h i s radial contour theory
pointed out that if all the artefacts of a c o n t e m p o r a r y and well-studied
culture are plotted one t y p e at a time on a distribution m a p they rather
s u r p r i s i n g l y d o not share identical distributions a l t h o u g h they neces-
sarily o v e r l a p . T h e o u t c o m e that w a s , and is, i n d i s p u t a b l y clear is that
the c o m p o n e n t a r t e f a c t - t y p e s do not share an identical and s h a r p
264       Analytical Archaeology

cut-out boundary. T h e model of this situation was largely developed
by Wissler in connection with the prevailing ideas on diffusion as a
process by means of which series of concentric ripples of diffusing
artefacts spread out into peripheral regions from a central 'cultural
hearth' or 'kernel'. T h i s radial contour theory suggested that there
would be a cultural 'core area' in which all the cultural artefacts are
found and that this core is surrounded by roughly concentric contours
reflecting the differential distributions of the diffused artefact-types
(fig. 6 7 ) .




                                                                                 7 7 7 7 7 7
                                                                                 8   8   -    8   8   8


  CULTURAL BRICK                  RADIAL CONTOUR                        POLYTHETIC
      THEORY                           THEORY                            THEORY



Fig. 67 T h r e e alternative schematic, conceptual models expressing the
relationship between the distribution boundaries of the sets of cultural
assemblage artefact-types and the boundary of the culture entity so defined.



      These      two      models       could       be    discussed        at    very         great    length.
H o w e v e r , all t h a t w e h a v e s p a c e to e m p h a s i z e h e r e is that the p a r t i a l
f a i l u r e of t h e s e c o n d m o r e h o n e s t a n d s o p h i s t i c a t e d t h e o r y h a s led to
t h e tacit u s e b y p r e h i s t o r i a n s of t h e first a n d m u c h m o r e d i s r e p u t a b l e
                                        Assemblage and culture         265

hypothesis. T h e 'cultural brick theory' necessarily assumes that
cultural assemblages are monothetic sets of types, that all the
components occur at all the sites, and that they all share identical
distribution boundaries. T h e s e premises are without exception false.
    T h e radial contour theory falls down on the grounds that artefact-
type distribution is not entirely a matter of diffusion, that diffusion
although irregularly radial is not truly concentric nor from a single
centre, and finally there are no cultural hearths or nuclear areas in
which all the types in the cultural assemblage occur together - just as
there are no peripheral settlements with only half a cultural assem-
blage. T h e reality caricatured in this model is by no means easy to
isolate and define. T h e relevant facts seem to be that the nucleus or the
distribution mean, mode, and median region for one artefact-type is
rarely the nucleus for another. Consequently, any nuclear region is not
so much the area within which the original inventions and develop-
ment took place, as rather the geographical and social focus where
elements originating in various parts of the territory were co-ordinated
and integrated. In addition, the polythetic selection of types in each
site assemblage makes it almost impossible to sustain a radial and
concentric distribution for all of them.
    T h e realization of the polythetic nature of the cultural assemblage
in terms of component artefact-types allows us to make some advance
on these earlier hypotheses of assemblage patterning within cultural
boundaries. T h e available evidence suggests that the individual dis-
tributions of the specific artefact-types from one culture extend in
irregular lobes in various differing directions, many types also occur-
ring as components in other cultural assemblages in neighbouring
areas, and vice versa. However, the respective irregular distribution
areas overlap to varying degrees in such a way that an area exists
within which more than 50 per cent of the total number of types occur
together in polythetic assemblages associating various sets of the
cultural artefact-types. T h e boundaries of this culture area only
occasionally coincide with the boundaries of any specific artefact-type
or group of artefact-types (fig. 67). Nevertheless, the distribution
pattern is not without regularity since the density of the type dis-
tributions do fall away rapidly in frequency of occurrence towards the
boundaries of the dispersion area. However, because this gradation is
more an exponential than a steady gradient, even the boundary
assemblages of very intermixed neighbouring cultures will necessarily
contain a greater number of types from one cultural set and lesser
266   Analytical Archaeology

numbers from others (figs 79, 80, 83, 85). A situation which once
again emphasizes the need for methods capable of assessing the
degree of similarity of given assemblages with one cultural array
or another, a need satisfied only by the methods of numerical
taxonomy.
      T h e outcome of this discussion has been the development of an
alternative 'polythetic model' to the existing 'cultural brick model' and
'radial contour model' of assemblage patterning within culture areas.
T h i s of course is only a crude beginning - for more precise purposes
an elaborate comparative cross-cultural distribution study is needed to
gradually develop some idea of the range of variation and general
categories of the composite distributions of the many different kinds of
polythetic cultural assemblages. On such a basis it might be possible
from an established polythetic format - number of types in the total
set, range of types shared, number of types in component assemblages
etc. - to predict and model an expected form of distribution category.
 In most practical examples of cultural artefact-type distribution
patterns it will be found that since the cultural assemblage is imper-
fectly polythetic and since the culture is a manifestation of an
internally intercommunicating social network - the number of
specific types shared with other individual cultures will be small
and the mutual boundaries fairly well defined by a band of expo-
nential gradients marking the zones of 'most rapid fall-off' for the
cultural artefacts in the boundary assemblages (fig. 80). T h e central
zone or irregular plateau in which the mutual affinity between
the polythetic assemblages remains high and roughly constant will
then define the essential archaeological 'culture area' - how such a
 concept accords with linguistic, tribal and social areas we shall see
 later on (figs 79-85).


GEOGRAPHICAL       MODELS

Geographical areas can be recognizably analysed into 'natural areas'
and 'natural routes'. However, these routes and areas are always
conceived in relation to a specific and idiosyncratic cultural outlook -
the areas and routes are 'natural' given the technology, desired
resources, social organization and political situation of the culture
concerned. T h e r e are no absolute forever-established 'natural areas'
and 'natural routes' - we have observed once already that the
environment looks different to different cultures and cultures react
                                        Assemblage and culture        267
purely in terms of their percepta, the environment as they understand
it. T h e Palaeolithic hunter camping on top of the world's largest iron
ore deposit does not 'perceive' this resource because his technological
'eye' is otherwise orientated.
     It follows that a geographical territory can be divided and sub-
divided into a number of different area formats based on routes,
resources and barriers, taking into account how these would affect a
given series of cultures with a given technology, desired resources,
social organization and political situation - assuming that accurate
palaeoecological knowledge is available. However, in a given geo-
graphical area the number of alternative networks and formats is
probably limited - to conceive an area as having one immutable
breakdown is clearly wrong but to conceive an area as having principal
format components - reflecting the least changing routes, resources
and barriers - seems highly reasonable. Any particular cultural situa-
tion will be unique in such an area but nevertheless it will be a specific
blend or strategy integrating some out of the limited set of probable
area component formats - the blend may be unique but the basic
components should be limited in variety on the basis of the geo-
graphical constraint (fig. 13). T h e greater the available information
about the culture, the greater the information that can be established
about the geographical constraints operating and the greater the pre-
dictable regularities in the culture area's blend of principal format
components. T h e compounds and fractions of the routes and areas
fluctuate and alternate in the prehistoric and historic record - disap-
pearing and reappearing as ghosts of former patterns. T h e constantly
changing aspects of this cultural kaleidoscope reflect the constantly
changing specific conditions but the constantly repetitive mosaic
fragments of routes and areas reflect the continuity of the geographi-
cal constraints operating in the area.
    Geographical culture areas and their particular combination of the
local principal format components are closely allied to the ecological
concept of habitat niches and their structure - not surprisingly since
the geography of an area embraces the surface topography, soil and
rock geology, climate, fauna and vegetation. Any specific culture area
or territory will necessarily include several interlaced ecological niches
and microenvironments each with their own fluctuating boundaries.
Culture areas, and the niches whose resources they tap, occupy
coherent territories usually bounded by obvious environmental limits
but although at any given time the equilibrium boundaries of these
268   Analytical Archaeology

areas can be shown to be 'natural' these boundaries are never constant.
If we view the problem from the ecological niche approach it will be
found that ecological niches are not separate and discrete box entities
but often cross-cut one another in a polythetic nested array. A par-
ticular river may be the boundary of one niche and simultaneously the
very central spine of another; a particular plant species will occur
simultaneously in several otherwise quite distinct niche formats in one
area. Sociocultural systems exploit particular idiosyncratic combina-
tions or strategic blends of territorial niches and their resources -
farming the valleys, hunting the woodland slopes and grazing on the
pastures above the mountain tree-line and so on. T h e succession of
cultures occupying a given area are to be compared most significantly
in the differing strategy adopted in the exploitation of the various
niches of the territory. Specialized and highly-adapted social segments
and their subcultures may become increasingly tied to one nest of
niches and their peculiar exploitation pattern - possibly leading to
divergent cultural developments. T h e complex and multi-level inter-
section of niches in a single area often allows the simultaneous and
different exploitation of these resources by cultures sharing the same
area at different 'levels' - for example, the Navaho horse nomads in
and around the Pueblo farmers, or the Scythian horse nomads and the
 Slav farmers provide interesting examples of the unstable pattern
often associated with nomad/agrarian system coupling, oscillating
 from symbiosis to outright parasitism.
    If we summarize the evidence about cultural areas then we must
emphasize their constant fluctuation and the futility of dividing a
given territory into a hard and fast set of natural areas. In cultural
studies of South America the territory has been variously divided into
twenty-four areas by Murdock, eleven by Stout, five by Wissler, four
by Kroeber, and three by Cooper - all to some degree useful and
relevant to particular studies but all equally invalid as natural areas
established for all time. A study of a similar nature attempted to force
a network of 'naturally' defined areas on the whole prehistory of the
British Iron Age with equally regrettable results (Hawkes 1959).
Culture areas fluctuate constantly, their borders are always 'natural'
but never constant and the areas often cross-cut one another if
superimposed through time. It is quite proper to illuminate and
analyse regularities in the distribution formats of the successive
cultural occupations of a given territory by distribution mapping the
associated specific artefact-types. But it is quite circular to force
                                        Assemblage and culture          269

culture areas into a preconceived territorial format, unless this pro-
cedure is used as a model to be rigorously tested by distribution
mapping to frame hypotheses by the method of residues (chapter 1 1 , 1 1 ) .
    Nevertheless, geographical areas do display various regular prin-
cipal format components which may recur in varying combinations to
make a composite culture area habitat. T h e recurrent 'personality' of an
area in Fox's ( 1 9 3 2 ) sense therefore represents this recurrent and
limited set of possible area components based upon the combinations of
possible natural boundaries surrounding and intersecting the area and
the natural routes giving access to it. In this way an area can have a
variety of personalities, albeit a limited and repeated variety, depending
on the limitations of the cultures concerned. T h e sporadic reappearance
of familiar area patterns in specific territories provides one of the more
interesting examples of regularities in history and prehistory (e.g.
Neolithic and Bronze Age cultures in the Middle Danube Basin).




SOCIAL    MODELS

T h i s discussion of the essential nature of an archaeological culture has
so far been primarily concerned with the cultural assemblage as a
complex material phenomenon. T h i s approach must never allow us to
forget that the phenomenon was generated by groups of people occu-
pying territorial areas through time and that it is a product of social
behaviour. T h e reality and importance of the properly defined
archaeological culture is its apparent but intricate relationship with
ancient societies which once f o r m e d coherent areas of homogeneous
behaviour patterning in which the attributes, artefact-types, the sets of
types and the cultural assemblages were material elements. T h e
cultural assemblage is the product of a social g r o u p of a certain com-
plexity and dimension - what particular limits we would attach to the
dimensions of the social groups responsible for prehistoric cultures is a
matter which must be considered in a subsequent chapter (chapter 9).
    T h e social basis of material cultures is not difficult to follow in
general terms. T h e individual in the society is located in a w e b of
kinship relations stretching beyond the family group. T h i s w e b of
kinship relations does not simply consist of an objective set of ties by
descent or consanguinity among individuals, but exists only as an
idiosyncratic and arbitrary system of ideas - often ignoring one side of
270   Analytical Archaeology

the family completely for particular though not for all purposes.
Within the society the different sets of kinsmen join together variously
and co-operatively for producing, distributing and consuming; they
are linked across kin boundaries by the mesh of educational, age-
group, recreational, ceremonial, religious, political and military group-
ings and subcultures. T h e society is given cohesiveness by this
cross-cutting web of obligations extending from group to group within
certain geographical limits. T h e diffusion of artefacts, customs, games,
ideas, religions, folk-lore, and techniques cannot occur without human
activity - and this takes place consciously or unconsciously through
this social network. It follows that items are most widely and homo-
geneously diffused over areas having good and regular intercom-
munication, common kinship, common language and common
institutions - an area of optimal internal diffusion. Of course artefacts
and ideas do travel beyond individual social networks but these
diffusions are sporadic when compared with the continuously rein-
forcing and repeatedly sustained interchange circulating within the
multiple linked nodes of the unit society - the area of primary
diffusion.
    A common cultural assemblage is thus the material manifestation
of an area of maximized group intercommunication. T h e social
network precipitates and maintains the culture area and the boun-
daries of the two should be broadly concurrent. A series of adjoining
but largely discrete sociocultural networks can therefore be compared
with a series of adjacent saucers each holding a specific artefact-type
pool, linked only with difficulty across the watersheds between the
network areas.
    T h e development of these cultural assemblages and their socio-
cultural systems is therefore intimately connected with the
mechanisms of population isolation both in terms of intercom-
munication and in differential adaptation to differing regional condi-
tions. It is likely that many new cultural taxa develop as the result of
the invasion of fresh ecological niches with the consequent rapid rate
of change yielding a new configuration. T h i s branching development
conjures the impression of cultural configurations in phenetic space
continuously developing to fit and penetrate the patterns of ecological
space (Sokal and Sneath 1963, p. 219).
    T h e accumulation of idiosyncratic traits as the result of change and
selection further increases the effect of such divergent drift, especially
                                          Assemblage and culture           271

where different sociological and environmental pressures are operat-
ing. A s this cumulative change progresses the possible developmental
trajectories and formats become increasingly restricted as the traits are
highly integrated within a functional whole. T h e more moderate and
slow rate of linguistic divergence would continue for a much longer
period to preserve the original ancestry of the g r o u p and the possi-
bility for renewed and efficient cultural interchange if conditions so
demanded. In the light of this predisposition it is particularly interest-
ing to observe the way in which divergent cultures of the same culture
group often selectively expand within the pre-existing network of
related populations (chapter 7, III, IV).
       Culture differences can be seen to be based on largely cumulative
systems of multiple factors, which are built up by the occurrence and
integration of large numbers of independent developments. Hence,
the probability that two isolated cultural assemblages will evolve in
exactly the same way in all of their characteristics is astronomically
low, and the convergence in every respect of previously dissimilar
cultural assemblages is even less probable (Sokal and Sneath 1 9 6 3 , p.
2 1 8 , after Stebbins). H o w e v e r , since cultures are rarely completely
isolated from d i f f u s i n g variety and since they may solve in the same
way the similar problems facing them in similar environmental
contexts - then a certain level of assemblage convergence within unit
areas of this kind may be expected. S u c h convergence should induce
supracultural material culture units with certain c o m m o n configura-
tions and a low-level mutual affinity which itself w o u l d make such an
entity prone to certain selective development processes (Tech-
nocomplexes, chapter 8).
    T h i s brief discussion of the social basis of material culture units
may help us to conceptualize the sociocultural convulsions which
underlie the complex systematic changes that we can perceive in the
superficial crust of material culture. H o w e v e r , as archaeologists we are
more interested in classifying the systematic regularities of this crust
and then correlating these with groups of probable social phenomena
than with the converse procedure which constitutes the field of the
anthropologist. T h i s syntactic procedure should provide a framework
for the detection of archaeological regularities and the construction of
a certain amount of synthesizing theoretical superstructure on that
basis. As part of this procedure we can now move on to examine the
time pattern regularities which suggest themselves in the trajectories
272     Analytical Archaeology

and traditions of many quite different cultures, not forgetting their
social generation.



IV    Time pattern regularities
From our earlier statements about artefacts and assemblages changing
with time it appears that cultural assemblages will change according to
the varying numbers of the artefact-types and their distribution across
the component assemblages and that these types will themselves be
changing as the sum of their fluctuating attributes. These categories of
change may act independently and in unco-ordinated and divergent
trends or on occasions they jointly correlate and together move to
mark significant nodes in the system's time-trajectory. In order to
examine the complex interaction of these separate trends the cultural
assemblage system and its changes can be laid out in the three familiar
levels (see above pp. 1 8 0 - 1 , 2 1 7 - 1 8 ) :

        (i) T h e quantitative change and oscillation in numbers of arte-
            fact-types
            (a) as variation in the number of different specific artefact-
                 type categories defining the cultural polythetic set in suc-
                 cessive phases,
            (b) as variation in the number of different specific artefact-
                 type categories per assemblage in successive phases,
            (c) as variations in both of the above aspects jointly, in a
                 variety of combining trends.
       (ii) T h e quantitative change and oscillation in numbers of the
            population of component assemblages forming the cultural
            assemblage in successive phases.
      (iii) T h e qualitative change and oscillation of the overall cultural
            assemblage system as a structured system.

    Once again the consideration of these changes involves the concept
of ontogeny and the culture entity. T h e culture as a population has
various kinds of ontogeny, like the artefact-type population, and in the
same way some confusion exists about the planes of 'birth, growth,
maturity, and death' involved. Cultural ontogeny has the same general
syntax as that of the artefact-type - the analogue resting on the same
population trajectory basis, with a similar confusion of levels of mean-
ing, but with one fundamental difference that will gradually emerge.
                                         A s s e m b l a g e and culture   273

In addition we have the intuitive but tenacious concept of cultural
florescence and climax, a concept which must be examined for its
reality and basis.

     (i) T a k i n g the separate trends in cultural assemblage time-tra-
jectories one by one, we start with the problem of the quantitative
change and oscillation in the number of different artefact-types
through time. T h e changing absolute or relative n u m b e r s of artefacts
within successive phases of a type population has already been consid-
ered at length as a gross fluctuation cutting across attribute oscillations
(chapter 5, iv(ii)). Fluctuations in individual artefact-type output tend
to vary according to the well known double lenticular trend model
(figs 56—60). H o w e v e r , w e are now immediately concerned with the
alternative changing aspects of quantities of artefact-types within
assemblages as variations of the kinds (a), (b) and (c) mentioned above.
T h e problem is essentially one of ascertaining the relationship
between the distribution of the artefact-types in terms of each assem-
blage component and the distribution of the assemblage population in
terms of each artefact-type.
     In each case the variation in n u m b e r s can be crudely reduced to
the relative basis of numerical increase, decrease, or stability in
frequency in successive phases of the system trajectory. In this par-
ticular class of variation - (a) the number of different artefact-types
found in each successive phase of a cultural assemblage system may
increase, decrease or remain stable, representing an increasing,
decreasing, or stable polythetic set of types in the cultural equipment.
It is assumed that sampling precautions have been taken and that this
is a 'real' fluctuation.
     Similarly under class (b) the average number of different artefact-
types per component assemblage may be increasing, decreasing, or
remaining stable - subject to the same precautions. Now the inter-
pretation of these trends depends very much on the relationship and
synchronization between the two classes or aspects of change (a and
b). T a k e n separately variation in the number of different artefact-
types defining the overall cultural polythetic set can be represented as
fluctuating the possible range of assemblage variation within the set
(a). Variation in the average number of different artefact-type cate-
gories per assemblage reflects a fluctuating degree of assemblage
variety and assemblage elaboration - fluctuation in the technological
sophistication of the culture (b) (fig. 24). T h e joint effect and complex
274     Analytical Archaeology
interaction of       these trends can be g l i m p s e d         f r o m the    following
combinations:


                   Nos different
Nos different      specific artefact-
specific artefact- types per assemblage
types in cultural in the cultural
polythetic set      population        Implications

(i) Decrease         Increase                Increasing assemblage elaboration with
                                               a decreasing range of cultural varia-
                                               tion
(2) Increase         Increase                Increasing assemblage elaboration with
                                               an increasing range of cultural varia-
                                               tion
(3) Decrease         Decrease                Decreasing assemblage elaboration with
                                               a decreasing range of cultural varia-
                                               tion
(4) Increase         Decrease                Decreasing assemblage elaboration with
                                               an increasing range of cultural varia-
                                               tion



     T h i s model is of course highly s i m p l i f i e d - in the first place only
t w o variations have been c o m b i n e d f o r each factor - increase or
decrease. If the three variations increase, decrease, and stability had
been used this w o u l d allow not f o u r categories of c h a n g e but nine. T h e
precise implications of these categories of c h a n g e w o u l d d e p e n d u p o n
the kinds of artefact-types i n v o l v e d in the c h a n g e s , as well as upon the
n u m b e r s fluctuating, the rate of c h a n g e , and in particular the degree of
correlation b e t w e e n the c h a n g e s in the i n d i v i d u a l artefact-type tra-
jectories. Nevertheless, it w o u l d appear that the rough sequence
sketched in the model w o u l d have m u c h in c o m m o n with the charac-
teristics of the s e q u e n c e of d e v e l o p m e n t of a cultural assemblage
through time:

      Phase (o) - p r e - f o r m a t i v e , decreasing a s s e m b l a g e elaboration with
        an increasing range of cultural a s s e m b l a g e variation within the
        c o m p o n e n t s of culture So.
      Phase ( 1 ) - f o r m a t i v e , increasing a s s e m b l a g e elaboration with a
        decreasing range of cultural a s s e m b l a g e variation within the
                                      Assemblage and culture       275
     components of formative cultural assemblage S i - t h e new
     culture becoming coherent.
   Phase (2) - coherent, increasing assemblage elaboration with an
     increasing range of cultural assemblage variation - a great
     variety of types and assemblages within the local population of
     culture Si.
   Phase (3) - post-coherent, decreasing assemblage elaboration with
     a decreasing range of cultural assemblage variation - a simpler
     cultural assemblage with fewer types per assemblage component
     in culture Si.
   Phase (o) - pre-formative, decreasing assemblage elaboration with
     an increasing range of cultural assemblage variation - the
     assemblages become very diverse in their content accompanied
     by fewer Si artefacts per assemblage. The phase in which the
     assemblage format of cultural assemblage S2 first becomes
     apparent in the increasing directive correlation of certain arte-
     fact-type trajectories.
    It is not suggested that this sequence expresses the real charac-
teristics of a developing cultural assemblage but merely that this
model does suggest the general way in which the broad correlation of
separate trends may combine to define and emphasize the threshold
changes from one system state to another. This feature in turn raises
the consideration of successive culture-states and the distinction
between independent cultural assemblages and transform cultural
assemblages related by phylogeny (see below, pp. 279—80).
    The increasing or decreasing numbers of different artefact-types in
successive cultural sets and numbers of different types per assemblage
component also seem to trend in steady gradients or oscillate between
poles. Unfortunately it is very difficult to find data recording both
forms of variation although both categories are always present in some
degree.
    Example. In nine successive cultural assemblage phases from
North Georgia, U S A , a carefully recorded study established a steady
change in the number of different specific ceramic types in the suc-
cessive cultural assemblage polythetic sets. The average number of
different ceramic types per component assemblage in the successive
cultural populations was consistently less than the possible polythetic
total for each cultural assemblage phase (Wauchope 1966, p. 24,
table 4).
276       Analytical Archaeology

                                       Nos different ceramic
Cultural assemblage                    artefact-types in
phases                                 cultural polythetic set

Advanced phase                           7 types
Lamar phase                             11                                 Late
Savannah phase                          10
Etowah phase                            13                                 Woodland
Woodstock phase                          8                                 tradition
Napier phase                             S                                 of North
Swift Creek phase                                                          Georgia
                                         S
Deptford phase                                                             Early
                                         4
Fabric phase                              I




      There       remain         two     f u r t h e r a s p e c t s of q u a n t i t a t i v e     change        and
oscillation in n u m b e r s of a r t e f a c t - t y p e s w i t h i n c u l t u r a l a s s e m b l a g e s .
O n e a s p e c t is t h e l o g i c a l e x t e n s i o n of t h e t r e n d s just d i s c u s s e d - t h e
replacement            of    one     set of           fluctuating      artefact-types             by    another -
c u l t u r a l s u b s t i t u t i o n . I n a c o m p l e t e s t r a t i g r a p h i c r e c o r d this p r o c e s s
w i l l u s u a l l y a p p e a r as t h e t r u n c a t i o n a n d d i s c o n t i n u i t y of o n e set of
t y p e s a n d t h e i r r e p l a c e m e n t b y a n e w set. H o w e v e r , since the a s s e m -
b l a g e s are likely to h a v e a p o l y t h e t i c o v e r l a p in t y p e s , e v e n t h o u g h
they may be f r o m differing cultures, then some f e w artefact-types will
s h o w an a p p a r e n t l y c o n t i n u o u s r e c o r d a l t h o u g h u s u a l l y m a r k e d at the
c u l t u r a l i n t e r f a c e b y d i s c o n f o r m i t y in t h e q u a n t i t a t i v e t r e n d s (fig. 46).
S u c h d i s c o n f o r m i t i e s in t h e r e c o r d p l u s a l a r g e scale r e p l a c e m e n t of
t y p e s is s u f f i c i e n t t o m a r k a c u l t u r a l c h a n g e .
      T h e r e m a i n i n g a s p e c t is t h e c o n v e r s e of t h e variation                     patterns
a l r e a d y e x a m i n e d - that is t o say t h e c o n s i d e r a t i o n of the d i s t r i b u t i o n
of the total c u l t u r a l a s s e m b l a g e of e a c h s u c c e s s i v e p h a s e o v e r t h e r a n g e
of a r t e f a c t - t y p e s . T h i s k i n d of    fluctuation      n e e d r e f l e c t no c h a n g e in the
absolute        n u m b e r s of s p e c i f i c t y p e s        per phase assemblage                     and      no
n e c e s s a r y c h a n g e in t h e total v a r i e t y of t h e p o l y t h e t i c c u l t u r a l assem-
b l a g e s . I n s t e a d t h e r e m a y b e o s c i l l a t i o n s or t r e n d s in t h e s u c c e s s i v e
states of t h e a s s e m b l a g e            population           d i s t r i b u t i o n o v e r the    existing
r a n g e of a r t e f a c t - t y p e s - s u c c e s s i v e c h a n g e s in t h e relative p e r c e n t a g e s
of the p a r t i c u l a r t y p e s p r e s e n t . T h i s of c o u r s e r e f l e c t s c h a n g e s in the
stance b u t not t h e c o n t e n t of the c u l t u r a l a s s e m b l a g e s a n d m a y o f t e n
be connected with subcultural reorganization.

      (ii) T h e q u a n t i t a t i v e s t u d y of t h e n u m b e r s of c o m p o n e n t a s s e m -
blages       forming          the     cultural         assemblage          in s u c c e s s i v e      phases      has
                                         Assemblage and culture         277

received very little attention. T h e reasons for this omission partly arise
from the difficulty of establishing accurate relative chronologies on
other than the taxonomic grounds being researched and partly from
the embarrassment of having to display the paucity of assemblages
representing successive archaeological phases. Nevertheless, the
numbers of assemblages representing each cultural phase should be in
part a function of the population size and dispersion and in part a
function of the steady displacement of one cultural assemblage state
by another. Complications arise from the interaction of these two
factors and the interference from sampling problems - the population
of assemblages per phase is a complex vector of these components.
    In practice, the number of assemblages per phase from a given
culture tend to form the familiar and roughly lenticular frequency
distribution through time - a few assemblages of the new culture
appear initially, then there is positive sigmoid growth in assemblage
numbers - a period of decreased growth rate as the asymptote is
reached, followed by negative growth and the final disappearance of
the culture in terms of its distinctive assemblage.

    Example. T h e following example is based upon two regional sub-
cultures of the British Early Bronze Age Beaker culture. In temporal
and distribution terms an earlier and northerly subculture, the
Northern British group, is being displaced by a related and southerly
subculture, the Southern British group, which is itself finally engulfed
by larger autochthonous cultures (fig. 46; Clarke 1967, 1970).



                         Xos of                                 Nos of
Culture phase            assemblages   Culture phase            assemblages


Primary Northern   Ni   17                                        -
Developed Northern N2 154              Primary Southern   Si     54
Late Northern      N3 157              Developed Southern S2    158
Final Northern     N4 17               Late Southern      S3     66
                       -               Final Southern     S4     76




    Assemblage trends of this kind suggest that the main factor
detected in these samples is the gradual appearance,    fluctuation,
and disappearance of a particular set of equipment - the corres-
ponding population of people continuing throughout, with unknown
278    Analytical Archaeology
fluctuations.    We should not imagine that a human population is
appearing, fluctuating and disappearing in a simply correlated fashion -
indeed exactly how demographic fluctuations affect assemblage trends
is not clear ; that they do affect them however is certain. T h e factor that
may be relevant in the latter problem is the nature of the archaeological
sample. Since the trends in the f r e q u e n c y of archaeological phase
assemblages closely resemble historic and documented changes in
recent cultural assemblages some degree of confidence is induced for
the usefulness of archaeological data for further analysis. T h e nature
and problems of the archaeological sample however, clearly demand
close attention (e.g. Mueller, 1975).
    If the quantitative ontogeny curves for artefact-types and assem-
blages may not be so simply related to human population            fluctuations,
is there any possibility of estimating demographic fluctuations f r o m
the information concealed in artefact assemblage trends? T h i s prob-
lem has scarcely been investigated, although carefully controlled
experiments with suitable modern hand-made artefacts would
certainly prove enlightening. One interesting possibility is that given a
growing human population, in which a roughly constant proportion of
individuals are hand-producing standardized artefact-types, then one
might imagine that the 'variance' of the attributes within particular
artefact-type populations could be affected to a measurable degree. If
this was indeed so, then in these very specific circumstances the role of
population growth in increasing 'the rate of innovation' and 'integra-
tive invention' may prove to be significant. H o w e v e r , this hypothetical
model relationship remains for the moment untested but suggests the
possibility of a number of interesting analyses of variance experi-
ments.

    (iii) T h e fluctuations and oscillations in the quantitative ontogeny
of numbers and combinations of artefact-types and assemblages may
be viewed as only part of the qualitative change and oscillation of the
system of intercorrelated types as a structured constellation changing
with time. In this dynamic version the earlier static phase model of the
overall cultural assemblage develops a time-trajectory in w h i c h types
come and go, change from state to state and move f r o m correlation
level to correlation level in reference to the other artefact-types in the
cultural set. We start, then, with a polythetically generated constel-
lation of artefact-types with varying levels of mutual intercorrelation,
distributed around nuclei of key artefact-types. Subcultural kits or
                                       A s s e m b l a g e and culture   279

type complexes may appear as nuclei of covarying and correlated
types but equally such nuclei may include key types from independent
but related complexes which happen to covary. It is dangerous to
assume that a correlated complex of artefact-types equates simply with
a subcultural kit; there are several other ways in which such nuclei
may arise (Binford and Binford 1966).
    In the dynamic model of the cultural assemblage time-trajectory
we are tracing the culture system from state to state throughout its
recognizable history as a given system format. T h e system is of course
generated by the integrated pattern of numbers of dispersed but
interconnected assemblage trajectories united by continuing bonds of
mutual affinity in terms of artefact-types and their succession of
type-states. T h e system model represents the overall compounded
'behaviour' of these artefact-type relationships within the multilinear
and mosiac developments of the many separate assemblages and their
complex reticulation.
    It follows from this dynamic model that any cultural system
format will go through a series of successive format-states or culture-
states differentiated one from another by quantitative fluctuations in
inessential and essential types and by the particular phase states of the
multistate artefact-types. Conversely, the successive system states will
be unified by a common subset of key artefact-types and by common
and continuing aspects of correlation structure. T h e culture entity,
like the artefact-type, is a continuous and multistate system and once
again it is useful to distinguish between those assemblages which may
be related as transform cultural assemblages within a single system as
opposed to assemblages from quite different and independent cultural
assemblage systems.

    Transform cultures. Cultural assemblages which are collaterally or
descent related and represent simply different culture-states or
formats from the time-trajectory of a single cultural system. Many
cultural assemblages scattered in time and space may then be under-
stood simply as culture-states from a common multistate culture
system. Such homeomorphic assemblages are to be distinguished by
their polythetic affinity one with another and by their continuation of
transformations of at least the key artefact-types in a common
arrangement - the majority of types in the assemblages can be shown
simply to be different states of shared groups of multistate artefact-
types. Having established a cluster of assemblages as transforms from
280    Analytical Archaeology

a single cultural system the problem is then to distinguish the
contemporary spatial transforms f r o m the time transforms.
     Independent cultures. Independent cultural assemblages or cultures
are not connected or derived from a c o m m o n system at the level being
discussed here. Independent assemblages may share certain artefact-
types but the level of affinity between the assemblages is low and the
majority of artefact-types cannot be related as different states of single
specific types. T h e essential and key artefact-types are different and
their interrelationship in numbers of assemblages remains distinct.
Nevertheless, independent cultures are transforms in some system,
somewhere.
     A particular cultural assemblage system will first emerge in an
identifiable format as the successive and cumulative introduction of a
growing set of directively correlated essential and key artefact-types -
eventually crossing a threshold marking the first coherent and
integrated appearance of the specific culture format (fig. 68). Previous
to this threshold the individual essential artefact-types were simply
appearing independently and sporadically in the assemblages of other
systems, or in an ancestral system which is gradually so modified as to
no longer represent simply a system state of the preceding trajectory.
T h e difference between system state and system state within a single
system as opposed to the difference between two transform systems is
simply a matter of degree and threshold height. T h e difference
between system states in the same cultural system is mainly a matter of
differing artefact-type states and their manner of association. T h e
difference between transform cultures is a much greater difference in
artefact-type arrays and their association pattern - including a much
lower level of affinity and differing essential artefact-types.
    Once f o r m e d , the culture system format will move continuously
from state to state marked by the continuous fluctuations in modal
artefact-type states and the varying correlation between types within
the system. T h e essential artefact-types mark those multistate types
which are present in some state in every phase of the trajectory of the
specific culture - expressing the continuity and survival of the system
as that system. T h e key artefact-types are a subset of the essential
types which are distinguished by a jointly maintained pattern of
covariation and correlation within the system - types which occur in
assemblages in repeated and specific relationship. Such key artefact-
types and their transforms are largely responsible for the continuing
identity of the cultural assemblage throughout its successive states.
                                                       Assemblage and culture             281
     c.2000
         B.C.




     c. 2 5 0 0
         B.C.




     c. 3 0 0 0
         B.C.
                  Polish/Prussian                               Tripolye/Gumelnitzo
                     Erlebolle       TRB A / B and                       Tell
                      Culture       Baalberg Culture                  Cultures
                  Blade industry    Basic Ceramic               Copper and Stone
                  Ovoid Jars        Types:-                     Battle-Axe prototypes,
                  Oval bowls        Beaker,                     Basic Copper tool types
                  Cording           Globular                    Hammer and Spiral Pins,
                  Pendant bands     Amphora,                    Copper versions of
                  and Herringbone   Cording,                    bone bracelets, belt
                  Motifs            Neck-Only                   rings, and boar's tusk
                                    Style,                      lunulae,
                                    Single-Burial               Ard agriculture ?
     c.3500
           B.C.




       Fig. 68a Directive correlation between artefact-types within
       an emergent culture or culture group. A schematic outline of
       the successive introduction and cumulative integration of
       essential and key artefact-types within the cultural system of
       the emergent Corded Ware/Battle-Axe cultures of northern
       Europe c. 2700-2500 BC.



Outside these regularities and constraints the inessential types will
constantly come and go from the system and the remaining types will
show a constant oscillation in state and correlation levels one with
another.
   T h e termination of such a cultural system trajectory can take place
in two main w a y s :
282     Analytical Archaeology




      threshold, 1895.
      Modified from Broom and Selznick 1958, p. 65, after F. Stuart Chapin.

      (1) T h e successive and cumulative introduction of new artefact-
          types until the old format loses coherence and a new format
          emerges integrating the novel artefact-types in an increasingly
          standardized arrangement - the development of one transform
          culture f r o m another.
      (2) T h e displacement and substitution of one cultural system by
          another independent system at a given locus.
                                        A s s e m b l a g e a n d culture   283

    T h e termination process is to be distinguished from the parallel
case involving artefact-type systems and provides the fundamental
difference between two otherwise closely congruent patterns of system
'behaviour*. In an artefact-type system the particular type may simply
go out of production, cease to exist and disappear from the cultural
range. In a cultural assemblage system the system and its population
may be displaced by another independent system but the culture can
rarely if ever, cease to exist, although continuing in increasingly
divergent transformations. It is conceivable that on very rare occasions
the complete population producing a particular sociocultural system
might be completely wiped out by war, disease, or famine - but these
occasions are of the highest rarity. Either the culture system is displaced
and simply shifts its territory elsewhere, or the mutual impact of one or
more culture systems in a restricted locus will give rise to a newly
'emergent' cultural assemblage on the lines already suggested (see (1)
above). T h e emergent culture may have several 'ancestors' which may
briefly survive within its format as vestigial ethnic or regional sub-
cultures. T h e new cultural assemblage cannot be regarded as a trans-
form of any one system but rather as a complex conjunct with an
individual and unique format with emergent characteristics. It is this
particular kind of new identity and this particular process which mark
the 'independent culture' and its 'birth*. It is worth noting that such a
process can have its possible occurrence optimized by taking a locus
with several neighbouring, different, yet interacting cultures; it goes
without saying that such a factor is not sufficient in itself to bring about
this process but may provide one of several possible and cumulative
causes.


CORRELATION AND C U L T U R A L       COHERENCE

In the terms of the dynamic model that we are developing the time-
trajectory of a cultural assemblage system resembles bundles of vary-
ing intercorrelated artefact-type trajectories - with types appearing
and disappearing, moving from state to state, and fluctuating in degree
of correlation with other types. T h e level of correlation between the
types within the changing constellation-trace expresses the inter-
dependence between these variables such that when one changes so
does the other, in some way similar to that represented by a mathema-
tical function but not in such a completely dependent fashion. It is
particularly important to realize that two variables — whether they are
284   Analytical Archaeology

attribute trajectories or type trajectories - may be correlated one with
the other without there necessarily being a simple direct connection
between them. T h e intercorrelation may suggest a cause and effect
relationship between the changing elements but equally the cor-
relation may very often reflect a complex relationship shared by two or
more variables being modified b y the effects of a common cause linked
with some other variable. T h e r e may be no significant connection
between two type trajectories which exhibit correlation other than
through their separate relationships to some third variable. It
is a dangerous over-simplification to interpret clusters of correlated
artefact-types simply       as   associated   subculture   artefact  kits
varying through time (Binford and Binford 1966). Once again
statistical considerations provide a basis for interpretation but
they do not provide unique and simple solutions to archaeological
problems.
    For the present it suffices that correlation measurements can
express the interdependence between covarying artefact-types
through the cultural system's time-trajectories. T h i s correlation is
«-dimensional where n is the number of artefact-types in the system -
each type is in some sort of relationship with every other type in the
system at every stage.
    Successive system states in the trajectory of the changing cultural
assemblage will necessarily show changes in the mutual intercor-
relation of the artefact-types within the constellation - both individu-
ally between pairs of types and overall as the population of types is
increasingly or decreasingly intercorrelated. We have previously
suggested that this overall degree of system integration or component
intercorrelation is the vector behind the intuitive impression of the
degree of 'coherence' of a cultural assemblage. Increasing levels of
overall intercorrelation between the artefact-types defining a culture's
time-trajectory suggest an increasingly defined cultural format
conceptualized as an increase in the cultural format coherence - the
upshot of directive correlation. Conversely, decreasing overall inter-
correlation linking the successive constellation of artefact-types would
invoke a decreasingly defined cultural format - a decreasing cultural
coherence. T h e significance of the 'coherence' concept is that it is
capable of further definition and in theory at least it is a measurable
and quantifiable factor, either in some f o r m of geometric mean or
perhaps as the moment of inertia of successive system states expressed
as correlation values (chapter 6, iv).
                                         Assemblage and culture         285

RATES-OF-CHANGE        AND   THRESHOLDS

If the level of artefact-type intercorrelation is an important factor in
cultural ontogeny then so is the correlation between the rates of
change of the system components. T h e pattern of change and the rates
of change of these components together help to define the thresholds
separating culture state from culture state and transform culture f r o m
transform culture. In a very substantial way it is the accelerated rate of
increase in new variety which marks the growth of a new cultural
format - the greatly accelerated rate of increase in new artefact-type
states and attribute states. T h e s e are the spurts of creative develop-
ment which divide up the otherwise sporadically fluctuating cultural
time-trajectory and it is these jointly correlated and rapid shifts to new
modes of artefact-type characterization which conveniently register
the development of new transform cultures, culture states, or
subcultures — according to the degree and nature of the changes.
    T h i s model of a continuous time-trajectory for cultural assem-
blages raises the familiar problem of the differentiation of culture state
from culture state and culture from culture in the sequence. Basically
the thresholds separating culture state f r o m culture state are slight and
insignificant compared with those separating transform culture f r o m
transform culture. T h e thresholds between culture states or phases
can be visualized as reflecting correlated changes in small n u m b e r s of
essential artefact-types taking them f r o m one modal state to another
and from one intercorrelation locus to another within the system as a
whole. At the same time some inessential artefact-types may help mark
the phase by appearing or disappearing f r o m the system. By
comparison the thresholds marking the formation and reformation of
the cultural format display correlated changes in most of the essential
and key artefact-types, a great variability in all the system
components, a greatly increased rate of change of types f r o m state to
state and the cumulative introduction of an increasingly coherent set
of new key artefact-types replacing the old ones. Consequently, the
time-trajectory of the cultural assemblage is segmented by clustered
nodes of maximized change markedly more emphatic than the inevit-
able and sporadically continuous changes in between.

v   System pattern regularities

Most of the regularities of assemblages and artefact-types within the
culture system have been itemized in connection with the system's
286   Analytical Archaeology
space and time-trajectories (section ni-iv). There remain those
inherent system regularities which depend upon the system as a
fragment of a sociocultural information system with the usual moving
and dynamic equilibrium between all the multifarious variety circu-
lated as coded behavioural information from the cultural subsystems.
     Given a particular cultural assemblage subsystem from a sociocul-
tural system it is possible to see specific artefact-types as representing
new, alternative, contradictive, or redundant variety in relation to the
whole system and its material aspect. The constantly changing socio-
cultural system equilibrium is maintained by repeatedly minimizing
the maximum amount of immediate system dislocation. It is this latter
process which determines whether a particular piece of diffusing
variety is suitable for integration or is to be rejected and similarly
stimulates or fails to stimulate the internal integrative invention of
'new' variety by re-networking old components. Because the system is
dynamic and coupled with a dynamic environing system sociocultural
equilibrium is never fully achieved and consequently the equilibrium
format is always changing. In any cultural assemblage trajectory, at
any one time, there are several foci within the system requiring
suitable variety to diminish the existing contradictory and disjunctive
variety focused at these points in the system's structure. These foci
fluctuate and move through the system forming loci of accelerated
change constantly minimizing the amount of fresh system dislocation
brought about by fresh developments at all levels within the system
 and within the coupled environment.
     Against this background a particular artefact-type may appear
within the communication network of a culture and may represent a
 totally new variety - if the new type minimizes some existing system
 dislocation in any subsystem then it will be accepted and integrated as
 a gain in system variety. The new type may well serve to stabilize a
 religious or psychological subsystem inconsistency as much as a
 material culture or economic subsystem dislocation. Many diffusing
 artefact-types will simply represent alternative forms to those already
 existing in the cultural format - simply differing states of multistate
 types generating no system inconsistencies or dislocation. A far larger
 class of artefact-types circulating and recirculating throughout the
 system will be simply redundant - that is to say that these are the
 modal types for this culture and their circulation effects no change in
 variety, they convey no 'new' behavioural information.
     However, the most significant category of artefact-type variety will
 be those types which contradict sections of the system's behavioural
                                        Assemblage and culture        287

code and its stabilized variety. T h e contradictive variety might be
presented by swine-herding and its artefacts to a J e w i s h community,
or by anthropomorphic sculpture to Moslems, or even the constant
military equivocation between the developing artefacts of armour and
those of mobility and fire power. In the face of contradictive variety
the sociocultural system in most cases simply rejects or refuses to
accept such diffusing variety and any internal integrative invention of
the kind is neglected by the system, though it may be avidly borrowed
by another. Nevertheless, it may be immediately advantageous to
accept and integrate one piece of contradictive variety in order to
stabilize an existing major dislocation at the expense of creating a new
minor one. Since sociocultural systems are not altogether intelligent
and forward looking organisms, such changes often subsequently lead
to serious and unforeseen consequences - especially on the basis of the
piecemeal integration of cumulative variety leading to an unforeseen
threshold. T h e short term strategy seems always to be one of mini-
mizing the maximum amount of immediate system dislocation and its
dependent social ambiguity.
    T h e culture system therefore displays all the system regularities
expected of an arbitrary material subsystem within the sociocultural
whole - those regularities pointed out in the general model. T h e s e
regularities include the general categories of variety just discussed, the
principle of dynamic adjustment to a moving equilibrium, system
oscillation at several levels, feedback, foci of accelerated change, the
operation of multiple factors and cumulative effect to thresholds,
directive correlation and the many other points of the general model for
cultural processes (fig. 1 1 and postulates 1 - 1 6 , chapter 2).
     T h e ontogeny of a specific culture or cultural assemblage has been
outlined in terms of the successive introduction and cumulative
integration of an emergent set of directively correlated essential and
key artefact-types. T h e 'new' cultural format thus emerges for the first
time as an integrated system at a major threshold (fig. 68), thereafter
moving f r o m system state to system state in space and time until the
same process of cumulative change brings about the transmutation of
the system into yet another major transform. T h e s e transitions, as we
have repeatedly stressed, do not come about of their own accord or
stem f r o m innate qualities of the artefacts - we need only recognize
that whatever the complex causes generating the changes may be, this
is the way in which such changes occur. T h e principal manifestations
of such transitions are marked by the cumulative interaction of the
superimposed tendencies of reinforcing trends. T h e s e grouped trends
288      Analytical Archaeology
m a r k the thresholds and s e g m e n t the c o n t i n u o u s process of trans-
f o r m a t i o n , s u g g e s t i n g the 'birth, g r o w t h , death' analogy of the o r g a n i c
w o r l d . W e m u s t n o w try and m o d e l in a tentative and crude m a n n e r
s o m e of the trends generated b y societies and responsible for the
a p p a r e n t o n t o g e n y of their material exoskeleton.



TENTATIVE            M O D E L OF M A T E R I A L C U L T U R E        SYSTEM
ONTOGENY

The      main      trends      thought          to be    involved,    at   varying      levels    of
i m p o r t a n c e , have been discussed in detail in earlier sections of this
c h a p t e r . T h e s e trends i n c l u d e :

      c h a n g e s in n u m b e r s of specific artefact-type categories d e f i n i n g the
         c u l t u r e ' s polythetic set,
      changes        in   numbers          of      specific   artefact-type     categories       per
         c o m p o n e n t assemblage (average),
      c h a n g e s in n u m b e r s of artefacts per specific artefact-type state
         (location and degree of central t e n d e n c y ) ,
      c h a n g e s in n u m b e r s of c o m p o n e n t a s s e m b l a g e s per culture phase
         or state,
      c h a n g e s in the level of overall intercorrelation b e t w e e n specific
         artefact-types (coherence),
      c h a n g e s in the rates of change, especially of t y p e s f r o m t y p e state
         to type state.

E a c h of these changes m a y be broadly divided into increasing, stable,
or d e c r e a s i n g attitudes or trends and therefore o n c e again w e have six
t r e n d i n g variables, each w i t h three c r u d e attitudes - a l l o w i n g a possi-
ble 3h or 729 broad c o m b i n a t i o n s or kinds of joint change.                       Taken
together, the i n t e r d e p e n d e n c e of s o m e of the variables, the crude
expression of their trends, and the n u m b e r of possible p e r m u t a t i o n s
all c o m b i n e to make any simple m o d e l on this basis merely schematic.
H o w e v e r , it is suggested that it is these m u t u a l l y              fluctuating    trends
which       are responsible           for defining cultural          assemblage        ontogeny,
s o m e w h a t in the f o l l o w i n g w a y :

      (o) Threshold            -'birth/death'
            S u c c e s s i v e phases of a cultural a s s e m b l a g e or culture exhibit-
                   ing:
               increasing n u m b e r s of t y p e categories d e f i n i n g the cultural
                   polythetic set,
                                  Assemblage and culture       289
      decreasing numbers of type categories per component
         assemblage,
      decreasing numbers of artefacts in previously modal states
         (Kurtosis),
      decreasing numbers of component assemblages per phase,
      decreasing level of overall intercorrelation between type
         categories,
      increasing rates of change, especially of types from state to
         state.
(1) Formative - 'growth'
    Successive phases of a cultural assemblage or culture exhibit-
         ing:
      decreasing numbers of type categories defining the cultural
         polythetic set,
      increasing numbers of type categories per component
         assemblage,
      increasing numbers of artefacts in newly centred central
         tendency,
      increasing numbers of component assemblages of the new
         format,
      increasing level of overall intercorrelation between type
         categories,
      decreasing rates of change, especially of types from state to
         state.
(2) Coherent -'maturity'
    Successive phases of a cultural assemblage or culture exhibit-
         ing:
      increasing numbers of type categories defining the cultural
         polythetic set,
      increasing numbers of type categories per component
         assemblage,
      maximal central tendency of artefacts in new key type states,
      maximal numbers of component assemblages of the new
         format,
      maximal level of intercorrelation between essential artefact-
         types,
      minimal rates of change, especially of types from state to
         state.
(3) Post-Coherent -'decline'
    Successive phases of a cultural assemblage or culture exhibit-
         ing:
290     Analytical Archaeology

            decreasing numbers of type categories defining the cultural
              polythetic set,
            decreasing numbers of type categories per component
              assemblage,
            decreasing central tendency of artefacts around former
              modal states,
            decreasing numbers of component assemblages,
            decreasing level of overall intercorrelation between artefact-
              types,
            increasing rates of change, especially of types from state to
              state.
      (o) Threshold -'death/birth'
          Successive phases of a cultural assemblage or culture exhibit-
               ing:
            increasing numbers of type categories defining the cultural
               polythetic set,
            decreasing numbers of type categories per component
               assemblage,
            decreasing numbers of artefacts in previously modal type
               states,
            decreasing numbers of component assemblages per phase,
            decreasing level of overall intercorrelation between artefact-
               types,
            increasing rates of change, especially of types from state to
               state.

    T h e scheme outlined above is intended as no more than a sugges-
tion of the nature of some of the changes which suggest cultural
system ontogeny - as a model the scheme is highly idealized and
completely hypothetical. Nevertheless, the sequence does help to
frame the processes involved in a way which emphasizes the complex
interaction of trends in the system and despite its weakness the model
provides a basis for the comparison of 'coherence' with the
phenomenon of cultural 'climax'.



CULTURE       CLIMAX

T h e schematic cultural system ontogeny just outlined has been
defined purely in terms of variety and patterned changes in variety -
there has been no mention of the economic or technological state of
                                            Assemblage and culture            291

the system involved. Quite correctly so, since we recognize that this
general ontogenetic pattern - ' b i r t h , growth, d e a t h ' - i s displayed by
Palaeolithic and by Iron Age cultures, by hunter-fisher-gatherer
material cultures and by urban material cultures. We recognize that in
terms of their material culture subsystem or specific cultural assem-
blage these entities are at one time non-existent, then they appear for
the first time, become widespread, only to finally disappear from the
scene again. T h i s is the general case irrespective of the specific socio-
cultural form or complexity.
     Now, sociocultural systems vary enormously in their technological
content, micro-structure, economic organization and environmental
conditions. It follows that the detailed development pattern of individ-
ual categories of sociocultural system will vary according to the
characteristic constraints operating in that system category. Steward
(1955), for example, has distinguished the pattern and pattern-poten-
tial of several levels of sociocultural integration based on taxa sharing
certain social, economic, technological, territorial and population dis-
persion attributes. Sociocultural systems like machines extract energy
from their environment and expend it in a variety of activities pre-
constrained by the system format and directed towards system
continuity. Like machines, cultural systems may either extract energy
steadily and release it gradually in a steady but small output of
sociocultural variety, or at the other extreme, some highly organized
and sophisticated cultural systems may extract energy from their
resources in great quantities and by concentrating it enormously
amplify the output of variety. T h e former strategy is a non-climax
satisficer system and the latter strategy a climax and optimizer
system - both systems have risks and advantages.
     Since the economic subsystem is the extractive source of system
energy, the more successful the particular economic strategy the
greater is the quantity of energy available for redistribution
throughout the system. Consequently, cultural climax represents the
peculiar form of system coherence or 'maturity' found in cultures with
super-elaborate economic organizations or alternatively superabun-
dant natural resources. Under the former arrangement we have the
urban states and empires - civilization; under the latter arrangement
we have the climax of simpler systems under unusually advantageous
conditions - the Magdalenian culture group of Palaeolithic Europe, or
the famed Northwestern Indians of recent North America. Accord-
ingly, culture climax follows the exponential burst of sociocultural
292   Analytical Archaeology
variety identifying the formative phases of certain categories of
cultural system and for this reason such phases are often organically
described as the phase of cultural 'florescence'. However, all cultures
have formative and coherent phases of integration but only under
certain circumstances will these phases also attain cultural florescence
and climax. There is of course a continuous gradation between poor
economies and rich economies with a consequent gradation from
non-climax, steady output cultures to climactic and amplified output
cultures. T h e advantages of the climactic systems are their more
effective capacity for the regulation and control of the environment
insulating the individual and system, but against this capacity must be
set the potential dangers of inflationary excess, overspecialization,
overexploitation of resources, and the marked social inequalities of
overorganization. T h e advantages of the non- or low-climax systems
are their potential for a more egalitarian society with a less drastic and
smoother development trajectory - the disdvantages being the vul-
nerability of the system to environmental fluctuation and the restric-
ted range of its potential development.
    On this basis it would appear that one might distinguish a general
and widespread pattern of system development inherent in the struc-
ture of every material culture system as opposed to a restricted and
special version of this development inherent only under certain
economic conditions:


General system   ontogeny             Climax system   ontogeny

Threshold                             Threshold/Archaic
Formative                             Formative/Florescent
Coherent                              Coherent/Classic climax
Post-coherent                         Post-coherent/Post-classic
Threshold                             Threshold/Archaic
  T h e system may have several          T h e system may have several
  successive transformations             successive transformations
  each with a distinctive                each with a distinctive
  formative and coherent phase.          florescent and classic climax
                                         phase.


    It is patently obvious that these simple unimodal models can be
multimodal - as in the case of the isolated Chinese and Egyptian
civilizations, or the models may be truncated and substituted by
                                      A s s e m b l a g e and culture   293
external interference - as in the case of the Spanish destruction of the
Meso-American cultures (Kroeber 1963).
      So far we have suggested that cultural climax is a special and
restricted manifestation of some cultural ontogenies but we have still
not directly accounted for this special 'creativity' or explained its
relationship with the formative phase of system development. It has
been noted, however, that the florescence-climax sequence is restric-
ted to systems so organized or situated that they may extract surplus
quantities of energy from their resources and by concentrating it
amplify the output of system variety. A first step is to find out how
cultural systems can amplify variety and what sociocultural structures
have this capacity.
      Inasmuch as each newly formed cultural entity arises out of the
elements of several pre-existing cultures and communities it is inevi-
table that the formative phase contains a wide diversity of contradic-
tive and alternative variety. In such a phase the structure and coupling
of the sociocultural system and subsystems have yet to be mutually
stabilized and institutionalized within a unit system - the internal
dislocation will thus be made severe by the contradictive wealth of
diverse sociocultural information and discordant subsystem outputs.
T h i s state of formative growth invites vigorous experimentation to
produce variety to stabilize the dislocations in a manner that is not
found in communities in a more mature phase. As cumulative change
progresses the possible developmental patterns and trajectories
become further restricted as the attributes are increasingly integrated
and institutionalized within a functional whole.
      T h e formative system disequilibrium within and between the
subsystems necessitates an optimal rate of generation of yet more fresh
and newly comprehensive variety in order to minimize the maximum
amount of dislocation in the system. T h i s new variety can only come
from the two customary sources:

   internal generation by integrative inventions,
   external generation and communication by diffusion.

T h e formative system phase is therefore characterized by a great
diversity of intrinsic variety requiring a correspondingly large quan-
tity of 'new' variety from internal integrative inventions and external
diffusion. Consequently, as Kroeber has so admirably shown, the
formative phase represents the ideal conditions for the roughly
constant population of latent genius cumulatively to interact and
294    Analytical Archaeology
produce a cluster of integrative inventions and discoveries - retro-
spectively marked by periods of clustered geniuses and threshold
achievements (Kroeber 1963). T h i s formative phase is also an unusu-
ally receptive and integrating phase for these same reasons. Such
'creativity' or burst of new variety in attributes and artefacts is thus a
potential of formative 'youth' in a sociocultural system - not to be
found in the same degree in later phases. It is not that the invention or
acquisition of new variety ever ceases it is simply that the 'florescence'
marks a greatly increased rate of new variety development.
    However, if the above hypothesis is correct why is the florescence-
climax phenomenon only observed in certain kinds and situations of
systems? T h e answer is simply a matter of degree and is expressed in
our previous contrast between satisficer sociocultural systems,
organized towards the steady exploitation and release of energy and
variety, as opposed to those optimizer systems with the amplifying
release of bursts of energy and variety. T h e capacity for such energy
and variety amplification resides in certain forms of sociocultural
organization and structure, where these are the necessary but not
sufficient prerequisites for climax potential. One such organization is
the city. T h e city is a most peculiar and extremely sophisticated unit
depending upon the organized population and resources of a local
territory, which in turn may perhaps rest upon a similarly highly
organized culture - a nation - and in the most powerful units this may
 in turn draw upon an organized and widespread extractive empire (fig.
 69). T h e city is therefore an energy or variety amplifier in this context
 and the nation may perhaps be seen as an artificially organized culture
 and the empire as a similarly artificially optimized culture group. T h e
 alternative optimizer and therefore potentially climatic strategy is a
 smaller amplifying unit based upon a more flexible cultural system but
 equally highly organized in a situation of high resources and low
 population. T h i s is the low florescence and climax category which may
 be seen in such hunting-fishing-gathering contexts as the Mag-
 dalenian and Kwakiutl tribes, with their highly specialized near-
 optimal subsistence strategies in abundant environments. Inevitably,
 the scope and stability of climax in such small unit systems must be
 less than that of the urban-agrarian technocomplexes.
    In summary, then, we have carefully distinguished between the -
formative, coherent, post-coherent - ontogeny which is repeated in all
cultural systems, and the - florescent, classic-climax, post-classic -
sequence which marks only the ontogeny of near-optimizer
                                            A s s e m b l a g e and culture   295
                               Rediffused variety plus
                                         GAIN
                          (new, integrative, invented variety)




Fig. 69 T h e city as an energy and variety amplifier plugged in the cultural
network. Raw material and variety of all kinds are drawn from the city's
region, culture, and perhaps imperial areas - this variety is integrated and
recirculated from the city (to varying degrees) as powerful, new variety
(complex machines, tools, etc., including social, religious, and conceptual
artefacts as well as material ones).



economies, often in the wake of an economic boom. T h e European
Renaissance provides a fine example of just this florescence and climax
sequence, following and depending upon the economic boom
immediately preceding it. It is important to note that northern Italy
was a cultural unit with a cultural ontogeny and climax even though it
was never a single political unit - it was a unit of which the
components were as unaware but inseparably a part, as were the city
states within Classical Greece or the organisms within a biotope.
    Florescence, climax, and post-climax are therefore merely a matter
of degree - the enormously amplified manifestation of variety changes
found on a smaller scale in all formative, coherent, post-coherent
transitions. All formative phases of cultural systems will have
contained heterogeneous and diverse cultural variety momentarily
integrated from many sources and only metastably balanced within
the unit culture system. In all cases this will give rise to foci of
dislocation and stimulate the invention and acquisition of new and
comprehensive variety —but it is the severity, scope and amplified
potential of these everyday developments which may chance to give
rise to a florescence and climax in an economically advanced cultural
system.
296    Analytical Archaeology

     Kroeber has summarized and documented this process in terms of
his hypothesis of 'pattern fulfilment' (1948, pp. 3 6 0 - 5 ; and 1963, pp.
825-46). He postulates that every cultural element, of every level, has
a limited potential range of development or transformation which is
quickly reached in outline in the formative florescence and then slowly
filled-in from the climax through the post-climax phases. On this
hypothesis the climax is the classic phase of outline or essential pattern
fulfilment, which is thereafter conservatively filled with branching
development. T h e interpretation and hypothesis offered here differs
from the Kroeber model because although conceptually satisfying that
expression is very difficult to support in detail. When is a pattern
'fulfilled' or 'filled-in', why does the pattern not continue its expansive
development of new variety? T h e explanation offered here suggests
that it is not that every cultural pattern has its fulfilment capacity but
conversely that the cumulative growth developing the pattern is initi-
ally stimulated by formative dislocation and ceases, or rather decreases
in its rate of development, when those dislocations are nearly stabil-
ized. T h e florescence is brought about by large-scale stimulative dis-
location in certain kinds of system and the climax is the arbitrary
stabilization of that dislocation in a 'new', emergent cultural
configuration integrated for the first time.
      T h i s variant of the Kroeber hypothesis can perhaps be most clearly
expressed in the definition of the crucial terminology.
      Florescence. T h e period of explosive growth in new and compre-
 hensive variety in aspects of an optimizer cultural system or
 subsystem - thus defining the cumulative and catalytic development
 of variety necessary to stabilize foci of system dislocation, brought
 about by the system's development.
      T h e term florescence, although only different in degree, is here
 separated from the small-scale version of the same process which is
 characteristic of the formative phase of all cultural systems.
      Climax. T h e period following a variety florescence in a system or
 subsystem, in which the dislocating alternative and contradictive
 variety produced by integrative growth is first coherently stabilized in
 the newly emergent system format.
      T h e term climax may be applied to the coherent emergence of a
 new format in any aspect of a climaxing system - pottery, painting,
 sculpture, architecture, drama, etc.
      Cultural Climax. T h e period following a variety florescence in an
 optimizer cultural system - thus defining the first coherent configura-
                                             Assemblage and culture             297

tion of the newly emergent cultural format, stabilizing the new variety
generated in the various cultural aspects. T h e period c o m m o n l y
agreed as defining the phases in which the majority of a culture's arts
and crafts reach their individual climax pattern. T h e process is cumu-
lative and catalytic - the climax coincidentally of one or more
components will often induce climax conditions in related aspects and
if the conditions are suitable (metastable) these too will climax. T h e
clustered individual aspect climaxes then provide a strong overall
pattern and fresh system configuration - a renaissance transformation.
S u c h conditions, as K r o e b e r pointed out, provide optimal pre-
conditions for inventions and innovations on an integrative basis and
thus retrospectively appear to cluster human genius (Kroeber 1963).
      T h e archaeological record can therefore hope to detect the
development of both cultural system formation and coherence and in
special cases their florescence and climax manifestations. It should
after all be possible to infer the general basis and character of the
clustered geniuses of the Renaissance and Classical Greece f r o m the
material remains and the contrast with what went before and followed
after. One very noticeable facet of these florescence-climax develop-
ments is their artistic investiture. T h i s artistic development is very
difficult to evaluate without recourse to contemporary value judge-
ments although it should be noticed that it is usually restricted to only
a selection of the available artistic fields. However, it is apparent that
this artistic development is also part of the general stimulus to
innovation to minimize the developing contradictions and ambiguities
of the florescent diversity - creating new variety in order to reconcile
or replace existing equivocal f o r m s . M u c h of this dislocation may be
social, religious, or psychological even though registered in artistic
output and in this sense art and the artist are truly 'characteristic' of
their period and context. E v e n this artistic output is very frequently
functionally integrated within the contemporary culture as con-
veniently concentrated units of conspicuously wasted time - the
essence of most prestige symbols and insignia. 2



Notes

   ( 1 ) T h e 'supra-cultural' nature of metal production and distribution in
the European Bronze A g e has been questioned by R o w l a n d s ( 1 9 7 1 ,    pp.
2 1 3 - 1 5 ) . In considering the ethnographic evidence for the position and status
of smiths he points out that the 'detribalized' or 'itinerant' smith has been
298    Analytical Archaeology
encountered only very rarely. The existence of regional or industrial
differences in metalwork as well as localized metalworking traditions in the
European Middle and Late Bronze Ages also argue against the notion of
supra-cultural production.
    (2) T h e role of information processing and decision making in state
formation have been discussed recently in a less abstract form by Johnson,
who argues that 'primary state development involves overloading the decision
making organization of a chiefdom. Since no single factor such as increasing
irrigation, population, warfare, local exchange or whatever can be shown to
have led to state development, it would appear that multiple sources of
information input are required to force basic organizational changes at this
level' (1973, p. 161). Flannery (1972) concurs with the key significance of
decision-making through an increasingly centralized and segregated/hierar-
chical social organization in state formation. These processes of segregation
and centralization, as well as the mechanisms by which they take place, are
held to have occurred in the evolution of all state systems, but the 'socio-
environmental stresses' (e.g. warfare/population growth/irrigation/trade)
which brought them into play would have been localized in their particular
configuration. T h e place of religion within the development of such climax
state systems has been tentatively explored by Drennan (1976), who suggests
that segregation and centralization increases the need for 'rituals of
sanctification' to ensure acceptance and help maintain the new social order.
7      Culture and culture group

       In the classification of relics perhaps the first step should
       now be to assign them to their proper cultural group,
                    'Changing methods and aims in prehistory',
         Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society for 1936, pp. 1 - 1 5
                                    V. G O R D O N C H I L D E 1 9 3 6




I   Introduction

In an important sense the culture is the entity at the peak of the
hierarchical model of archaeological entities (fig. 49). T h e archaeo-
logical culture when properly defined represents the material culture
subsystem of a specific sociocultural system. T h e culture system and
the communities which generate it embody the largest unit with
internally the most richly cross-connected and mutually reinforcing
system of information variety, uniting and stabilizing every channel of
human intercommunication and behaviour. Social organizations of
greater size than the society and its culture are less richly networked
and consequently have less rich system 'behaviour'. T h e increasing
power and diversity of methods of communication have nevertheless
allowed a steady increase in the sustainable size of such sociocultural
systems.
     T h e archaeological culture is therefore the entity category with the
biggest information content - to place an assemblage in a specific
culture is to attribute it with many general and specific characteristics.
T o assign an assemblage or a culture to a culture group is to attribute
it to a larger entity but to one with a lower group information content
- a bigger entity in terms of area and population but less complex in
network organization and in the level of affinity between its
components. In precisely the same way the category 'species' in
biological classification carries more information than the categories
'order' or 'genus' although their populations are far greater. It is for
this reason that great care must be taken in archaeological terminology
in order to correctly isolate cultural entities from larger and less
informative entities. T o designate Gravettian assemblages a culture,
300   Analytical Archaeology
for example, is to grossly mistake the size, nature and degree of
organization of the entity under consideration - to attribute it with a
false set of inherent properties. Our concern with the careful definition
of the information levels of archaeological terminology and their more
rigorous employment is directed at this very problem.
     It must immediately be emphasized that of course all cultures are
also part of culture groups and of such higher and increasingly general
entities as technological complexes and socioeconomic groupings - in
much the same way as a species necessarily falls within a genus and
order. Component assemblages and cultural assemblages belong at
one and the same time to the intersection of these several broad sets
which are distinguished one from another as archaeological categories
by the varying levels of complexity and necessary affinity uniting the
assemblages in these sets. T h e relationship of the particular case or
sample within these broad sets of collateral relatives conveys a great
amount of latent information about the particular case. T h e more
precise our definition of these sets the correspondingly more abundant
our reward in precise information. Although it may prove impossible
to allocate an assemblage to a precise culture it is usually much easier,
requiring less information, to allocate the assemblage to a culture
group — to one unknown culture of which the assemblage primarily
belongs. In this way, although the individual cultures of Neolithic
Europe remain myriad and ill-defined the culture groups offer a
broadly simplified pattern of bundles of related transforms (fig. 70).
 By alternating between the minutiae of incisive analysis and the broad
pattern of overall development orientation the archaeologist can grope
his way forward to fresh information.
     We might define a culture group as - a group of affinally related,
 collateral cultures characterized by assemblages sharing a polythetic range,
 but differing states, of the same specific multistate artefact-types. A low
 level affinity, perhaps 30 per cent or less, uniting the group in terms of
 shared sets of specific type states, but a residual high level affinity,
 perhaps 60 per cent or more, uniting the group in terms of sets of type
 families and multistate transform types. T h e essence of the culture
 group, so defined, then becomes the polythetic set of multistate arte-
 fact-types which are variously shared by the culture group's members
 and which together express the culture group's necessary identity.
      T h e culture group essentially consists, then, of a group of closely
 related cultures often based on the regional subcultures of an expand-
 ing cultural tradition. In later prehistory, for example, Europe is
Fig. 70 A tentative Model of the main Culture Groups in Neolithic
Europe c. 6000-2000 BC. Each Culture Group is a multidimensional
football through time and space; the overlaps emphasize that as
polythetic structures, and as an important factor in development,
individual cultures may belong to and link several culture groups,
without contradiction. Group content:
Balkan!Anatolian Group               Early Bronze Group                     Danubian II Group
Hacilar culture, Kremikovci and      Periam-Mokrin, Glina, Foltesti,        Vinca Tordos, Tis2a, Lengyel,
Karanovo I culture, Pre/Proto        Kisapostag, Nagyrev, Perjamos,         Stichband, and Rossen cultures.
Sesklo, Starcevo-Koros-Cris          Unetice, cultures.
                                                                            Danubian III Group
                                                                            Tiszapolgar, Ludanice,
Danubian I Group
                                     Corded Ware Group                      Bodrogkeresztur, Decea,
Eastern, Western and Northern
                                     Globular Amphora, Fatyanovo,           Jordansmuhl, Baalberg cultures.
Danubian I cultures, Bukk,
                                     Dniepr-Dniestr, Zlota/Vistula,
Hinkelstein etc.
                                     Swedish, Danish, Haffkiisten,          Danubian IV Group
                                     Oder/Marschwitz, W. German,            Jevisovice, Aichbuhl,
Boian Group                          Dutch PFB, Swiss. Saxo-                Schussenried, Altheim, Pfyn,
Boian, Dudesti, Vadastra, Butmir,    Thuringian cultures.                   Horgen cultures.
and Marica cultures.
                                                                            TRB Northern Group
                                     Mediterranean Impressed Ware           Jordansmuhl, Baalberg,
Balkan/Danubian Tell Group
                                     Group                                  Salzmunde, Walternienberg,
Gumelnitza, Salcutza, Dimini,
                                     W. Black Sea cultures: Hamangija       Wiorek, Lubon, Nosswitz, T R B
Petresti, Tripolye-Cucuteni,
                                     I, Burgas, Bug/Dniepr cultures. E.     A/B, C, Michelsberg, M X . T R B .
Thrace-Macedonian cultures.
                                     Mediterranean: Adriatic Smilcic,       Scandinavia and Netherlands.
                                     Molfetta, Sentinello I cultures. W.
Baden Group                          Mediterranean: Portuguese,             Western Steppe Group
Baden, Pecel, Kostolac, Bubanj,      Spanish, S. France, N. Africa,         Caucasian Corded Ware, Usatova,
Vucedol, Mondsee, Zok, Laibach       Sardinia, Malta, impressed ware        Cernavoda, Cotofeni, Ochre Grave
cultures.                            cultures.                              cultures.

These Culture Groups should be objectively delineated by clustering the cultural assemblages in terms of mutual
affinity, by the standard taxonomic yiethods. However, in the absence of such studies this intuitive-subjective
assessment can be used with caution.
302    Analytical Archaeology

successively occupied by a fluctuating format of such culture groups as
the Impressed Ware culture group, the Danubian I culture group, the
T R B culture group, the Corded Ware culture group, the Chas-
sey/Cortaillod/Lagozza culture group and so on. Indeed, it is probable
that many prehistoric entities, particularly in Palaeolithic studies, are
of the rank of culture groups rather than of the status of true single
cultures. It seems probable that most of the Lower and Middle
Palaeolithic groupings are of this order, or of an even looser order, and
that groups approaching true cultural rank are detectable at the
moment only in parts of the Upper Palaeolithic. T h i s does not mean
that cultural entities did not exist in these early times but that we are
only now beginning to have sufficiently detailed data and powerful
analyses to think about defining cultural and regional groups within
such entities as the Mousterian and even in the Aurignacian. T h e
entities that we have at present belong to much grosser categories, as
one might suspect from their huge size, low information content and
the tacit abandonment of the suffix 'culture' by Palaeolithic
archaeologists.


11    Culture group systems
Culture group systems are systems of interconnected cultural assem-
blages, varying in terms of their component assemblages, which in
turn change as the integral of the changing artefact-types. T h e
continued coherence of the culture group system depends on a low
level of continuous intercommunication between the component
regional assemblages. Any discontinuation of this limited diffusion of
common cultural variety would gradually lead to the diminution and
loss of the essential sets of shared multistate artefact-types and ulti-
mately to the loss of the culture group's identity under the impact of
divergent development. T h i s is one way in which the 'death' of a
culture group may come about.
    T h e sociocultural basis of the culture group is particularly interes-
ting and informative. T h e preceding chapter suggested that the
culture and its cultural assemblage reflected a compact territory and
society, providing an area of maximal internal intercommunication
and diffusion. T w o of the major means of diffusion linking such a
cultural entity seemed to be the common social reticulation and a
common language or group of dialects as a maximal means of inter-
communication. Observation appears to support the approximate but
                                      Culture and culture group          303

rarely coincident equivalence of a language area with a culture area -
at least the former set is usually larger than or equal to the latter set. It
was further suggested that a deliberately organized culture with a
common language formed the basis of the 'nation' as an entity. On
these general lines we arrive at a rough equivalence and connection
between the separate sets - culture, language, and nation (fig. 75).
     Now, the culture group as a group of closely related cultures in
adjacent but discontinuous territories should on this general basis
reflect a group of closely related languages and societies - a language
group and a sociocultural group. Furthermore, since one origin for
culture groups seems to be the increasing divergence of an expanding
culture with widespread regional subcultures, there is every reason to
suspect that such a culture group would be marked by equally diver-
gent languages forming a group with a once common background.
One must hasten to add that since the culture group can also be
formed in other ways this is not an automatic characteristic of culture
groups and their language systems. Nevertheless, we can understand
that it will frequently be the case that culture groups equate roughly
and without exact coincidence with language groups and as such may
provide the archaeologist with an invaluable but highly complex and
dangerous clue to the development of such important phenomena as
the I n d o - E u r o p e a n and other major language groups, with
significantly greater success at the lower scale in such cases as the
Celtic, Slav and Bantu linguistic and culture group entities. T h e
complexity and danger in such studies lie in wait in the imprecise
terminology, and the fact that linguistic and material culture sets are
never simply equivalent to social sets. T h e time and space trajectories
of language groups and culture groups are closely related but not
identical, the complicating factor being the differing rates of change of
the twin aspects.
      T h e pre-existence of a common language group in a set of contig-
uous societies and territories necessarily constitutes an ideal pre-
condition for the formation of a loose confederacy or tribal grouping.
S u c h a confederacy is usually marked by a sufficient increase in
mutual contact and interdiffusion of material culture as to mark out a
roughly coincident material culture group. But to expect such a
culture group to be exactly coincident with an absolutely homo-
geneous language g r o u p and tribal group would again be excessively
naive. Nevertheless, the fact remains that such units as the Iroquois
and Zulu confederations and the Scythian and Celtic tribal groupings
304    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

have survived in the broad outline of their material culture, in the
f o r m of major culture groups defined in terms of artefacts (chapter 9).
In some cases the deliberate organization of such a confederacy or
grouping by a single culture may result in the formation of a focally
organized and maximally implemented culture g r o u p - the colonial
empire. T h e r e exists therefore a very loose but definite connection
between the separate sets - culture group, language group, and social
confederations, mainly as entities of roughly equivalent rank and
occasionally as sequential consequences one of another.
      In the case of the colonial empire as an artificially organized
culture g r o u p , focused on an a m p l i f y i n g urban state, the sequence
usually moves f r o m the military occupation of a network of
economically desirable colonies, followed by their partial acculturation
into a culture group, sometimes with the temporary establishment of a
shared language group. T h e risks of maintaining such an imperial
territory have often resulted in a dramatic post-climax disintegration
as the result of the cumulative effect of multiple factors reaching an
historic threshold (chapter 2, III). Seen from outside the last factor in
such a process and superficially the most p o w e r f u l manifestation is
often the military break-up of the system organization and the
economic loss of the colonial territories. T h e destruction of the
amplifier's input variety, however, robs the f o r m e r colonial territories
themselves of the optimized output of inventive and integrative
variety, a reversion often characterized by contrast as a 'Dark A g e ' (fig.
69). Another alternative trajectory, out of the many possible, is the
post-climax peaceful release of the f o r m e r colonies and a transition to a
network of independent cultures yet remaining within a single system
organization. By avoiding the military and inflationary collapse of the
system the a m p l i f y i n g units may still be preserved and continue to
benefit the whole.
    Even in this brief outline it has become apparent that culture
groups may integrate and disintegrate in a n u m b e r of different ways.
Once formed, their trajectories may pursue a number of different
general sequences with differing consequences. A s systems, culture
groups vary in their degree of system organization and structure, some
are loosely organized or exist with no conscious harnessing of the
organization, others are highly organized and deliberately structured
systems. T h e s e and other factors considerably affect the ontogenv of
the culture g r o u p and will be further examined in probing this aspect
of these systems (section iv). It is sufficient for the time being to
                                     Culture and culture group          305

speculate that these diverse organizations, ontogenies and trajectories
are not without constraint and therefore not without regularities.


111   Phase pattern regularities

A s w e proceed through the hierarchy of archaeological entities f r o m
the culture onwards it becomes increasingly difficult to isolate the
phase, time, and system regularities of these entities. T h i s is partly
because the units become increasingly large in size and numbers of
components but mainly because there is insufficient analysed data to
synthesize. V e r y few archaeologists have bothered about the detailed
analysis of entities larger than the cultural assemblage, mainly perhaps
because these larger entities still remain unclassified taxa - like the
Palaeolithic units - or on the assumption that there is nothing to be
gained by their definition. T h o s e classificatory studies that have
intelligently emphasized these larger groupings have been forced to
document them in a general w a y , only broadly defined as - the
Urnfield culture group, the T u m u l u s culture g r o u p or the Aunjetitz
culture group, to give three European Bronze A g e examples. What is
required is a series of precise and detailed analyses of these entities and
all aspects of their material culture and time and distribution tra-
jectories. What are their shared polythetic sets of artefact-types, what
is the size and nature of these sets, how does their development as an
entity vary with this structure? It is impossible in so condensed a
study as this to start to provide this missing detailed basis but before
venturing into generalities it is essential that we sketch in a rapid and
crude way some example and some model of what w e intuit these
entities to look like. In such circumstances the dangers are insuperable
and the chances of a really penetrating insight almost negligible but at
least the possibilities may make themselves apparent.
     In an attempt to highlight the great potential of detailed studies at
this level we will first develop a static phase model of a culture group
and then compare it with a practical case — treated superficially. T h i s
basis will then allow us to illustrate the distribution and time regulari-
ties we might expect in other cases with a more fitting documentation.


STATIC    MODEL

Let us take an imaginary culture g r o u p , ' G ' , defined by six contem-
porary regional cultures, 1 , 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
306       Analytical Archaeology

      E a c h cultural assemblage in the g r o u p shares from amongst certain
specific artefact-types, A,                       B,       C, D,         E.   . . with certain variant type
states, A i , A 2 , A 3 ; B i , B 2 ; C i , C 2 , C 3 ; D i , D 2 ; E i , E 2 ; at different
frequencies of occurrence per cultural assemblage (absent, infrequent
a n d frequent/modal).                   Then,             the static model of the structure of
culture g r o u p unit - G , might be schematically represented by the
polythetic relationships of the c o m p o n e n t cultural assemblages, in
table 1 .

Table 1 Schematic model of culture group*'G' illustrating
the polythetic structure of the six regional cultures consti-
tuting the group


                                         Cultural assemblages
Specific               Variant
artefact-type          state                           1       2         3        4           5   6


Type                   State
A                      A1                    X             *       —          X           —       X
                       A2                     *            X       X          X           X       X
                       A3                     X            —       X          X           X       —

B                      Bi                    X             —       —          —           X       X
                       Bz                    X             X       —          X           X       —


C                      Ci                    X             —         X        —           X       X
                       C2                   —              X         X        X           X       —


                       c3                    —             *       X          X           —       X
D                      Di                    X             —         X        X           X       X
                       Da                     X            X       —          X           X       X
E                      Ei                    X             —       X          —           X       X
                       E2                    —             X       X          X           —       X


      T h e s i m p l i f i e d m o d e l in t a b l e 1 i l l u s t r a t e s the e x p e c t e d p o l y t h e t i c
structure         of     a culture           group             embracing              several         regional    cultural
a s s e m b l a g e s . T h e e n t i t y of t h e u n i t is p r o v i d e d b y the s e l e c t i v e s h a r i n g
of v a r i o u s s t a t e s of a c o m m o n set of m u l t i s t a t e s p e c i f i c a r t e f a c t - t y p e s -
s o that n o o n e c u l t u r e h a s all the t y p e s a n d e a c h c o m p o n e n t c u l t u r e
h a s an i n d e p e n d e n t s t r u c t u r a l i d e n t i t y . A l t h o u g h s o m e t y p e s or t y p e
s t a t e s m a y b e s h a r e d b y all the c o m p o n e n t c u l t u r e s , this is an e x c e p -
tion r a t h e r t h a n t h e r u l e ( T y p e A 2 , t a b l e 1 ; flint a x e s , t a b l e 2). T h e
essential         system          artefact-types                in       such         a       context    are     especially
r e p r e s e n t e d b y t h o s e s p e c i f i c a r t e f a c t - t y p e s e x i s t i n g in a m u l t i p l i c i t y of
s t a t e s w h i c h are s e l e c t i v e l y p r e f e r r e d b y t h e r e g i o n a l c u l t u r e s . T h e k e y
t y p e s f r o m a m o n g s t this set w o u l d t h e n i n c l u d e those s p e c i f i c t y p e s
                                      Culture and culture group         307
with a distinct chronological or regional correlation trend within the
culture group. The inessential types are largely missing from this
condensed model but would include those types or type states which
were uniquely held by single cultural assemblages within the group -
contributing nothing to the unity of the group but serving to differen-
tiate members.

    Example. The static phase model provides us with a particular way
of looking at the artefact-types and assemblages constituting
archaeological culture groups. When we attempt to analyse a known
culture group in the same terms we immediately encounter certain
difficulties. The first of these difficulties simply arises from the already
stressed absence of sufficiently detailed studies of whole archaeological
culture groups as taxonomic units; the model is difficult to test or
modify because of the lack of analysed data. The second difficulty is
also a consequence of lack of information - as a phase model the
practical example should minimize time trends by taking contem-
porary cultural assemblages over only a short duration, perhaps a
century or so. In practice, archaeological dating is so limited that the
cultural assemblages of successive phases are rarely known for every
culture within the group under analysis. The following example is
characteristically imperfect in all these respects and in any case is
intended merely as an illustrative sketch (table 2).
    In the example, the well-known Corded Ware/Battle-axe culture
group has been analysed into its components. This culture group may
be set out as embracing twelve major regional cultural assemblages,
each representing an homogeneous geographical area containing a
concentration of interrelated assemblages within a unit culture -

Cultural assemblage in table 2: (p. 308)
      (1) The Middle Dniepr culture
      (2) The Upper Dniestr culture
      (3) The Fatyanovo culture
      (4) The ZJ'ota/Vistula culture
      (5) The Haffkiistenkultur
      (6) The Swedish Boat-axe culture
      (7) The Oder/Marschwitz culture
      (8) The Saxo-Thuringian culture
      (9) The Danish Battle-axe culture
   (10) The North German/Dutch Protruding Foot Beaker culture
   ( 1 1 ) The West German Beaker culture
   (12) The Swiss Corded Ware culture
Table z T h e Corded Ware/Battle-axe culture group illustrating the poly-
thetic structure of the twelve regional cultures constituting the group


                                 Cultural                assemblages
Specific        Variant
type            state            i       2       3        4      5       6       7       8           9101112


Beaker          Cord             X       X       X        X      X       —       X       X       X       X       X       X
                Herringbone      X       X       X        X      X       —       X       X       X       X       X       X
                Groove          •— —             —        X      X       —       X       X       X       X       X       X
                Maeander        —        —       —        X      X       X
                Round base       X       X       X        X      X       X
Globular        Flat base        X       X       —        X      X       —       X       X       X       X       X       —

  amphora       Round base       *       —       X       —       —       X       —       —       —       —       —       —


Bowl            Flat base        X       X       —        X      X       X       X       X       X       X       X       —

                Round base       X       X       X        X      X       X       X
                Polypod         —        —       —        X      —       —       X       X       —       X       X       —

                Oval            —        —       X        X      X       X       X       X       —       —       —       —


Ovoid storage   Flat base       —        X       —        X      X       X       X       X       X       X       X       X
   jar          Round base       X       X       X       —       X       X
Globular beaker Flat base       —        —       —        X      —       X           X       X       X   X       X           X
                Round base      —        —       X       —       —       —       —       —       —       —       —       —


Flowerpot       Flat base       —        —       —        X      —           X   X           X       X   —       —       —

Battle-axe      Struve A         X       X       X        X          X       X       X       X   X           X       X   —

                M. Dniepr        X       X       X        X      —       —           X   —       —       —       —       —

                Fatyanovo           X        X   X           X       X       X       X
                Facetted         —           X   —           X   —       —           X   X           X       X       X       X
                Uckermark        —       —       —       —       —       —       X           X   —       —       —       —


Boat axe        Jutland          —       —       —       —       —           X       X   —       X       —       —       —


   variant      Swedish          —       —           X       X       X   X       —       —           X   —       —       —


Axe             Flint            X           X       X    X      X       X       X           X   X           X   X           X
Trapezoid       Stone               X        X       X    X          X       X   X       X       —           X   X           X
   blades       Flint               X        X       X    X          X   X           X       X       X       X       X       X

Dagger          Flint               X        X       X       X       X   X       X           X   X           X   X       —


Arrow heads     Hollow base         X        X       X       X       X   —       X       X       —           X       X       X
                Trapeze                      X       X       X       X   —           X

Wrist Guard                          X       X       X       X   —       —           X       X   —       —       —       —

'V' Buttons                      —           X       X       X       X       X       X       X   —       —       —       —


Pins                                X        X   —           X   —           X       X       X   —       —       —       —


Belt fasteners   Rings           X           X       X       X       X       X       X       X       X   —           X   —

                Plaques             X        X   X           X       X   —           X

Graves           Flat               X        X   X        X      X       X       X       X           X       X       X       X
                 Barrow          X       X       —           X       X       X       X   X       X       X       X           X
                 Shaft           X       X       —           X       X   —           X       X       X       X       X   —


                 Catacomb        X           X
                 Wood cist       X           X   —           X       X       X       X       X       X       X       X       X
                 Stone cist          X       X   —           X       X       X       X       X       X       X       X       X




 — absent, x - infrequent. X - frequent.
                                     Culture and culture group        309

    T h i s culture group example therefore has twelve major cultural
assemblage components whose regional distribution is suggested on
the map (fig. 7 1 ) . T h i s culture group distribution map is already of
great interest since it illustrates the broad linear correlation of the
distribution with the European deciduous forest zone, barring the
distorting influence of the Baltic Sea and important excursions into the
mixed coniferous zone in Russia and S w e d e n (cultures 3, 6) and into
the edge of the true Steppe zone in the Southeast (cultures 1, 2).
Essentially the map suggests a linear distribution with radial dis-
tortions and emphasizes the discrete distribution of the cultures
within the group - their concentrations are not continuous and it is
doubtful if the total distribution was ever continuous.
    Continuing the analysis, table 2 schematically illustrates some-
thing of the structure of the twelve cultures in terms of their shared
specific artefact-types and their type states. In reality the Corded
Ware/Battle-axe culture group list of artefact-types is very much more
extensive and the structure of the whole group much more polythetic
than is suggested in this table. For the purposes of condensation and
convenience large numbers of types held by only one or two of the
component cultures have been omitted and the types themselves are
only crudely characterized by the headings used here. A final
qualification must emphasize that this example is purely schematic
and that contrary to our intentions the assemblages represented here
probably stretch over a period of several hundred years, somewhere
between 2500 and 2000 BC.
    Nevertheless, even admitting the sketchy nature of this particular
evidence and all its limitations, the resulting structure of the culture
group does seem to reasonably approximate our tentative phase model
(table 1). T h a t the individual cultures are grouped within the culture
group entity as a polythetic and not a monothetic group seems fully
substantiated (table 2). In the same way the importance of the alter-
native states of the specific artefact-types in knitting together the
cultural assemblages within a single group is also quite apparent. T h e
very weakness of this real example shows how important it is that the
individual specific artefact-types be defined accurately and in detail.
In the same fashion it is apparent that the definition of the variant
states within each multistate specific artefact-type is equally essential
in order to appreciate the nuances of regional affinities and the struc-
tural integration of the group of cultural assemblages. It is particularly
interesting to compare the structure of this culture group from
                                       C u l t u r e and culture g r o u p   311

pre history with the similar structuring of the material culture of
historically related groups of North American Indian tribes (figs 7 7 -
86).

DISTRIBUTION       AREA    MODEL

If our previous discussion of the relative merits of the 'cultural brick',
'radial contour' and 'polythetic' models of cultural artefact-type dis-
tributions is accepted then it follows that a c o m p o u n d polythetic
model should fit the culture g r o u p situation (figs 67, 72, chapter 6, III).
In this case we have not one but several cultural areas defined by the
reinforcing central tendencies of numerical distribution of the various
multistate artefact-types, each rapidly falling away beyond the areas of
mean, mode and median distribution - with types shared poly-
thetically across the w e b (fig. 72). T h e culture areas of a culture group




      Fig. 72 A schematic model expressing the relationship
      between the distribution boundaries of the sets of cultural
      assemblage artefact-types and the boundaries of four cultures
      within a culture group. A much simplified extension of the
      polythetic distribution model (fig. 671») from the culture to the
      culture group. Clearly, the means and modes of the dis-
      tribution sets are as relevant as their boundaries in this situa-
      tion.
312    Analytical Archaeology

are rarely completely contiguous and continuous, partly because such
a situation would more frequently mark the expanding culture with
regional subcultures (the embryo culture group) and partly because
there are usually attractive geographical foci which cluster primary
settlement in density for socio-economic reasons. In addition, there is
no reason to assume that cultures of the same culture group are
necessarily less territorially defensive between themselves than
independent cultures and consequently they will mutually repel one
another into constantly readjusting but distinct culture areas.
Although the human population may on rare occasions be semi-
continuous over the entire area it will still reflect centres of density and
uneven dispersion. T h e material effect of this arrangement is the
clined distribution density patterns of the artefact-types which are a
complex function of the human population distribution - the patterns
illustrated by the polythetic model (fig. 72).
    An exception to the non-contiguous and non-continuous dis-
tribution rule is immediately apparent in the case of military empires
or deliberately organized culture groups. In these cases the normal
processes of regional isolation and regional divergence are deliberately
and systematically reduced by the institution of elaborate and effective
artificial communication channels which incidentally maintain a large
and continuous flow of commonly diffusing variety, permeating the
whole network. T h e empire as a focally organized and artificially
implemented culture group often deliberately occupies contiguous
and continuous territories to maximize control and communications.
 In the case of maritime empires it is the sea which provides the
continuous link between the geographically non-contiguous ter-
ritories.
    In less highly organized culture groups the common identity at the
culture group level is maintained by a variety of sociocultural links
which also maintain a certain level of common diffusion. These links
may even operate more powerfully between the distant members of a
culture group than with closer alien cultures, for various preferential
reasons. Political, religious, historical, cultural and linguistic
congruence probably help to maintain most of the culture group links
that the archaeologist perceives in secondary material artefact terms.
    It is already apparent that one process capable of generating
culture group entities is the regional isolation and increasing diver-
gence of the peripheral regional subcultures of an expanding culture.
Indeed, the differentiation between a large culture with regional sub-
                                      Culture and culture group         313

cultures and a culture group with regional cultures is both arbitrary
and difficult. One criterion we have already noted is the non-contig-
uous and discontinuous distribution of culture areas in a culture
group - as opposed to the semi-continuous entity of the large culture
with subcultures. T h i s factor in itself gives the culture group a larger
mean distribution area than the large culture, a factor normally
endorsed by a larger absolute population in people and artefacts. It
should be possible to characterize the separation of the range of
culture and culture group sizes but here again little work has yet been
done. A rough estimation would suggest that the range of prehistoric
culture areas tends to cover territories of radius c. 20-200 miles,
whereas culture groups usually spread across territory of radius c.
2 0 0 - 7 5 0 miles. On this basis alone one would see the European
Michelsberg as an expansive Neolithic culture with a radius of c.
 1 5 0 - 2 0 0 miles and six regional subcultures, as opposed to the Corded
Ware culture group with its radius of c. boo miles and twelve regional
cultures (Scollar 1959). It would be foolish to use this size criterion
alone but it is certainly one significant indicator. In all such studies
one is unavoidably and therefore deliberately measuring the collapsed
palimpsest of the fluctuating distribution of the culture group through
time. It is once again preferable to come to terms with the realism of
'vertical' tradition taxa than with the largely illusory mosaic of
'horizontal' unit distributions.
       One corollary of the development of an expanding culture with
subcultures into a dispersed culture group is the regular pattern of
dispersion of culture areas in the group. T h e constraints operating in
this situation are first of all the peripheral and radial development of
regional subcultures distant from one another and from the central
areas, and secondly the geographic constraints peculiar to the ter-
ritory. In practice two repetitive modes of culture group distribution
are noticeable - the radial and the linear (fig. 73). T h e radial
arrangement of cultures around a core of inner culture areas is the
obvious unrestricted development of the ideal expansion, with
interdiffusion weakening as a function of the distance from the original
culture areas; it is however a dangerous simplification to simply
postulate a single central 'ur-culture' and concentric expansion f r o m it,
as we shall see. T h e alternative linear model is appropriate when
geographic zonation or constraint has channelled the expanding
culture group. T h i s is frequently the case with culture groups aligned
on major river axes or following ecological zones (Danubian I,
314     Analytical Archaeology
                     LINEAR M O D E L - C U L T U R E   GROUP A
                                                                         Constraint




                     RADIAL    MODEL-CULTURE            GROUP B


      73 Regularities in culture group distributions and expansions - the
 linear model (A) and the radial model (B). T h e linear model best fits
 culture group expansion within the constraints (ecological or otherwise) of
 a narrow zone. T h e radial model approximates culture group development
 within a relatively homogeneous field, only peripherally constrained
 (compare fig. 97). T h e 'primary' culture areas are shaded; the dots suggest
 the territories for 'induced' convergent development - other factors being
 equal.



C i r c u m p o l a r or the M e d i t e r r a n e a n Littoral culture groups). A l t h o u g h
good e x a m p l e s of both radial and linear culture g r o u p patterns exist it
is quite o b v i o u s that this bipolarization is artificial and that most real
distributions have elements of both f o r m a t s , e.g. the C o r d e d Ware
culture g r o u p (fig. 7 1 ) . N e v e r t h e l e s s , it is similarly apparent that the
dispersion pattern will have c o n s i d e r a b l e effect upon the niaintenace
of the g r o u p identity and the culture g r o u p ' s subsequent time-tra-
jectory. It f o l l o w s that since most cultures are consciously or
unconsciously part of a culture g r o u p the d e v e l o p m e n t of the specific
                                     Culture and culture group         315
culture cannot be meaningfully studied in isolation from the
phenomenon in which it is set.
     A striking example of this latter observation is the relationship
between culture group networks and their subsequent transformation
and reorientation at the hands of an infiltrating entity - sometimes a
transform of one of the regional cultures. In its simplest aspect the
pre-existing culture group network acts as a pre-stamped circuit into
which the infiltrating culture can preferentially expand by acculturat-
ing the nodes within the net of ready constructed set of channels and
information. If the infiltrating culture is simply a particularly expan-
sive regional transform of a pre-existing culture group then there is
every probability of pre-existing sociocultural and linguistic
congruence to facilitate the penetration. Here again we have a pref-
erential constraint likely to give rise to geographic pattern repetition in
the successive phases of a territory's history. As examples it might be
relevant to point to the western expansion of the Corded Ware culture
group into the pre-existing format of the related T R B and Michels-
berg culture, or the European Bell beakers into the Chassey/Cortail-
lod/Lagozza territories. Historically the same conditions seem to
operate at the subcultural level in the Scythian interpénétration of the
Slavs, the Swedish Varangian infiltration of the Rus and the earlier
Goth movements down to the Black Sea. In some of these examples
there is good reason to suppose pre-existing connections and in others
it is certain that the process is simply one regional transform expand-
ing within its former culture group network. On occasions this 'back-
spread' helps to conceal the former relationships between transform
cultures so that a former peripheral area may later become important
and axial and vice versa.


1v   Time pattern regularities

Culture group systems are changing systems of cultures, assemblages
and artefact-types - expanding, fluctuating and contracting with time.
The time-trajectory of these large but loosely interconnected entities is
a compound of the individual trajectories of the component cultures -
commencing with the first appearance of the cultures as a related
group, followed by their mosaic of interlinked successive trans-
formations, and terminating with the reduction and disappearance of
the affinity threshold linking the cultural assemblages at the culture
group level.
316     Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

    T h e levels of change within these large systems grade f r o m
changes in attribute states to changes in cultural assemblages. T h e
trending changes at all these diverse levels may act independently or
they may variously correlate and co-ordinate to mark major and minor
thresholds in the whole system's time-trajectory. T h e s e trends and
their joint interaction have been discussed at length for the case of
culture trajectories (chapter 6, iv) and we need only remind ourselves
of the main f r a m e of development at this different level:

        (i) T h e quantitative change and oscillation in numbers of arte-
            fact-types, especially those essential multistate types poly-
            thetically shared across the culture group
            (a) as variation in the number of different artefact-types
                 defining the culture group's overall polythetic set in suc-
                 cessive phases;
            (b) as variation in the number of different artefact-types per
                 cultural assemblage in successive phases;
            (c) as variations in both of the above aspects jointly, in a
                 variety of combining trends.
       (ii) T h e quantitative change and oscillation in numbers of the
            population of component assemblages forming the combined
            culture group assemblage in successive phases.
      (iii) T h e qualitative change and oscillation of the cultural group
            system as a structured system of specific artefact-types and
            their intercorrelation.

    Each of these levels of system interaction can be characterized in
the ambiguous terminology of ontogeny which only becomes
meaningful when the particular level and factors of change are pre-
cisely specified. In addition the degree of organization of the particular
culture g r o u p system can make a considerable difference in the variety
of possible time-trajectories - varying from the unorganized and
loosely controlled systems to deliberately and highly organized urban
imperial systems with a climax potential.
    T h e demographic relationships of culture group ontogeny are as
unclear as those of cultures themselves but in the same way it is
apparent that population trends are involved. T h e culture group
certainly represents a far larger population of individuals than the
average culture, and culture group formation by cultural expansion
and subcultural divergence suggests that quantitative population
expansion would be a p o w e r f u l factor in this over-extension of a
                                      Culture and culture group          317

culture in terms of its internal communications. H o w e v e r , such factors
as the peripheral exploration and exploitation of new ecological niches
and economic stances would be equally involved.
     T h e qualitative change and oscillation of the culture g r o u p as a
structured system expresses the integration of all the varied levels of
system interaction in a summary form. T o review the general nature of
the changes involved we must generate a dynamic version of our
earlier static polythetic model (table 1). T h i s can be simply accom-
plished by using the dynamic constellation trajectory model relating
the intercorrelation of artefact-types within changing culture systems.
T h e culture group as a system of cultures can be portrayed as a galaxy
of nucleated constellations of artefact-types - the nucleated constel-
lations representing the correlated types defining the component
cultures. S u c h a model is, of course, multidimensional with many
artefact-types webbing the space between particular cultural assem-
blage clusters and representing the types polythetically shared as the
very basis of the affinity linking the group of cultures in the culture
group. Nevertheless, each culture will still display a large number of
idiosyncratic and less widely shared types, not to mention particularly
structured complexes of types. In so far as the culture g r o u p is
concerned it is the polythetically shared types which define the culture
group and therefore represent that system's essential and key vari-
ables. T h e maintenance of this set, or some transform of this set,
reflects the maintenance of the culture g r o u p ; the fluctuation of this
set of types conversely represents the weakening or strengthening of
the group ties between thresholds defining the disintegration of the
culture group or its assimilation into a single cultural entity.
     T h e time-trajectory version of this correlation model consists of
the cultural constellations of artefact-types moving through time -
transforming the model into a complex interweaving bundle of tra-
jectories. T h e types and the cultures move f r o m state to state and
transform to transform defined by the correlation of the changes
involved. T h e cultural constellations of types may move closer
together in interlinked affinity or further away in diverging dis-
similarity. T h e essential set of shared multistate artefact-types
defining the culture group may lose some types, gain others and
together move through various type transformations and transitions.
T h e relationships between the component cultures are never the same
at any one time, neither are those between the artefact-types and the
type states interlinking the group of cultures - they change constantly.
318   Analytical Archaeology

T h e degree of intercorrelation and the changing rates of change
involved once again play a major part in defining the system
thresholds.
     T h e segments of the system trajectory that are particularly inter-
esting are those reflecting the origin, development and disappearance
of culture groups as unit material culture systems. We can examine
these critical sections of culture group ontogeny first of all as abstract
parts of the dynamic model and then as the material manifestation of
certain sociocultural processes.


C U L T U R E GROUP   ONTOGENY

T h e 'birth' of a culture group depends upon the coming into being of a
relationship between a group of cultural assemblages that share a
polythetic range but differing states of some specific multistate arte-
fact-types. Now this relationship may be reached by two different
categories of trajectory. In one category we have the possibility of the
regional subcultural assemblages of an expanding culture gradually
diverging and becoming decreasingly similar until they are reduced to
this level of loose culture group affinity - the break-up of an expanding
culture into a culture group. Alternatively, the other category of
trajectory may start with quite separate and different cultural assem-
blages and then successively and cumulatively introduces into them a
widely diffusing set of common artefact-types or type-states - the
partial acculturation and convergence of a group of diverse indepen-
dent cultures. T h e one category of culture group origins depends
upon the reduction of the affinity of assemblages to a decreasingly
similar but loosely united level; the other category depends upon the
elevation of the assemblages' affinity to an increasingly similar but
equally loosely united and identical level.
    In more detail, the first category of culture group development
arises from one cultural assemblage system trajectory. In this culture
trajectory a post-coherent phase is reached in which more and more
inessential artefact-types enter the system - at first as chance and
sporadic introductions but increasingly in regular and increasingly
ordered complexes connected with new activities and behaviour.
These novel artefact-types, cumulatively and successively introduced,
gradually establish several 'new' subsystem formats in which the novel
types are essential and even key variables. Finally, these subsystems
become substantially separate transform systems by virtue of the
                                      Culture and culture group         319

emergent properties of their coherent new formats; nevertheless, they
still remain linked as transform cultures sharing differing states of the
same multistate artefact-types in addition to their novel idiosyncratic
types.
    In the second category of culture group development the converse
situation applies. We have several distinct cultural assemblage tra-
jectories - they may be so distinct as to be quite independent culture
systems or they may be very distantly related transforms with little in
common. T h i s group of cultures may share connection and com-
munication with a common source of steady, strong variety output; a
source of saturating diffusion. T h i s common cultural source, or g r o u p
of sources, successively and cumulatively introduces a variety of states
of the same specific artefact-types into the group of independent
cultures. T h e formerly diverse cultural assemblages increasingly share
a small set of directively correlated multistate artefact-types giving rise
to a low level affinity, which freshly unites the cultures at the culture
group level. One interesting reflection arises from the point that
although jointly subject to a common source of saturating diffusion the
independent cultures could well have rejected the diffusing variety, or
separately selected quite disparate sets of variety. T h e fact that the
independent cultures simultaneously accepted similar sets of variety to
stabilize their system dislocations suggests that they were motivated
by a simultaneous and common stimulus or crisis. Such a common
stimulus might be environmental, social, religious, political, or
economic - or any combination of these factors. An artificial con-
vergent directive might be the military colonization of diverse cultures
by a single culture, the extinction of a major game animal and its
substitution by another quarry - or one might cite the convergent
effects of the introduction of the horse to the very diverse cultures of
North American Indians. Whatever the particular situation, the joint
acceptance of the same set of variety by formerly independent systems
points to a joint dislocation affecting all of them.
    We might summarize these alternative trajectories to culture g r o u p
status as divergent and convergent categories (Childe 1956, p. 147), not
forgetting that disregarding their approach the ultimate status is iden-
tical. Nevertheless, the subsequent alignment and direction of these
inevitably continuous trajectories will certainly be affected by the line
of approach up to culture group status - just as the subsequent
position of the aeroplane is severely constrained by its past course
(chapter 2, I).
320     Analytical Archaeology

     As an example of the divergent trajectory one could suggest the
transition from Danubian I to the variegated cultures of the Danubian
I I culture group in Neolithic Europe. For the opposite case - increas-
ingly convergent acculturation - examples might be sought in the
condensation and formation of the primary T R B and Corded Ware
cultures in northern Europe or, in America, the convergent trajectory
of independent cultures into the stable format of the Pueblo culture
group with cumulative homogeneity.
     T h e particular interest of this convergent category is its inference
that cultures may frequently not arise in or from a preceding single
culture and its trajectory but may also arise from the condensation of a
group of adjacent unstable cultures, by increasingly convergent
development under saturating diffusion. T h e sequence in such a
hypothetical case would move:

      (a) A group of independent and unstable cultures, unstable by
          virtue of a new and shared system dislocation - encircled by or
          adjacent to a culture, or groups of cultures, emitting useful
          variety.
      (b) T h e formerly diverse and independent cultures sharing the
          same 'needs', acculturate to culture group affinity - itself facil-
          itating previously slight intergroup diffusion and com-
          munication; the independent cultures coalesce into a transient
          culture group.
      (c) T h e acculturation continues but the new culture group orien-
          tation promotes more powerful variety interchange between
          the member cultures going beyond the culture group affinity
          threshold and moving into the status of a large culture with
          ethnic or regional subcultures; the condensation of the culture
          group into a large 'new' culture and cultural assemblage.

    Such a 'new' culture is an independent not a transform culture
because although drawing variety from a source of acculturation and
drawing other variety from a group of diverse cultures, nevertheless,
the 'new' culture is a freshly unique integration with newly emergent
characteristics and potential. If such a large and newly stabilized
culture has effected a new and highly successful sociocultural strategy
- as it is likely to have achieved by feedback adjustment to the original
source of joint dislocation - then, there is every likelihood of a
subsequent expansion by the new culture into neighbouring and
congruent regions. Once again the cases of the T R B and Corded Ware
                                    C u l t u r e and culture g r o u p   321

cultures' successive expansions across the whole of the North Euro-
pean and Baltic Plain, spring to mind. T h e whole sequence may then
tend to repeat in an oscillating development:

   (a) a group of unstable, possibly independent cultures,
   (b) partial and joint acculturation into a transient culture group,
   (c) further condensation into 'new' large culture with regional sub-
       cultures,
   (d) expansion into congruent territories suitable for the 'new'
       stance - becoming a large culture with divergent regional sub-
       cultures,
   (e) over-expansion, regional isolation and crystallization of a stable
       culture group,
   (f) increasingly divergent development into independent cultures
       acculturating with disparate groups of peripheral cultures,
   (a) a peripheral group of unstable, possibly                independent
       cultures. . . (b) (c) (d) (e) (f). . .
    This is not the only possible or necessary culture group trajectory,
as we should anticipate from our basic postulates (postulate 13) but it
is one class from a limited set.

   Example. As a brief example of this oscillation we can pursue the
Neolithic Corded Ware case in terms of these phases:

   (a) a group of unstable format cultures of Southeastern Poland -
       the Upper Vistula and Bug T R B cultures c. 3200-3000 BC,
   (b) their convergent and joint acculturation (from the Pontic
       Steppe and Carpathian Chalcolithic culture groups) into the
       nuclear Vistula/Bug Corded Ware culture group c. 3000-2800
       BC,
   (c) condensation into a more homogeneous Zfota/Vistula culture
       with Vistula, Bug, and Dniestr regional subcultures c. 2800—
       2600 BC,
   (d) expansion into congruent territories and acculturation of
       inhabitants - becoming a large culture with regional sub-
       cultures; Ztota culture with earliest Haffkiistenkultur, Oder,
       and Saxo-Thuringian subcultures c. 2600-2400 BC,
   (e) overexpansion, regional divergence into full Corded Ware
       culture group - Ztota, Swedish, Fatyanovo, Oder, Marschwitz,
       Saxo-Thuringian, Danish, Dutch, and Swiss Corded Ware
       cultures c. 2400-2200 BC.
322     Analytical Archaeology

      (f) increasingly divergent development into independent cultures
          acculturating with disparate groups of peripheral cultures;
          acculturating with T R B Middle Neolithic groups around the
          Baltic, Pit Ware groups in Russia, Bell Beaker groups in the
          West, and Early Bronze Age groups in Switzerland, c. 2 2 0 0 -
          2000 BC,
      (a) f o r m i n g peripheral groups of independent cultures within
          diverse culture groups of the Early Bronze A g e c. 2 0 0 0 - 1 8 0 0
          BC.


    T h e trajectory conveyed in the scheme (a)-(c) is one possible
course for the convergent category of culture g r o u p trajectories. For
culture groups based on the converse divergent category - an expand-
ing culture breaking up into regional cultures - one probable tra-
jectory is equivalent to the segment (d)—(f). H o w e v e r , a more frequent
class of culture group trajectory is neither convergent nor divergent
but parallel - that is to say the development of one culture group into
another 'new' culture g r o u p . T h i s replacement of one culture group by
another 'new' culture g r o u p with a related distribution is more than
the simple transformation of the whole system into a new state. T h e
basis for such parallel 'renewal' arises f r o m the capacity of a culture
group system to act as a pre-stamped circuit of congruent cultures
linked by ready made communication channels. We have already
noted that such a system is particularly susceptible to interpénétration
by any of its own expansive transform cultures and only slightly less so
by an alien independent culture. In this way one culture group may be
infiltrated and repatterned by another culture group, so that culture
group formats tend to perpetuate the same area components remapped
into simple composites. T h e s e culture g r o u p areas are not so simple
that they can be permanently defined for all time but their variations
are based on a common set of territorial components until such time as
the technology or the local ecology is so drastically changed that a new
modal mosaic is defined. In this way it is noticeable that the culture
group areas of Neolithic E u r o p e repeatedly centre as units based on:
the Balkans/Lower D a n u b e , the Middle D a n u b e Basin, the Pontic
 Prairies, the North European/Baltic Plain, the East Mediterranean
 Littoral, the West Mediterranean Littoral and other similar areas.
 Similar components for similar culture group mosaics have been
 mapped for several periods and areas of the Americas but have usually
 been terminologically confused by calling them 'culture areas'.
                                    Culture and culture group         323

     T h u s far the 'birth' of archaeological culture groups has beet
studied in terms of convergent, divergent, or parallel cultural trans
formations leading to thresholds defining 'new' culture groupings
T h e subsequent development of these culture groups may then dis-
play the same set of component culture trajectory alignments - con-
vergent, divergent, parallel - in which the group may continue the
trends leading to their initial appearance or move in the alternative
directions, or oscillate from one trend to another. T h e s e same trends
ultimately mark the 'death' of the specific culture group system, as an
identity, by moving across the fundamental threshold maintaining the
culture group's essential and key set of artefact-types.
     T h e 'death' of a culture group system can come about in the same
general way as the 'death' of an individual culture - by transformation
or by displacement.

   Transformation. T h e successive and cumulative introduction of new
artefact-types condenses a new set of essential and key types, accom-
panied by the decreasing correlation and gradual fragmentation of the
former key artefact-type constellation. T h i s transformation into a
quite 'new' grouping may be accomplished b y :

   (a) Convergence. T h e acculturating convergence of a culture
       group with increasing inter-group communication and
       diffusion condensing into a single large culture.
   (b) Divergence. T h e territorial expansion of the culture group,
       leading to regional divergence and regional isolation in
       response to regional adaptation. T h e component cultures
       become decreasingly similar with decreasing intercom-
       munication, which together with their divergent development
       takes the group across the threshold to unrelated and diverse
       independent cultures.
   (c) Parallel transformation. T h e pre-related cultures of the
       culture group are optimally interlinked for the successful
       infiltration of a 'new' cultural system. T h i s new culture may be
       an expansive transform of one of the culture group cultures
       'spreading-back' through the system, or it may reflect the
       interpenetration of the system by an alien culture system.

   Displacement. T h e displacement of a culture group in a given area
by another alien culture group, representing the disappearance of the
group only at that locus. Displacement and substitution is rarely total
324     Analytical Archaeology
and usually leads to joint transformation; even in its extreme f o r m the
'death' of the culture group is local and merely reflects the territorial
shift of the group under some external impact.

      It is once again self-evident that, as with other entities, the pro-
cesses of culture g r o u p 'death' are the same as the processes of culture
g r o u p 'birth' - 'death/birth' marks but a single threshold. T h e culture
group and culture system trajectories are marked by only two kinds of
change - 'death/birth' transitions at major thresholds and develop-
mental change through a series of successive states marked by minor
thresholds. T h e time pattern regularities of culture group systems
arise f r o m this fundamental basis to culture and culture group time-
trajectories, plus the additional constraints that operate on every
culture as a m e m b e r of a culture group - however diffuse the group-
ing. T o echo a f a m o u s line - no culture is an isolate, it exists as a
component of a whole cultural g r o u p , standing as one of a set of
transform cultures amidst independent cultures linked within other
culture groups. T h e setting of the part within the context of the whole
must constrain the time-trajectory of that part. T h e constraint limiting
culture group time-trajectories is in part inherent in the entity as a
system of organized artefact-types, assemblages and cultures, and in
part stems f r o m the setting or coupling of such systems.



v     System pattern regularities

T h e culture g r o u p is a system of cultures, assemblages and artefact-
types, occupying a dispersed but interconnected group of territories
over a certain period of time. T h e system is most richly networked
within its component culture subsystems which are more loosely
interconnected within the culture group entity. T h e 'looseness' or
relative simplicity of these inter-cultural connections may vary from
unconscious and unorganized linkage to artificial and optimally
organized networking. H o w e v e r , even at its most elaborate the culture
g r o u p remains more richly networked within the component culture
subsystems than between culture and culture in the entity. It would,
perhaps, in this light be more accurate to see the culture group as a
circuit of linked systems rather than as a system with subsystems ; the
culture is a more complex entity than the culture group.
    Nevertheless, the culture g r o u p as a system or circuit of cultural
entities does affect the 'behaviour' of its components. T h e culture
                                        Culture and culture group           325

g r o u p is maintained and exists by virtue of a c o m m o n set of variety
and the continued circulation of incoming variety at a certain minimal
level. Should this variety circulation cease, or rather fall below the
minimal threshold, the cultures in the circuit will diverge indepen-
dently. If the variety continues to circulate within the g r o u p then the
time-trajectories of the component cultures are continuously inter-
related by a shared constraint and a certain level of c o m m o n regularity
in their development. Since the local environments of the cultures
within the g r o u p will not be identical, the culture g r o u p intercon-
nection acts as a useful circulating pool of adaptive information - some
of which may be useful against the background of changing circum-
stances. A successful strategy in one m e m b e r of the g r o u p may induce
similar stances in the other members.
    Cultural systems as behavioural information units may also be
treated in terms of information compatibility and their cultural inter-
action seen as variety interaction. In this way pairs of cultures interact
either as new, alternative, contradictive, or redundant variety when
brought into contact one with another. H o w e v e r , since the cultures
within a culture g r o u p share m a n y features in c o m m o n these units are
usually additional, alternative or redundant to the culture g r o u p
circuit - only becoming mutually contradictive under conditions of
territorial competition or by radical transformation. Culture groups as
mutually adjusted components of a dispersed system are rather unin-
teresting f r o m the point of view of system interaction between
independent cultures at a confined locus. T h i s aspect of major cultural
interaction will be examined later in connection with larger and more
diverse systems (chapter 8, v).
    In general, each cultural assemblage within the culture g r o u p has a
largely self-contained, self-stabilizing strategy, preserving the socio-
cultural system in its local environment. T h e set of artefact-types
shared between the cultures of the culture g r o u p represent that
system's key and essential variety which, if dispersed, reflects the
disintegration of the system. T h e s e multistate artefact-types held in
common may be part of a shared past trajectory or the d i f f u s e d and
widely adopted essentials of a freshly successful adjustment to widely
operating conditions. T h e continuous adjustment to stability and
equilibrium takes place in each component culture in the g r o u p ; the
group as a system merely circulates information on these adjustments
which may be accepted and integrated or ignored by the individual
cultures.
326    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

    T h e peripheral cultures of culture groups often fulfil the very
valuable role of probing the boundary conditions of the culture group
area and developing 'new' integrative variety to stabilize consequent
dislocation. T h e boundary cultures then act as the developmental foci
within the culture group system, f r o m which a stream of newly
developed or acquired variety may flood back and circulate around the
system. In this way new ecological niches and boundary territories can
be successfully penetrated and exploited. T h e penetration of the polar
and circumpolar regions document the gradual re-equipment of whole
culture groups to the threshold beyond which they could explode
across the territory of this format. Similarly, the Neolithic penetration
of E u r o p e shows ecological constraints d a m m i n g the Balkan-Ana-
tolian culture groups within the area of semi-Mediterranean ecology
for half a millennium before the boundary adaptation of the first
Danubian culture exploded into the environment of 'real' Europe.
    We have seen that the culture g r o u p may come into existence as
part of this process by the common re-equipment of a group of
independent or transform cultures, or by the regional divergence of an
expansive culture. Each of these processes relates to the continuous
readjustment of sociocultural systems to environmental variety by
adaptive feedback minimizing immediate system dislocation. As a
culture builds up and expands so its spreading periphery is internally
tessellated into an extending network of newly condensed and formal-
ized subcultures, often repatterning components from former social
and geographic formats. It is the artificially formalized and institu-
tionalized recognition of this intersecting network that marks the
beginnings of primitive government and the deliberate organization of
simple confederacies of the kind developed by the Iroquois, Zulus,
Celts, T e u t o n s , and Scythians. T h e s e are steps towards larger optimal
and climax organizations if urban units are developed but if dependent
on simpler socioeconomic units then the ontogeny is inevitably less
elaborate (Gluckman 1 9 6 3 , pp. 6 7 - 8 0 ) .




Note
     ( 1 ) T h e r e is clearly room for disagreement over the contents of some of
the culture g r o u p s defined in this model. T h e validity of groups such as
D a n u b i a n I I , as well as the general use of the division into Danubian I - I Y
established in the 1 9 2 0 s by G o r d o n C h i l d e , can also be debated. T h e r e are
                                              C u l t u r e and culture g r o u p       327

also a n u m b e r of notable g a p s in the cultural and geographical coverage of the
m o d e l : the later Neolithic cultures of F r a n c e and the Italian and Iberian
peninsulae are good e x a m p l e s here. In spite of all these reservations, it s e e m s
advisable to leave the model as originally p u b l i s h e d , since it f o r m s an integral
part of the arguments developed and illustrated in this chapter.
8      Culture group and technocomplex

       C o n v e r s e l y all c u l t u r e s u n d e r identical e n v i r o n m e n t a l
       c o n d i t i o n s are liable to e x h i b i t q u i t e a n u m b e r of c o m m o n
       traits - b e h a v i o u r p a t t e r n s and archaeological t y p e s
       e x p r e s s i n g t h e m are i m p o s e d on m e n b y external natural
       c o n d i t i o n s such as raw materials, or are at least
       a d a p t a t i o n s p e c u l i a r l y well fitted to s e c u r i n g s u r v i v a l in a
       particular environment,
                                       V    G O R D O N C H I L D E , 1 9 5 6 , p. 1 3 7




i   Introduction
A s we have hinted several times during the course of earlier chapters
there appear to be larger and grosser archaeological groupings than
even the culture group. T h e s e grosser entities involve groups of
cultures which are not related or collateral cultures but which do share
polythetic complexes of type families on the basis of common factors
in environment, economy and technology. Since it is extremely
difficult to discuss an entity without a name let us tentatively call these
gross groupings technocomplexes. A term intended to convey a certain
kind of gross artefact complex as the vector of particular sociocultural,
technological, economic and environmental stances. T h e technocom-
plex is a larger and looser entity than the culture g r o u p ; an entity of
larger size but lower rank than either the culture, or culture group.
    T h e need to define such an entity stems f r o m the dangerously
loose application of 'culture' to quite disparate levels of archaeological
entity and the equally perverse neglect to qualify entity labels by
classificatory indicators. If the rank of the taxon is never stated it
becomes difficult to ensure that only entities of a comparable level are
being compared. We have already seen that the loose employment of
terms like T a r d e n o i s i a n , Gravettian, Palaeo-Indian, and Mousterian
probably reflect no more than widely diffused technologies in use in
similar contexts, although undoubtedly s u b s u m i n g true entities of
cultural status. T h e Acheulean and C h o p p e r - c h o p p i n g tool complexes
surely reflect huge and loose alignments of this gross rank, rather than
                            Culture group and technocomplex             329

those smaller, higher rank entities that we have discussed in detail. It
would seem that the Palaeolithic archaeologist is probably, with rare
exceptions, conceptualizing entities of technocomplex and culture
group status as against his later colleagues' preoccupation with entities
of cultural and subcultural rank. T h e importance of comparative
status is that these differences in rank carry quite different information
and implications about the range of the ethnic, sociocultural and
linguistic attributes to be inferred for the entity. T o confuse entities of
different ranks is to confuse and impair the information content of the
classification. Clearly we need to know something of the charac-
teristics of the technocomplex entities and their behaviour in space
and time.
    T h e first step must be a general statement of the negative and
positive characteristics of the technocomplex entities, leading to some
attempt at a condensed definition of the concept. From the negative
aspect it is useful to emphasize that the technocomplex is a more
specific and a higher rank system than those defined in terms of broad
technology or subsistence economics alone. T h e technocomplex is not
the same as the technological categories of the 'three ages' scheme -
Palaeolithic, Mesolithic, Neolithic, Bronze Age etc. - neither is it
equivalent to the hunter-fisher-gatherer, simple           horticulture,
pastoral, or plough agriculturalist subsistence strategies. T h e tech-
nocomplex represents the partly independent arrival of diverse
developing culture systems at the same general equilibrium pattern
based on a similar economic strategy, in similar environments with a
similar technology and a similar past trajectory.
    T h e group of cultural assemblages falling within a particular
technocomplex will probably be ethnically and linguistically quite
diverse - any smaller homogeneous groupings will form culture group
subsets within the more comprehensive complex. Furthermore, the
assemblages need not share any specific artefact-types or type states,
suggesting at first sight a total lack of affinity between the assemblages
within the complex. T h i s dissimilarity may indeed be total at the type
and type state levels but the affinity relationship uniting the group
does appear at the type group or type family level. T h e technocomplex
assemblages may not share the same specific type or state of backed
blade, burin, end-scraper, point, or bone harpoon but they will share a
polythetic range of differing specific types and states from the com-
mon set of artefact-type families. T h e technocomplex assemblages
need only share a polythetic selection from a shared set of families of
33°    Analytical Archaeology
artefact-types - most of which are artefacts broadly grouped by com-
mon function and technology.
    T h e technocomplex entity begins to emerge as a comprehensive
and low level category uniting a complex of type complexes, widely
diffused in space and time and linked together as the skeletal frame of
a general sociocultural mixed strategy adapted to the mould of a
broadly similar environmental context. A complex of types and a
complex of type complexes associated with the implementation of a
particular subsistence pattern in a particular set of niches. Without
further elaboration we may attempt to define the technocomplex as - a
group of cultures characterized by assemblages sharing a polythetic range
but differing specific types of the same general families of artefact-types,
shared as a widely diffused and interlinked response to common factors in
environment, economy and technology. A negligible level of affinity,
perhaps 5 per cent or less, uniting the group in terms of shared specific
types but a residual medium level affinity, perhaps 30—60 per cent,
uniting the group in terms of shared type families.



11    Technocomplex systems
T h e technocomplex is a huge system networking culture groups,
cultures, assemblages and artefact-types. T h e richest reticulation in
the network remains within the individual, self-adjusting culture
units. T h e extra-culture network is less complex, uniting only the
general structuring of parts of the otherwise elaborately diverse
culture systems; the linkage at this low level depending upon wide-
spread diffusion and convergent development. T h e technocomplex
system is really an interlinked set of systems sharing a broadly similar
material and technological substructure but probably quite varied in
the rest of their sociocultural superstructure, within the operating
constraints.
    Particular technocomplex formats are mctastable equilibrium
basins into which a number of independent and variform culture
trajectories have converged. T h e steady state of systems within a
particular technocomplex basin is metastable in so far as certain
changes or sequences of changes in the coupled sociocultural and
environmental systems might initiate displacement out of the stable
region (chapter 2, I). T h e particular technocomplex basin is thus both
a metastable region and a constrained set through which culture
                            Culture group and technocomplex             331

system trajectories must pass and momentarily pause, before they may
move on to certain other technocomplex basins. T h e culture must, for
example, move into the food-producing technocomplexes before its
trajectory can m o v e into the full urban, metallurgical or industrial
technocomplex regions. Each technocomplex has a limited number of
alternative trajectories into and out of its basin, each trajectory with
differing potential in terms of its route through successive metastable
formats. It is the serious constraint offered by successive technocom-
plex basins that gives rise to the most general and striking regularities
in cultural trajectories - the regularities summarized in the modern
versions of the 'three ages' scheme in which the categories are not
rigidly successive levels but sequences of groups of technocomplex
basins linked b y various trajectories with various but limited 'goals'
(chapter 2, examples 3 - 5 ) .
    T h e trajectories of culture systems approaching a state of equilib-
rium and a technocomplex basin 'behave' as if they were goal-seeking
systems, the state or basin being the goal. T h i s directive factor in
system trajectories we have seen to stem from coupled feedback
subsystems in the integrated system (chapter 2, I; fig. 1 1 ) . A n interes-
ting feature of the trajectories into such stable basins is the 'trial and
error' adaptive hunting of the system and all its oscillating
components, all effectively scanning the available variety for suitable
mutually stabilizing attributes and components. T h e cultural systems,
as Semi-Markovian systems with semi-stochastic transformations,
move from one state to one of a possible set of states, the selection
being based on the limited range of possible states and having certain
differential probabilities. A s systems of this general kind, cultural
trajectories f r o m basin to basin are not unique and consequently the
cultures within a technocomplex set do not f o r m a wholly homo-
geneous category, neither are their past or future trajectories neces-
sarily identical.
    A technocomplex basin is defined by an integrated strategy
involving a certain set of artefact-type families, a certain technology, a
specific environmental range, with a particular blend of subsistence
and resource exploitation methods. T o analyse an example already
mentioned, one can take the loose Tardenoisian technocomplex when
used for assemblages f r o m the Balkans to Britain and f r o m Spain to
Poland - the specific Tardenoisian culture group of France being a
detailed subset within this gross set. In the Tardenoisian technocom-
plex we have a certain set of geometric microlith and flint and antler
332   Analytical Archaeology
artefact families, a micro-blade and burin technology, in the forest
zone of post-glacial Europe, hunting small forest game with the bow
and only marginally exploiting marine resources. T h i s set of traits
united the various far-flung territories and diverse assemblages of
many different sociocultural and linguistic units (for a criticism of this
interpretation of the Tardenoisian as a technocomplex, see T r i n g h a m
1 9 7 1 , p. 38).
     T h i s example immediately points to the terminological and
taxonomic difficulties at present confusing the archaeological scene.
T h e term Tardenoisian, like the term Maglemosian, or Natufian and
most archaeological terms has been simultaneously used for a quite
specific, localized culture or culture group and at the same time by
loose extension, for broadly similar Tardenoisian-like, Maglemose-
like, Natufian-like assemblage groupings. Usually, the frame and level
of reference is left totally inexplicit. T h e technocomplex entity is here
defined to encompass the latter examples of 'like' cultures, to dis-
tinguish them from the more closely interrelated culture groups and
culture entities, in an effort to disperse this fog of imprecision. Under
this burden of old terminology it is inevitably the case that one name is
used for a specific culture, for the culture group that it represents and
for the technocomplex that it characterizes - confusing the gross set
with its subsets. It is essential to specify whether one means the
Natufian culture of Palestine, the Natufian culture group of the
Levant, or the Natufian-like technocomplex operating from Cyrenaica
to Kashmir.
     A technocomplex system reflects a certain general mixed strategy
in the game between culture and environment. T h e moves in the game
represent the successive states of the culture and environment tra-
jectory, the culture aims to play for successive satisficer or near-
optimizer equilibria against the successive moves of the environment.
On both sides the next move is constrained by the present position on
the board and its past sequence of states (chapter 2, postulate 14).
Therefore, there are for both sides only a limited number of moves,
and a limited number of outcomes or pay offs. T h e advantage of the
culture system in this game is that it can anticipate the environment's
moves to a limited extent based on observing previous moves (lead,
fig. 1 1 ) . T h e environment might play - arctic conditions, tundra flora,
tundra fauna; the culture may play - hunting-fishing-gathering, co-
operative band society, shaman magic, and U p p e r Palaeolithic tech-
nology. T h e outcome is fed-back to successive generations of the
                             C u l t u r e g r o u p and technocomplex     333

society which will adjust its successive stances accordingly. T h e
culture is playing for d y n a m i c equilibrium in a changing situation -
the culture will play within the stable technocomplex region until it
can no longer achieve an equilibrium outcome therein. T h e flexibility
of the culture's game and strategy depends on the culture system's
capacity as a regulator/insulator and cannot exceed the culture
system's variety and its capacity as a multichannelled communication
system with a continuous existence. T h e environment in this develo-
ping game may be thought of as directing the culture system's 'search'
or oscillating 'hunt and stick' trajectory f r o m stable basin to stable
basin; the environment is the vetoer of all states of equilibrium in the
culture system save only those in a certain set.
    I f , in the course of the game, there should be a direct contradiction
or equivocation between the culture system's variety and the
environment variety then this dislocation is minimized by cultural
moves towards a 'new' set of variety, a 'new' strategy. T h i s 'new'
variety, or set of variety, represents the integration or invention of a
novel set of variety, broad enough to be alternative to the former
cultural variety and sufficiently comprehensive to meet the new
environmental strategy. T h e culture may generate this 'new', stabiliz-
ing variety by outright acquisition, by internal invention, or by adopt-
ing a 'new' blend of old elements. Severe environmental changes
therefore play a large part in stimulating the adaptive development of
new cultural variety and this is often based on a minimax blend of old
components, which will minimize the m a x i m u m amount of immediate
system dislocation. T e c h n o c o m p l e x e s represent just this momentary
strategic blend of components of old and tried efficacy which f o r m a
skeletal framework within which many different individual formats
may be accommodated.


E X A M P L E S OF   TECHNOCOMPLEXES

In most existing studies of material culture, entities of technocomplex
rank are either unlabelled, mislabelled, or delitescent. In American
archaeology, the term 'tradition' is sometimes used more consistently
for entities of this general configuration (e.g. Palaeo-Indian T r a d i -
tion). However, since the term 'tradition' is also widely and con-
veniently used for the time-depth or time-trajectory of every kind of
archaeological entity it falls somewhat dangerously into the rag-bag
multilevel, multipurpose category that robs a term of its possible
334   Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y
information content, as w e have seen in the case of the term 'culture'.
F o r this reason the term tradition has here been used for the time-
depth aspect of all archaeological entities and the term technocomplex
suggested for a specific entity with a spatial as well as a time dimen-
sion. T h e situation is further complicated by the developmental
sequence in which the artefacts and technology defining a tech-
nocomplex will often first appear in a single culture, become wide-
spread in a culture group expansion, and only terminally express a
gross technocomplex entity; this is but one trajectory of technocom-
plex ontogeny. In such a case a single term may unwittingly be used at
all three levels for very different kinds of system, as we have already
described.
     T h e technocomplex units that w e are about to list were previously
designated, cultures, culture groups, traditions, phases, or horizons, or
they simply remained anonymous. T h e i r names variously refer to the
first culture to show the technocomplex format, a 'typical' culture
within the group, or they refer to a major aspect of the technological,
economic, environmental, artefact equilibrium polygon. T h e tech-
nocomplexes are noticeably larger and clearer for Palaeolithic pre-
history than for later times - the reasons for this reflect the sparse,
unidimensional and even monotypic representation of Palaeolithic
entities as opposed to the multifacetted representation of later entities,
down to subcultural levels. I f , in a similar context, the material culture
of modern Australian Aborigines was reduced to their stone artefacts
alone then we might detect at most, perhaps three or four contem-
porary technocomplexes without any apparent further subdivision. If
one takes into account the basketry, wood and bone artefacts, and
decorative motifs from cave paintings to body paint - then the mono-
lithic technocomplexes would reveal much smaller entities of culture
and culture g r o u p levels, with a greater degree of correlated linguistic
and social information. One suspects that the same diversification
w o u l d appear in the superficially monomorphous 'cultures' of
 Australian prehistory and in such Palaeolithic entities as the European
Acheulean and Mousterian.
    Like the culture group, the huge space-time dimensions of the
technocomplex have the great advantage of providing a much simpler
outline of prehistoric trajectories - expressing them not as individual
culture system trajectories but clustered in successive bundles. T h e
European Palaeolithic sequence, for example, largely reduces to the
interaction of the Acheulean, Clactonian, Mousterian, Aurignacian
                               Culture group and technocomplex                  335

and Gravettian, or Perigordian, technocomplexes; many of these enti-
ties integrate successive technocomplex transforms, like the many
facies of the Acheulean industries, or some of the five groupings
within the French Mousterian. Later Palaeolithic technocomplexes
(e.g. the T a n g e d Point technocomplex) have also been distinguished
in the North European Plain (Schild 1976). Strongly localized and
smaller time-space entities like the Franco-Cantabrian Chatelper-
ronian, Solutrean, or Magdalenian, sensu stricto, by contrast suggest
culture g r o u p transforms in time depth. Characteristically, several
of the gross technocomplexes are notably connected with specialized
but mixed hunting strategies in certain limited ecosystems -
centred on the cave bear, horse, reindeer, buffalo or mammoth, for
example.
    In the same general way N e w World prehistory exhibits the same
order of groupings - starting with the Palaeo-Indian, Old Cordilleran,
Desert, Archaic, Northwest Microblade, and Arctic Small-tool tech-
nocomplexes (Willey 1966, fig. 2 . 3 1 ) . T h e so-called Palaeo-Indian
industries, for example, are united by the possession of large flint
projectile points, some of them noted for their connection with the
hunting of specific species - the Clovis point with the mammoth and
the Folsom point with the bison. Recent attempts to rename the
Palaeo-Indian complexes as 'big-game hunting traditions' amount to
a recognition of their loose technocomplex basis.
    T h e Palaeolithic prehistory of A f r i c a provides a similar breakdown
into groups of many differing levels. T h e great technocomplexes
provide the in situ transformation of the Oldowan and Acheulean
groupings moving on multilinearly into the Sangoan, Fauresmith,
Levalloiso-Mousterian, and L u p e m b a n technocomplexes. Here again
there are well-documented connections between the generalized arte-
fact assemblages shared within the technocomplex and particular
environmental factors met by a common mixed strategy - such links
connect the Sangoan complex, with its heavy axe and pick-like tools,
with its territories in the C o n g o forest lands.
     In Southeast Asia the growth of archaeological research within the
last decade (e.g. in T h a i l a n d ) has led to considerable revision of our
knowledge of this area's development in prehistory. A m o n g such
revisions has been G o r m a n ' s ( 1 9 7 0 , pp. 8 2 - 3 ) reinterpretation of the
Hoabinhian assemblages as a technocomplex 'reflecting common
ecological adaptations to the Southeast Asian humid tropics', from the
late Pleistocene until c. 6 5 0 0 - 5 0 0 0 BC. T h e last part of this period
336   Analytical Archaeology

witnesses the significant appearance of cord-marked pottery, plant
domestication and edge ground stone tools.
    T h e later prehistory of all these various areas continues to show
technocomplex groupings which are usually broken-up by the more
minute focus on cultures and subcultures. Mesolithic examples have
already been cited - the gross Maglemose-like, Tardenoisian-like and
Blade and T r a p e z e technocomplexes which respectively dominated
the North European Plain from Britain to the Urals, the forests of
France to Roumania, and the Mediterranean littoral. T h e Neolithic of
America develops the Woodland, Meso-American, and Southwestern
technocomplexes amongst many others. In Europe the Neolithic
cultures fall within a succession of Mediterranean and Danubian
technocomplexes - later developing Northern and Atlantic complexes
and eventually, in the east, seeing the development of successive
Mounted Nomad technocomplexes. With the appearance of bronze
metallurgy, studies based purely on metallurgical aspects have tended
to obscure the great technocomplex groupings by forcing them into
chest-of-drawers divisions. T h e Carpathian, Caucasian and Alpine
technocomplexes develop long traditions from Chalcolithic system
states down to the great Alpine Late Bronze Age, and Atlantic Late
Bronze Age complexes - vaguely anticipating the C o m m o n Market
and European Free T r a d e Area format. T h e s e technocomplexes
comprehensively contain the various great culture groups of the
period - the successive Aunjetitiz, T u m u l u s , and Urnfield groupings -
and loosely unite assemblages sharing certain families of tools,
weapons and artefacts with economies based on varieties of mixed
farming and ard agriculture strategies.
     T h e sociocultural generalizations linked with the regularities of
'tribal-heroic', 'feudal', and 'industrial' Europe are related to the con-
straining characteristics of the great technocomplexes of Iron Age and
historic times. It has even been noted that these pattern regularities
are equally meaningful for the culture trajectories of Japan as they are
for Atlantic Europe. T h i s does not mean that completely uniform and
gigantic technocomplexes succeeded one another from the Atlantic to
the Pacific. On the contrary, there is little significant connection until
the Urban and Industrial eras - the fourth and fifth ages of the three
ages scheme. What these convergent sociocultural regularities do
emphasize is the increasing scope of piecemeal intercommunication
and diffusion and the parallel development of great quantities of
                          C u l t u r e g r o u p and technocomplex   337
similar regulatory variety. T h e technocomplexes define very similar
stable basins for very similar but not identical reasons.
    T h e technocomplex of early medieval Western Europe was a quite
localized entity that one might loosely characterize as the Franko-
Teutonic technocomplex based on heavy plough agriculture, Iron Age
technology, urban and feudal society operating in a sub-Atlantic,
forested European environment. T h e artefact assemblages typical of
this complex from c. AD 900 to 1200 included the horse accoutrement
type complex, the castle, the mail-coat, conical helm, lance and shield,
together expressing the aristocratic subculture of the elite. An
equivalent subcultural assemblage existed for the Church and the iron
scythes, ploughshares, billhooks, clippers, chisels, axes, storage jars,
bowls, jugs, timber houses sufficed for the peasants - elaborated only
in the distinctive burghs. Between the Franko-Teutonic technocom-
plex of the West and the samurai of the East lay many intervening
technocomplexes including those of the Byzantine Empire, the Slavo-
Scandinavian, and the Asiatic Nomad technocomplexes. T h e tech-
nocomplex of early medieval Japan was localized in eastern Asia and
Japan and shared a complex based on intensive rice agriculture, an
equestrian elite, an Iron Age technology, urban and feudal society and
a Pacific, forested environment: a sociocultural strategy generally
similar to that operating in the far West and constrained by similar
contextual factors.
    The technocomplex unites heterogeneous groups of otherwise
varied linguistic and sociocultural alignments. Inevitably the tech-
nocomplex will occupy semi-continuous and contiguous territories
and must include separately homogeneous units of culture or culture
group, language and language group rank. On occasions a large culture
group with a strongly individual economy, technology and environ-
ment will also form a single technocomplex; in the limiting case the
borders of the two entities may roughly coincide.


hi   Phase pattern regularities

T h e technocomplex is marked by the possession of types from the
same type families, in a polythetic selection propagated by interlinked
diffusion over the technocomplex area. Technocomplexes in different
areas of space-time may be very similar indeed, as one might ex-
pect for such generalized artefact-technology-economy-environment
338    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

strategies and stable basins. T h e s e are the similarities that one notices
between feudal J a p a n and feudal E u r o p e , between the Celts and the
Zulus, the Magdalenians and the K w a k i u t l , the multi-kiva nucleated
defensive settlements of the recent Pueblo and that of Neolithic Catal
Hiiyiik. Nevertheless, these convergent similarities do not place the
cultures in question within single technocomplexes because the enti-
ties are not directly interlinked and because the affinity even in terms
of type families is too low. It may be useful to bring together similar
entities of this kind in socioeconomic or sociocultural categories in the
manner of S t e w a r d but they are socially orientated rather than artefact
orientated in their regularities. H o w e v e r , it is still very useful to draw
attention to the sociocultural regularities connected with similar
technocomplexes in different times and places.
    T h e technocomplex system is a system of artefact-type families
expressed in varying combinations of varying specific types. T h e
essential type families of a given technocomplex are those most widely
and frequently shared across the complex and, of these, the key type
families are those that are most idiosyncratically distinctive and exist
together as a syntactic format throughout the integrated existence of
the technocomplex. T h e inessential type families in such systems are
the artefact-types restricted to the particular component cultures or
culture groups and not extending further in the net. Since the tech-
nocomplex is united by strong affinity links between sets of type
families, the system can once again be modelled by a static arrange-
ment of type family intercorrelations expressed in multidimensional
space - rather like the culture g r o u p galaxy but with specific types
replaced by type families (fig. 50).
    As a polythetic entity the technocomplex cannot be defined by a
single artefact-type contour. Instead we again have a general poly-
thetic distribution model of overlapping and intersecting sets defining
a broad area bounded by steep fall-off gradients in the essential type
families and containing the mean, mode and median points of all the
type family distributions although not necessarily containing their
centres of origin (fig. 67).
   T h e distribution areas of such technocomplexes are in keeping
with their huge time and content dimensions. One may compare the
roughly estimated range of radius of culture areas of c. 2 0 - 2 0 0 miles,
and culture groups of c. 2 0 0 - 7 5 0 miles with that of technocomplexes
which range f r o m the giant Acheulean, Gravettian, or Palaeo-Indian
areas of up to 3,000 miles radius down to the later and smaller
                             C u l t u r e g r o u p and technocomplex    339

technocomplexes of expanded culture g r o u p size, greater than 750
miles radius. T h e very order of these dimensions should be quite
sufficient to emphasize that these different entities are systems of very
different rank, complexity and 'behaviour'.


Iv    Time pattern regularities
T e c h n o c o m p l e x systems express huge, loosely interconnected systems
of culture groups, cultural assemblages, and artefact-types. T h e
specific frame of reference of these systems is not the totality of the
components' traits but merely those essential families of artefact-types
which define the c o m m o n , integrated strategy towards the economy
and the environment in which it must function. T h e technocomplex is
a stable basin or set of strategies through which a number of diverse
culture and culture g r o u p trajectories will pass. A s a stable configura-
tion, in a particular context, the technocomplex acts as a goal into
which culture systems will oscillate by feed-back adjustment.
      However, even stable basins or sets must change with changing
circumstances and the stable stance of yesterday may become an
unstable stance today. T h e technocomplex basin is a moving target
with its own time-trajectory and a changing format. Consequently,
technocomplexes can be said to have an ontogeny on the usual basis of
their appearance, growth, development and disappearance as defined
by:

       (i) the quantitative change and oscillation in the numbers of
           different artefact-type families polythetically shared within
           the technocomplex.
      (ii) the quantitative change and oscillation in n u m b e r s of assem-
           blages within successive states of the technocomplex
           development.
     (iii) the qualitative change and oscillation of the technocomplex
           system as a structured system.

    T h e first appearance of a given technocomplex is retrospectively
marked by the individual appearance of the system's essential and key
type families, often in several cultures at several times and places. T h e
widespread interdiffusion of these type families within a common
environment marks the initial directive correlation of these types into
an increasingly stereotyped assemblage, emphasizing widely shared
but variously elaborated activities of a fundamental kind. M a n y of
34°    Analytical Archaeology
these activities and their distinctive artefact-types will be found
individually outside the technocomplex area - indeed they may well
originate beyond its bounds. But it is only within the technocomplex
that these varied and scattered behaviours are regularly integrated into
a generalized system of a polythetic kind. S o m e artefacts and activities
will be widely spread by diffusion, others will be jointly developed by
parallel invention based on c o m m o n needs and c o m m o n available
variety. T h e more universal the opportunity and the simpler and more
widespread the dislocation stimulus the more likely the repeated
independent and partially independent integrative invention and
innovation. A s remarked earlier, the very acceptance of the same set of
basic technocomplex variety, by formerly unrelated systems, points to
a joint dislocation affecting all of t h e m ; a c o m m o n convergent direc-
tive based on environmental, cultural, religious, political or economic
stimuli, or any combination or permutation of these factors. T h e
outcome is the increasing convergence of the various oscillating time-
trajectories of different cultural systems, finally converging into the
bounds of a temporarily stable technocomplex basin.
    T h e formation of a new technocomplex system is therefore largely
a matter of the general acquisitive integration of certain widespread
variety and its augmentation by internal invention on convergent
lines. T h e successive technocomplexes of the Arctic provide good
examples of marked convergence in basic equipment based upon the
wholesale borrowing of both Asiatic and American variety, further
developed by ingenious local invention and skilfully integrated into a
series of unique technocomplex formats in the face of extreme
environmental and economic constraint. In this context the famed
inventiveness of the E s k i m o is more than matched by his system
induced capacity for integrating d i f f u s i n g elements from without.
     T h e specific technocomplex therefore appears as a shared means of
adjustment to a particular set of changing conditions. T h e growth and
development of the technocomplex reflect the spread and successive
transformations of the basic set of activities and artefacts. T h e tech-
nocomplex can therefore be viewed as a system with successive trans-
form states segmenting its time-trajectory, terminal thresholds mark-
ing the first and last appearance of the system as this kind of system.
T h e s e thresholds mark the system's birth and death respectively and
therefore the passage of the component cultures out of or into other
technocomplex strategies. S u c h major thresholds are marked by the
appearance or disappearance of a whole structured set of essential and
                           Culture group and technocomplex             341

key artefact families, the minor thresholds by similar changes in the
successive specific artefact-types and subtypes characterizing the
system phase states.
    T h e disappearance of a technocomplex system reflects changes in
the cultures and/or in the environment such that the technocomplex is
no longer a stable strategy, or that a strategy with a better pay-off is
freshly possible. It is also probable that the c o m m o n orientation
shared by cultures within a single technocomplex may occasionally
increase in mutual congruence to the point where the technocomplex
might condense into one or more culture groups. A n homogeneous
economic, material and technological background may well provide a
firm basis for further convergent sociocultural and linguistic accul-
turation.


TECHNOCOMPLEX        CATEGORIES

In an earlier chapter we distinguished between the climax system
ontogeny of systems with near-optimizer strategies as opposed to those
with satisficer and minimax strategies (chapter 6, v). T h e systems with
a climax potential were either very highly organized, employing
urban, urban-state, or urban-imperial units, or they might arise in
areas of unusually rich resources exploited by a simple but near-
optimally effective strategy. T h e climax itself represents the exponen-
tial and simultaneous burst of 'new' variety accompanying the forma-
tive development phase of such systems. T h i s burst of variety, a spate
of innovation and invention, comes about because the formative phase
of a system freshly incorporates a m a x i m u m amount of internal dis-
location, yet to be minimized, and requiring the rapid integration or
invention of new variety as a comprehensive and stabilizing form. T h e
coherent phase then reflects the effective diminishment of these dis-
locations and consequently a slowing of the rates of change and rate of
new developments, together with the increasing institutionalization of
the stable format. In this respect, so-called 'pattern fulfilment' reflects
the coherent and post-coherent states of a system w h e n the m a x i m u m
dislocation of the formative phase has largely been stabilized by the
newly developed variety; thus minimal dislocation means minimal
new developments.
    Now different kinds of technocomplex system appear to have
different kinds of detailed ontogenies and the immediate difference is
between technocomplexes with climax and non-climax ontogenies.
342    Analytical Archaeology

Whilst not confusing the very specific technocomplexes with the
broader taxa of subsistence economies it is often useful to group
technocomplexes under these subsistence categories for comparative
purposes. In this way it is possible to compare and contrast the variety
within the hunter-fisher-gatherer, pastoral nomad, and agrarian
technocomplexes as groups and compare and contrast variety between
these groupings. E a c h of these subsistence categories has climax and
non-climax f o r m s found within particular technocomplexes. Indeed,
each successive technocomplex or technocomplex state is usually
repatterned by the output of new variety f r o m climax cultures within
its structure.
   It may prove useful to discuss the characteristics and necessary
conditions operating in climax and non-climax technocomplexes
within these subsistence categories.


Hunter-fisher-gatherer         technocomplexes

Each of the gross subsistence taxa conceals an enormous range of
cultural variety and variation - none more so than the h u n t e r - f i s h e r -
gatherer economies. T h i s range of variation can be much more
specifically dealt with in terms of the particular component tech-
nocomplex systems, thus emphasizing one of the contributions of this
taxon. H u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r s have existed for the whole two and a
half million year span of hominid development. A s economic strate-
gies they have varied in their differential emphasis on hunting, on
fishing, or on gathering, even to the exclusion of some of these aspects ;
varying the combination of these staples, their degree of importance,
their role organization and of course the groups of species exploited.
Technologically, their material culture has ranged from the simplest
stone and wood-working traditions up to iron-using and latterly the
use of fire-arms. T h e social organization of hunter-fisher-gatherers
has equally spanned almost every variation from matricentred to
patricentred and f r o m large composite bands down to small dispersed
families. Indeed it is a frequent occurrence in this form of organization
that the groups change their whole social configuration and stance as
they move around the resources of their territories.
    Nevertheless, in each specific case there appears to be a strong
correlation between the social pattern and the efficient exploitation of
economic resources. T h e exploitation of resources is rarely optimal,
under these conditions, because the risks would also be optimal; in
                           Culture group and technocomplex            343

such contexts the exploitation of resources and their distribution
through society is coupled to group continuity not to individual
welfare. T h e greater the real or imagined economic contribution by
one sex, and the more specific and restricted their method of opera-
tion, the greater their polarity in the kinship scheme. In one sense, and
one sense only, the multipurpose kinship mechanisms are adapted to
exploit the environment to advantage and to arrange an effective
distribution of the society's main productive agents. T h e most pro-
ductive agents tend to be evenly and effectively distributed through
the dispersed group by clustering the less productive agents around
them, as a penumbra to a nucleus. T h i s arrangement helps to ensure
an efficient and wise distribution of food and produce whilst at the
same time the same social network also operates towards quite other
ends.
     T h e variety of social superstructures that a given technocomplex
can sustain is very large and any social reconstruction is made doubly
difficult by the missing record of agents and roles in these societies.
Some hunting-fishing-gathering tribes may be strongly patrilineal
and patrilocal - especially where hunting is a staple and game is small
and scattered; here the emphasis is on male hunting, with young males
brought up within and intimately acquainted with every niche of their
future hunting terrain (Steward 1955). However, other hunter-fisher-
gatherer tribes are matrilocal and matrilineal, especially in cases where
female gathering and fishing is the basis; where the same conditions
operate, but the males do the fishing and gathering, quite the opposite
structures may prevail. Archaeological evidence may thus indicate an
appropriate sociocultural set and its limits but it will not specify a
single social arrangement for a technocomplex.
     In the absence of variety amplifying units such as the city, hunter-
fisher-gatherers'   climax potential can only be achieved by a near-
optimal strategy in an area of unusually rich resources. T h e tech-
nocomplexes that show a climax development on a hunting-fishing-
gathering basis have two main features in common:

    (i) a formalized sequence of resources that may be successively
        exploited in rotation throughout most of the year;
   (ii) a socially focused and organized exploitation of one or more
        gregarious staples.
        These features or tactics are found to some degree in most
        hunter-fisher-gatherer strategies but they are especially highly
344   Analytical Archaeology
        developed and institutionalized in the cultures with climax
        potential.

     T h e first of these requirements - an annual resource rota - can be
achieved in several different ways. Under one strategy, advantage is
taken of various kinds of ecological zonation to devise, by trial and
error feedback, a schedule which will take the group from zone to zone
and from resource to resource just as each resource reaches fruition.
T h e group concentrating and dispersing in phased succession as the
type of resource and its density constrain - a rhythmic, alternating
stance through the annual cycle. Another climax strategy may take
advantage of an exceptionally well situated territory astride several
closely packed ecological zones and by successive exploitation of zones
close at hand may achieve settlement stability. T h e favourite kind of
territory in the latter case usually embraces a land and sea strip with
deep-sea, marine shallows, littoral, estuary and river, inland forest and
lakes, as ecological niches with a great variety of resources with a
rotational harvest.
     T h e second requirement for a climactic hunter-fisher-gatherer
strategy depends upon the availability of one or more gregarious
staples and its organized exploitation by focused social segments. A
gregarious staple resource, regularly congregating in dense and
nucleated profusion in a small area is more easily exploited than a
solitary and dispersed resource. Sometimes the resource species may
be dispersed for the greater part of the year and only swarm at certain
times in certain areas. In such a case the group will also congregate at
these times and places and disperse at others; in other cases the
resource is permanently mustered. T h e gregarious species may be
aquatic or terrestrial and faunal or floral. T h e gregarious aquatic
species range from the whale and tunny fish through the various seals,
sardines, salmon, oysters, down to periwinkles - all the shoal fish and
shellfish. T h e gregarious land species embrace the flocks and herds of
 buffalo, reindeer, horse, deer, elephant, mammoth, ducks, geese - all
the gregarious animals and birds. Last, but not least, we have the
gregarious plants - the nettles, the trees, the grasses, above all others -
 the cereals. T h e organized exploitation of one or more of these gre-
garious resources ensures a near-optimal payoff.
    It is under conditions such as these that climactic hunter-fisher-
gatherer communities like the Magdalenians focused on reindeer or
bison, the Folsom technocomplex on bison and the Clovis and
Gravettian technocomplexes on mammoth. Some degree of climax
                                      C u l t u r e g r o u p and t e c h n o c o m p l e x       345

was even possible a m o n g s t the C a l i f o r n i a n I n d i a n s w i t h strategies
based on acorns, seeds and pine nuts, and in the E v e r g l a d e s c o m p l e x
of Florida on the basis of wild rice and fish. T h e shell m i d d e n s of the
Ertebtflle and M e d i t e r r a n e a n E p i - P a l a e o l i t h i c g r o u p s attest a similar
achievement, as do the m o r e recent A m e r i c a n I n d i a n s of the N o r t h -
west C o a s t and the E s k i m o of the A r c t i c ( F o r d e 1 9 3 4 ) , w h e r e the latter
could even competitively displace the t e c h n o c o m p l e x of the t w e l f t h -
century Vikings of G r e e n l a n d . U n d e r c l i m a x c o n d i t i o n s the h u n t e r -
fisher-gatherer    economies and societies are m o r e delicately poised and
more precariously balanced than are the c o m m u n i t i e s of the peasant
farmer.
    T h i s brings us to the d a n g e r s of a climactic h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r
technocomplex and s o m e characteristics of the time-trajectories of this
kind of subsistence strategy. W e have s u g g e s t e d that e c o n o m i c
patterns are strategies based on m i x e d c o m b i n a t i o n s of resource
exploitation, continually a d j u s t i n g b y f e e d - b a c k oscillation. O v e r -
specialization gives a m a x i m u m - y i e l d strategy linked to a single g r o u p
of rich resources, or a single resource. H o w e v e r , the d i s a p p e a r a n c e or
severe population oscillation of this resource can cause d r a m a t i c f e e d -
back oscillations in the c o u p l e d sociocultural s y s t e m . T h e r e are m a n y
cases w h e r e the periodic or p e r m a n e n t d i s a p p e a r a n c e of m a m m o t h ,
whales, oysters, s a l m o n , sardine, b u f f a l o , c a r i b o u and seals have dras-
tically repatterned the d e p e n d e n t t e c h n o c o m p l e x s y s t e m s . O n e
characteristic of h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r subsistence strategies there-
fore is their oscillating instability, arising f r o m the simplicity and
directness of their c o u p l i n g w i t h the e n v i r o n m e n t . C l i m a c t i c strategies
in this g r o u p are thus especially v u l n e r a b l e , b y virtue of the intense
specialization and organization w h i c h y i e l d s the c l i m a x potential in
those t e c h n o c o m p l e x e s . B y contrast, the s l o w and steady exploitation
of h u n t i n g - f i s h i n g - g a t h e r i n g resources in a less specialized, m i n i m a x
and satisficer strategy y i e l d s less potential but o f f e r s less risk and m o r e
certain continuity. It is f o r this reason, a m o n g s t several others, that
the climax h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r t e c h n o c o m p l e x e s represent the cul-
de-sac areas or basins of overspecialized trajectory d e v e l o p m e n t ,
whereas the future potential lay in the s y s t e m organization of the less
elaborately constrained and less climactic t e c h n o c o m p l e x e s .


Pastoral nomad technocomplexes

Pastoral n o m a d cultures are e v e r y bit as varied as those of the h u n t e r -
fisher-gatherers    but in the s a m e w a y exhibit a characteristic set of
346    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

constraints and regularities in their structure and cultural ontogenies.
T h e technocomplex taxa help to break down the apparent monolithic
unity of the pastoral nomad societies into smaller and variously
equipped units, without reducing the view to the overcrowded level of
individual cultures. Before we move to examine some of these con-
straints and regularities it is important to dispel two common miscon-
ceptions. T h e term 'pastoralist' simply encompasses that set of
economies that make use of animal herding within their compound
strategy. It is necessary to distinguish the pastoral or mixed f a r m i n g
aspects of sedentary agrarian strategies f r o m those mobile nomad
societies almost entirely dependent on herding. T h e term 'pastoralist'
does not necessarily mean 'nomad pastoralist' neither does it coincide
with 'mounted nomad pastoralist'. T h e point of this diatribe is the
frequent transference of the narrowly constrained characteristics of
'mounted nomad pastoralists' to all 'pastoralist' societies. Archaeo-
logically this amounts to the automatic mental impression that
cultures with large herds are 'pastoralist' and that 'pastoralist' societies
are always 'mobile mounted nomads' - the Corded Ware/Battle-Axe
culture g r o u p has been a notable casualty in this respect, a sad mirage
of the first plough agriculturalists in E u r o p e .
    Once this misconception is erased the g r o u p of technocomplexes
under discussion immediately assumes a more concise form. T h e
mixed f a r m i n g pastoralists with more sedentary settlement patterns
and cereal staples fall outside this pastoral nomad group, they come
within the various agrarian strategies. T h e true pastoral nomad set
itself falls into two broad and important divisions - mounted and
unmounted (Forde 1934). T h e steed of the mounted pastoralist may
variously be the horse or camel, or on occasion even the donkey,
reindeer, yak or ox. T h e basis of the unmounted nomad pastoralist's
strategy is on the contrary severely limited by the range and endurance
of his own feet. Not surprisingly, there is an interesting convergence
between the technocomplexes of mounted pastoralists and mounted
hunters, like the Plains Indians, and similarly between unmounted
nomad pastoralists and nomad hunter-fisher-gatherers - the parallels
are significant but should not confuse the separate identities of these
groups.
    Pastoral nomad technocomplexes emerge with a wide range of
variation within the limitations of their compound strategy. T h i s is
centred on certain herd animals but freely and regularly backed by
hunting, fishing and gathering further resources, and by buying and
                           C u l t u r e g r o u p and t e c h n o c o m p l e x   347

stealing yet others. T h e range of variation expresses a varying habitat,
a varying emphasis and combination of staples, a contrast between
mounted and unmounted herding, and a variation in the beasts ridden
and herded. Nevertheless, this broad range operates within composite
constraints (fig. 7) that arise from the historical trajectories of these
societies and from their necessary conditions. T h e most important
constraint is the inability of most recent pastoral nomad subsistence
strategies to be fully self-supporting and fully independent of sur-
rounding systems of different kinds. T h e pastoral nomad economy has
been described as a highly specialized 'parasite' strategy but this may
not always have been the case. T h e general trajectory of most of the
technocomplexes associated with pastoral nomadism has been greatly
clarified by recent archaeological and historical research and some
attempt to sketch this development is now possible (Phillips 1965).
    T h e present evidence everywhere suggests that pastoral nomadism
arose independently in many areas and periods from the increasingly
pressured expansion of mixed farmers from primary agrarian niches
into more marginal, arid territories. T h e pressure operating in these
circumstances mainly arose from the exponential population increase
following intensive agriculture and urban settlement in the primary
areas - particularly the narrow river valleys and littoral strips. T h e
expanding network of urban settlements with their peripheral halo of
towns and villages progressively extended into most of the easily
exploited agrarian areas. However, when this expansion into the pri-
mary areas had been effectively fulfilled the population did not cease
to increase. T h e marginal and in most cases increasingly arid altitudes
and territories were slowly penetrated at the expense of a slow repat-
terning of the economic strategy. Initially these peripheral groups
pursued a mixed strategy based upon simple hoe agriculture and small
herds of hardy animals, carefully backed by rotational hunting, fishing
and gathering. As the groups moved into more marginal agricultural
land the herding element became more vital and the agrarian less
feasible and reliable.
    Eventually, in order better to exploit the vast areas of thinly
grassed land a more fully mobile sociocultural system was developed.
In many areas this early form of unmounted nomadism was based
around small, hardy, slow travelling, easily herded animals like the
sheep and goat, with the donkey or some other species of pack animal
for tents and equipment and the dog as a very useful adjunct. T h e
earliest evidence for this kind of unmounted nomadism convincingly
348   Analytical Archaeology

appears in the mountain zones and along the desert flanks of the
'fertile crescent' before the fourth millennium BC and is beautifully
documented in the specific traditions of the Semitic Hebrew. T h e Old
Testament gives a vivid account of a group of tribes of tented sheep
and goat-herding nomads, traditionally from the environs of U r and
gravitating across the pasture from the eastern fringe of the desert to
the western edge, in the period between 3 0 0 0 - 1 5 0 0 BC. Similar
unmounted nomadism and transhumance developed in many other
steppe, desert and mountain areas.
     T h i s web of montane, desert and steppe areas was by no means
devoid of previous communities. Indeed, in both the Old and New
World these were the niches of many minutely adjusted and well-
balanced hunter-fisher-gatherer technocomplexes - mainly based on
gathering seeds, nuts, fruit, and roots and hunting the small sparse
game animals of the deer, gazelle, goat group. T h e presence of these
hunter-fisher-gatherers is often registered by the rock art which clus-
ters around the rock shelters, waterholes and other territorial
resources, vigorously recording their main game animals. Indeed these
symbols may have unconsciously served a vital role in the mutual
 territorial adjustments of wandering bands roaming vast overlapping
 territories - serving much the same purpose as the territorial scent
 marks of many terrestrial mammals. T h e pastoral nomads borrowed,
 adapted and integrated many features and doubtless intermarried with
 individuals from these earlier groups. T h e unmounted pastoralist
 technocomplexes incorporated much of the strategy and many of the
 artefacts of these well-adapted aborigine groups. T h i s convergent
 development is, for example, well documented for the penetration of
 the Sahara and the Arabian deserts after c. 3000 BC.
    Climax situations under pastoral nomad conditions seem mainly to
have arisen when mounted nomadism was introduced - allowing a
much larger territory, a much more flexible strategy and the herding
of large and fast herd herbivores like horses, camels, and cattle. T h e
impetus, inventions and innovations for this ecological breakthrough
seem to have arisen yet again within the pastoral-agrarian com-
munities of the marginal agricultural areas. Herds of cattle, horses and
camels are first noted for these more sedentary communities, where
the herding element is often registered by specific subcultural
complexes.
    T h e horse is by far the most useful mount in temperate conditions,
to the south the camel has the advantage and to the north and east the
                                       C u l t u r e g r o u p and t e c h n o c o m p l e x          349

reindeer and yak predominate. T h e horse s e e m s to have been in use as
a herd animal in pastoral-agrarian c o m m u n i t i e s f r o m the Pontic
S t e p p e s to the Iranian plateau by 3000 BC. In this area an o x - w a g o n
based pastoral nomad t e c h n o c o m p l e x s e e m s to have o p e r a t e d between
2 5 0 0 - 1 5 0 0 BC and to have i n t r o d u c e d the horse as a traction animal
a r o u n d 2000 BC and as a riding m o u n t b y c. 1 4 0 0 BC. In this way
h o r s e - m o u n t e d n o m a d s h e r d i n g horses, cattle, or s h e e p first appear
and spread after 1 4 0 0 BC on the E u r a s i a t i c steppe. T h e s u b s e q u e n t
introduction of horse riding to the East s e e m s to have acculturated to
n o m a d i s m the marginal M o n g o l i a n f a r m e r s of the desiccating fringes
of the C h i n e s e E m p i r e . In the N o r t h horse r i d i n g and pastoral nomad
h e r d i n g seem to have induced the d e v e l o p m e n t of reindeer herding
and riding b y b l e n d i n g the k n o w l e d g e of the i n d i g e n o u s reindeer
hunters with the new t e c h n o c o m p l e x skills. In the south the camel was
in military and nomad use by 1 0 0 0 BC in the A r a b i a n and S y r i a n
deserts ( Y a d i n 1 9 6 3 , p. 3 6 1 ) . M o u n t e d pastoral n o m a d i s m b e c a m e a
f u l l y e v o l v e d subsistence pattern with m a n y local variations and
several regional and successive t e c h n o c o m p l e x m a n i f e s t a t i o n s .
       T h e r e q u i r e m e n t s f o r climactic conditions within pastoral nomad
t e c h n o c o m p l e x e s are m u c h the same as f o r h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r s .
In the case of the pastoral n o m a d the strategy already involves the
successive exploitation of a rotation of resources and the socially
focused interest in one or m o r e g r e g a r i o u s staples. T h e additional
r e q u i r e m e n t in this strategy is an a d v a n t a g e o u s e x c h a n g e relationship
with nearby agricultural t e c h n o c o m p l e x e s . T h e n o m a d is customarily
d e p e n d e n t u p o n these s y s t e m interchanges f o r s u p p l i e s of cereals,
fruit, vegetables, metalwork, skilled artisans, m a n u f a c t u r e d g o o d s and
l u x u r y items. T h e fluctuating ' s y m b i o t i c / p a r a s i t i c ' role of this system
interaction is discussed in a s u b s e q u e n t section (section V). In any
event the inherent instability of this kind of relationship e m p h a s i z e s
the other precariously balanced f a c t o r s o p e r a t i n g in a pastoral nomad
climax.
       A s an e x a m p l e of a climax s y s t e m within the pastoral nomad
t e c h n o c o m p l e x e s one might take the S c y t h i a n culture of the Pontic
S t e p p e (Phillips 1965). In fact w e have here the S c y t h i a n s u b c u l t u r e of
the R o y a l H o r d e characterizing and climactically r e p a t t e r n i n g the
S c y t h i a n culture and e x p a n d e d culture g r o u p , within the less homo-
geneous S c y t h i a n t e c h n o c o m p l e x - the t e c h n o c o m p l e x of the m o u n t e d
pastoral n o m a d societies f r o m the C a r p a t h i a n s to the M o n g o l i a n
S t e p p e , f r o m 500—0 BC. U n d e r the organization of the focal R o y a l
35°   Analytical Archaeology
Horde the Scythian tribes displaced and assimilated the Cimmerian
nomads of the Pontic Steppe in the seventh century BC. T h i s territory
at this time was ideally suited for a climactic exploitation - the steppe
grasslands were bordered by the resources of the deciduous forests to
the north and the pleasant shores of the Black Sea to the south. T h e
Black Sea littoral was shortly settled by immensely rich Greek colonial
trading cities, whilst to the east and west lay the metallurgical centres
of the Caucasus and the Carpathians, and on the southern flanks lay
the towns and cities of the Persian Empire. T h e Scythians were able to
extract tribute from the urban Greeks and Persians as well as staple
produce from the subjugated Cimmerians and the neighbouring Slav,
Celt, Teuton and Bait agriculturalists and Finnish hunter-fisher-
gatherers. T h e basis of this interchange being the formidable military
advantage of the Scythian cavalry and archery units and the mutual
advantages of trade in both directions.
    T h e final collapse of the Scythian climax provides an excellent
example of multiple factors and cumulative effect. Some of the factors
include the political detachment of the Scythians around the Greek
colonies, the increasing settlement in an urban and agricultural
system, the aggressive stance gradually adopted by the Persians, Celts,
and Teutons, followed by physical invasion by the Sarmatians around
250 BC with their superior heavy cavalry stirrup-hauberk-lance-sabre-
helmet complex.
    T h e instability of pastoral nomad systems in general and climactic
examples in particular, stems primarily from the instability of the flora
and fauna resources of such extra-sensitive boundary habitats, the
instability of the essential extra-system sources of variety, and the
vulnerable nature of any climax organization in such a context. T h e
oscillating progress of postglacial dessication was particularly severely
registered in precisely the staple areas of these technocomplexes and
although it would be excessively naive to attribute nomad movements
to climatic changes, such changes were nevertheless one of the more
important elements in the cumulative interaction of factors.
    T h e social organization commonly found within pastoral nomad
technocomplexes is narrowly constrained by the inherent system
conditions. These societies display almost exclusively patricentred
organizations with a regularly developed emphasis on polygamy. T h i s
structure seems to be connected with the trajectories behind these
systems in which male organized herding became increasingly
 important and increasingly corporate with a corresponding decline of
                                      Culture group and technocomplex                             351

significant female gathering and food collection. In the same fashion
these societies share a segmentation into units such that the smallest
m a y efficiently operate its herds, tents and e q u i p m e n t in a dispersed
configuration suitable to hard conditions, and the largest m a y
periodically operate as an integrated unit in good conditions. H a r d l y
s u r p r i s i n g l y , these societies also share elaborate hospitality and f e u d -
ing s y s t e m s which at one and the same time may ensure the s a f e
c o n d u c t of essential supplies, artificers, traders and caravans and yet,
b e y o n d an invisible line, permitting wholesale piracy, looting, w a r f a r e
and m u r d e r in pursuit of valued staples. In general, the whole n o m a d
sociocultural system f r o m social values to language structure is usually
p e r v a d e d b y the central role of the prime staple resource - w h e t h e r it
be camels, horses, cattle or reindeer.
     T h e s e characteristics of pastoral nomad t e c h n o c o m p l e x trajec-
tories d i f f e r f r o m those of h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r s mainly in d e g r e e
rather than in pattern. T h e same oscillating instability of the staple
resources operates just as drastically and must induce lag and lead
oscillations in the coupled sociocultural systems. H o w e v e r , the larger
average c o m p l e m e n t of sociocultural variety and organization helps to
regulate and control the severity of these fluctuations to a degree not
usually matched in h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r c o m m u n i t i e s - the oscil-
lations m a y be smoothed by a m o d i c u m of system control. U n d e r
ordinary conditions the amplitude of the fluctuating system variables
is less than in the s i m p l e r technocomplexes. U n d e r exceptional condi-
tions a climax configuration and strategy may be d e v e l o p e d , also
c o m m e n s u r a t e l y greater than that of the h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r s .
Nevertheless, the stability of such a climax is inevitably short-lived
under the cumulative impact of the many factors that it induces.


Agrarian technocomplexes

T h e agrarian technocomplexes have existed as integrated strategies as
long and p r o b a b l y longer than those of the pastoral n o m a d s , p e r h a p s a
full ten thousand years. T h e variety and blend of c o m p o n e n t s in
agrarian strategies range f r o m garden horticulture to plough agricul-
ture and f r o m emphasis on domestic herds to concentration on vege-
table or cereal staples. T h e particular e q u i l i b r i u m polygon b e t w e e n
domestic animals and crops often integrates h u n t i n g - f i s h i n g - g a t h e r -
ing components on a seasonal basis. T h e difference between agrarian
and h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r strategies is less marked than one m i g h t be
352    Analytical Archaeology
led to believe - except in the case of agrarian climax conditions. T h e
segmentation of the annual cycle is as m a r k e d and necessary to the
successful harvest in the one economy as in the other. T h e Eskimo
h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r may divide his year into the caribou season
and the seal season b u t t h e n the agrarian T e m i a r of Malaya equally
move f r o m a h u n t i n g season to an horticultural season. T h e same
minutely a d j u s t e d and formalized sequence of successively exploited
resources f o r m s the basis of the rotational schedules. T h e same socially
focused and organized exploitation of one or m o r e gregarious staples
provides a c o m m o n d e n o m i n a t o r . T h e differences that exist between
non-climax examples of both subsistence t e c h n i q u e s reside in m a n y
individually trivial characteristics b u t it is the cumulative implications
of these differences in attitude and preference that gradually led some
agrarian t e c h n o c o m p l e x trajectories into metastable configurations of
m u c h greater potential.
       T h e trivial characteristics which initially began to distinguish the
post-glacial hunter-fisher—gatherers whose trajectories did move
towards domestication and those h u n t e r - f i s h e r - g a t h e r e r s whose tra-
jectories did not move in that direction are not yet clearly u n d e r s t o o d .
T h e s e characteristics f o r m a cumulative system of interrelated and
interacting factors in which it is difficult to sort the consequences f r o m
the causes. However, we can notice the difference between those
Epi-Palaeolithic c o m m u n i t i e s that were already highly involved and
intimately integrated in systems exploiting climax h u n t i n g , fishing or
gathering conditions, whilst others were less specialized. S u c h an
intense formalization and institutionalization of a focal activity makes
divergent d e v e l o p m e n t very difficult. A n o t h e r factor may have been
the location of societies in ecological b o u n d a r y areas of the world,
where some formerly exploited staple became extinct or migrated
away u n d e r the pressures of intensive exploitation, postglacial desic-
cation and the inevitable cumulative cycles of existence. Here again, a
retrospective condition can be seen to be the strongly localized habi-
tats and territories of the domesticable flora and fauna. Yet other
factors would isolate those cultural c o m m u n i t i e s w h o repeatedly made
a t t e m p t s to protect and regenerate their staple resources and those
again that p r e f e r r e d to stay in a single settlement for as long as
possible. Evidence is even accumulating that suggests that the more
static societies with widespread exchange systems, initially dealing in
such raw materials as obsidian, stone, shells, woods, and b i t u m e n ,
were also in an optimally placed position to integrate and directively
                           Culture group and technocomplex            353

correlate the dispersed and individually insignificant agrarian innova-
tions of peripheral groups. All of these factors represent constraints
with very broad boundaries, sets individually including large areas of
the world, but taken as a composite restriction the joint intersect sets
of such possible areas and societies is much reduced (fig. 7).
    Whatever the pattern of events, it is now clear that even when
accomplished the integrated innovation of a strategy using domestic
plants and animals as one component was a change to an alternative
and not necessarily to a 'better' subsistence pattern. Nevertheless, in
certain advantageous circumstances the cumulative interaction of the
premiums of a more static settlement and of an increasing and storable
food surplus began to produce climax results - the rapidly expanding
range of cultural variety providing a more stable sustenance for more
people. T h e addition of domestic plants and domestic animals to the
existing range of resource variety added to the flexibility and variety of
possible subsistence strategies.
     Climax conditions were reached by agrarian technocomplexes that
had integrated a wide and nicely balanced range of domesticates and
had gradually transferred these staples to new ecological niches,
simultaneously removing natural predators and placing the staples in
unusually advantageous contexts. T h i s transition seems to have come
about with the permanent settlement of alluvial soils and their
intensive exploitation by organized communities with optimal socio-
cultural continuity and employing such techniques as ditch irrigation,
soil replenishment, and careful control in plant and herd management.
    Under such conditions as these, villages produced a continuing
surplus, the surplus supported subcultural specialists and some of the
specialists set about optimally organizing the source of their own
well-being. Villages grew into towns, towns grew into cities and cities
grew into urban states and urban empires. T h e introduction and
development of the urban unit produced an entity with a potential as
unforeseen as that of agriculture itself. T h e city as a centre for well-
supported specialists and artificers became a fountainhead for the
integrative invention, innovation, adaptation and redistribution of
variety of every kind - with a continuous input of raw materials and a
continuous output of manufactured variety. T h e city became as m u c h
a social engine for the generation of new social variety as it was an
amplifier for material variety (fig. 69; Wrigley 1967).
    T h e city manager, or managers, continually strove to optimally
adjust the territory and resources of the city, in their own interests.
354     Analytical Archaeology
T h e advantage was the occasional climactic development of a near-
optimal subsistence system with a hitherto unmatched stability in
terms of input and output fluctuation. Nevertheless, the disadvantages
of a near-optimal strategy also followed. Both resources and manpower
still fluctuated to some extent although this could be regulated by the
new variety. Trade and business cycles also appear as inherent system
oscillations. T h e cumulative effect of these fluctuating and oscillating
variables may then occasionally result in a superimposition of trends
in an oscillation of drastic amplitude. T h e world still anxiously waits
to see whether such inflationary oscillations can be fully regulated and
controlled.
     T h e regularities of the time-trajectory of agrarian climax systems
are well-known and have been studied in some detail (Steward 1955).
T h e individual systems, in optimal cases, moved through the states of
- incipient agriculture, stable agriculture, urban formative/florescent,
urban state coherent/classic, imperial expansion, and eventually to
imperial collapse and repatterning. This trajectory is, however, only
one of the many possible for agrarian systems, depending on the
particular strategy or not.


v     System pattern regularities

T h e system under investigation is the technocomplex system of
cultures, assemblages and artefact-type families. This technocomplex
category embraces a set of interconnected, related and unrelated
subsystems that happen to share some aspects of the same general
strategy of resource exploitation, in the same general environment,
and with a broadly similar equipment. It follows from this definition
that cultures within the same technocomplex would represent
contradictive variety in terms of subsistence strategy if concentrated at
a single locus, since they would be competing for the same resources,
at the same time and in the same way. This contradiction can be
avoided if the cultures are from different technocomplexes and exploit
complementary niches, or if from the same technocomplex they may
use the same territory and resources in succession (fig. 19). These
relationships reflect part of the basis of the interaction of one socio-
cultural system with another. The nature of this relationship clearly
depends on the nature of the variety exchanged between the interac-
ting and coupled systems, within the context of their environing
system. When several such systems are coupled together, the whole
                                  Culture group and technocomplex                       355

can be at a state of equilibrium only when each is in a state of
equilibrium, in the conditions provided by the others (Ashby 1 9 5 6 , p.
233)-
      T h e main problem arising f r o m the analysis of cultural system
interaction is the multidimensional nature of the variety interchange.
T h i s variety can, as we have seen, be new, alternative, contradictive or
redundant variety affecting the existing system variety concerning
social, religious, psychological, linguistic, economic and material
culture, or any combination and permutation of these factors. In the
simplest case the interchange may affect only one of these subsystems
but it would be most unusual for the exchange not to have reper-
cussions in some of the other aspects. T h i s complexity can be arbi-
trarily simplified by treating the culture system's variety as projections
within three broad sets - the sociocultural, the socioeconomic and the
technocomplex aspects. T h e interaction between separate culture
systems can then be examined in terms of the impact within these
three sets and the reaction between the sets.
     T h e dissection of sociocultural and socioeconomic interaction is
beyond the proper sphere of this work. H o w e v e r , following the
admirable analysis by Steward ( 1 9 5 5 ) we have already noted that
much of this interaction occurs between subcultural segments and
their type complexes - in such processes as the truncation and substi-
tution of subcultural units. S t e w a r d distinguishes several categories of
sociocultural configuration connected and constrained by certain
socioeconomic conditions. In this scheme a broad separation into
family, folk, and state configurations is further subdivided into those
societies employing strategies based upon - h u n t i n g - f i s h i n g - g a t h e r i n g
in nuclear family, patrilineal band, matrilineal band, or composite
band units, pastoral nomad bands and lineage units, or agrarian strat-
egies with localized lineage villages, multilineage-multiclan villages,
multivillage nations, u p to urban and conurban states. If arranged in
order of ascending complexity it is assumed that the more c o m p l e x
structures may also incorporate simpler forms.
     T h e advantage of this gross categorization, like that of the
complementary technocomplex scheme, is the ease with which
generalized system interaction may be studied in a crosscultural
framework. T h e regularities of interaction between state/family
systems, such as the American/Shoshoni Indian case, can be
compared with similar cases and with state/state subculture inter-
actions like the Inca/Conquistadores, or the state/folk interactions of
356    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

the R o m a n / S a x o n and Roman/Celtic system impacts. T h e archaeolo-
gical advantage of this treatment is that whereas the archaeologist can
never identify the specific social structure of his groups he can by
noting the technocomplex constraints in his systems at least s p e c i f y
the limited range of sociocultural units that they could be coupled
with (see chapter 3, ill and note 2).
      It is on this general basis that the archaeologist can suggest that the
operative units amongst say the Acheulean and forest Mesolithic
technocomplexes would range f r o m nuclear family bands in hard
conditions to matricentred and patricentred bands of moderate size in
good conditions and depending on the productivity and role allocation
between the sexes. L a r g e composite bands are only likely under climax
conditions with the co-operative concentration on gregarious staples,
such as w e recognize in the Aurignacian and Gravettian technocom-
plexes and in the Magdalenian culture group. Composite bands and
composite lineage groups are also to be expected as optimal arrange-
ments in such technocomplexes as the Maglemose-like and Erteb^lle-
like communities of postglacial E u r o p e . In the case of the Ertebfille
tribes the emphasis on shellfish collection under optimal conditions,
will probably have led to localized lineages of considerable size and
varying f r o m matricentred to patricentred according to the allocation
of the role of the collection of the major staple. In the same way, it is
very probable that such towns as early £ a t a l Hiiyiik were based on
multilineage and multiclan units, with perhaps a matricentred orien-
tation if the agrarian trajectory had passed from female seed-gathering
to agriculture, but a patricentred focus if the agricultural role was
male and the male hunting pattern was still important. T h i s
kind of approach can only be tentatively employed but is likely to
be far more realistic than the unfounded equations between long
 houses, female           figurines, and matrilineality that archaeologists
 still employ.
    T h e regularities in system interaction can therefore be usefully
scrutinized in terms of the likely interaction of the sociocultural,
socioeconomic and technocomplex configurations involved, on the
basis of their variety content and within the frame of the environ-
mental context. U n f o r t u n a t e l y , under archaeological conditions the
only reasonably dependable data relates to the technocomplex
morphology - the outline of the technological, economic, environ-
mental and artefact equilibrium strategy. F r o m this and the system's
distribution and dispersion pattern, a limited range of sociocultural
and socioeconomic superstructures may be inferred but cannot be
                          C u l t u r e g r o u p and t e c h n o c o m p l e x   357

further specified on other than a probability basis. T h e outcome of
such system interactions depends upon the sociocultural masses, the
context of the interaction and the technocomplex categories involved.
T h e sociocultural mass here reflects the number of individuals
concerned in the interchange, the area of their territory and the
pattern of their dispersion within the territory.
     The archaeologist can therefore look at system interaction only
from the technocomplex point of view and this view will conspicu-
ously lack information about other sociocultural interchange which
will certainly have operated as an important factor. T h e terminology
that archaeologists employ for the description of cultural system
interaction yet again leans heavily on biological and ecological analogy
- using such terms as parasite and symbiosis, or co-operation, dis-
operation, competition and toleration (Allee et al. 1950, p. 348). T h e
analogy rests on the isomorphic similarities between biological,
ecological and cultural systems but as we have seen previously, this
similarity does not amount to identity and it is the unspecified set of
differences that help to blunt the incisive development of cultural
analysis. A specific set of cultural terms should be devised to meet this
need but until cultural anthropologists provide us with such tools we
will have to make do with our own redefinition of other people's terms
( % • 74)-
     The terms that seem to have a useful equivalent in technocomplex
system interchange may be reused in the following way:

    Symbiosis - an interchange to mutual advantage; the variety
exchanged being new, alternative, or redundant but not contradictive.
    Disoperative - an interchange to the disadvantage of one or both
systems, the variety exchanged being contradictive or ultimately
contradictive.
    Parasitic - an interchange to the advantage of one system only ; the
new, alternative, or redundant variety passes only one way, in the
other direction there is either no passage of yariety or the harmful
passage of contradictive variety.
    Tolerative - an interchange bringing about no immediate change;
either no variety is exchanged, or the variety is new or redundant and
neutral.
    Competitive - an indirect interchange via a mutually coupled
system inducing change in one or both the competitors; new alter-
native, contradictive or redundant variety is induced in the competi-
tive systems.
358   Analytical Archaeology
                         TERRITORIAL
                        ENVIRONMENT




      Fig. 74 A schematic diagram illustrating categories of cultural
      system interaction - at the technocomplex level, in a limited
      territory, in reference to the particular culture system Si and its
      relationships to other alien systems S2-S 6 : - Si/Environment -
      Action/Reaction; S1/S2 - Symbiosis; S1/S3 - Disoperation;
      S , / S 4 - Parasitic; S1/S5 - Tolerative; S\/Sb loop - Competitive.

    These terms refer to the study of relationships between pairs of
coupled technocomplex systems or rather cultural systems interacting
at the technocomplex level, where all other levels are obscured. In
reality a compound situation may involve two systems, three systems,
four systems, and so on - giving a complex network of couplings and
varied relationships in two, three or four phase systems. In this
context it is useful to appropriate the term 'coaction' for the variously
valued interactions between cultural systems and to restrict the terms
'action and reaction' for the interchange between the cultural systems
and the environment. Although we can hardly develop a full dis-
cussion of cultural system interaction here, it may be useful to sketch
the possibilities under the subsistence categories of technocomplexes.

Hunter-fisher-gatherer/pastoral     nomad system coaction

T h e main feature of mixed two-phase coactions, such as that between
a hunter-fisher-gatherer group and a pastoral nomad group, is that
                           Culture group and technocomplex            359

they offer some possibility of economic coexistence even in a single
locus. A toleration which is usually impossible in coactions between
groups of the same technocomplex or applying the same subsistence
strategy in the same limited territory. However, it would be false to
assume that such differently based economic coactions operate in a
continuous state of tolerative or symbiotic harmony. Such a stable
state may indeed be briefly established to mutual advantage but it
would be quite exceptional if both systems had expanded and
developed without at some stage impinging on one another's essential
resources. In practice it is more frequently the case that mixed two-
phase coactions go through a series of synchronous or semisyn-
chronous oscillations involving both populations and their system
attributes.
     Let us take a hypothetical hunter-fisher-gatherer group in a ter-
ritory gradually penetrated by an intrusive pastoral nomad system -
assuming for convenience that neither is a climax system. Initially it
may be possible for both systems to pursue their formalized and
sequential exploitation of their particular selection of the area's
resources. A tolerative interchange is possible, especially if the two
systems mutually adjust their movement around the territory. In time,
a symbiotic relationship may come into being so that the hunter-
fisher-gatherer  may desist from hunting the pastoralist's herds in
return for an exchange of resources or services - an economic
arrangement to mutual advantage. Nevertheless, in time the pastoral
nomad system will expand at the expense of the resources of the
hunter-fisher-gatherers who may be reduced to a parasitic, then a
competitive and eventually to a disoperative interchange. If the
hunter-fisher-gatherer system survives this coaction then the coupled
systems may continue to fluctuate from state to state as their particular
fortunes wax and wane - oscillating in any sequence through a suc-
cession of tolerative, symbiotic, parasitic, competitive or disoperative
states.
    T h e archaeologist may detect something of this economic inter-
change and possibly a little of the complementary coactions involving
the whole of the rest of the sociocultural systems involved. Accul-
turation and integration, or subcultural truncation and substitution
are likely to alter the system coaction into a totally new system
situation.
    In the particular case of hunter-fisher-gatherer and pastoral
nomad coactions, conflicting interests are likely to arise very quickly in
360   Analytical Archaeology

the interchange. T h e large herds of the nomad are just another
resource to the hunter and furthermore they will certainly upset his
game animal staples - competing both for fodder and for the water
resources of the area. T h e interaction between the intrusive Bantu
pastoralists and the hunting-gathering Bushmen is dramatically
depicted in the territorial rock paintings of the Bushmen often show-
ing their tribesmen stealing cattle, hotly pursued by the irate Bantu.
T h e outcome in this case saw the gradual dominance of the Bantu
groups modified by Bushmen acculturation, the appearance of 'new'
hybrid Hottentot systems and the retreat of the remaining Bushmen
groups into increasingly marginal territories. A somewhat similar
interchange seems to have occurred between hunter-fisher-gatherers
and pastoralists in the earlier pastoralist expansions into the Sahara,
the Arabian deserts, and the Siberian plains. Gradually displacing the
gazelle, deer, or reindeer hunters from the best grazing areas, leaving
only their rock art as a reminder of their former presence and special
interests.



Hunter—fisher—gatherer/agrarian   system coaction

Once again we are concerned with a mixed two-phase coaction and
once again we have sets of situations involving an oscillating relation-
ship with the difference in this case being one of degree. T h e gulf
separating the economy of the agrarian systems from those of the
hunter-fisher—gatherer probably increases rather than decreases the
possibility of brief periods of tolerative or symbiotic coexistence in a
single area. Nevertheless, even these phases of mutual adjustment are
likely to be dispelled when the agrarian system is expansive or climac-
tic. T h e brief coexistence of the American Indian/European Settler
system provides one tragic example and the deliberate extermination
of the Tasmanian Aborigines and the Ona of Tierra del Fuego provide
others. From the view of one technocomplex the hunter-fisher-
gatherers are predatory vermin to be put down, from the other tech-
nocomplex view the fields and flocks of the agriculturalist are just a
new set of resources to be exploited; this contradictive variety ensures
severe dislocation in such a composite system.
    Exceptions arise when the agrarian penetration is slight and not
climactic - a situation likely to mark the early phase of the develop-
ment in such a system. Alternatively, the hunter-fisher-gatherers may
                              Culture group and technocomplex          361

occupy a particular set of territorial niches or micro-environments
such as not to impinge too heavily on the agriculturalists. Indeed, a
symbiotic exchange may arise like the famous interchange between the
Congo Forest Pygmies and contiguous Negro farmers, or the less
laudable employment of hunter-fisher-gatherer aborigines as
mercenary military specialists.
    T h e recent settings for most hunter—fisher-gatherer/agrarian
coactions have characteristically been in territories involving thick
forest interspersed with cleared areas. In prehistoric times this inter-
change must have been more frequently set in the lightly wooded
grasslands that supported the big herbivore herds but which later
supported domestic herds and crops. In this light, one wonders
whether the defensive stance of such early 'towns' as Jericho and £atal
Hiiyiik was adopted against other agrarian settlements or against
displaced pastoralists or hunter-fisher-gatherers.


Agrarian/pastoral     nomad system coaction

Here again the juxtaposition of two differently based technocomplex
systems will allow an oscillating coexistence. T h e distinctive feature in
this interaction is the unusual stability of the periods of tolerative
coexistence which depend upon the largely complementary resources
and strategies of the two kinds of system. T h i s tolerative or symbiotic
relationship springs to mind in the cases of the Bedouin/Oasis Arab,
Chukchi/Russian peasant, Lapps/Finnish peasant, Scythian/Slav
peasant or Navaho/Pueblo coactions. Nevertheless, this kind of
temporary stability may be distinctive but it is certainly not static or
inevitable.
    In the case of the changing relationships between the Lapp rein-
deer herders and the Finnish peasants c. AD 1 5 0 0 - 1 9 0 0 we have a
particularly well documented example (Whitaker 1955). T h i s inter-
action could be crudely summarized under three successive states in
the interaction:

    Phase I         Symbiosis, a few intrusive peasants learn from, and
                    exchange with, the local nomad Lapps to mutual
                    advantage.
    Phase I I       Tolerative, peasant communities become large and
                    established and need the Lapps' output less and less;
                    the Lapps have become semi-parasitic.
362      Analytical Archaeology

      Phase I I I   Competitive, large peasant communities backed by an
                    urban and industrial network expand into larger areas
                    of land, fencing out the Lapps; the Lapps no longer
                    able to obtain necessary resources, disoperative dis-
                    location.

    T h i s case roughly sketches the fluctuating coaction between the
two systems and in cases where the agrarian system is backed by urban
technology and superior armament this is likely to be the broad
sequence of events. However, the latter state of affairs only came into
existence with the appearance of the firearm. It is therefore no
accident that Central Europe was periodically ravaged by hordes of
Pontic Steppe nomads - from the first appearance of mounted
nomadism c. 1000 BC for almost every century until AD 1300. So long
as the urban world's offensive armament remained the horse, the
mounted warrior and the lance or bow, the mounted nomad was
invincible unless surprised. T h e mounted nomad was a professional
horseman, his units were optimally mobile and with the small
compound bow, unmatchable in mobile firepower. Consequently, in
pre-firearm times the fluctuating coaction trajectory did not always
end to the advantage of the agrarian system. T h e Scythians decimated
the eastern Slavs and settled amongst them first as predatory overlords
and then as a substituted aristocratic subculture truncating the earlier
social system. Somewhat similar sequences seem to have operated in
the case of the later Sarmatians, Parthians, Huns, Turks and Mongols
- seriously affecting marginal urban Europe, Asia and China. In the
 New World the interaction of the mounted Navaho and Apache
 nomads seems to have similarly proved a culminating factor in the
dislocation of the Pueblo agrarian system. These examples may suffice
to illustrate how technocomplex system interaction shows marked
 regularities and also how these coactions may be modified by changes
 in circumstances within the systems.
9      Group ethnology

      T h e unit 'Iroquois culture' seems to have been shared by
      tribes that were not only outside the f a m o u s confederacy
      but in some cases not even affiliated linguistically,
              G   R. W I L L E Y   a n d P. P H I L L I P S   1 9 5 8 , p. 5 3




i   Introduction

In the preceding chapters w e have occupied ourselves with the
hierarchy of entities and patterns displayed by aggregates of cultural
artefacts. T h e s e artefacts have deliberately been treated in an abstract
and disembodied way in order that the regularities of their aggregate
'behaviour' in space and time might become apparent, without
prejudice from our feelings about the nature of hominid culture. T h e
result has been the gradual construction of an internally consistent
hierarchy of entities, each carefully defined and ranked in order of
complexity - from attribute to artefact, type, assemblage, culture,
culture group and technocomplex (fig. 49). N o w , whether our purpose
is culture-historical and dominated by interest in sequence, or whether
it is cultural-ecology and dominated by system relationships — at some
stage a statement or hypothesis must be formulated to relate the ranks
of these artefact entities with the ranks of social, linguistic, and racial
entities. T h e range of connection of the archaeological entities must be
specified in human terms if their information value is to be maxi-
mized. Once this intermediate relationship has been outlined we can
return in the final chapter of this part to the overall implications of the
hierarchical model for archaeological theory.
    T h r o u g h o u t historic and prehistoric time the individual man has
inherited a particular physique, acquired a particular linguistic dialect,
grown u p within a particular social organization and used particular
artefacts in the pursuit of particular activities. T h e man has been the
node at the intersection of social, material, linguistic and genetic sets,
each operating in different attribute dimensions, categorizing different
aspects of the same populations. In each aspect or dimension the man
364   Analytical Archaeology
is connected in space and time to an ever-widening network of related
individuals and items - some in a very remote and slight connection
and others in a very direct and strong connection. For purely arbitrary
reasons it has proved useful to distinguish in each particular plane or
dimension the graded strength of connections relating a reference
individual to successively larger and less similar sets of individuals.
But since no two individuals ever possess completely identical groups
of attributes even closely related individuals may be registered in
different dimension sets and subsets, at least in respect of a few
attributes. It then follows that the sets and subsets grading the inter-
connection of individuals' attributes will not be identical or equivalent
in their content in the different planes or aspects. T h e contents and
size of these aspect sets and subsets will be related however, because
genetic make-up, language, social organization and material culture
affect one another in constraints and consequent regularities. T h e
relationship between the hierarchical sets racial group, race, subrace,
or language group, language, dialect will be complex enough but the
multidimensional relationships between the sets of differing aspects -
race, language, social and material culture - will be vastly more
 intricate.
    Unfortunately the intricacy of the connection between these
taxonomic sets and subsets of different aspects has tended to lead to
either a desperate over-simplification of the relationship or a denial of
its existence. That a relationship does exist depends on our recog-
nition of the constraints and regularities relating the individuals and
their aspect attributes. T w o kinds of connection are operating in these
aspects - a genetic connection paramount in the physical aspect and
sense communication connections dominant in the other aspects.
Populations with a degree of communication and connection amongst
their membership will inevitably tend to be more uniform within their
boundaries than with unconnected individuals outside their set. The
greater the degree of interconnection and intercommunication within
the set the more uniform will be its characteristics. Consequently, it is
the human family unit, in all its differing forms, that generates the
basis of the taxa of race, language, social organization and material
culture - the family representing the smallest population unit with
optimal genetic and communication interconnection between its
members. T h e time and space transformation of this unit immediately
generates a widening network of kith and kin, uniting in a distant way
a huge group of genetically related individuals and more localized
                                               Group ethnology         365

clusters of individuals, segmented into sub-populations polythetically
sharing common linguistic, social and material attributes. The
taxonomic sets and subsets of race, language, social organization and
material culture are thus related one to another as intersecting nested
hierarchies with a variable but limited range of mutual relationships.
T h e taxa of one aspect are related to the taxa of the other aspects as
elaborate injective and surjective mappings, whose boundaries are
always related and may sometimes coincide, with significant
consequences.
    T h e complexities of the problem of equating archaeological entities
with social, linguistic and racial groupings rapidly becomes apparent.
There is no a priori reason why the different ranks of groupings within
the different aspects should equate exactly one with another -
although much archaeological literature tacitly equates such entities as
culture group and language group, particularly in relation to the
Corded Ware/Battle-Axe and Indo-European problem. T h e opposing
arguments over these problems take a very familiar course. On one
hand we are presented with the simple equivalence of culture and
language, culture group and language group, whilst on the other hand
the argument emphasizes the lack of precise coincidence between
cultural, tribal, linguistic and racial boundaries and consequently
denies any correlation between these sets. We have already seen that
simple and naive equation of these differently based entities is not
possible and is demonstrably false, but lack of exact correlation
between the entities does not mean that there is no correlation what-
soever - it simply emphasizes the complexity of the relationship.
     T h e statements that can be made relating these entities one to
another, are once again conditional probability propositions, of the
kind some /Is are B s (chapter 1, III) - 'most tribes are polythetically
homogeneous in race, culture and language, with the tribe within the
intersect of these differently bounded sets'. As statistical or probability
propositions such statements have limits beyond which they are not
necessarily accurate - the limits usually defining the precise level of
racial, cultural, linguistic entities being equated and requiring a care-
fully defined terminology. At the same time, probability propositions
are not conclusively refuted by producing contrary examples from
limiting cases; for example, although most language groups
incorporate more than one culture, nevertheless in relict cases the
language group may be equal to or smaller than a culture, as in the
case of Basque. Against this difficult background, statements of useful
366        Analytical Archaeology

predictive value can be made if it is accepted that they are of this
nature and are true only within specified limits.
    T o proceed from the supposition that probability propositions
linking social, cultural, linguistic, and racial entities can be made to
actually making them is another matter. T h i s problem is mainly set in
the field of social, cultural and physical anthropology, and is not one
for an archaeologist to answer. Nevertheless, we can perhaps look at
the problem and consider how a solution may arise. We can note that
the problem involves the old bugbear of dealing with different fields or
aspects, each of which is internally divided into a series of levels of
ranked entities. In such comparisons between the different hierar-
chical organizations the problem becomes one of knowing which rank
of which field to compare with which? In material culture the choice
ranges from the attribute, artefact, type, assemblage, culture, culture
group, to the technocomplex, in linguistics we have the dialect,
language, and language group levels and in social organization the
family, family group, tribe, tribal group and so on (fig. 75). Add to

FAMILY
2-10 s                                       Site
                                           - assemblage
GRP OF       FAMILIES                                                      -Dialect
10s—100s
                                           - Subculture
                                                                                                           -Subrace


TRIBES
                                           -Culture
100s—1000s                                                                 -Language


TRIBAL GRP's                                                                                               -Race
                                           -Culture grp.
1000s-10,000s

                                                                           -Language grp.
TRIBAL CONFEDERATIONS                                                                                   — Race grp
NATIONS
1000s—100,000s
                                         — Technocomplex
                                                                             Multi
                                                                             language




         75     A s i m p l i f i e d a t t e m p t to illustrate the r o u g h r a n g e of c o r r e l a t i o n
 b e t w e e n the h i e r a r c h i c a l entity sets of f o u r s o c i o c u l t u r a l d i m e n s i o n s - social,
 material, linguistic, genetic.
                                                G r o u p ethnology     367

these the levels of race group, race and subrace and then add the
proviso that all of these entities are arbitrary horizons of unspecified
definition, and the difficulty of isolating significant mutual correlations
is understandable. All that can be accomplished here is an intuitive
assessment of the rough order of correlation between these entities, in
the light of some practical observations of particular cases.
    T h e aim in this inquiry is to try and assess the likely limits and
implications of our archaeological taxa in human terms; an essential
step if the application of these taxa to prehistoric assemblages is to
yield the m a x i m u m amount of predictive information. In order to
achieve this end, there seem to be three lines of approach the integra-
tion of which may lead to some success. T h e first of these is in a sense
an internal method, in that having defined our hierarchy of entities
with great care we may examine them to see whether their conditions
naturally imply certain kinds of correlation. T h e second approach is
ethnographic and depends upon the analysis of the relationship
between the equivalents of the hierarchy of archaeological entities and
their setting within recent primitive societies. T h e third approach is
historical and rests upon the correlation, or lack of correlation,
between archaeologically defined entities and historically documented
peoples, wherever and whenever the prehistoric cultures cross the
boundary separating the undocumented gloom from the historical
sunlight. T h e s e three approaches will be tackled one by one and then
some attempt will be made to integrate their implications (sections II,
III,   IV).




11     Internal evidence
Earlier discussion about the behavioural implications of our
archaeological entities has already suggested the approximate
equivalence between an archaeological attribute, artefact and artefact-
type and a hominid action, sequence of actions, and a repeated
sequence of actions (chapter 4). A specific artefact-type expresses the
consistently regular recurrence of a specific range of attributes in a
population of artefacts from a limited and continuous area of space
and time. T h i s regularity can only express a specific set of constraints
- some of them functional and largely defining the artefact family -
but many of them marking idiosyncratic requirements shared by the
fabricators. If the artefact-type population expresses such shared
idiosyncratic requirements it must represent the products of an inter-
communicating human group. It now appears that we can say that the
368    Analytical Archaeology

makers of a specific artefact-type population were an intercom-
municating and therefore connected human group from a limited and
contiguous area of space-time. Since the optimally interconnected and
intercommunicating human group is the family unit, it follows that
the artefact-type population would result from the handiwork of a
kernel representing the time and space transformation of a number of
these units generating a reticulated and widening network of kith and
kin and their associates. T h e characteristics of this specific artefact-
type would be optimally diffused amongst the appropriate operators of
this network by virtue of a common linguistic link and a repeatedly
intercommunicating social network. Almost by chance then, we can
perceive that the specific artefact-type will be largely contained within
an extended kith and kin network, within a common language area and
within a largely homogeneous breeding population.
    However, we know very well that specific artefact-types diffuse
through trade, gift-exchange, warfare and many other forms of inter-
communication, to neighbouring groups with an alien cultural, and
possibly linguistic and even racial background. T h i s relationship
erases any simple 'one to one' equivalence between an artefact-type
and a social group, but is itself noticeably constrained by the pre-
requisite that the alien borrowers must be 'neighbouring' or at least in
communication with the originators. T h e frequency distribution of a
specific artefact-type in time and space is such that although artefacts
do travel beyond individual social webs, these diffusions are sporadic
and thinly represented by comparison with the repeated and sustained
interchange circulating within the w e b and mesh of a social unit, or
group of closely interconnected social units.
    T h e distribution of a single artefact-type population in space and
time may in itself be a poor social marker. Fortunately however,
human families pursue a number of very different activities and
consequently manufacture a number of very different specific artefact-
types - an assemblage in fact. T h e compounded space and time
distribution of this polythetic ensemble, or assemblage of specific
types, produces the archaeological culture (fig. 67). T h e repeatedly
shared core area of these multidimensional and individual artefact-
type distributions should cumulatively define the common social unit
which is responsible for this regularity. A social unit greater than the
family but effectively intercommunicating in terms of codified actions,
sequences of actions, activities and general sociocultural behaviour,
requiring a common language, a common social organization and
                                                 G r o u p ethnology     369

therefore stipulating a largely homogeneous kith, kin and race g r o u p
f r o m a limited and contiguous area of space and time. T h e social unit
that best accords with these specifications is that most richly net-
worked, self-regulating, self-recognizing and variously constituted
g r o u p of interrelated families - the tribe or tribal band.
      T h e s e arguments suggest that a specific artefact-type population is
mainly the product of the closely connected family units within a tribe
or group of connected tribes. T h e s e larger groupings are better iso-
lated by the compounded intersection of all the specific artefact-types
shared between the assemblages produced by each person and f a m i l y ,
thus partially eliminating the fringe effect of externally d i f f u s e d
variety inevitably stemming f r o m the tribal group. T h e archaeological
assemblage, especially a single site assemblage, can therefore usually
be equated with a g r o u p of families; the archaeological culture poly-
thetically incorporates the specific types from these assemblages in
space and time. T h e preconditions for this sort of regularity infer that
an archaeological culture is the time transform of an entity of roughly
tribal level which would have been largely but not entirely homo-
geneous at the language and subrace level.
    T h e nature of this partial equivalence is most important. A n
archaeological cultural assemblage is not identical in space or time
distribution with a tribal group, a language, or a subrace and these sets
themselves share different boundaries. Nevertheless, the archaeologi-
cal culture is most likely to have been the product of a group of people
with a largely homogeneous tribal organization, language system and
breeding population - whether the people themselves recognized the
set or not. T h e archaeological culture maps a real entity that really
existed, marking real interconnection - that this entity is not identical
to historical, political, linguistic or racial entities does not make it the
less real or important. T h e archaeological entities reflect realities as
important as those recognized by the traditional classifications of other
disciplines; the entities in all these fields are equally real, equally
arbitrary and simply different.
     T h i s general argument can be extended to the culture group and
technocomplex entities. T h e culture group englobes a family of
affinally related transform cultures, collateral cultures sharing a poly-
thetic range but differing states of the same specific artefact-types.
T h e fact that the individual cultures within a culture group are linked
by still sharing specific types suggests that considerable intercon-
nection exists, or previously existed, between the units of the g r o u p ,
37°     Analytical Archaeology
although not as rich an interconnection as within a single tribe. T h e s e
factors, taken with the connection between tribe and culture and the
size and distribution pattern of the culture g r o u p , together suggest
that the culture g r o u p reflects a large set of related tribes - a large
tribal g r o u p or loose confederation. O n e would expect a linguistic
diversity amongst such a g r o u p i n g b u t probably within the b o u n d s of
a single language g r o u p if the basis of interconnection is to be
explained, or at least sharing one c o m m o n language. Finally, the
technocomplex entity, characterized merely by a c o m m o n strategy and
only sharing generalized artefact families suggests no necessary social,
linguistic, or racial linkage between its m e m b e r s , except in limiting
cases. Nevertheless, the technocomplex is equivalent in size or smaller
t h a n the racial units with which it may in the past have occasionally
converged - especially in those periods when some racial groups were
marked by localized adaptation to severe conditions in a rigorously
confined territory. On the whole, the technocomplex need reflect no
social, linguistic, or cultural uniformity although it may occasionally
d o so and will necessarily incorporate n u m b e r s of such h o m o g e n e o u s
groups.
     T h e internal analysis of our definitions has suggested a very rough
order of correlation between our archaeological entities and the main
social, linguistic and racial entities. A correlation that is at least partly
reinforced by the evidence of the time and space distribution patterns
of these entities. It is noteworthy that even this r o u g h correlation must
collapse if a precise definition and a rigorous use of terminology do not
u n d e r p i n o u r taxonomy. T h e arbitrariness of the t e r m s and definitions
are immaterial so long as the arbitrariness is confined to an explicitly
given pattern which is always followed. Nevertheless, even if we are
only saying that single assemblages are usually the p r o d u c t of i o s -
ioos of people, cultures of i o o s - i , o o o s , culture g r o u p s of i , o o o s -
 io,ooos and technocomplexes of i o , o o o s - i o o , o o o s then we are at least
establishing some limits of correlation and saying something about the
relative ranks of the entities concerned. In a discipline that is apt to
treat the Acheulean as if it were equivalent to the Sioux, any cate-
gorization of entity, rank, and complexity is better than none.


in    Recent ethnographic evidence
T h e ethnographic approach to the problem of assessing the limits and
implications of archaeological taxa provides the most promising key to
                                                  G r o u p ethnology      371

the information locked in archaeological data. Unfortunately, many
attempts to release this information have resorted to a simple violence
more in keeping with a gelignite or 'jemmy' approach than with that of
making a delicate key for a complex lock. T h i s ethnographic approach
depends upon the analysis of the relationship between the material
culture equivalents of our archaeological entities and their setting in
relation to recent primitive societies. In this respect it is doubly
unfortunate that anthropologists rarely study the material culture of
their peoples in a way that can be related to this problem. M o d e r n
anthropology has momentarily turned away from ethnology and eth-
nography, to the embarrassment of the archaeologist and the detri-
ment of both disciplines.
    Luckily, a few superbly detailed and comprehensive ethnographic
studies have been accomplished before the accelerating disappearance
of the last primitive peoples and before fashionable indifference
altered the trajectory of anthropology. T h e s e very few detailed
studies, based upon the more recent methods of anthropology, are to be
distinguished from the older, historical studies of ancient peoples. T h e
pre-Renaissance accounts of primitive societies and their material
equipment are extremely useful for their record of long-vanished tribal
communities in what is now nationalist Europe, Africa and Asia.
However, they are more valuable for their proximity to actual pre-
historic societies than for the uneven and unreliable coverage of their
ethnography. T h e evidence of these historical sources has its own
special value which will be pursued in the section following this one. In
the present section we will concentrate on the skeleton key provided by
the few modern studies centred on this problem.
    Most of the ethnographic studies that provide sufficient detail for
archaeological comparison are based on African and American tribes.
In Africa a wealth of information has been steadily gathered relating
the oral traditions, anthropology, ethnology, history and archaeology
of the indigenous Africans. Perhaps the most complete part of this
record describes the Bantu peoples and their penetration into South-
ern A f r i c a ; a record which introduces all the characteristic difficulties
and latent information concealed in the relationships between
variously orientated hierarchies of taxa. It may prove useful to follow
the Bantu example a little further.
     T h e term 'Bantu' correctly designates a set of languages and
dialects shared by many widely differing groups of people f r o m Africa.
T h e precise set 'Bantu' is a language group with perhaps about sixty
372   Analytical Archaeology
major distinct component languages, comprising roughly 300 tribal
dialects - in the recent phase of the Bantu entity trajectory. However,
the Bantu as a set of interconnected and interrelated peoples have
certain racial, anthropological, ethnographic and distribution
regularities which follow from the constraints of their interwoven
time-trajectories and shared language groupings. Most Bantu-speaking
peoples constitute an interbreeding subrace within the set of the
African, Negro race, itself a subset of the 'Black Skinned' racial group
— a loose label for a huge group defined by a polythetic set of charac-
teristics in addition to Black Skin. Some Bantu-speakers nevertheless
reflect different subrace sets which have become acculturated minori-
ties or subcultures within the Bantu milieu. Yet again, the Bantu-
speakers also share certain social and ethnographic features which
isolate them as a polythetic entity amongst their spatial and temporal
neighbours. As a polythetic entity we would not expect any one of
these features to be necessarily confined to the Bantu - most of them
will be variously shared with non-Bantu-speakers from whom they
may have been borrowed, or who may have been acculturated in
respect of the particular characteristic. These polythetic attributes
which secondarily centre around the Bantu-speaking tribes include a
specific complex social organization and land tenure system based
upon hoe agriculture, cattle and settled villages - as well as iron,
copper and gold metallurgy. T h i s largely Bantu-speaking complex is
materially represented by a Bantu culture group of related and colla-
teral cultural assemblage transforms, characterized by a polythetic
assemblage of the same families but differing states of the same
specific artefact-types. Politically, the Bantu-speakers have recently
been represented by some 600 large tribes, some of which have
 periodically established transient dominance over local sectors to form
 impermanent 'nations' within the much larger set of Bantu-speakers.
    Altogether, one can appreciate that the Bantu language group
encompasses one set of people, the 'Bantu' culture group another
somewhat equivalent set, the 'Bantu' technocomplex another much
larger grouping, the ethnological 'Bantu' tribes another and the
subrace 'Bantu' yet a fifth set (fig. 76). These sets are not identical.
However, all of these sets share a large subset of people representing
the intersect of all or most of these variously defined sets. It is this
polythetically bounded common set with most of the variegated
'Bantu' essentials which we commonly designate 'the Bantu' - unless
we are more narrowly concerned with the Bantu-proper, the set of
                                                        G r o u p ethnology    373

           'Bantu'                                              'Bantu'
           technocomplex                                        subrace




                                 Bantu language group

       Fig. 76 A purely diagrammatic illustration of the kind of
       relationship operating and the kind of confusion endemic in
       the simultaneous use of a single taxonomic indicator 'Bantu' for
       several different sets of elements. T h e term could equally well
       be an archaeological one - the Aurignacian culture, the Aurig-
       nacian culture group, the Aurignacian technocomplex.


Bantu-speakers. T h e source for confusion is quite apparent in the
variety of different sets that one can designate 'Bantu', a confusion of
intent equally f o u n d in such similar terms as 'the Pueblo Indians' or
the 'Iroquois Nation'.
     Now if w e were to take the recent Bantu-speaking entity and rot
away its organic components then we must ask ourselves what we
might archaeologically detect. T h e r e can be little doubt that the
archaeologist would rapidly differentiate the technocomplex associ-
ated with the hoe agriculture/cattle/savannah/metallurgy strategy but
this would include much of non-Bantu A f r i c a . H o w e v e r , within this
set it should be possible to detect the time and space transforms of a
more specific culture g r o u p - a g r o u p of cultures not only within the
same technocomplex but producing a closely related family of specific
pot types, metal types, settlement types and human skeletal types.
T h a t this would indeed be possible is borne out by the present
identification of five distinctive assemblages, mainly ceramic, which
coincide with the principal Bantu languages - Sotho, Nguni, Venda,
L e m b a , S h a n g a a n - T o n g a - groupings that were still producing their
characteristic artefact assemblages till recent times (Fagan 1 9 6 5 ,
p. 1 6 1 ; Schofield 1948). T h e archaeologist's culture g r o u p entity, in
this case, roughly but not exactly isolates and identifies the
374   Analytical Archaeology
Bantu-speakers, and the component archaeological cultures approxi-
mately define the main tribal language units. In some cases it is even
possible to identify archaeological subcultures with particular tribal
subdivisions as for example the rough correspondence between the
three groupings, within Sotho pottery and the three subdivisions of the
Sotho themselves (Fagan 1965, p. 162).
    T h i s discussion of the archaeological and ethnographic dimensions
of the Bantu entity has provided some substantiation for the kind and
general ranking equivalence already suggested as the social basis of our
archaeological entities. However, this probe has rather shown how
such an equivalence might be erected than its actual erection. T h e
partial equivalence but non-identity linking tribe and culture, tribal
group and culture group has been supported but not demonstrated or
clarified. Such a clarification can only come about if the material
equipment of a large number of primitive tribes has been studied and
published in terms of numbers of specific artefact-types and their
distribution. One of the few extant studies of this level of adequacy is
the series of quite remarkable analyses of Southwestern American
Indian tribes, directed by Kroeber between 1 9 3 0 and 1940 and exe-
cuted by his pupils and colleagues f r o m Berkeley University. T h e s e
studies have already been subject to some skilful and enlightening
analysis from the anthropological viewpoint but they can also provide
us with an archaeological index of great value. T o do this adequately
would involve an elaborate programme of analysis and synthesis but
some idea of the possibilities can be more rapidly extracted (Kroeber,
Gifford, Driver, et al. 1 9 3 5 - 5 0 ) .
    T h e original aim of these Californian studies was to attempt a
record of the total list of cultural traits, reflecting material and social
culture, for each of the hundred or so fast disappearing Indian tribes
in the area. Most of these 'traits' equate with our artefact or artefact-
type entities - including both material and social artefacts, or assem-
blages of attributes. Indeed, one of the ailments of this kind of
treatment in anthropology has been the use of the term 'trait' or
'element' for entities varying from the level of a single action, to a
sequence of actions or activity, to a sequence of activities or behaviour,
making taxonomic assessment almost impossible. In archaeology we
have the use of the terms - attribute, artefact, artefact-type, and
assemblage to cover the material aspects of this same range.
Consequently, although the original studies designate an 'animal head
decoy', a 'circular subterranean house' and 'the rabbit dance' as 'ele-
                                                   G r o u p ethnology       375

merits' or 'traits' we will regard them as artefacts, artefact-types, or
even assemblages of artefacts, respectively. Nevertheless, in these
important studies we have an artefact by artefact comparison and
analysis of tribes of known social structure, known language groupings
and known history - a small but priceless mine of information.
     It is impossible to summarize the huge amount of data contained
in the Berkeley culture element lists, which eventually embraced tribes
from Southern California to the Northwest Coast. However, most of
the one hundred or so Californian tribes studied were h u n t e r - f i s h e r -
gatherers or simple Pueblo maize-squash-beans farmers. T h e local
terrain grades through parallel zones from the Gulf of California,
through the littoral strip, the foothills, and then up into the high
Cordillera mountains and the plateaux beyond, whence the rivers arise
and run rapidly down to the sea, dissecting the zones with their valley
systems. T h e climatic conditions vary with altitude but for the most
part run f r o m arid desert to pleasant Mediterranean conditions, with
grassland and light forest in the more fertile river valleys. T h e area
encompasses societies of incredible linguistic diversity making it a
particularly suitable area for experimental observations (cf. Melanesia:
Terrell 1977). T h e material equipment of the simple maize farmers is
little different from that of their ancient Pueblo and Basketmaker
ancestors; that of the hunter-fisher-gatherers is similarly archaic with
the emphasis on collecting seeds, berries, acorns and pine-nuts, fresh-
water fishing, and communal hunting for deer, rabbit, birds, squirrels,
bear and antelope - using their only domestic animal, the dog.
    T h e total ascertainable culture of each tribe was recorded under a
comprehensive series of headings; each heading covered a set of
artefacts which were noted as present or absent (fig. 77). T h e authors
discuss at length the problems of trait-levels and of forming exhaus-
tive, unbiased lists of cultural equipment. Despite all the reservations,
one is left convinced of the value and adequacy of the resulting lists as
broad outlines. In order to convey their importance for our problems
it may prove useful to condense and summarize some of the main
points that emerge from these studies and then proceed to take some
particular and more detailed examples of groups of tribes in a given
area.
    It was found that an artefact or element list of 1,000-2,000 arte-
facts sufficed to code the main cultural manifestations of each of these
tribes. Since the tribal assemblages proved to come from a convinc-
ingly polythetic aggregate set and tribes shared some artefacts but not
                                                  I + + I +          M        I I       I I     I t i



+ + +      I I I I                                                   I I I I I I I I


    I I                   I I I           - + + + + + +                  + I + I + I + +



    + + +OT + U 1 +                + + +          + + tn I +         + I + + + + I I                 +


    + +    I tn + +                 1 +   1 + + + + I I              + „ . 1 1 1 1 +             +


    I I M I I I I + +                             I t t i        I   t    M       t t     I   t t             +   11             I +



                     I                        + I + + I +                + 1 1 1 + +



                 I   I I I I I I                                              I     I +



+ + +            + 1 +             + + +            + + + +              I I 1 1 + + +                        +   11             +



+ + +      I + en I                + +        +     + +     I <n          I I I       I I


+ + + I + I +                      + + +                    II       + +      I I +       I I



- + +      I + S +                 + +                 I         I   + I



- + +      I +       I +                             - +         I   + + I



    I +    I +       I I +          I                         +      + + +          I +   I +



+ + +      I + + -                                            +      + I I I          +   I + +          +C/1++            + I



           I +       I I           + +                                              I + + + +            + + -



           I     I + +             + +



           I + + + +               + -



+    1 +   1 I + +                + + + + + + +                                                          + + +         I         I



+ + +      I +            +                          1+          +   + +            + + + + I




                     .5
                     S
                      E       •
                     13
        0 ^
                     C
        w 0                                                                                                                y         5 s
       T3 £          S.                                                                                                     -        2
                                                                                                                                     ? 3a
       Jd -O                                                                        e 3                                    JA
        «0 . .                          0 6                                         « O                   I                          >> >
                                                                                    w c                                    N
                                                                                                                            5          X)
    íask decoy       0 .
    itelope-ma       _o                                                             Ëf.5 ï    8 ?        a^.y-s            ^     c e
                                                                                                                           73.  3 3
    iffalo-mask                                                                                                             û   a. a
                                                                                                                            c a «> -
    ith hide         •5 "o
                                                                                                                           S i d a

               t wi-O t>00 O* «-
cñá
                                                G r o u p ethnology     377

others, the total artefact list for groups of tribes is not much greater,
closer to 3,000-5,000 artefact-types per multitribal area. A test count
showed that out of the 2,000 artefacts characterizing a group of tribes,
only a m a x i m u m of c. 450 artefacts could be expected to survive under
advantageous archaeological conditions - the remainder reflecting the
intangible aspects concerning sociocultural structures. In this crude
count we have the implication that even with optimal excavation and
preservation the prehistorian is attempting to pronounce on less than
15 per cent of the basic culture. T h i s observation confirms that it is on
the basis of the microvariation of a very small sample of the cultural
system that archaeological interpretations are based. T h i s limitation
must be squarely faced if archaeological interpretation is to be reliable.
    T h e polythetic nature of the culture content variation is repeatedly
and satisfactorily demonstrated in these lists (fig. 77). T h e variation is
characteristically polythetic only in large part, with sometimes up to 2
per cent of simple, functional artefacts shared by all the heterogeneous
tribes in one area, the percentage referring to the total artefact list for
the group of tribes. Most tribes held 2 5 - 5 0 per cent of the total
multitribal artefact list within their own particular polythetic selec-
tion. Significantly there is not a single tribe that does not share at least
30 per cent of its specific artefacts with some other tribe within a
radius of several hundred miles. Conversely, a tribe can usually be
optimally matched with a shared m a x i m u m of c. 90 per cent of its
specific artefact list with a politically, historically, geographically, or
linguistically related tribe in the vicinity - amounting to a virtual
identity only unrecognized by the organizations of the tribes them-
selves. T h e absolute m i n i m u m number of artefacts shared by tribes of
the same language g r o u p appears to be around c. 45 per cent but the
average shared between language-linked tribes was much higher - c.
70 per cent. T h e s e crude figures are based on the element list consen-
sus and are mainly intended to convey the complexity and general
order of the relationships involved.
    T h e archaeological implications of these figures are rather sugges-
tive. T h e kind of situation recorded is not unlike the kind of informa-
tion that one might expect from a well-studied area of Neolithic
cultures within a common territory, except that the total number of
different specific artefact-types recovered for each culture, the
archaeological 100 per cent, is known to represent no more than 1 5 per
cent of types that once existed to outline the culture systems. G i v e n
this limitation, the figures suggest that of this sample a background of
378      Analytical Archaeology
30 per cent of each culture list of artefact-types may be shared between
assemblages from alien tribes lacking any significant political, ideo-
logical or linguistic relationship, given tribes of similar economic
systems operating in similar environments. A 30 per cent affinity
between    cultural   assemblages   of   specific artefact-types   may   not
necessarily reflect any more than a common technocomplex back-
ground, accounting for perhaps the 30 per cent of specific types and
maybe up to 60 per cent of the artefact-type families overall. However,
a level around 7 0 per cent of shared specific artefact-types seems only
to occur between very closely connected tribes, usually linguistically
interlinked, and roughly united within an entity equivalent to our
archaeological culture. Nevertheless, in exceptional cases some tribes
sharing even 7 0 per cent of their artefact-types in one direction are not
tribally or linguistically related but may represent proximate accul-
turation, in one case reaching 8 7 per cent of types shared with an
'unrelated' tribal culture. Unrelated politically or linguistically that is,
since the 87 per cent behavioural affinity undoubtedly reflects a real
'relationship'   which   is   encompassed     and   materialized    by   the
archaeological culture but not in the tribal or linguistic sets. T h i s
example may serve once again to emphasize that the entities defined
by archaeology, if properly defined, are not only less significant than
the tribal, liguistic, or historical sets - they are simply different.
      Perhaps, on average a 65 per cent linkage best coincides with the
linkage between assemblages from tribal clusters. For example, a 60
per cent single linkage in one case clustered all the related tribes in a
territory but unfortunately added 20 assemblages of unrelated tribes.
Raising the level to 70 per cent linkage, based on matching specific
artefact-types, eight tribal assemblages were clustered 'correctly', two
assemblages were added 'incorrectly' and six tribal assemblages were
not clustered although politically and linguistically affiliated to the
group.
      T h e figures outline the importance of a common language group-
ing as a factor capable of maintaining a residual level of cultural
affinity - partly stemming from an interlinked past cultural trajectory,
and partly from a continuing capacity for intercommunication. In this
respect, the modal range of artefact-types shared by linguistically
unrelated tribes was 0 - 3 0 per cent but if the tribes are linguistically
akin this lower limit is centred around 5 0 - 8 0 per cent. Since it is the
lower limit of shared artefact-types that is raised by a common
linguistic background, it unfortunately follows that clustering tribal
                                                                    G r o u p ethnology            379

assemblages at the arbitrary 65 per cent level, whilst d e t e c t i n g the
g r o u p s of tribes s h a r i n g c o m m o n l a n g u a g e ties, will also add to t h e m
s o m e acculturated n e i g h b o u r i n g tribal a s s e m b l a g e s of q u i t e different
linguistic affiliation w h i c h m a y , on o c c a s i o n , share u p to 87 per cent
of the crucial artefacts. T h e s e               figures      p r o v i d e a clear w a r n i n g that
c l u s t e r i n g a s s e m b l a g e s in terms of overall affinity, whilst                certainly
isolating      linguistically         and      tribally        affiliated   units,     will     never-
theless include s o m e cultural assemblages of other l a n g u a g e and tribal
groups.
     T h i s discussion b r i n g s us back to the familiar situation that s u c h
propositions as 'all full L a T e n e a s s e m b l a g e s w e r e m a d e b y C e l t i c
s p e a k i n g tribes' are almost certainly incorrect, e v e n if t h e total assem-
blages are properly defined b y p o t t e r y , m e t a l w o r k , s e t t l e m e n t pattern
and so on. W h a t m i g h t be said w i t h a fair d e g r e e of p r o b a b i l i t y is that
'the majority of the tribes sharing the f u l l L a T e n e a s s e m b l a g e w e r e
Celtic     speaking       but     that, even         so, s o m e     would      belong     to    other
language       groups       and      some       Celtic-speakers          would       possess     other
material culture'. A s i m p l e , one to one identification is i m p o s s i b l e n o w
and was impossible e v e n at the time in the ancient past. C o n s e q u e n t l y ,
any s w e e p i n g general proposition or s t a t e m e n t of identity is likely to
be incorrect but this need not prevent the careful and skilful isolation
of   an    underlying         relationship          between        linguistic,     historical      and
archaeological entities within the d e f i n e d limits of a p r o b a b i l i t y p r o p -
osition.
     T h e more i m p o r t a n t points of i n f o r m a t i o n arising f r o m                these
complicated relationships m i g h t be s u m m a r i z e d b y s a y i n g that if w e
are clustering c u l t u r a l assemblages on the basis of the degree                                of
similarity      of    their      specific      artefact-type         assemblages,        then      this
investigation s u g g e s t s t h a t :


     (1) A great deal d e p e n d s on the nature of the i n d e x or coefficient
           of similarity used to measure the affinity b e t w e e n                            artefact
           assemblages ( D o r a n and H o d s o n 1975, p p . 139-43).
     (2) U p to c. 5 per cent of specific e l e m e n t s or a r t e f a c t - t y p e s m a y
           be shared b y all the alien cultural a s s e m b l a g e s in a c o m m o n
           t e c h n o c o m p l e x and e c o s y s t e m .
     (3) U p to c. 30 per cent of specific e l e m e n t s or a r t e f a c t - t y p e s m a y
           be shared b e t w e e n some pairs of a s s e m b l a g e s w i t h o u t indicat-
           ing a n y t h i n g    more than a c o m m o n                technocomplex           back-
           ground.
380      Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

      (4) About 65 per cent of shared specific elements or artefact-types
          seems the best level to cluster cultural assemblages, probably
          interlinked by a common tribal and linguistic background -
          although this level will inevitably integrate some exceptions.
      (5) All of these observations refer to an archaeological 100 per cent
          list of artefact-types which we know can only reflect less than
          c. 15 per cent of the former cultural contents.


     Before illustrating some of these points with detailed examples,
two kinds of observation can be made from the corpus of Californian
material which concern matters vitally important for the prehistorian.
T h e first of these observations registers something about the way in
which the set of culture elements are polythetically shared between the
settlements and assemblages within the culture area and tribal area
(fig. 78). T h e second observation is complementary to this internal
structuring but describes the manner in which sets of elements or
types are externally shared between neighbouring tribes over a given
area (fig. 79). These observations loosely based upon one hundred or
so tribes in the Californian region cannot of course be sweepingly
extended outside their frame of reference. In spite of this, the
results are so consistent within the area and depend on such wide-
spread constraints, that they present the possibility of a regularity of
wider significance - to be tested in the light of new data from other
areas.
     T h e first kind of observation, registering variation within the
culture area, is best illustrated by Gifford and Kroeber's study of the
Pomo Indians (Gifford and Kroeber 1 9 3 7 ; Kniffen 1939). T h e Pomo
Indians have many tribelets with settlements dispersed with a mean
mutual separation of about ten miles between sites. Careful study
showed that c. 95 per cent of each Pomo element assemblage was
variously shared between adjacent settlements, with 1 per cent of the
elements or types being idiosyncratically local in distribution and the
remaining 4 per cent of each site assemblage known elsewhere but not
used or made outside its main locus. A transact across the culture area
of the Pomo, from settlement to settlement, produces an irregularly
fluctuating total of elements and types per site - with the total number
of elements out of the total Pomo cultural assemblage represented at
each site fluctuating slightly, and the actual polythetic selection of
specific types at each site being slightly different.
                                                 G r o u p ethnology      381




         0       10    20     30    40     50    60     70     80    90
                                         Miles


   Fig. 78 Cultural assemblage variation within a culture area. T h e solid
   curve represents a smoothed transect from the centre to a periphery of
   the territory of the Pomo Indians - moving from nearest settlement to
   nearest settlement, registering the number of elements shared with
   central settlements.
   Derived from Kniffen 1 9 3 9 ; Gifford and Kroeber 1 9 3 7 .


    Within the Pomo culture area therefore, the localized settlement
assemblages produced a slightly fluctuating but roughly numerically
stable individual site content - approximating a horizontal line.
However, at the borders of the group, although the element content of
each site remains approximately steady, an ever-increasing proportion
of each assemblage content is made-up from non-Pomo artefacts
whose distributions impinge upon the polythetic Pomo domain (fig.
78). Correspondingly, of course the proportion of Pomo artefacts
begins to fall away slightly and then markedly, in the marginal areas -
                                      External assemblage variation




       1300-


       1200-

       1100-


       1000-

       900 -
V)
"c
I       800-
a>
o                                           Smoothed element
5       700"                                   - o f f curves
o


       600-


        500-


        400-


        300-


        200
                     -i   i   i   I    i   I    i   L_   -i     i   i   •   •   1

                                               Tribes

    Fig. 79 Cultural assemblage variation outside a culture area. T h e
    set of curves represent smoothed transects from a chosen tribe to
    increasingly more distant tribes - moving from tribal area to tribal
    area, registering the n u m b e r of elements shared with the arbitrarily
    chosen reference tribal assemblage. Eight separate transects are
    given here across various Southwestern American Indian tribes.
    Data from Anthropological Records, Berkeley, 1937-50.
                                                G r o u p ethnology      383

registering the composite gradient fall-off at the edge of the P o m o
polythetic distribution pattern (fig. 78). When this marginal fall-off of
proportional content has reached the threshold of the cultural level c.
6 5 - 5 0 per cent the assemblages can no longer be regarded as eth-
nologically or archaeologically Pomo in character. T h e threshold is not
quite a simple cline since the gradient suffers a comparatively abrupt
descent to new cultural formats, belonging to neighbouring tribes
whose margins are in turn saturated with shared P o m o elements. S u c h
cultural divides are usually further marked by a break in the web of
settlement pattern (fig. 80).
    Let us take the hypothetical version of the Pomo case, in which
each settlement fails to share 5 per cent of the artefact-types of its
neighbour, and so on down a line of settlements at 10-mile intervals -
assuming a continuous and maximal rate of loss at 5 per cent, rather
than the demonstrated polythetic oscillation. T h e n it would require a
culture area of 50 miles radius to achieve a drop to 75 per cent
similarity between the central and the marginal site assemblages, or a
100 miles radius to achieve a 50 per cent affinity. Since we put our
cultural/tribal boundaries at about the 65 per cent level, this would
coincide with an area of about 70 miles radius - very close to the actual
area of the Pomo tribe (fig. 78). In other words, the hypothetical
maximum sustainable cultural area of the Pomo is closely approxi-
mated by reality and depends on the degree of linkage and com-
munication between its component settlements. Once again we notice
the broad coincidence between these hypothetical culture area limits,
from 50 to 100 miles radius and those actually encountered in well-
mapped prehistoric areas, under similar conditions.
      T h i s sketch of assemblage variation within the tribe or culture
brings us logically to the assemblage variation between sets of neigh-
bouring tribes. T h e method of study is similar to that adopted for the
last analysis of internal variation. In this case a great deal more
comparative data is available and we shall take several groups of
neighbouring Californian tribes and draw arbitrary transects across
them, each several hundred miles long and each passing through
1 0 - 2 0 contiguous tribal areas with known element lists. F r o m this data
the number of elements, or artefact-types, shared by tribe A with tribe
B, tribe A with tribe C and so on, can be expressed down the entire
length of the transect. One can then survey the decreasing degree of
similarity between a given tribe and other tribes at increasing dis-
tances along the transect (fig. 79). T h e eight examples plotted on the
384      Analytical Archaeology
diagram are the smoothed c u r v e s based on these transects for various
areas and tribal sets. T h e general consistency of these curves is strik-
ing and informative.
      W h e r e a s the pattern of internal artefact assemblage variation pro-
duced a gentle c o n v e x curve, falling-away at the tribal boundary (fig.



                                   Internal/external      assemblage variation




                                                                     Smoothed pattern
                                                                     of cultural elements
                                                                    of culture X shared
                                                                   I with external cultures




                                                          Widely shared element
                                                          p o d —the technocomplex level
                                                          for the regional ecosystem

                                         _1_       _L         _L       _L       _L     _L
                  Within culture    X territory — Across      alien   territories

                                               Distance


   Fig. 80 Cultural assemblage variation within and without a culture
   area. A hypothetical transect f r o m an arbitrarily selected central
   cultural assemblage - moving to the border of that culture area and then
   to increasingly more distant cultural assemblages. T h e curve plots the
   decline in assemblage elements shared with the arbitrary reference - it
   does not indicate an absolute decline in elements per assemblage,
   merely that a decline in the elements is shared with the reference.
                                               G r o u p ethnology     385

78), the pattern outside the tribe falls extremely steeply from the 65
per cent to the 30 per cent level of shared elements; a fall from the
cultural to the technocomplex level, at which it smooths out (fig. 79).
T h e factors behind the combined curves express the contrast between
the substantial polythetic affinity of assemblages within the tribe,
falling-away slightly in the marginal areas exposed to optimal external
diffusion, and then externally an abrupt gradient to a general
background-level widely shared by heterogeneous societies sharing
a territory with common constraints (fig. 80). T h i s background
level reflects a widely shared set of technocomplex elements
polythetically dispersed among variegated tribes with similar econo-
mies, operating in similar environment and saturated by historical
diffusion.
     On this tiny sample of studies it can only be said that in several
separate areas of the Southwestern United States several transects
across different sets of contiguous tribes consistently show a pattern of
minutely irregular but broadly exponential element loss beyond the
tribal boundaries. Indeed, the ethnic definition of a tribe depends
partly upon this external contrast with its own internally maintained
pattern - this leads one to suspect that on occasions communities may
be rather ambiguously oriented in tribal affiliation and this is in fact
the case, allowing a disjunctive or contradictive social ambiguity
which is of prime importance in the periodic recasting and repattern-
ing of tribal formats. In any event, the internal and external affinity
curves provide an interesting regularity and in the practical examples
that follow it is possible to pick out significant departures from these
curves which thus acquire a local predictive value in detecting
abnormal links and barriers between tribes - sometimes linguistic,
sometimes historical and political, and often topographical.

    Examples. (1) T h i s example is a sketch of the culture elements or
artefacts of the Northwest Californian coast tribes, taken from Driver's
comprehensive and detailed study (Anthropological                 Records,
Berkeley, 1 : 6 , 1939). T h e survey covers sixteen hunting-fishing-
gathering tribes, including four pairs of confederate tribes, the whole
representing four language groups, twelve languages and some sixteen
dialects. T h e tribes occupy territories along 200 miles of Pacific coast-
line, half of them with a Northwest Coast culture, the remainder with
a Californian Indian culture (fig. 81).
386      Analytical Archaeology

      From north to south the tribes run:


Abbreviation   Tribe              Language group       Culture group

To.            Tolowa             Athabascan           Northwest Coast
Chim.          Chimariko          Hokan                Californian Indian
Kar. 1         Upper Karok        Hokan                Northwest Coast
Kar. 2         Lower Karok        Hokan                Northwest Coast
Yur. 1         Yurok ( Y i )      Algonkin             Northwest Coast
Yur. 2         Yurok (Y2)         Algonkin             Northwest Coast
Wy.            Wiyot              Algonkin             Californian Indian
Hup. 1         Hupa (Hi)          Athabascan           Northwest Coast
Hup. 2         Hupa (H2)          Athabascan           Northwest Coast
Chil.          Chilula            Athabascan           Northwest Coast
VD.            Nongatl            Athabascan           Californian Indian
Mat.           Mattole            Athabascan           Californian Indian
Sin. 1         Sinkyone (Si)      Athabascan           Californian Indian
Sin. 2         Sinkyone (S2)      Athabascan           Californian Indian
Ka.            Kato               Athabascan           Californian Indian
C. Yuk.        Coast Yuki         Yuki                 Californian Indian



    T h e first impression of these data is that no one set is identical with
any other - the language groups do not exactly equate with the culture
groups, and so on. Nevertheless, there is a measure of relationship in
that the Northwest Coast culture group speak largely Hokan and
Algonkin languages to the north but adopt Athabascan languages in
the southern neighbourhood of the Athabascan speaking Californian
Indians. One gets the impression that tribes of various language
groups have divergently adopted the cultural equipment most suitable
for their tribal territory and most widely diffused on their margins.
   T h e s e data enable us to make three simple experiments which
might illuminate the sharing and distribution of elements or artefact-
types amongst neighbouring tribes of diverse languages and cultures.

      (a) In the first experiment the broadly central tribe of the Y u r o k
( Y u r . 1 section) have been taken and the n u m b e r of Y u r o k elements
f o u n d in every other tribal assemblage noted on the map (fig. 8 1 ) . T h e
Y u r o k 1 have 1 , 3 7 6 elements in their own assemblage, they share most
elements with their confederate tribe Y u r o k 2 which has 873 elements
of Y u r o k 1 culture, and so on down the map. T h e contoured map
confirms the way in which Y u r o k 1 elements fall away in an exponen-
tial and irregularly radial fashion. Significant distortion noticeably
                                                                          Group ethnology                    387
o c c u r s t o s h o w s u r p r i s i n g l y s t r o n g links w i t h t h e g e o g r a p h i c a l l y dis-
t a n t b u t linguistically a k i n W i y o t t r i b e , or to e m p h a t i c a l l y e x c l u d e t h e
linguistically, g e o g r a p h i c a l l y a n d c u l t u r a l l y d i s t a n t C o a s t Y u k i . I n
o t h e r w o r d s t h e d i v e r g e n c e s f r o m t h e idealized e x p o n e n t i a l a n d r a d i a l
m o d e l of ' e l e m e n t fall-off' d o reflect significant r e l a t i o n s h i p s - t h o u g h
t h e s e m a y b e of m a n y k i n d s .
       (b) I n t h e s e c o n d e x p e r i m e n t each t r i b e is c o n n e c t e d w i t h a line
a n d a d i r e c t i o n a l a r r o w t o t h a t o t h e r t r i b e w i t h w h i c h it s h a r e s m o s t
e l e m e n t s or a r t e f a c t - t y p e s - t h e r e b y linking t r i b e s to o t h e r t r i b e s w i t h




                     •---I--200
                                  300~--

             i°72,       ^        600

           YUR2\*873            TOO \
                                800                \II \ I \I
                                                         I I
                                        V ¡ I I I
                                                 I ' l l
                                        \\I \ I II I lI l
                                        KAR 2 / '
                    \v\ YUR1         809/// I !
                ^chilW *.             •' / ' / "
                     a vvj376        / / /
                                               /

                 CQC* \             / ' /

                        \     HIJP1'" ' /
                        777° H //'<'       / /
                  /       746?_ ^ P2 / /
                               /''•CHIM                   Language group        Fig. 81 T h e
                             / '304 ' I
                            I       : /                                         assemblage sharing
                                                           O Athaboscan
          ix 609                                                                pattern of elements or
        , WY                                               * Algonkin           artefact-types
                        634 !                              • Hokan              amongst neighbouring
                        ovd;
                                                                                tribes of diverse
           OSIM1                                                                languages and
MAT/O364% 541
                                                                                cultures (a). T h e map
                                                                                schematically
                    OSIN2                                                       illustrates the number
                 i.219 \                                                        of Yurok tribal
                                                                                elements (YUR. 1; an
                                                                                Algonkin language
                              \ 0 KA                                            tribe) shared with
                      CVx                                                       neighbouring tribes of
                       m             —                                          varying political,
                                                                                linguistic, and ethnic
                                                                                affiliations.
                                                                                Data from Driver
                                                                                1939-
388     Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y
the most closely similar social and material culture (fig. 82). Once
again language links appear stronger even than simple proximity links
- the Algonkin-speakers, are clustered in one group, the Athabascan
speakers in two, despite many Athabascan tribes being geographically
closer to Algonkin tribes and vice versa. Of particular interest is the
extraordinary link between the Tolowa and the Sinkyone 1, both
speaking Athabascan but separated by a hundred miles and by ten
tribes of two other language-groups. Most of the other surprising
clusters reflect that the mountainous inland terrain may effectively




                                     KAR 1




                          362   Language group

                                O    Athabascan
                                 x   Algonkin
                JSIN                              Fig. 82 T h e assemblage
MAT/(                            •   Hokan
                                                  sharing pattern of elements or
                                                  artefact-types amongst tribes
                                                  of diverse languages and
                                                  cultures (b). In this
                       .441                       experiment a maximum
                                                  linkage clustering with lines
                                                  and arrows connects that
                          )KA                     other tribe with which every
                       333                        given tribe shares most
                                                  elements in its assemblage.
                                                  Area of map and data, as for
                                                  fig. 81 - 200 miles of the
                                                  Pacific Northwest Coast.
                                               G r o u p ethnology      389

cut-off and re-orientate otherwise geographically and linguistically
close tribes. Clustering tribal assemblages on the basis of linking
assemblages with the most elements or types in common does clearly
coincide with a reasonable cultural and linguistic grouping — for
example the two affinity clusters focusing on the Yurok 1 and Sinky-
one 1 tribal assemblages broadly equate with the Northwest Coast and
Californian Indian culture groups respectively.
    (c) T h e third experiment takes several representative tribes f r o m
this area and plots the exponential but fluctuating fall-off of their
assemblage elements beyond their own borders (fig. 83). T h e transects
move from nearest tribe to nearest tribe and graph the number of
elements shared with the successively selected neighbours. T h e nature
of the element fall-off beyond the tribal borders is well brought out,
with the divergences from the model once again predicting unusual
local, linguistic, or topographical ties or barriers. Much more precise
and sophisticated analyses of the data are to be found in the original
publication (Anthropological Records, Berkeley, 1 : 6 1939).

   (2) As a comparative example we may take the similar study in the
same series by G i f f o r d of the Apache-Pueblo tribes (Anthropological


Abbreviations   Tribes                   Language group Culture group

W\              Western Navaho           Navaho          Apache/Navaho
EN              Eastern Navaho           Navaho          Apache/Navaho
XT              North Tonto Apache       Athabascan      Apache/Navaho
ST              South Tonto Apache       Athabascan      Apache/Navaho
SC              San Carlos Apache        Athabascan      Apache/Navaho
CI              Cibecue Apache           Athabascan      Apache/Navaho
WM              White Mt. Apache         Athabascan      Apache/Navaho
WS              Warm Springs Apache      Athabascan      Apache/ Navaho
HU              Huachuca Mts. Apache     Athabascan      Apache/Navaho
ME              Mescalero Apache         Athabascan      Apache/Navaho
LI              Lipan                    Athabascan      Plains Indian
LL              Llanero Apache           Llanero         Plains Indian
OL              Ollero Apache            Athabascan      Plains Indian
su              Southern Ute             Llanero         Great Basin
WA              Walpi                    Pueblo          Pueblo
ZU              Zuni                     Pueblo          Pueblo
SA              Santa Ana                Pueblo          Pueblo
SI              San Ildefonso            Pueblo          Pueblo
KP              Kikimai Papago           Piman           Papago
HP              Huhula Papago            Piman           Papago
                                                       Language



       1200-


       1100-


       1000-


        900-



¡n      800-
 ca
vE
<°      700 -
a


5       600-

        500-



        400 -



        300-


        200-

               o     x    »    *    x    o    o        o           *    x           o    o        o    o       o   «
           0. —1                    '         '                I            '                l         l           '

                TO        K1        Y1            H1       |           CM       |       VD            MT   |       KA   |

                     Y2        K2        C1             H2                  WY                   S1        S2           CY

                                                           Tribes
     Fig. 83 T h e assemblage sharing pattern of elements or artefact-
     types amongst neighbouring tribes of diverse languages and cultures
     (c). Transects taken from three arbitrary reference tribal assem-
     blages (arrows - Tolowa, Yurok 2, Kato) outwards across adjacent
     tribes at increasing distances across a single territory (area, figs 8 1 ,
     82) - illustrating the real but fluctuating exponential fall-off of
     shared assemblage elements (smoothed in fig. 78).
                                                           G r o u p ethnology          391

R e c o r d s , Berkeley, 4 : 1 , 1940). In this study there are twenty tribes,
some h u n t i n g - f i s h i n g - g a t h e r i n g others maize f a r m e r s , with five
language g r o u p s and twenty l a n g u a g e s ; the main contrast is between
the P u e b l o tribes of ancient f a r m i n g tradition and the A p a c h e / N a v a h o
tribes of a m o r e n o m a d i c character. T h e tribes are scattered over an
inland plateau over a circle of c. 300 miles diameter.
      T w o simple e x p e r i m e n t s were carried out with these data which
illustrate the u n u s u a l l y severe division in language g r o u p and culture
g r o u p of the A p a c h e / N a v a h o and the P u e b l o block - a local case in
which c o m p l e m e n t a r y technocomplexes have not accelerated con-
vergent d e v e l o p m e n t .


                                        SU
                                       388




                                         x Pueblo

  Fig. 84 T h e assemblage sharing pattern of elements or artefact-types
  amongst neighbouring tribes of diverse languages and cultures (a). A
  schematic map of the number of White Mountain Apache (WM) cultural
  elements shared with neighbouring tribes of varying political, linguistic,
  and ethnic affiliation - area, Colorado Plateau, U S A .
  Data from Gifford 1940.
392         Analytical Archaeology

      (a) T h i s m a p (fig. 84) a g a i n t a k e s an a r b i t r a r y c e n t r a l - t r i b e - t h e
W h i t e M o u n t a i n A p a c h e ( W M ) , a n d c o n t o u r s t h e a s s e m b l a g e s of t h e
r e m a i n i n g t r i b e s a c c o r d i n g to t h e n u m b e r of e l e m e n t s o r t y p e s that
t h e i r a s s e m b l a g e s s h a r e w i t h t h e r e f e r e n c e d a s s e m b l a g e of 986 ele-
m e n t s . A g a i n , a b r o a d l y radial a n d e x p o n e n t i a l fall-off is s u g g e s t e d -

                                                  o   Athabascan    tribes

                         NT       ST         CI        SC     WM        WS            ME     LI

            1200


            1100



            1000


            900


            800
       a>
       *!   700                                                            Athabascan
                                                                           speaking tribes

      3      600
      u

            500


            400

                                                            language groups
            300


            200


             100                              1                          _L           _L
                                  WA         WN        ZU      EN        SA            SI    LL

                                         •    Pueblo, Piman,     Llanero     tribes

       Fig. 85 A comparison between the rate of shared element fall-off
       along an homogeneous language group transect (Athabascan, North
       T o n t o - Lipan assemblages, a 150-mile transect) and a hetero-
       geneous language group transect (Athabascan, Piman, Navaho,
       Llanero, Pueblo; from North T o n t o - Llanero assemblages, a 100-
       mile transect). T h e reference assemblage - North T o n t o Apache
       ( N T ) , area, fig. 84.
                                                       G r o u p ethnology        393
with a noticeably gentler gradient amongst the other A p a c h e / N a v a h o
tribes when compared with the culturally and linguistically                      alien
Pueblo to the northeast.
    ( b ) T h i s unusually contrasting linguistic and cultural situation
enables us to compare the rate of element fall-off amongst                     homo-
geneous and heterogeneous language sets. T h e N o r t h T o n t o A p a c h e
( N T ) at the extreme northwest w e r e taken as a reference point and t w o
transects drawn in different directions, one southeastwards through
entirely Athabascan-speakers like the N o r t h T o n t o themselves, the
other transect goes due east, through               variegated      Piman,    Pueblo,
Llanero language g r o u p s (fig. 85). Each point on the transects plots the
number of N o r t h T o n t o elements shared b y that particular tribal
assemblage. T h e superimposition of the t w o graphs confirms the
extra-tribal exponential       decline in the t w o directions but             greatly
contrasts the severely rapid loss of elements in the alien language area
despite the fact that its tribes are closer and the overall distance less.
T h u s the Athabascan-speaking L i p a n tribe, o v e r 150 miles away, still
shares more North T o n t o elements than does the Zuni P u e b l o , only 50
miles away.
    ( c ) Considerably m o r e elaborate comparisons and clusterings of
these tribes were prepared          by G i f f o r d and K r o e b e r   (1937) using
similarity coefficients and matrices (fig. 86).
   SU EN WN NT ST SC Ci VMHWS Hi Mt Li 01 LI V*o Zu SA SI KP HP
SU I B S                    H 0     QR0
EN B I I Q S             ra         B     0CE                   Fig. 86 Sorted
WN E M Œ 0 B 0 S B                  B       B E                 matrix of coefficients
NT    0 1 E M B B B U U B                                       of resemblance (Q2)
ST    S Q I I M i n O i ï I Q                                   between the culture
SC        [ • » • • • • n a n s
C.                                                              element   assemblages
      B S i i i i i a n x
WM                                                              of twenty Apache-
          S M M M I I Z ]
ws        B f l i a o f l i i M n i ]                           Pueblo tribes, key, p.
Hu 0          n n n n o i n n i i B                             389, chapter 9, ill,
Me S          S Q C D f f l B r a m i B                         example (2); also see
Li             S B        n O M O C E                           fig- 77- This diagram
01 Œ 0                   n i D O I I              s             isolates the
LI ra B                      HHÍEBB                             Athabascan speaking
Wa
                                  umuu
      0 0                                    M O D
Zu    K0                                                        tribes as a cultural
SA                                 nmrnu                       group, although two
SI
KP
                                 s nan                          portions of it have
                                                               acquired considerable
HP                                                              Pueblo material
                                                               culture elements.
                0 79-0-70            0 5 9 - 0 50               Source: Gifford 1940,
                    a         IE          B                    p. 201.
     1 0 - 0 80           0 69 - 0 60
394    Analytical Archaeology
     Before w e move on to our third line of approach - the historical
method - the tentative results of these ethnographic experiments
might be restated. In the tiny sample of tribes studied, the evidence
supported the view that individual site assemblages within a tribal area
express polythetic variations on the total tribal assemblage, with a
customary level of 6 5 - 9 5 P e r c e n t of shared elements or types linking
pairs of assemblages f r o m a single tribe. T h e r e does not appear to be
any confirmation of the concept of a focal 'tribal hearth' within which
all the tribal elements appear and thence decline radially in concentric
zones (fig. 67). Beyond the tribal boundaries the tribal artefacts and
elements still occur amongst other tribes but these fall-away in an
approximately exponential decline in all directions from the tribal
margins. Exceptions to this exponential decline do occur, with shared
elements even reaching 87 per cent between tribally and linguistically
unrelated assemblages in one exceptional case (Voegelin 1942, pp.
2 5 0 - 1 ) . Such exceptions are clearly related to unusually good or bad
lines of intercommunication and interconnection introduced by
unusual topographic, linguistic, historic, or sociocultural ties and bar-
riers.
      In areas of fairly homogeneous environment, containing tribes of
similar technology and economy the exponential decline defining each
tribal entity tends to fall from the 9 5 - 6 5 per cent level down to a
background level from c. 30 to o per cent of shared elements linking
otherwise totally unrelated tribes, connected only by a common tech-
nocomplex strategy. All of the tribes studied have been within the
same racial group at the American Indian level but, as one might
expect in regionally interbreeding communities, subracial populations
and characteristics are apparent and do partly coincide with kin-linked
entities of tribal group level. T h e implications of the data make it clear
that if element and artefact assemblages are clustered on the basis of
overall affinity, then clusters of closely similar assemblages will usually
unite tribally and linguistically linked units in a meaningful way
although the entity will not exactly equate with either the one
component factor or the other.


iv    Historical ethnographic evidence

T h i s brings us to our third method of inquiry which seeks to examine
archaeological entities wherever and whenever they cross into the
tinted light of history. T h e colouring of historical documentation
                                                 G r o u p ethnology      395

arises f r o m the inevitable filter effect of the individual author as a
literate member of an elite literary subculture writing f r o m the point
of view and with the prejudices of his set, about selected matters of
interest to that set. Once again it is possible to claim that historical
evidence is more complete than the best archaeological evidence, but
both have inherent bases and their information is intersecting and
different, not merely better or worse. When the historian Bede tells of
J u t e s settling in Kent he means one thing; when the archaeologist
notes the absence of Jutish assemblages f r o m K e n t , he is referring to
another. T o the historian, a group of heterogeneous North G e r m a n s
politically united and connotatively symbolized by perhaps a single
Jutish royal princeling may be designated J u t e s . T o the archaeologist
an intrusive assemblage of S a x o n and Frisian artefacts, lacking the key
types of the J u t i s h assemblage, may not be designated an intrusion by
Jutes. M a n y such historical and archaeological contradictions reside in
the different frames of reference of the studies concerned - both may
be right in their own w a y . It follows that in the contrast and
comparison of archaeological and historical entities it cannot be
assumed that the 'truth' is the prerogative of one discipline or the
other; nor may it be assumed that the relationship between an
archaeological and a historical entity is without complexity.
    Historical ethnographic evidence cannot compete with the scope of
recent ethnographic data. T h e historical evidence is too uneven and
biased to provide the kind of information studied in the last section.
However, selected historical evidence about ancient cultures and
tribes may be a more equivalent base for comparison with ancient
archaeological entities than that provided by modern ethnography. In
the first place ancient documents often refer to the contemporary
societies of which w e have the archaeological skeleton and as a second
consideration we cannot assume that the surviving primitive com-
munities, driven into marginal niches, still provide a good model for
prehistoric cultures.
    T h e records of the best ancient historians are therefore invaluable
in these respects. Indeed, the very basis of ethnographic identification
and classification used by ancient authors was a polythetic and tacit
blend of the distinctive attributes of dress and behaviour, peculiar
aspects of material culture and social organization and secondarily the
linguistic affiliation and tribal names of their barbarian neighbours. T h i s
basis closely resembles that underlying archaeological taxa, both
integrating the diverse attributes materializing the pattern of many
396   Analytical Archaeology
different cultural dimensions. In this respect the set of peoples
identified by the ancient authors as recognizably Scythian, Celtic,
German or Iberian are in all probability more closely coincident with
the set of archaeological assemblages noted as Scythian, Celtic,
German or Iberian than either group of sets is with the restricted
linguistic sets of the same name. In these respects the tribal units and
confederations discussed by the great Classical historians can usefully
be sought in the archaeological record - from the hints of the Homeric
sagas, to the detail of Herodotus on the Scythians, Tacitus on the
Celts and Germans, or Ptolemy and Jordanes on the Baits, Slavs and
Goths. These authors document the basic web of tribal Europe which
survived and was transformed into the feudal nations of Medieval
Europe and is still familiar from the territorial combinations and
permutations that form the contries of Western Europe.

    Example. As an example of particular significance, this kind of
historical approach can be illustrated by the trajectory of the Urnfield
culture group of Central Europe and its transitions from obscurity to
limelight in the early centuries BC. The developments are registered in
an equally fragmentary form in the archaeological and the historical
record but they allow the broad comparison and evaluation of the
evidence and entities involved.
    The Urnfield culture group encompassed a group of related and
collateral cultures characterized by assemblages sharing a polythetic
range but differing states of the same specific artefact-types. In the
archaeological record this assemblage is represented by settlements,
pottery, bronze tools and weapons, together with various peculiar
funerary and cult apparatus. The pottery assemblages vary upon
cylinder-neck and biconical urns, elaborate dishes, plates and jugs
and a fine-ware specializing in highly burnished, deliberately
metallic fabrics and forms, with a decoration based upon corrugated
grooving, circular and semi-circular bosses and turban effects. The
large storage jars were also used for cremation burials, usually
covered by a dish, and arranged with others in large cemeteries. Cult
apparatus accompanying such burials often included theriomorphic
 models and clay rattles - with wildfowl, cattle and wild boar as
 favourites.
    Differing regional variants on this pottery assemblage are found in
the collateral cultures within the Urnfield culture grouping. The
settlements included villages of substantial rectangular timber houses,
                                                G r o u p ethnology     397

often associated with large hill-top fortifications used as communal
refuges for local communities. T h e economic background of the
culture group centred around a mixed f a r m i n g strategy with extensive
ard agriculture and a complementary pastoral aspect with large herds
of cattle and pigs. T h e rich bronze assemblage depended on an
industrially mass-produced set of equipment distributed by a set of
trade networks radiating f r o m the large-scale exploitation of the Slo-
vakian and Alpine deep copper mines. T h e characteristic weapons
included the revolutionary flange-tanged leaf-shaped slashing sword,
cavalry lances, javelins, the long oval shield and an occasional bronze
version of the leather cuirass and crested helmet. T h e tool-kit ranged
from plentiful palstaves, socketed axes, sickles, saws and hog-back
knives, to dress pins and the sporadic bronze fibula. Beaten bronze
sheet was increasingly used for cooking cauldrons and services of cups,
buckets, basins and strainers for mixing liquor.
    T h i s assemblage made an integrated appearance as the result of
the directive correlation of artefacts and elements formerly scattered
through Central E u r o p e but especially focused in the Middle Danube
region. By the tenth century BC the culture g r o u p proper embraced not
only the Middle Danube (Hungary) but also a northwestern territory
in Poland (Lausitz culture), a southwestern area in the Western Alps
(Hallstatt) and an Italian territory pointing into the Mediterranean; an
overall distribution pattern resembling a hub with three radial spokes
(figs 73b, 87).
     By historical and archaeological accident we know far more about
 the sequence and identity of the Southwestern Urnfield spoke,
involving the Alpine Hallstatt culture. In archaeological terms the
Hallstatt time-trajectory has been segmented into broadly successive
phases running f r o m Hallstatt A down to Hallstatt D. T h e s e successive
artefact modes map the fluctuating expansion of the assemblage dis-
tribution area to the south and the west. In the Hallstatt A phase, the
full assemblage was confined to the western Alpine foothills and valleys
in a territory including much of Austria. T h e Hallstatt B and C
assemblages extend further southwest, until for a short period in the
seventh to sixth centuries BC the advance d o w n the Rhone valley was
halted north of the classical city of Massilia - the Urnfield culture there
sharing a boundary with an archaic Bronze A g e culture which formerly
extended along the Riviera coastline. By this time the Hallstatt Urnfield
assemblage was re-equipping with iron weapons and tools, mostly
copying the older bronze models. Early in the sixth century BC the
398    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y




Fig. 87 A tentative map of the central areas of Indo-European languages c.
500 BC. The inner, shaded areas relate the emergent development of Celtic,
Italic, Slav and Illyrian with the radial distribution of the Urnfield culture
group c. 1200-700 BC, thus emphasizing the existence of an older, outer ring of
non-Urnfield Indo-European areas - Teutonic and Baltic on one hand and
Thraco-Phrygian, Greek, and Hittite on another.



Hallstatt assemblage overruns the Riviera coast and Hallstatt C and D
assemblages freshly penetrate northern Spain.
    T h e importance of this series of events is that they involve a total
cultural assemblage on the move and each move can be roughly dated.
Of yet greater significance is the fact that the Greek authors have
preserved historic accounts of a series of movements in this region, in
this period, and in this general pattern which match the changing
archaeological configurations.
    T h e ninth-century tradition of the Homeric poems tells us vaguely
that the Riviera coast was then occupied by an indigenous tribe called
the Ligyes, or Ligurians, and beyond them to the north lay the
Cimmerians. In the seventh century the colonial Greek city of Massilia
                                                G r o u p ethnology      399

was established in the land of the Ligurians but in the sixth century
Hecateus relates that beyond the Ligurians a p o w e r f u l tribal con-
federation called the Celts had appeared. Herodotus, writing a little
later, states that the Celts were centred in the Alps around the head-
waters of the Danube but including much of Austria and the
important town of Nyrax or N o r i c u m , in Styria, also mentioned by
Hecateus. Herodotus infers, and the later historian Eratosthenes
confirms, that some Celts were o c c u p y i n g northern Spain. T h e large-
scale trade between Massilia and the Celtic tribes on the headwaters of
the Rhone and Danube distributed wine and luxury goods to the
chieftains in return for organized supplies of raw materials, especially
gold, tin, slaves and cereals. T h i s interchange between the Celts and
the Greek and Etruscan colonial cities gave rise to the aristocratic
patronage of classically derived L a T e n e art in the fifth century Celtic
area; a style which became the subcultural diagnostic of a cultural
élite.
    In the archaeological and the historical record of this area and
period we have two outlines of events covering the ninth to fifth
centuries BC. Both outlines coincide to a remarkable degree in pattern
and sequence; taken together they produce a stereoscopic picture
lacking only fine detail and u n i f o r m lighting. T h e coincidence
between the historical and archaeological sets involved is of the kind
suggested by recent ethnology and allows a reasonable identification of
the Southwestern spoke of the Urnfield culture g r o u p , the West
Alpine Hallstatt culture, as the material equipment of the Celtic g r o u p
of tribes. T h i s equation rests on the assumption that other languages
were spoken in the g r o u p besides Celtic dialects and that many non-
Celtic-speaking tribes, like the Ligurians, adopted Celtic material
culture. T h e broad equivalence of some of the Celtic language g r o u p
with some of the Alpine Urnfield culture and both with the ethnic
Celtic tribes, remains satisfactory and convincing.
    T h e ancient authors' identification of neighbouring barbarians
focused on two levels of organization - 'peoples' and 'tribes'. T h e
tribal unit was one which still underlay Classical society and one
which could still be seen operating as politically autonomous units all
around its borders. Over and above these small operational units could
be recognized ethnic 'peoples' categorized by the broad intersect of
subrace, language g r o u p and culture g r o u p sets. T h e historian
Ephorus, for example, noted four major barbarian 'peoples' in the
fourth century BC - the Celts, Scythians, Persians and L i b y a n s .
( a ) Celt (Avignon Museum)      (ò) German (Marcus Agrippa's Basilica
                                 Neptuni, Rome)




(c) Scythian (Kul Oba vase)       (d) Dacian (Trajan's Column, Rome)
                              Fig. 88
                                                              Group ethnology                 401

Because these ancient identifications are ethnic and not purely-
linguistic the entities discerned e q u a t e quite well w i t h archaeological
assemblages with distinctive art styles, w e a p o n s , artefacts, and styles
of dress. W e a p o n s and dress especially i m p r e s s e d the ancient histori-
ans as characterizing and e n s h r i n i n g the essential d i f f e r e n c e s b e t w e e n
'peoples'. T h e i r p e r c e p t i v e and f o r t u n a t e observation is s u p p o r t e d b y
recent e t h n o g r a p h i c situations, f o r e x a m p l e the identification of the
various R e d I n d i a n tribes can b e carried to a fine level p u r e l y on the
basis of modal and idiosyncratic features of clothing (figs 88, 89). O n
this convenient but r o u g h e q u i v a l e n c e in the basis of ancient ethnic
and archaeological taxa we may b r o a d l y equate the ancients' 'peoples'
with culture g r o u p s or larger entities and the 'tribes' with archaeolo-
gical cultures or smaller entities. It is still possible, after all, to




            Fig. 89 Modal variations in tribal dress patterns among
            the Indians of the Western United States.
            Source: Wissler 1923, p. 54.
4-02    Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

distinguish a material culture g r o u p distinctively expressing Ephorus's
- Celts, Scythians, Persians and L i b y a n s .
     We have momentarily strayed f r o m the problem of the Urnfield
culture g r o u p to study one of its three radial spokes - the Southwest-
ern Celtic expansion. What do we know about the historical and
linguistic identities of the other sections, the Central European
 Urnfields, the Northwestern Urnfields and the Italian Urnfields?
T h e s e areas shared collateral developments of the same general
 Central European Urnfield assemblage. Furthermore, the movements
which took the U r n f i e l d cultures into France, Italy and Poland
represent the last large-scale movements of total cultural assemblages
before the record of Classical history scans the barbarian horizons and
records its configurations. S u r e l y , if the Celtic ethnic g r o u p makes
such an impressive impact on the archaeological record, then some-
thing of the same order should correlate with the other Urnfield
entities, of a similar size and dimension?
     T h e Northwestern or Lausitz Urnfield group was connected with
the Central European area continuously over a long period of pre-
history - the formation of the Lausitz culture reflects more of a
repatterning and reorientation than the other, later and more abrupt
radial expansions. U n f o r t u n a t e l y the area of the Lausitz Urnfields
only emerges into history with the works of T a c i t u s in the first century
AD. Nevertheless, T a c i t u s records that the lower Vistula valley, within
the Lausitz territory, was in his time occupied by two tribal con-
federations, the Venedi and the Lugii - these are noted as resembling
the G e r m a n s but differing f r o m them in physical characteristics and in
culture. T h e Venedi survived into early medieval E u r o p e and are
specifically identified by the Gothic author J o r d a n e s as having split-up
into the Antae and Sclavs - both historical Slav tribes, the latter
naming the whole group. T h e Lugii, on the southern Vistula, was a
confederation embracing the tribes of the Harii, Helvecones, Manimi,
Helisii and Naharvali, according to T a c i t u s . T h e s e tribes also survived
in the same general area, under scarcely changed names, until the
tenth century AD at which time they are all Slav speaking. T h e
conclusion would seem to be that the Venedi and Lugii tribes of the
first century AD, o c c u p y i n g the lower Vistula basin, were ethnically
Slavs. T h e r e f o r e if the last preceding and surviving cultural assem-
blage tradition to move into this area was that of the Lausitz Urnfields,
then this radial aspect of the Urnfield culture group was probably
largely composed of Slav tribes and their ancestors (Jazdzewski 1949).
                                              G r o u p ethnology    403
     Similar arguments seem unavoidably to connect the complex and
lengthy Urnfield infiltration of Italy with the distribution of the
historic Italic-speaking tribes; the last large-scale ethnic movement
detectable in the peninsula before written history. T h e Central Euro-
pean area of the Urnfield culture group similarly emerges into Classi-
cal history as the area of the Thracian and Illyrian tribes.
     Now, the Celtic, Slav, Italic and Illyrian languages are all part of
the greater Indo-European language group, they are all fairly closely
allied one to another. Consequently, it appears probable that the three
main Urnfield cultures took the proto-Celtic, proto-Slav, and proto-
Italic languages into their recent homelands. An additional impli-
cation is that western Celtic is the most recent language to detach
itself, Italic the next, and Slav the earliest and most closely linked to
the archaic Illyrian languages. T h i s tentative identification has
important corollaries.
     If we look at a backdated linguistic map of Europe and accept the
broad identification made above, we find that at least two prominent
Indo-European languages are not dealt with in the Urnfield theory
(fig. 87). These are the Teutonic group centred on Germany and
Scandinavia and the Bait group centred on the Eastern Baltic. Now it
is precisely in both of these closely related areas, in the East and West
Baltic respectively, that archaeology records a surprisingly continuous
and uninterrupted cultural and religious development throughout the
Bronze Age and into the early Iron Age. In both areas, after a Middle
Neolithic integration of Corded Ware/Battle-Axe and T R B culture
groups an homogeneous local Late Neolithic tradition survives in
essence until the Iron Age. We have therefore the suggestion that
some of the Indo-European languages of Europe go back at least as far
as the Middle Neolithic c. 2500 BC and involve the Corded Ware/Battle-
Axe and T R B culture groups, and yet others - including the Celtic,
Italic, Slav, Illyrian groups date from Late Bronze Age contexts c. 900
BC. Now, since the intervening phases of the European Early and
Middle Bronze Age, c. 2000-1200 BC, contain numbers of cultural
transforms from the T R B and Corded Ware culture groups, as well as
proto-Urnfield cultures - we have the implication that the Indo-
European language group has a long and complicated ancestry in
Europe - going back into Neolithic cultures at least, with complex
reticulated ramifications. A simple equation between the Corded
Ware/Battle-Axe culture group and the Indo-European language
group thus appears predictably impracticable, although few would
404    Analytical Archaeology

deny the probability of that culture group playing some component
role.
    T h i s section and its example may help to highlight some of the
ways in which historical ethnic entities and archaeological entities are
connected. T h e first point of importance is that archaeological data
and its entities are not so much less accurate or less informative than
historical data and entities, as differently focused. Artefacts provide
different information and bias as behavioural documents to those
provided by written documents. T h e difficulty of equating archaeolo-
gical and historical entities resides in this difference; no simple or
exact equivalence is possible but correlation does exist within limits.
In this respect we have noted, for example, that the 'peoples' of the
Classical historians usually broadly equate with the intersect of
language group, culture group and subrace sets, whilst the smaller
'tribal' entities concern individual and specific language, culture and
kinship sets.
    Perhaps the final lessons of this, section are the classificatory
difficulties which arise in a time-trajectory in which entities may move
from rank to rank and back again. T h e Celtic peoples first appear as an
ethnic group of cultural status on the Middle Danube and Alpine
borders of the Urnfield culture group, a group of tribes with a specific
cultural assemblage and probably a specific group of dialects. In the
course of time the culture expands into a large culture with regional
cultures and then eventually becomes a culture group in its own right,
with component cultures; linguistic development and diversification
must accompany these developments but will not be a simple function
of them, either in space or time distribution. By the first century BC the
Celtic group has escalated to at least culture group status, with
component cultures from Ireland to Spain and from France to Ana-
tolia, with a comparable linguistic diversity. T h e same may be said of
the Slavs and of the Scyths and many other major 'peoples'. Former
populations are absorbed or acculturated and inject some of their
attributes into the continuing system - often inessential attributes
which will later play a crucial catalytic role in emergent repatterning.
One is made aware of the rhythmical pulsating pattern of the repeated
cycles of cultural 'birth', 'growth', expansion into culture groups,
regional divergence, repatterning and realignment or 'death'; the
archaeological entities are not static but move through many states and
levels of organization.
                                                    G r o u p ethnology       405

Notes
T h e archaeological cultural assemblage is central to the discussion in this
chapter and it has been a feature of British archaeology within the last decade
that entities such as this and the culture group have been in declining usage.
After Childe's (1929) pioneering systematization of European prehistory in
which the 'culture' was the organizing unit of analysis, culture definition
became one of the main foci of archaeological activity in the period up to the
1950s. Once defined in time and space, cultural similarities were interpreted
in terms of their degree of social interaction: movement of people, diffusion
and 'influences' were the processes most commonly suggested as being
behind intercultural similarities. But now there are vociferous critics of this
approach and it seems useful to summarize their positions, so that the
arguments developed through chapters 6-9 can be put into perspective.
     Daniel ( 1 9 7 1 , p. 149) has argued that the culture was merely a conceptual
device for grouping together sites and artefacts in the absence of methods of
independent absolute dating. With the explosion of dating methods in
archaeology the culture concept has become redundant and should be aban-
doned in favour of description of 'the life and times of prehistoric people'.
This 'descriptive' aim is open to vigorous debate but of more relevance here is
the fact that Daniel gives insufficient attention to the spatial aspect of culture-
definition: are there recognizable spatial patterns in the distribution of
material culture which justify the creation of 'cultures' (as pursued in chapter
6) and their equation with human social groups (as argued in this chapter)?
     One point of view here is that 'cultures' defined by material culture
obscure the recognition of important variability in human behaviour. T h e
ethnographic observations of Donald Thomson, published in the late 1930s
(Thomson 1939), that the same group of Australian hunter-gatherers would
use totally different material culture assemblages at different seasons of the
year, have been stressed by the late Eric Higgs and his pupils at Cambridge
(e.g. Higgs 1975, p. 77). T h e implication of these observations was that the
archaeologist would identify four separate cultural assemblages from artefac-
tual differences which simply reflected seasonal subsistence strategies. If this
was the case with Thompson's Wik Monkan aborigines, could it not also be
the case with other areas of the world where the archaeologist had dis-
tinguished different 'cultures'? Furthermore if the material culture assem-
blages from two or more sites were identical, did it follow necessarily that
their subsistence practices were also similiar? Behind the monolithic façade of
the 'culture' it was realized that a great range of economic variability might lie
concealed and awaiting archaeological analysis (Higgs 1972, 1975).
     A further source of variability lies in the increasing recognition of ex-
changed or traded items in the archaeological record. T h i s has been a feature
of research employing characterization studies of raw materials, using such
methods as neutron activation analysis and optical emission spectroscopy
406       Analytical Archaeology

(e.g. e x a m p l e s in Brothwell and H i g g s 1969). In addition to studies of
such materials as flint, igneous stone, obsidian and metal, the analysis of
prehistoric pottery has been v e r y thought-provoking. T h e often unwritten
assumption that pottery w a s p r o d u c e d , used and discarded within the same
social g r o u p i n g , in spite of m a n y e t h n o g r a p h i c e x a m p l e s to the contrary, was
widespread within E u r o p e a n prehistoric studies. As pottery w a s also the most
frequent artefact present on later prehistoric sites, it is not surprising that it
became an important diagnostic feature in the definition of 'cultures'. Close
similarities in f o r m s , f a b r i c s and particularly decoration w e r e thought to
represent the tradition of a c o m m o n social g r o u p . T h e effect of trading and
marketing patterns on British medieval pottery distributions (e.g. the wider
distribution of fine w a r e s c o m p a r e d with more localized e v e r y d a y 'utility'
wares) was stressed fifteen years ago b y J o p e ( 1 9 6 3 ) . But it was not until
Peacock's petrological analysis of classes of Iron A g e pottery in the Here-
f o r d s h i r e - C o t s w o l d region of Western E n g l a n d that it w a s f u l l y realized that
'study of the origins of ( p o t t e r y ) . . . styles . . . should lead to a greater under-
standing of the cultural heritage or influences affecting the potters and not
necessarily the pot users' ( 1 9 6 8 , p. 4 2 5 , m y emphasis).
       With the recognition b y British and E u r o p e a n archaeologists of variability
resulting f r o m subsistence b e h a v i o u r and trading or e x c h a n g e patterns, there
appeared an increasing reluctance to define and use 'cultures'. C u n l i f f e
( 1 9 7 4 ) , for e x a m p l e , p r e f e r r e d to define 'style zones' in the British Iron A g e
and Clark ( 1 9 7 5 ) substituted 'social' and 'techno-' territories f o r 'cultures' in
studying the late- and early post-glacial settlement of S c a n d i n a v i a . T h e r e was
also a revival of interest in ethnographic studies of trade, stimulated in Britain
by G r a h a m e Clark ( 1 9 6 5 ) . Spatial patterns in material culture were still
recognized by archaeologists, but the pertinent question now was w h e t h e r
they should be equated necessarily with social g r o u p s .
       On an analytical level recent studies of individual artefact distribution
patterns have used quantitative methods (e.g. regression and trend surface
analyses) to define 'fall-off' c u r v e s of decreasing interaction with distance
between c o m m u n i t i e s ( H o d d e r and Orton 1 9 7 6 , H o d d e r 1977a). T h e often
 implicit recognition of decreasing spatial similarity in artefact patterns has
been the basis of 'culture' definition, but H o d d e r ' s work has demonstrated the
 parts played by c o m m u n i c a t i o n (e.g. water, roads, t o p o g r a p h y ) , social and
economic value (e.g. c o m p a r e the distributions of low d e m a n d mosaic pro-
 duction centres and high d e m a n d roofing-tile kilns in R o m a n Britain),
 competing service centres (e.g. the results of the use of gravity models on the
 distributions of late R o m a n O x f o r d and N e w Forest pottery or British Neoli-
 thic stone axes) and settlement pattern density. It is f u r t h e r noted that
 individual artefact-types are not ' c u l t u r a l l y - b o u n d ' - e x a m p l e s such as British
 Neolithic stone axes and F r e n c h G r a n d Pressigny flint are known to be
 associated with more than one cultural assemblage. But if all these factors are
 admitted as affecting the precise f o r m s of fall-off distribution patterns which
 we can observe in the archaeological record, what part if any did social and
                                                     Group ethnology           407

cultural factors play? In chapter 6 David Clarke argues that 'the number of
specific types shared with other individual cultures will be small and the
mutual boundaries fairly well defined by a band of exponential gradients
marking the zones of 'most rapid fall-off' for the cultural artefacts in the
boundary assemblages . . . T h e central area or irregular plateau in which the
mutual affinity between the polythetic assemblages remains high and roughly
constant will then define the essential archaeological 'culture area' (above p.
266). T h i s line of argument is supported by the ethnographic studies presen-
ted in chapter 9. T h e general point relating plateaux and distribution dis-
continuities to the existence of territoriality has been made by Soja ( 1 9 7 1 ) ,
but Hodder and Orton (1976, pp. 196-7) advocate caution in the automatic
transfer of this to the interpretation of archaeological distribution patterns:
their analysis of the distribution of coins of two pre-Roman tribes in Britain
clearly does not reveal the predicted territorial pattern.
     When turning to the associations between artefact distribution patterns, it
is now argued that archaeologists should employ tests of association to
distinguish between random and non-random patterns (Hodder and Orton
1976, p. 200) otherwise it may well be that 'cultures' could be defined on the
basis of purely random 'association groups'. When association tests are ap-
plied to material of the North German Early Bronze Age and the Carpathian
Basin Middle Bronze Age (op. cit., pp. 2 1 1 - 2 3 ) , there emerges a range of
distributions from localized groups based on ornament types to more wide-
spread patterns formed by swords and axes. It is suggested that the localized
ornaments reflect 'symbols of identity' (Hodder 1977a, p. 3 1 9 ) occurring in
areas of higher settlement density, whilst swords and axes are in a much lower
level of local demand and 'may relate to interaction at a high level in the social
hierarchy' (Hodder and Orton op. cit., p. 2 2 1 ) .
     This distinction between distribution patterns and their significance in
terms of human interaction has been pursued further by Hodder (1977b) in
his work among three tribes in the Baringo district of West Kenya. Between
two tribes, the T u g e n and Njemps, there are clear distinctions in traits such
as personal dress and compound plans and construction and there is little
intertribal movement of traits. In the archaeological record this material
culture evidence would be interpreted in terms of a lack of interaction
between the two tribes. In actual fact there is well-documented data on
contact across the tribal boundaries (e.g. markets, reciprocal exchange etc.).
This observation runs contrary to one of the basic assumptions implicit in the
use of the 'culture' concept: the degree of interaction between communities or
social groups is not necessarily directly reflected in material culture patterns
(cf. Binford 1972).
    On the other hand Hodder notes that the methods of assemblage and
culture definition presented in Analytical Archaeology would be capable of
distinguishing the three tribes and assessing which are more closely inter-
related. Here the archaeologist would be distinguishing artefactual patterns
reflecting 'tribal identity', as Clarke does with the ethnographic data from
408       Analytical Archaeology

North A m e r i c a in this chapter. But three p r o b l e m s arise. Firstly there is the
thorny question of the 'tribe' itself - how can one adequately define its spatial
limits ( H o d d e r 1 9 7 7 a , pp. 3 1 3 - 1 4 ) ? S e c o n d l y , how can one distinguish
fall-off patterns in artefact distribution which result f r o m cultural diffusion
f r o m those which reflect declining interaction with distance f r o m a central
area (op. cit., pp. 3 1 4 - 1 5 ) ? T h i r d l y m a n y d i f f e r e n t 'cultures' could be defined
in the Baringo district of West K e n y a on the basis of the traits selected or
available   for study (i.e. on the basis of differential preservation and sample
size).
     What then are the main implications of this recent research for the
'culture' concept and its social interpretation as presented in chapters 6 and
9? Clearly there must be a more quantitative approach to the analysis of
artefact distribution patterns, w h e t h e r considered individually or in asso-
ciation with each other. T h e r e is a current feeling that the 'all-in' methods of
'culture' definition as proposed by C h i l d e ( 1 9 2 9 ) and developed by Clarke in
this v o l u m e have left the archaeologist with rather coarse entities whose
detailed structure needs closer examination - for example what different
distribution patterns occur within cultural entities? E v e n w h e n distribution
patterns (e.g. localized vs. w i d e s p r e a d types) and fall-off curves have been
quantified, the archaeologist is still left with the problem of identifying the
processes which gave rise to these patterns. Here we have to look through the
filter imposed on us by the cultural and non-cultural factors that distort
patterning in the archaeological record ( S c h i f f e r 1 9 7 6 ) and recognize that the
archaeologist may still be able to discern s o m e signs of social groupings in
material cultural patterns. But note must be taken of the other factors (e.g.
cultural d i f f u s i o n ) w h i c h could give rise to similar or identical patterns. It is
this linkage between pattern and process that is at the very heart of any
attempt to interpret spatial patterning in material culture.
io       Entities and processes and
         procedure

         Entitation is more important than quantitation,
                         'Intelligence, Information and Education',
                                           Science, 148, pp. 7 6 2 - 5
                                    DEAN    R. W   GERARD      1965




I   Introduction

T h e material artefacts produced by hominid societies simultaneously
fulfil a number of different roles — some consciously appreciated b y
their manufacturers but others functioning by unforeseen inter-
actions. Material culture patterns are in the first place material
behaviour patterns - patterns of socially acquired actions and activities
condensed in solid form. E v e r y artefact and assemblage expresses in
its highly specialized structuring a particular set of behaviour direc-
tively correlated towards its manufacture, in addition to another set of
behaviour conveyed by the usage pattern anticipated in the design (fig.
26).
    T h e obvious role of material artefacts, apart f r o m their mani-
festation of acquired behaviour, embraces material culture as an
elaborate means of environmental regulation and control (figs 6, 9, 1 1 ) .
A n increasingly elaborate material culture provides an increasingly
powerful regulation and control mechanism networked within a
particular sociocultural system. T h e greater the variety in the material
culture, the more flexible may be the sociocultural strategy in blocking
the destructive variety from the environment and the capacity to
shield the system's essential format, enhancing the degree of system
continuity. In this vital respect the material culture helps to sustain
and insulate the sociocultural system and preserve the asset most
precious to its generators - its continuity (figs 24, 25).
    T h e least appreciated and most subtle role of material artefacts
is their capacity for information communication, a symbolic and
410    Analytical Archaeology

evocative role impinging on the psychological subsystem of the
society itself in a continuous feedback loop. A s an information com-
munication system material culture is ancillary to all the other socio-
cultural communication techniques and like all such systems it has its
own characteristics (chapter 3, 11). Artefacts and assemblages consti-
tute real messages because by definition they express consistently
recurrent and ordered selections of attributes/artefacts from a limited
set of possible components known to the agents concerned.
    Of course other means of communication are far more important
to society than material culture. Speech, writing, wireless, telephone
and television compete and supplement individual gestures and social
artefacts like ceremonies, customs, traditions, rituals and so on - all
jostling one another in the continuing communication revolution.
However, it is this continuous interchange of information of very
many kinds, by numbers of very different channels each with varying
characteristics, which jointly ensures the adequate transmission of an
almost 'error-free' cultural message, despite the noise. Shannon's
theorem shows that if the number of channels is greater than the
equivocation then it is possible to get error-free transmission and
sociocultural systems are networks with almost an infinity of such
intercommunicating channels (Ashby 1956, p. 190).
    T h e importance of the overall cultural message getting through
from one generation to the next is that it expresses the model of the
sociocultural survival system itself which, if received, is then capable
of unfolding and generating the structure and transformations
characterizing that system. T h e multiple channels consequently
ensure the adequate communication of this message which is vital to
sociocultural continuity but the inevitable ambiguity and distortion of
the message fed-back into the younger generation allows an inevitable
range for selective interpretation and progressive developmental
change on that basis. Material culture is therefore just one channel for
such communications and merely as one aspect of the whole sociocul-
 tural information system it too displays fluctuating attributes and
 assemblages and the selective development of successive formats in
successive phases.
    T h e role of material culture as an information communication
system is particularly relevant to the task of the archaeologist. For,
although the ancient societies are long since dead, the continuing
existence of their material culture still conveys the weak coded
                        Entities and processes and procedure             411

messages which were intended for the culture's generators but which
may yet be interpreted by us. T h e difficulty arises f r o m the frag-
mentary nature of the surviving message, the obscurity of the material
channel of its transmission and the complexity of the code. T h e
archaeologist must try to separate the message from the noise, with
especial care to minimize the interference from the variety inherent in
his own acquired sociocultural receiving apparatus (fig. 1 1 1 ) . One line
of approach in the analysis of such coded information is to rely on the
fundamental difference between the message variety and noise variety.
Otherwise wholly similar, the message variety differs from the noise in
having been structured or selectively ordered into a covarying and
correlated set. T h e r e f o r e , the archaeologist for a start can try to
differentiate between the key variety amongst the attributes, artefacts
and assemblages and the essential and inessential variety - the key
variety being marked by its constraint and the consequent regularity
of its joint trends and covarying intercorrelation patterns (chapter 2,


    T h e 'significant' system attribute and artefact variety trends and
covaries in space and in time, whilst the 'inessential' attributes and
artefacts vary irregularly, or not at all. Effectively, the message isolated
by this approach should help differentiate those attributes and types
which the generators were especially interested in controlling. T h e
procedure, therefore, is to distinguish in the archaeological sample the
controlled attributes and types from the uncontrolled or irregular
aspects. Success-in this respect then provides the archaeologist with
the fragmentary and coded message 'cleansed' of its noise. T h e inter-
pretation of this treated sample still poses the formidable problems of
ascertaining the effect of the archaeological sampling as well as the
necessity of attuning one's mind to receive the message in a way
congruent with its transmission.
    T o summarize, it must be emphasized that material culture is but
the network of a single dimension within a whole sociocultural
behavioural information system and that no single aspect can be
treated with reality alone or as a discrete part. S o m e part of the
'behaviour' of artefacts and assemblages expresses a peculiar mani-
festation of the inherent general behaviour characteristics of very
complex sociocultural system entities. T h e material culture studied by
the archaeologist may therefore be regarded as a material expression
once fulfilling three main roles as:
412     Analytical Archaeology

        (i) a communication channel of a wider behavioural information
            system;
       (ii) a functional implementation of a particular material
            behaviour pattern ;
      (iii) a sociocultural system regulation and control subsystem.

T h e overwhelming aim of all three roles of material culture and indeed
of all sociocultural variety is toward system continuity, with the great
advantages which that constraint endows.



11    Entities
T h e opening chapter of this work suggested that a model or structured
set of hypotheses gave birth to analytical archaeology with the 'three
ages' scheme of T h o m s e n , in 1 8 1 9 . Such models remain the most
powerful form of conceptual expression in archaeology today and
hopeful signs suggest that the discipline is slowly moving away from
iconic and simple analogue models towards symbolic models of greater
scope and predictive power (chapter 1 , VI; Clarke 1972). T h i s move-
ment gains momentum from the continuous and increasingly more
powerful attempts to match archaeological perceptual experience with
ever more accurate conceptual models. As an elementary step in the
same direction, three low-level but general models were proposed as
potentially useful in developing archaeological theory (chapter 1, vi):

        (i) a model for archaeological entities - the hierarchical and poly-
            thetic model (figs 3, 49);
       (ii) a model for archaeological processes - the general dynamic
            system model (fig. 1 1 ) ;
      (iii) a model for archaeological procedure - the three sphere feed-
            back model (fig. 2).

    T h e s e three models have formed the frame of discussion
throughout the preceding chapters and now we can summarize the
main outcome from these deliberations under the same three models
and headings - entities, processes, and procedure.
    T h e model adopted for archaeological entities in this study has
been a nested hierarchical model of individually polythetic entities
arranged in ascending order of system complexity; where complexity
is taken to register the degree of internal networking (figs 3, 49). Such
an organization of archaeological data is a purely arbitrary conception
                              Entities and processes and procedure                        413

adopted because: - it is concise - it suits polythetic entities -
archaeological affinity d i s t r i b u t i o n s are a p p r o p r i a t e to such a structur-
ing - the field of inquiry is by this m e a n s broken d o w n into suc-
cessively smaller areas of u n c e r t a i n t y in an empirical m a n n e r - and as
a 'natural' system it possesses a predictive capacity. Nevertheless, the
fact that such a model is an arbitrary organization of data which in
reality exist in dimensions of greater complexity should not be
obscured. T h e r e are other kinds of model w h i c h might have been and
could be adopted for the same data - b r a n c h i n g d i c h o t o m o u s models
or multidimensional models to n a m e but two alternatives (Cherry
I
  9S7. PP- 227-8). I n d e e d , it has b e c o m e increasingly clear in the
course of discussion that archaeological entities do not really exist in
simple hierarchical levels and that m a n y of the most tantalizing prob-
lems are false p r o b l e m s arising f r o m a model which is not entirely
adequate. T h e p r o b l e m of cross-correlating the 'hierarchical' sets of
the social, cultural, linguistic and racial population d i m e n s i o n s is a
case in point (fig. 75). T h e evidence rather more closely approximates
with a continuous m u l t i d i m e n s i o n a l system of elaborately networked
multistate elements and the p r e c e d i n g c h a p t e r s have sporadically
a t t e m p t e d to outline alternative constellation models on these vague
lines (figs so, 51, 53, 54, 65, 66).
      T h e hierarchical aspect of the model m u s t therefore be taken as a
temporarily acceptable expedient with some d a n g e r o u s properties. In
all probability a variety of m o r e subtle multidimensional models will
be developed for f u t u r e archaeological classification. Similarly, we
have repeatedly pointed out that although the polythetic inter-
pretation is immensely more realistic and p o w e r f u l t h a n the old tacit
monothetic models, the fit is still only a p p r o x i m a t e . In the first place
most archaeological populations are not fully polythetic and in a
second respect it is to be noted that there are very m a n y different
categories of polythetic relationship - varying in b o t h n u m b e r s of
elements and the range and n a t u r e of their 'sharing' p a t t e r n . It is to be
expected that various categories of polythetic s t r u c t u r e will variously
and with varying accuracy model different archaeological entities. T h e
nested hierarchical model of polythetic entities is to be taken only as a
c o n t e m p o r a r y approximation.
    Archaeological entities exist because t h e r e once existed networks
of links between people which 'accidentally' generated links between
their artefacts (fig. 48). T h e s e archaeological entities are for the most
part c o m p o u n d e d of m a n y smaller entities clustered in certain ways
414      Analytical Archaeology
and in this respect they are all 'populations'. Earlier discussion
established that some of the most general regularities in archaeological
taxa of all levels arise from this constraint and its consequences
(chapter 4, 1):

      ( 1 ) T h e population entity is a unit system of components coupled
            in some environmental context such that the 'behaviour' of the
            whole is more complex than that of the elements and the
            successive states of the whole system influences the successive
            states of the parts.
      (2) T h e population may therefore possess 'emergent' characteris-
            tics which are not found in its individual components.
      (3) T h e population has a definite structure and composition,
            stipulated for any given moment but changing with space and
            time.
      (4) T h e population entity is ontogenetic; it may exhibit a 'life
            cycle'
               (i) A s the quantitative growth and oscillation in numbers of
                   component elements;
              (ii) A s the quantitative growth and oscillation in numbers of
                   whole representative entities;
            (iii) As the qualitative change and oscillation of the system as a
                   structured system.
      (5) T h e population has a 'heredity' - an antecedent trajectory
            relating the population as a transform to other earlier popu-
             lations.
      (6) T h e population has the property of the numerical distribution
            of its elements in space, time and states. T h e clustering,
             central tendency, deviation, range and other statistical
             measures help define this important quality.

Technocomplexes, culture groups, cultures, assemblages, artefact-
types and similar archaeological entities are all population systems,
with the consequent population properties.
    If we think of archaeological entities in terms of populations, then
there are basically only two categories of archaeological variety and
three levels of organization. All of the higher archaeological entities
are populations of artefact-types and the lower entities are populations
of attributes. Within these two categories of variety three broad levels
of organization can be detected, based upon the necessary degree of
affinity defining the items in the entity levels - varying from the
                                 Entities and processes and procedure                             415

highest degree of mutual similarity, t h r o u g h m e d i u m a f f i n i t y , d o w n to
low affinity. I n d e e d , it w a s pointed out that the s y m m e t r y of the
archaeological t e r m i n o l o g y u n d e r l i n e d the s y m m e t r y of the affinity
s y n t a x relating these parallel entities (chapter 6, 11):


                      Internal                                      Internal
Entity       set      affinity   level       Entity       set       affinity   level
T y p e group         Lowest                 Culture group          Lowest
Type                  Medium                 Culture                Medium
Subtype               Highest                Subculture             Highest
      T                                               r
artefact                                     assemblage
populations                                  populations
of attributes                                of types

         1                                            J
                      T w o variety
                      categories

(In this context type is artefact-type, culture is cultural a s s e m b l a g e and s u b c u l t u r e
here represents local or regional s u b c u l t u r e s . )


       T h e general i m p r e s s i o n e m e r g e s that archaeological entities are
categories of c o m p l e x s y s t e m s r e p r e s e n t e d b y p o p u l a t i o n s of elements,
generated by related categories of social units. T h e s y s t e m s h a v e a
polythetic structure based on the constrained variation of sociocultural
and environmental v a r i e t y , a s t r u c t u r e w h i c h is reflected in the dis-
tribution of elements within the entity categories and in g e o g r a p h i c
space (figs 67, 72). T h e time and space ' b e h a v i o u r ' of the c o m p l e x
s y s t e m s representing archaeological entities can be s e p a r a t e d into t w o
aspects. One aspect reflects the regularities inherent in a particular
system as a m e m b e r of a class of similar s y s t e m s w i t h basically similar
structures and limited by the constraints of that s t r u c t u r e and in
addition by similar contextual constraints. T h e other aspect of entity
' b e h a v i o u r ' reflects the idiosyncrasies arising f r o m the particular and
u n i q u e values and states of the e l e m e n t s in a specific s y s t e m - w h i c h
give rise to the peculiar b e h a v i o u r of the particular entity w i t h i n the
constrained set of possible b e h a v i o u r s . O n e p u r p o s e of this s t u d y as a
whole has been to try and isolate the 'inherent' regularities that m i g h t
be expected f r o m the v a r i o u s categories of archaeological entity
s y s t e m s in order that the u n i q u e and peculiar qualities of particular
cases might be the m o r e strongly e m p h a s i z e d . It m a y be a r g u e d that
the time and space regularities isolated in this w o r k are too general to
416    Analytical Archaeology

be used in particular instances but in fact the isolation and separation
of these very general regularities provides the best means of isolating
and defining the residual specific peculiarities of given situations.
    T h e nested hierarchical model of polythetic entities provides a
convenient representation of the relationships governing archaeologi-
cal entities, whilst remaining an arbitrary conceptualization which
may be replaced by more recent developments. In the same fashion, it
is not assumed for one moment that the definitions adopted in this
work will be widely accepted or adopted. On the contrary, it has been
assumed throughout that widely useful and accepted definitions for
archaeological entities and processes will only come about after a
prolonged period of terminological anarchy (chapter i , v). T h e
definitions suggested here are to be understood as a positive step
towards this healthy anarchy in that they may provoke modifications
and alternatives from which a satisfactory terminology may ultimately
be selected. T h e history of the sciences and related disciplines suggest
that such a period of clashing views and concepts is to be infinitely
preferred to the prevailing complacency within archaeology.


Ill   Processes

T h e major part of this book has been devoted to the discussion and
definition of archaeological entities, or rather entity taxa, in the belief
that the future of archaeology depends upon the further clarification of
its concepts in order that powerful, modern techniques may be
employed to the utmost capacity of their potential. These archaeolo-
gical entities display constant change in a variety of dimensions and
the operating vectors made apparent by these successive changes in
state are usually called 'processes'. T h e first chapter suggested that one
of the most useful models for archaeological processes of all levels
would be a general dynamic system model and subsequently an
attempt was made to develop such a model in terms of a system
structure and a set of broad postulates about its inherent 'behaviour'
(chapter 2, 11, fig. 1 1 , postulates 1 - 1 6 ) .
    T h e general dynamic system model provides a framework against
which the particular changes of particular processes upon specific
archaeological entities can be studied by postulating and separating
the inherent general changes from the informative and unique
circumstance changes, providing in addition a set of appropriate
analytical procedures (chapter 2, m , fig. 12).
                       Entities and processes and procedure             417

    All archaeological entities are kinds of system and changing enti-
ties are dynamic systems. Since we are distinguishing archaeological
entities or systems of varying levels of organization and complexity we
should expect each kind of entity to have differing and appropriate
kinds of process which may act upon them. We should not expect the
processes that operate upon cultures or culture groups to be the same
as those that operate upon artefact attributes, although since the
former entities are c o m p o u n d s of the latter elements we might expect
the processes appropriate to higher entities to integrate the simpler
processes as well. Each level of the hierarchy of archaeological taxa has
appropriate categories of processes which are relevant to that par-
ticular kind of entity. One of the purposes of the hierarchical
classification is that the correct allocation of a particular archaeological
entity to a particular rank should predict the appropriate category of
processes which might be expected to operate upon the entity -
providing a predictively useful classification.
    Perhaps one useful initial step w o u l d be to distinguish three broad
categories of 'general processes' which operate upon most sociocul-
tural entities, with differing effects according to the system, the
complexity of the entity and its levels of variety:

   (1) Entity ontogeny
   (2) Entity migration
   (3) Entity interaction.

    Entity ontogeny covers the quantitative appearance, growth, and
disappearance of the entity population itself - the particular culture
group, culture, artefact-type, or attribute, for example.
    Entity migration simply expresses the capacity f o r the quan-
titatively growing and fluctuating entity population to have a fluctuat-
ing geographical distribution.
    Entity interaction reflects those variety interchanges which must
occur between any d y n a m i c coupled systems and is usually marked by
mutual element or variety fluctuation and adjustments b y :

   loss of variety
   gain of variety
   transformation of variety.

    In sociocultural systems and therefore in archaeological systems it
has been tentatively suggested that the equilibrium basis for d y n a m i c
adjustment in mutual variety is on the basis of the principle of
418    Analytical Archaeology

continuity: sociocultural systems are continuously adjusting their
variety in such a way as to minimize the m a x i m u m amount of
immediate system dislocation, involving new, alternative, contradic-
tive, or redundant variety. T h i s moving equilibrium or stable format is
continuously adjusted by the loss, gain or transformation of system
variety at all levels. T h e gain or increase in system variety can usually
be achieved either by development within the system, by internal
invention, or it may be achieved by acquiring variety f r o m outside the
entity's own system, by acquisition from diffusing variety reaching the
system's boundaries. In overall effects entity interaction, with its
moving equilibrium, is marked by the qualitative change or gradual
transformation of the entity population by virtue of the changing
states of its component elements - the culture changes in terms of its
changing artefact-type components, the artefact-type changes as the
integration of its changing attribute states.


ARCHAEOLOGICAL        PROCESSES

It has been suggested that archaeological processes mark the on-
togeny, migration, or transformation of the various levels of
archaeological entities in terms of their attribute or artefact loss, gain,
and transformation. However, archaeological processes do not operate
in vacuo; they are vectors of sociocultural factors and it is desirable to
have a terminology which conveys the specific kinds of social processes
which are likely to be connected with the categories of archaeological
entities and processes. A process terminology is required which
simultaneously implies various combinations of social and material
culture changes. Such a terminology can conveniently follow the
nested hierarchical model with the higher processes appropriate to the
higher levels and subsuming the lower processes as components.
    T h e hierarchy of archaeological processes therefore usefully links
material culture changes in artefact-types and attributes to certain
categories of social change which might bring them about. T h e precise
interpretation of such an archaeological process depends upon the
degree of deliberate organization involved in the particular case -
differentiating between deliberately, optimally organized            and
comparatively unorganized processes. Organized diffusion, for exam-
ple, is the counterpart of deliberate trade whereas ordinary diffusion
may have no element of deliberate trade organization in its generation.
In a similar way, culture group repatterning may come about simply
                        Entities and processes and p r o c e d u r e   419
by preferential diffusion around the pre-existing network of related
cultures, or it may reflect the imperial colonization of the network by
one of its members or by an alien culture. T h e classification of
archaeological processes is socio-archaeological in much the same way
that Steward's anthropological regularities are socio-cultural
(Steward 1955).
    T h e nested hierarchy of socio-archaeological processes may be
sketched in the following way:

Technocomplex repatterning - the periodic repatterning of tech-
    nocomplexes, usually from successive climax centres; the wide-
    spread adoption of convergent strategies.
        Organized form: the formation of international economic
    blocks or federations.
Culture group repatterning - the repatterning of the culture group by
    preferential diffusion around the pre-existing network of connec-
    ted cultures by a member culture or an alien culture.
        Organized form: imperial colonization or unification by mili-
    tary conquest.
Cultural intrusion/substitution - the displacement of one culture by
    another in a specific territory and the occupation of unoccupied
    areas.
        Organized form: military conquest followed by settlement; or
    mass migration.
Acculturation - the increased similarity of cultures consequent upon
    diffusion in one or both directions, convergent interaction.
        Organized f o r m : organized cultural intercommunication.
Cultural assimilation - the assimilation by one culture of another,
    which survives as an incorporated ethnic subculture.
        Organized f o r m : military conquest following acculturation.
Subcultural intrusion/substitution - the displacement of one subculture
    and its type complex by another of similar role.
        Organized f o r m : the substitution of one military, aristocratic,
    religious, or other class of subculture by another, by deliberate
    action.
Subcultural intrusion/insertion - the addition of a subcultural segment
    to an existing social structure, from without.
        Organized form: the deliberate accumulative introduction of
    a new subcultural segment, e.g. slaves, workers, renegades,
    mercenaries, specialists etc.
420    Analytical Archaeology

Stimulus diffusion - the like response to like needs precipitated by a
    common outside stimulus which is not itself copied or adopted.
        Organized f o r m : deliberate derivative development by inter-
    action, e.g. from warfare, observation, or the transfer of knowl-
    edge.
Secondary diffusion - the process by which cultural elements spread
    beyond the limits of the culture area of origin.
        Organized f o r m : economic trade, gift exchanges, etc.
Primary diffusion - the process by which cultural elements spread
    within the limits of the culture area of origin, via the network of
    social interconnections; the recirculation of variety.
        Organized f o r m : internal trade.
Invention - the device of 'new' variety by the renetworking of existing
    components in a system with emergent characteristics - the stabil-
    ization of a sociocultural dislocation, either deliberately or by play,
    or accident.
        Organized f o r m : scientific experiment and research.
Loss — the loss of sociocultural variety by displacement by more
    comprehensive variety, by lack of raw materials, or by isolated
    drift.
        Organized f o r m : utilitarian displacement. 1
    These processes involve varying patterns of artefact-type and
attribute trends, reflecting varying degrees of human movement and
population reorganization. Most of these processes have been
outlined, together with their characteristic pattern, in the successive
chapters relating to the relevant entity levels. However, the outstand-
ing omission from that discussion has been the ramifications involving
diffusion and distribution models; it is therefore in that direction that
we must now elaborate. T h e hypotheses developed throughout this
section largely summarize or modify the fundamental deliberations of
Kroeber, Dixon and Wissler wherein these matters are more fully
explored (Kroeber 1948, Dixon 1928, Wissler 1923). Perhaps the only-
significant modifications are the substitution of a polythetic model of
cultural structure and distribution for the older tacit monothetic
model (figs 67, 72), and the addition of concepts and procedures
derived from more recent work in geography (e.g. Gould 1969).


DISTRIBUTION      AND D I F F U S I O N   MODELS

T h e process of diffusion of cultural traits and ideas operates upon
entities of attribute, attribute complex, artefact-type, type-complex
                        Entities and processes and procedure               421

and assemblage levels. In this restricted sense archaeological entities
of higher status cannot be said to 'diffuse', but geographical studies of
diffusion have long included consideration of population movement
and we will return to examples of these later. For the moment we
are concerned with the processes by which cultural elements are
spread through and beyond their area of origin. Following Dixon we
will distinguish 'primary d i f f u s i o n ' and the spread within the culture
area of origin, from 'secondary diffusion' beyond the originating
area's boundaries (Dixon 1928, pp. 5 9 - 1 0 6 ) . T h e term diffusion
consequently conveys a set of related processes operating on a limited
range of entity categories. T h e characteristics of diffusion will there-
fore vary according to the entity level under consideration, the par-
ticular kind of diffusion process operating upon it and the constraint
of the plane of diffusion. T h e constraint in such cases is com-
pounded from the permissive and limiting control of the physical
environment and the state of the material, technological, economic,
religious and psychological system variety and dislocation in the
intervening communities, together with the latter's dispersion
characteristics.
    Primary diffusion occurs within the culture area of origin of the
particular element, which is usually distributed the length and breadth
of the territory by the continuously reinforcing and recycling of
cultural variety within the reticulated kin and acquaintance network of
the linguistically united cultural pool. T h e main mechanism of pri-
mary diffusion is person to person contact, in the course of which the
element will suffer cumulative modification and transformation.
Within the culture area this element transformation will not usually be
serious because of the constantly cross-referencing redundant
information defining the cultural mode f o r that element.
      Secondary diffusion denotes the processes by which cultural ele-
ments are spread beyond the limits of the culture area of their origin.
T h i s external diffusion differs only in degree and capacity f r o m pri-
mary diffusion. T h e mechanisms are the same but less elaborately
reinforcing, the degree of element modification and transformation
during the diffusion are consequently the greater. T h e reticulated
network of kin and acquaintance, w e b b e d by common language, is
here replaced by the more sporadic and less efficient traffic of cross-
cultural marriage, warfare, slaving, trade and gift exchange. T h e
capacity for element distortion increases with the diminishing
efficiency of the person to person contact, which still remains the basis
of the process.
422      Analytical Archaeology

    T h e transfer of cultural elements by secondary diffusion clearly
depends upon the successive acceptance and transference of the ele-
ments. T h i s acceptance, modification and integration of the diffusing
element itself, depends upon its congruence with the particular socio-
cultural system and the element's standing as novel, alternative,
contradictive, or redundant variety in relation to the system and its
foci of dislocation. If the element is not accepted by the sociocultural
system then it does not diffuse in this particular direction (chapter 3,
II).
    T h e basis for the acceptance or rejection of the diffusing element
depends on its capacity to minimize immediate system dislocation in
the variety of intermediary cultures - it must satisfy a 'need'. T h e
modification of the element in this cross-cultural passage is thus a
vector of a number of factors - its relationship to existing cultural
variety, the severity and location of the accepting system's dislocation
foci, the extent and continuity of contact, the complexity of the
element's structure, and the prestige of the bearers of the novelty. T h e
changes in the diffusing element may involve changes in structure or
status or both. Different elements will clearly be differently affected by
diffusion processes depending upon their inherent characteristics and
that of the intervening cultures - this gives rise to the effect of
differential diffusion which selectively disperses elements from an
array. T h e selective transmission of the compass, silk, gunpowder, and
paper by medieval Islam and yet its conservative resistance to other
Chinese variety had a marked effect upon the pattern of Oriental
innovations reaching medieval Europe, for example.
    T h e diffusion of cultural elements is quite apparently constrained
by the nature of the elements being diffused and by the intervening
sociocultural and environmental limitations. It follows that both
primary and secondary diffusion patterns exhibit regularities
consequent upon these general constraints - regularities which give
rise to useful postulates and some tentative axioms.
    T h e regularities may be summarized under the following prop-
ositions, wherein the term 'element' may mean attributes, attribute
complexes, artefact-types, or type complexes:


Postulates

       (1) Each specific cultural element has, or once had, a semi-
           continuous polythetic distribution pattern over a limited
           culture area.
                                Entities and processes and procedure                               423

    (2) T h e s e o v e r l a p p i n g areas contain the distribution m e a n , m o d e ,
        and m e d i a n of a large n u m b e r of associated e l e m e n t s w h i c h
        together c i r c u m s c r i b e the culture area within the w i d e r dis-
        persion pattern (fig. 67).
    (3) T h e area of e l e m e n t origin need not be central nor need it be
        the source of later m o d i f i c a t i o n s and t r a n s f o r m a t i o n s of the
        element.
    (4) On the c o n t r a r y these later t r a n s f o r m a t i o n s are o f t e n
        peripheral i n n o v a t i o n s , w h e r e the d i f f u s i n g e l e m e r t s e n c o u n -
        ter new e n v i r o n m e n t s and c u l t u r e s -                  p r o d u c i n g the
        p h e n o m e n o n of ' f r o n t i e r innovation and invention'.
    (5) F r o m the culture area in w h i c h it arises the d i f f u s i n g element
        d i f f u s e s a s y m m e t r i c a l l y and erratically at v a r y i n g rates,
        s p r e a d i n g o u t w a r d in irregular but radial c o n t o u r s .
    (6) E l e m e n t s lost in the course of d i f f u s i o n are p e r m a n e n t l y lost
        unless r e i n t r o d u c e d f r o m another source - hence seriation
        along a d i f f u s i o n line is m a d e possible.
    (7) T h e w i d e s p r e a d initial s e c o n d a r y d i f f u s i o n of an element will
        f r e q u e n t l y stimulate        parallel       developments             and  trans-
        f o r m a t i o n s , especially in c o n t e x t s of similar conditions - stim-
        ulus d i f f u s i o n and t e c h n o c o m p l e x c o n v e r g e n c e .



Tentative axioms

T h e axioms w h i c h m a y be d e v e l o p e d f r o m the p r e c e d i n g propositions
have some general utility in the analysis of w i d e l y d i f f u s e d assem-
blages and e x p a n d e d culture g r o u p s . T h e y m i g h t be stated as f o l l o w s :

    ( 1 ) G i v e n a w i d e l y d i f f u s e d a s s e m b l a g e of specific multistate
           cultural elements, then the specific element state or assem-
           blage of e l e m e n t states w i t h the largest area of distribution is
           likely to h a v e been part of the earliest e x p a n s i v e assemblage.
    (2) T h e a s s e m b l a g e with the greatest n u m b e r of the early and
          w i d e s p r e a d specific element states is likely to have constituted
          the earliest e x p a n s i v e a s s e m b l a g e .
    (3) T h e internal affinity d e f i n i n g the culture g r o u p , culture and
          similar entities, despite their polythetic s t r u c t u r e , d e p e n d s
          upon a set of key specific a r t e f a c t - t y p e s and cultural elements -
          the area of origin must p r o v i d e a set of antecedent sources
          f r o m w h i c h these key e l e m e n t s m a y have been integrated or
          developed.
424      Analytical A r c h a e o l o g y

      (4) T h e final and total distribution area of a widely diffused
          assemblage may usefully be contracted by separating later
          expansions f r o m the irreducible area of basic early dis-
          tribution.
      (5) T h e area of origin of a specific cultural element or entity is
          unlikely to be absolutely peripheral or absolutely central to its
          final and total distribution area but it is likely to have been
          within an area of concentration, not necessarily the area of
          densest concentration; the distortion of contextual constraints
          must be taken into account.


DISTRIBUTION          MODELS

T h e analysis of element distributions in space usually produces two
main categories of distribution pattern - a single continuous dis-
tribution area, or several discontinuous distribution areas. Now, if all
known instances of a cultural element are plotted in time depth and
the final distribution f o r m s a single continuous area, then the
inference is that the element originated in its integrated f o r m some-
where within that unitary distribution. H o w e v e r , if the element dis-
tribution is nucleated within widely separated and discontinuous areas
then the possibilities suggest either widespread diffusion followed by
regional isolation, or independent invention in the separate areas or
common stimulus followed by parallel regional development. T h e r e -
fore, if a case for the diffusion of a particular cultural element complex
is to be upheld then it is essential to demonstrate:

      ( 1 ) T h a t the elements are individuals in complexes or assemblages
            of similarly distributed elements.
      (2) T h a t the complexes being compared are really the same or are
            closely related transforms.
      (3) T h a t the components of the complex repeatedly occur
            together in more than chance aggregates, when compared with
            their total numbers and frequency of occurrence together.
      (4) T h a t the elements forming the complex must be shown to
            repeatedly occur together in a physical and chronological
            association, not merely repeatedly scattering over the same
            area.
      (5) T h a t the demonstrated complex cannot be more, easily
            explained as a general functional complex based on parallel
            development from a common basis.
                      Entities a n d processes a n d p r o c e d u r e   425

    These qualifications provide a simple and crude test for the rela-
tionship of apparent parallels between cultural elements which are
suspicious by virtue of their discontinuous and distant location in
relation to the distribution of the main body. T h e existence of similar
or identical elements in widely separated and apparently unconnected
areas must be checked by such tests before diffusion or intrusion can
be invoked.
    An excellent example is the superficially strong argument which
would demand a connection between Southeast Asia and South
America since these areas share the following elements: nut and lime
chewing, pan pipes, tie-dying, terrace irrigation, plank extended
dugouts, gauze weaving, the blow-gun, and bronze metallurgy. T h i s
ingenious argument for an intrusion or diffusion connection between
the two areas can be countered on the basis of the simple tests already
enumerated:

   (1) T h e elements are not individuals in a single complex, they do
       not have the same distribution within their areas. T h e plank
       canoe is found in Chile, tie-dying in Peru, coca-chewing in the
       Andes, the blow-gun in the Amazon, and so on.
   (2) T h e elements being compared are not more closely similar
       than parallel and functional constraints would require - they
       are not specific artefact-types.
   (3) T h e components in the overall complex do not repeatedly
       occur together in more than chance aggregates of at the most
       two elements from the same assemblage.
   (4) T h e component elements in this complex are from various
       areas and various chronological periods in Asia and America -
       not even repeatedly occurring within the same culture areas.
   (5) T h e complex is not an association assemblage and can more
       easily be explained as an aggregate of elements separately
       developed for similar functional requirements in similar
       technocomplexes (Dixon 1928, pp. 180—226).

    It is fairly clear from this and many other examples (e.g. Rowe
1965-6) that even having established the existence of similar
complexes in separate areas it is essential to analyse their functional
and idiosyncratic components before invoking diffusion. On the one
hand one may distinguish largely functional complexes of elements
linked together by their common association with a specific cultural
activity which would necessarily require the presence of some or all of
426    Analytical Archaeology

the elements - horse riding, chariotry, or cereal agriculture, for
example. In contrast, there are those idiosyncratic accretions or
adhesions, sets of elements linked together as an arbitrary and selec-
tive association of specific elements f r o m a much wider possible
vocabulary - an idiosyncratic complex. T h e elements gathered into
these functional or idiosyncratic complexes may range f r o m sets of
attributes up to sets of specific artefact-types, or indeed complexes of
type complexes. T h e importance of the contrast between the different
categories of element complexes arises from the different implications
and information which may be extracted from regularities in their
distribution patterns. Specific idiosyncratic complexes shared by
widely separated communities would point more firmly to some direct
interconnection than would a shared functional complex, for example.
Indeed, in a crude sense one might say that every cultural assemblage
is composed of widely shared functional complexes relating to a
common technocomplex background and less widely shared idiosyn-
cratic complexes defining a limited cultural superstructure.


DIFFUSION     MODELS

Consideration of diffusion models and their relationship to dis-
tribution patterns takes us beyond Dixon's 'primary' and 'secondary'
categories and into the work of modern geographers who have
developed their own classification for diffusion processes. T h e i r basic
distinction is between expansion diffusion, by which information or
cultural traits spread through an area while still remaining in their area
of origin, and relocation diffusion, by which the carriers of the
information or traits themselves move through new areas (migration).
Expansion diffusion can in turn be divided into two subtypes,
contagious, in which direct contact is the method of dispersal and
increasing distance between individuals lessens the probability of
contact, and hierarchical, in which dispersion occurs through a social,
economic or political hierarchy (e.g. from large urban centres to small
hamlets or vice versa). T h i s classification is well presented and illus-
trated by Haggett ( 1 9 7 2 , pp. 348-9), and G o u l d (1969, pp. 3 - 8 ) , who
points out that these types of diffusion are not mutually exclusive.
Barriers to diffusion may be physical, linguistic, religious, political or
psychological, and normally they are permeable, 'allowing part of the
energy of a diffusion pulse to go through, but generally slowing down
the intensity of the process in the local area' (Gould 1969, p. 13). In
                        Entities and processes and p r o c e d u r e   427

rare cases the barriers may be either completely absorbing and stop a
diffusion pulse from proceeding any further (e.g. swamps, high
mountains) or completely reflecting and concentrate the energy of a
diffusion pulse in a local area from which it will 'explode' forward with
great force.
    Archaeological studies of diffusion have (with a few exceptions) yet
to approach the frequency or productive results of their geographical
counterparts. But there have been a number of attempts to relate
quantified archaeological distribution patterns to particular diffusion
processes and we will outline their application here under the follow-
ing general headings:

   (1) distance-decay models
   (2) wave of advance models
   (3) stochastic simulation models
   (4) trend models
In terms of the types defined above, (1) deals with cases of expansion
diffusion, (2) with relocation diffusion and (3) and (4) with examples of
both.

Distance decay models

T h e observation that human groups are characterized by a decreasing
amount of interaction with the increase in distance between them has
been the basis of much research into the processes behind cultural
distribution patterns during the past decade. Models based on the
distance decay principle have been stimulated from three different
sources:
   (a) the development of characterization studies (e.g. neutron
       activation analysis, optical emission spectroscopy) to trace the
       sources of different raw materials used to make prehistoric
       artefacts (e.g. for pottery see Peacock 1970);
   (b) the introduction into archaeology of quantitative methods for
       analysing spatial patterns, largely drawn from contemporary
       geography (e.g. Hagerstrand 1953, Haggett 1965);
   (c) an increased interest in the different types of trade or exchange
       and their operation and significance in small-scale societies
       (e.g. Sahlins 1972).
T h e characterization studies have provided the archaeologist with
some reliable information on the types and quantities of raw materials
428    Analytical Archaeology
(whether in that state or as finished artefacts) which were circulated or
moved with their owners over sometimes large distances in the past.
Whereas earlier discussions about cultural diffusion or trade in pre-
history had rested almost solely on the criteria outlined above (dis-
tribution models, pp. 424-6), scientific source analysis now provided
much needed independent evidence. Furthermore the increasing
numbers of such analyses revealed the potential for the application of
quantitative techniques (e.g. regression analysis, see below) to define
their spatial distribution patterns.
     T h e interpretation of these patterns depended upon the stimulus
of developing 'substantivist' economic anthropology (e.g. Polanyi et al.
1957; Sahlins 1972), in which small-scale societies were viewed in
terms of limited economic goals (non-optimizing, anti-surplus) and
the operation of trade/exchange through social channels. T w o types of
economic transactions, reciprocity and redistribution, were dis-
tinguished (Sahlins 1972) and interest focused on the different types of
social and political organization with which they were associated. T h e
fundamental archaeological question which was raised was how these
types of exchange patterns could be recognized within prehistoric
societies.
     It is important to realize that consideration of the spatial diffusion
of cultural traits involves two key concepts: first the obvious one of
movement of the traits themselves and secondly the human interaction
with which this movement was associated. Here a strong analogy has
been detected between trade/exchange and a communication system
(Renfrew 1976), in which information may be transmitted by either
the commodity exchanged or the concepts associated with that com-
modity or by direct communication between the people exchanging
the commodity (op. cit. pp. 22-4). If the communication associated
with exchange is to be fully investigated then it should be remembered
that simply considering the whole problem under the general term
 'diffusion' may conceal complex patterns and processes.
     Early characterization analyses of prehistoric artefacts soon began
 to yield distribution patterns showing a general fall-off in frequency as
 distance from their raw material source increased. This property has
 been expressed as the 'Law of Monotonic Decrement': 'In circum-
 stances of uniform loss or deposition and in the absence of highly
 organized directional (i.e. preferential, non-homogeneous) exchange,
 the curve of frequency or abundance of occurrence of an exchanged
 commodity against effective distance from a localized source will be a
                        Entities and processes and p r o c e d u r e      429

monotonic decreasing one' (Renfrew 1977, p. 72). Variations in the
fall-off patterns shown by different types of artefact have been used to
infer the operation of different models of trade. Three of these models
are outlined briefly below.

    (i) Down the line exchange : the successive reciprocal exchange of a
commodity from its source, sometimes over very long distances.
    Example. T h e exchange of obsidian in the Near East from known
sources in the Levant, Anatolia and the Zagros area c. 7500-5500 BC
(fig. 90a). Renfrew, Dixon and Cann (1968) distinguish a 'supply zone'

°h
100




                                                           Fig. 90a Trade
                                                           models - down-
                                                           the-line exchange.
                                          •L               Source: Renfrew
                                                600km.
             Dittane* fron »ourc«                          1972, p. 466.

of c. 300 km radius from the sources in which the proportion of
obsidian to other chipped stone fell very gradually and a 'contact zone'
beyond this in which the obsidian frequency declined exponentially
with increasing distance. Renfrew (1972, fig. 20.9 - reproduced here as
fig. 90a) substitutes 'contact' for 'supply* zone and 'fall-off' for 'contact'
zone.
     (ii) Prestige chain exchange: the restricted transfer of prestige
goods between people of higher social rank. T h e non-utilitarian nature
                               Fig. 90b T r a d e
                               models - prestige
                               chain exchange.
          _1_                  Source: Renfrew
Distane* from sourc*   600 km. 1972, p. 468.




                              Fig. 90c Trade
                              models - redistri-
                              buii ve/directional
                              trade.
                              Source: Renfrew
                       bOOkm. 1972, p. 470.
                        E n t i t i e s a n d processes and p r o c e d u r e   431

of these goods and their subsequent further exchange increases the
distances over which they travel and decreases their rate of fall-off (fig.
90b).
     Example. T h e exchange of Spondylus shells of Aegean origin in
Neolithic Europe (Shackleton and Renfrew 1970).
     (iii) Redistributive I directional trade: either the existence of central
places serves to concentrate the occurrence of exchangeable com-
modities for redistribution or in a related way there is a direct
exchange of commodities between distant areas without involving any
middlemen (fig. 90c). T h e latter type of trade was referred to as
'polarized diffusion' in the first edition of this volume (Clarke 1968,
pp. 419-20).
     Examples. Redistribution has been discussed by Renfrew (1972) in
relation to the development of civilization in Bronze Age Greece.
Examples of directional trade between discrete, distant areas have
been increasingly recognized in the later prehistoric and early historic
periods in Europe. T h e discrete inland concentration of Greek
metalwork around Massalia and in the Rhine/Rhone/Danube head-
waters of the Hallstatt mining technocomplex has been noted by
Piggott (fig. 91). T h e distribution of Dressel type 1 amphorae pro-
duced in southern Italy and shipped direct to southern England in the
first century BC has been published by Peacock ( 1 9 7 1 , fig. 36). In
Roman Britain there are good examples of directional trade in the
occurrence of Severn Valley ware on Hadrian's Wall and the Antonine
 Frontier (Webster 1972, fig. 1 ; 1977), black-burnished pottery from
southeast England in the Scottish frontier zone in the second to
fourth centuries AD (Farrar 1973) and mortaria vessels from Col-
chester in the same northern area AD 140-200 (Hartley 1973).
     T h e analysis and interpretation of fall-off curves showing various
types of decreasing interaction with increasing distance from a com-
modity's source has been taken a step further by the use of regression
analysis and gravity models (Hodder 1974). T h e fall-off curves of
fifteen different types of commodity, ranging in date from the Neoli-
thic down to the Roman period, were examined to find the regression
line which gave the best fit to the varying frequencies of the data. All
the regression gradients were plotted together (fig. 92) and were
interpreted as showing two general patterns: first a group showing a
small local distribution involving common, utilitarian and sometimes
bulky commodities (fig. 92 - e.g. Roman tiles, Savernake pottery,
Malvernian Roman pottery, Bronze Age palstaves) and secondly a
432    Analytical Archaeology




Fig. 91 An example of directional trade. T h e distribution of Hallstatt imports
and luxuries, seventh-sixth centuries BC: i - imported Greek etc. bronzes,
seventh century BC; 2 - imported bronzes and gold, sixth century BC;
3 - imported Greek pottery, seventh-sixth centuries BC; 4 - Massaliote
amphorae, seventh-sixth centuries BC; 5 - Hallstatt C and D gold objects;
M - Massalia; H - the Heuneberg; V - Vix.
Source: Piggott 1965, p. 188.


group of finer commodities produced in large numbers and exchanged
or traded over larger distances (fig. 92: e.g. Oxford Roman pottery,
Anatolian obsidian, Neolithic Cornish pottery). T h e analysis here
enabled the archaeologist to make various inferences about the pro-
cesses behind the distribution patterns of the different commodities.
T h e use of a gravity model was designed to predict the boundaries
between the service areas of two neighbouring towns and relates the
interaction between them to their sizes and the distances separating
them (Hodder 1974, pp. 183-5). T h e formula is expressed as follows:
                      Entities and processes and procedure         433




         Fig. 92 A regression analysis of fifteen commodities:
         1 - Rowlands Castle pottery; 2 - Dobunnic coins;
         3 - Late Roman fine wares; 4 - Malvernian
         Roman pottery; 5 - Roman tiles; 6 - Savernake
         pottery (density); 7 - Savernake pottery (percentages);
         8 - Neolithic picrite axe-hammers; 9 - New Forest
         pottery; 10 - Bronze Age palstaves; 1 1 - Oxford
         pottery; 12 - Neolithic Cornish pottery; 13 - Neolithic
         Group I axes; 14 - Neolithic Group VI axes;
         15 - Anatolian obsidian.
         Source: Hodder 1974, p. 1 8 1 .


where Dhi is the distance from the breaking point b to centre „ 1 and j
are the two service centres, Pi and Pj are the respective population
sizes of the two centres.

This model was then applied to different types of Romano-British
pottery and to the distribution of British Neolithic stone axes of
434     Analytical Archaeology




 Fig. 93 Predicted 'breaking-point' based on a gravity model compared
 with the actual distribution of Group I and Group VI Neolithic stone axes.
 Source: Hodder 1974, p. 186.


petrological G r o u p s I and V I . In the latter case (fig. 93) the predicted
'breaking-point' between the areas supplied by the two sources coin-
cided very closely with the actual distribution b o u n d a r i e s in the
A v e b u r y district of southern E n g l a n d . T h e success of this model in
this example and in predicting boundaries between R o m a n o - B r i t i s h
pottery distributions s u p p o r t s the hypothesis that c o m p e t i n g service
centres were responsible for the uneven spatial distributions of these
commodities.
                       Entities and processes and p r o c e d u r e     435
    T h e assumption behind much of the research into distance-decay
models has been that the differences in the shape of fall-off curves of
various commodities could be related to differences in the processes by
which they were moved between human communities. T h i s can be
seen quite clearly in the attempts to define different 'modes' of trade
and their spatial correlates (e.g. Renfrew 1976 and recanted in Ren-
frew 1977, p. 88). But the problem raised by recent simulation studies
(see below) is that the same general type of fall-off curve may be
produced by different spatial processes (fig. 100). This complicates the
interpretation of artefact distribution patterns, as does the recognition
that 'barriers' to diffusion may not produce any major differences in
these patterns (figs 100, 101). On the other hand it may still be
possible to relate such factors as the degree of concavity of fall-off
curves with close, frequent contacts with a production centre (Hodder
and Orton 1976, pp. 142-5). It is reasonable to suggest that further
consideration of the relationship between distribution patterns and the
processes that produced them will help archaeologists to enter a new
and stimulating phase in the analysis of trade and cultural diffusion in
general.


Wave of advance models

T h e concept of a 'wave of advance' was initially developed in the field
of genetics in the late 1930s and given mathematical definition a
decade later. Its introduction into archaeology has been the work of
Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza ( 1 9 7 1 , 1973), who have attempted to
measure the rate of diffusion of cereal agriculture into Europe from
6000 to 3000 BC. As an initial assumption they note the increasing
frequency with which careful collection has yielded palaeobotanical
remains on early Neolithic sites in Europe and conclude that 'it follows
that the dates from the earliest known Neolithic sites in Europe can
provide estimates of the spread of the cereals and with them of early
farming' ( 1 9 7 1 , p. 675). They selected fifty-three sites in Europe with
radiocarbon dated early Neolithic levels as their sample for a rate of
diffusion analysis. This selection is governed by several criteria,
including the use of dates with a standard deviation of 200 years or less
and the deliberate exclusion of possible contaminated dates and of
dates from areas where a retarded spread of agriculture was suspected.
     Each date from the fifty-three sites was then plotted against the
distance of each site from the diffusion centre in the Near East, and
436       Analytical Archaeology

               •• -        1                  1                               T                    1


                                                                                      •       :    .   /

4,000
                                                                              •            •jr*        . _
                                                                                          A
                                                                       •
                                                                              •
                                                              •        •• .       y

                                                          •
3,000     -                                                                                                -

                                                                  J§
km                                                        A-"

2,000     -                      •       V            Q
                                                                                                           -

                      *              X

                                                  •



1,000




      0
                           1                   •                              "                    «
                          8000               7000                          6000                   5000
                                             Year» B.P.
Fig. 94 T h e diffusion of farming into Europe. Points represent dated
Early Neolithic sites used in the analysis. T h e graph shows the linear
pattern of diffusion, with the solid line representing the principal axis which
gives an average rate of c. 1 km per year.
Source: A m m e r m a n and Cavalli-Sforza 1973, fig. 1.




linear correlation coefficients used to see if the rate of d i f f u s i o n w a s as
constant      in   time        and   space        as the               initial    plot    suggested.       The
coefficients were all very high and c o n f i r m e d the linear pattern seen in
fig. 94, in w h i c h the principal axis gives the average rate of d i f f u s i o n as
nearly 1 k m per year. T h e diffusion centre w a s taken as Jericho, b u t
tests on three other sites ( C a y o n u , A l i K o s h and J a r m o ) c o n f i r m e d
b o t h the constant rate of diffusion and the general m a g n i t u d e of the
                        Entities and processes and procedure             437
average annual rate. As well as a couple of minor additional tests, the
same method was applied to the early Neolithic sites in north Africa
and central Asia and some degree of agreement with the European rate
and centre of diffusion obtained. Preliminary regional diffusion rates
were also calculated and confirmed, among other things, the expected
higher rate of spread of the Linearbandkeramik culture of central and
northwestern Europe. Some idea of the regional variation may be
gained from fig. 95, in which it is plotted alongside the general
diffusion at 500-year intervals.
    Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza then raise the important question
of how this early agriculture spread into Europe. Here they prefer an
explanation based upon population growth and movement (demic




              5940




                                                                      Oericho
                6000     6500
                                   7000X^7500        8000




Fig- 95 T h e diffusion of farming into Europe. Dates in years BP. T h e arcs
show the expected pattern of spread at 500-year intervals with broken lines
indicating suggested regional variations.
Source: Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza 1971, p. 685.
438      Analytical Archaeology
diffusion) to one which depends upon the spread of information and
cultural traits (cultural diffusion). T h e y point to the association of
population growth with the adoption of cereal agriculture (and seden-
tism, see Binford and Chasko 1976) as the basis for this preference.
T h i s leads them to their main interpretative conclusion.

      It has been shown mathematically . . . that if such an increase in
      population coincides with a modest local migration activity,
      random in direction (comparable to a Brownian motion), a wave of
      population expansion will set in and progress at a constant radial
      rate. T h i s is just what we have observed with the measured rate for
      the European data. There is good agreement between the
      measured rate and the constant rate of advance predicted by the
      model, which will be referred to as that of the diffusional popu-
      lation wave of advance or simply 'wave of advance'. ( 1 9 7 1 , p. 687)

    This model seems to give a good approximation to the actual
dating evidence and allows the archaeologist to explain the spread of
cereal agriculture into Europe in terms of a well-defined process of
population growth and movement. Future work on both the average
overall rate and the regional rates of diffusion is clearly required, and a
trend surface analysis of the radiocarbon dates (see below for an
example from America) might help isolate regional variations or 'resi-
duals' from the trends.


Stochastic simulation models

We have encountered the use of computer-based simulation models in
the earlier discussions on subsistence and site location strategies
(chapter 3, Ml) and on systems models (chapter 3, note 4). T h e basic
procedure of specifying initial conditions, variables etc., and running
them through a computer programme to produce a simulated
behavioural or distribution pattern to be compared with real
archaeological patterns is the same as before. Such models have been
used by geographers to analyse innovation waves of culture elements,
the distribution of entities at sites ('nodes') and the spatial relationship
of these sites in a 'network'. Before looking at some actual archaeolog-
ical simulation studies, it would be profitable to outline some of these
geographical case-studies.
    In studying innovation waves, the main impetus has come from
the Swedish geographer Torsten Hágerstrand, who has developed the
                       E n t i t i e s a n d processes and p r o c e d u r e   439

use of dynamic stochastic simulation models through Monte Carlo
methods (1952, 1957)- T h e stochastic element, or complex of random
factors, arises from the very complicated interplay of minor factors in
real diffusion situations - including the chance distribution of centres
or nodes, the chance variation in output of the innovation at the
different nodes, the chance aspect of the mechanisms of dispersal, and
the chance mechanism of survival in the original situation and in the
archaeological record sample. T h e procedure under these kinds of
circumstance is in effect to say 'let us ignore the few obvious and easily
ascertainable process factors and let us look at the same situation as a
product of a multiplicity of unknown factors, acting in various direc-
tions - then we can compare the patterning from these kinds of factors
with the real patterning involving additional essential variables'. T h e
simulated spatial diffusion of a hypothetical innovation through suc-
cessive time periods is shown in fig. 96 and is based on Hagerstrand's
initial observation that the probability of contact between separate
human groups or individuals will decrease in an exponential way as
the distance between them increases (see above, distance-decay
models). Given a pattern of contagious diffusion, the probability of




 periods, fi, <2 • • • h-
 Source: Haggett, after Hagerstrand 1953; and Bunge 1962, p. 118.
44°     Analytical Archaeology
acceptance of an innovation from any single point by other points in
its neighbourhood can be predicted and the diffusion process can be
analysed by a stochastic simulation model. T w o interesting
conclusions which Hagerstrand drew from this study are that initial
innovation centres remain fairly stable through time (compare t i - 6 in
fig. 96) and that there may be chance long-distance spread of innova-
tions at an early stage which themselves develop into secondary 'high
acceptance' centres (cf. J o p e 1 9 7 3 , figs 31a—c on the diffusion of the
curving shaped gables in southern Britain c. AD 1 5 0 0 - 1 7 5 0 ) . An
important aspect of such simulation studies is their 'fit' to real geo-
graphical data and here the results inspire confidence in the general
method: this is the case both for Hagerstrand's simulation of the
diffusion of pasture subsidies in central Sweden in the 1920S-30S and
for Bowden's study of the spread of wells for irrigation agriculture in
eastern Colorado (Haggett 1 9 7 2 , pp. 3 6 0 - 1 and figs 1 5 - 1 1 , 1 5 - 1 2 ) .
    Yuill (1965) has also used a Monte Carlo simulation model to study
the effects of four different types of barriers on the diffusion of
innovation waves.
    T h e distribution of entities at sites or 'nodes', and their diffusion
has been studied by Bylund as part of a historical study of the
colonization of Lappland before 1867 (Bylund i960). T h e set of hypo-
thetical models of node diffusion covers four simple patterns in which
the nodes represent settlements (fig. 97). However, the same approach
and the same patterns are equally applicable to the development
patterns of other nodal entities, including settlements, cultures, and
culture groups (compare figs 7 3 , 97). T h e s e hypothetical models
assume that the diffusion plain is homogeneously attractive and that
distant areas will not be settled until those immediately and easily
accessible have been colonized. In real situations distortions of these
basic patterns will emphasize localized barriers or attractions, for
minute examination. T h e patterns vary from the radial to the linear
according to the constraint on the field of expansion - expansion from
a coastline providing a very frequent pattern regularity.
    Stochastic models again prove useful in simulating node pattern
developments - whether they are settlement, culture, or culture group
entities. Morrill (1962) has approached settlement expansion by means
of a Monte Carlo model using a sequence of random numbers to
allocate each new settlement a direction and distance from a prob-
ability matrix derived from empirical studies generalizing a large
number of real settlement expansions. T h e s e 'distance-and-direction-
                             Entities and processes and procedure   441
      Colonization A                           B
      development
      0 Origin
      O 1st. stage
      <D 2nd stage
      O 3rd stage
                         •       •

      C                              0
                ^
                                               0
          O JD—<
                     i   l   o


          c / f c >—ob


           Fig. 97 Hypothetical models of entity diffusion.
           Source: Haggett, after Bylund i960, p. 226.

from-the-mother-settlement' rules are then combined with size growth
rules to generate a realistic hierarchical development of the centres
(fig. 98; Haggett 1 9 6 5 , pp. 9 7 - 8 ) .




      Fig. 98 Simulated settlement pattern generated by Monte
      Carlo methods.
      Source: Haggett, after Morrill 1962, p. 1 1 9 .
442     Analytical Archaeology
    Lastly stochastic simulation models have been developed to study
the probable development of settlement and route networks and these
models have then been compared with the actual development
pattern. In this way Kansky has 'predictively' simulated the railway
network of Sicily in 1908, using Monte Carlo techniques. Morrill
simulated the peasant colonization and population migration in fores-
ted southern Sweden between i860 and 1980, running successive
simulation cycles based on a Monte Carlo allocation of settlers to
areas, with the probability of migration between two areas pro-
portional to:

   (a) the distance between the two areas,
   (b) the difference in 'attractiveness' between the two areas,
   (c) the history of previous migration contacts.

T h e latter condition is especially reminiscent of the factors involved in
culture group repatterning in archaeology by preferential diffusion
and infiltration around the pre-existing network of connected, col-
lateral culture areas (chapter 7, chapter 10, III). In similar stochastic
simulations, random walk processes have also been used to model the
features of network development (see Haggett 1965, pp. 305-9;
Haggett and Chorley 1969, pp. 294-302).
     Archaeological simulation studies have so far been concentrated
upon the diffusion of cultural elements and settlements and have yet to
exploit the full potential of network analysis. Hodder and Orton's
simulation of fall-off curves resulting from different processes of arte-
fact diffusion (1976, pp. 126-54) has been mentioned briefly in the
discussion on distance-decay models. Their work was based upon the
use of a random walk model by which an element of chance is
introduced into the distances and/or directions moved by points from
a common central source (cf. Clarke 1972, p. 20). T h e three variables
chosen to determine the resulting patterns were:

      (a) the direction taken at each step,
      (b) the length of each step,
      (c) the total number of steps permitted for each walk.

T h e procedure followed was to select different combinations of these
variables which were to have randomly chosen values while the others
remained constant. T h u s in initial random walks only one of the three
variables was allowed to be random while in later studies this was
extended to all of them. T o take a simple example, if step length and
                       Entities and processes and procedure           443




      Fig. 99 Two examples of random walks from a central point.
      Source: Hodder and Orton 1976, p. 128.

the total number of steps are both fixed, each point is allowed to 'walk'
a certain step length in a randomly chosen direction for the number of
steps stated. This is repeated 100 times. In spatial terms this results in
an uneven but gradual dispersion of each point (fig. 99) which can be
plotted on a fall-off curve in terms of the number of points reaching
ten equally spaced concentric bands around the central source (fig.
100). Different shaped fall-off curves will result according to the values
given to each of the three specified variables.
     T h e initial results obtained from these simulations are of the
greatest importance for the interpretation of the processes behind the
archaeologically observed distribution patterns of prehistoric arte-
facts. As we have already noted (above p. 435) the same concave
fall-off curves can be produced by different combinations of variables
(fig. 100) and the presence of variable 'barriers' to diffusion can only
produce slight differences in distribution patterns as revealed in these
fall-off curves (figs 100, 101). Any attempts to distinguish particular
processes of trade or exchange (e.g. reciprocity vs. redistribution) as
well as cultural boundaries on the basis of fall-off curves showing
decreasing interaction with distance need to be made with great cau-
tion in the light of this simulation study.
     In the first edition of this book, it was predicted that stochastic
simulation studies of settlement expansion could release significant
information to the archaeologist by their comparison with actual
444    Analytical Archaeology




                                                                          Distance

Fig. 100 A comparison of simulated fall-off curves for different combina-
tions and values of the same variables, i - Number of steps chosen between i
and 14. Step length fixed at 0-5 cm. 2 - Number of steps fixed at 18. Length
fixed at 0-25 cm. 3 - Number of steps chosen between 1 and 8. Step length
chosen between o and 1 cm. 4 - Number of steps fixed at 22. Step length fixed
at 0-5 cm. $ - Number of steps fixed at 6. Step length chosen from a negative
exponential distribution with mean of 0-5 cm. 6 - Number of steps chosen
between 1 and 14. Step length fixed at 0-5 cm. Barrier at 1-5 cm. 7 - Number
of steps chosen between 1 and 4. Step length chosen between o and 1 cm.
Only outward movement allowed.
Source: Hodder and Orton 1976, p. 140.


settlement distribution patterns (Clarke 1968, p. 472). Recent work is
beginning to confirm this optimism. Zubrow's ( 1 9 7 1 , 1975) work in
Arizona is one of the earliest publications dealing with this subject.
His main concern is with the relationship between population and
resources, for which he constructs a model of carrying capacity as a
dynamic equilibrium system. This model incorporates such variables
as population growth (i.e. a neo-Malthusian position by which popu-
lation expands until limited by available resources), migration ('the
development of populations in marginal resource zones is a function of
optimal zone exploitation' 1975, p. 29), spatial and temporal variation
in resources and climate. T h e model is expressed as a flow chart (1975,
                         Entities and processes and procedure               445

fig. 2 . 1 9 ) which is then used as the basis of a simulation of population
growth and settlement expansion in the Hay Hollow valley from AD
2 0 0 - 1 5 0 0 . Eight simulations are run, starting from a single known
settlement at AD 2 0 0 with an initial population of fifty: in these
simulations the birth and death rates, the 'migration velocity' and the
'settlement longevity' are allowed to vary while the m a x i m u m settle-
ment population, resource growth and consumption are kept constant
( I 9 7 S . P- i o 3 > table 6.1). Zubrow's main interest is in the comparison
of the simulated relationship between population growth and settle-
ment in different microhabitats and the actual pattern revealed by




                                                                 Distance

      Fig. 101 A comparison of three simulated fall-off curves, two
      containing a differently located 'barrier' to diffusion. Number of
      steps chosen between 1 and 6. Step length fixed at o-5 cm. 1 -
      Barrier at 0-75 cm; 2 - barrier at 1-5 cm; 3 - no barrier.
      Source: Hodder and Orton 1976, p. 137.
446     Analytical Archaeology
archaeological research in the Hay Hollow valley. Here he concludes
that there is a general degree of agreement between simulated and
actual population figures, and that of the simulated site locations 50
per cent were in an unsampled area, 35 per cent where there are
known archaeological sites and 15 per cent where there are no known
sites. T h i s predictive element is a vital part of any model and enables
the archaeologist to ask new and relevant questions in his research.
Z u b r o w suggests that further complexities (e.g. multiple initial
settlement locations and multiple 'budding-off' settlements) can be
built into the simulation and one could also suggest that the emer-
gence of settlement hierarchies be investigated, and that predicted site
locations be tested in detail in archaeologically unsampled areas.
    T h e simulation of settlement spread on the basis of a random walk
model has been suggested for the study of the earliest 'Linearband-
keramik' or 'Danubian I' agricultural communities in central and
northwestern Europe in the fifth millennium BC (Clarke 1 9 7 2 , pp.
20-4). T h i s idea is being developed by Hodder (1977a, pp. 2 5 8 - 7 7 ) ,
who has conducted an initial simulation of four phases of settlement
spread in the Untermaingebiet area of Germany, based on a logistic
model of population growth and a random choice of distance and
direction moved during each phase. Comparison of simulated and
known settlements revealed the potential for predicting settlement
spread (fig. 102), whilst isolating important areas where a more
complex model (e.g. including the effect of rivers, soils etc. on known
settlement distribution) may be developed (fig. 103).
    A problem which has taxed archaeologists, anthropologists and
linguists for many decades concerns the nature of the human settle-
ment of the islands of Polynesia: where did the settlers come f r o m and
were their voyages across the open seas the result of intentional
navigation or drifting off course and 'sailing before the wind'? T h i s
problem has been approached in a new way by a computer simulation
(Levison, Ward and W e b b 1972). T h e elements incorporated in the
model included the location of all land masses and the distances from
which they could be seen, the probabilities of occurrence of different
winds and currents in each 5° square in each month of the year, the
speed of boats under these conditions, the chances of survival at sea,
the risk of gales and the desired course. T h e simulation was set in
motion as follows:

      (a) select a starting island, a date and the voyage's m a x i m u m
          length,
                              Entities and processes and procedure                447

                          •        >               •




                                       %   o   .       o


                                       o V ° .
                                       o       o
          o                        •




               •

                                       o


                               o




           Fig. 102 A comparison of the simulated (open circles) and
           observed (filled circles) distribution of Linearbandkeramik
           phase 2 settlements in the Untermaingebiet.
           Source: Hodder 1977a, p. 276.



    (b) make a random selection of w i n d and current for that day,
    (c) c o m p u t e the position of the boat at the end of the day,
    (d) if the boat has come within sighting distance of land, end the
        voyage,
    (e) if the m a x i m u m length of the voyage has been reached, end the
        voyage, select the next date and start the simulation again at
        (b).

F o l l o w i n g this procedure the authors used s i x t y - f o u r starting islands
to simulate 100,946 drift voyages and nine starting islands for 8,052
448      Analytical Archaeology
              O




                                               O         °


                                       o         8 n °
                                                             O

                                                     O

                                           O




                                  O    Q
                                           • •
                                  6>



       Fig. 103 A comparison of the simulated (open circles) and obser-
       ved (filled circles) distribution of Linearbandkeramik phase 4
       settlements. The visual fit is less good than in fig. 102 - note the
       overrepresentation of simulated sites to the north of the river
       compared with the underrepresentation to the south. A more
       complex simulation should attempt to allow for these observed
       patterns.
       Source: Hodder 1977a, p. 277.


navigated voyages. On this basis they calculated the probabilities of
drift voyages f r o m these starting points reaching other islands and
represented them on cartograms (e.g. fig. i 0 4 a - d ) . O n this basis they
concluded :

      - that drift voyages f r o m the A m e r i c a n continent and f r o m N e w
        Zealand were extremely unlikely,
      - that most of the major voyages involved in the Polynesian
        settlement required only elementary navigation systems,
                      Entities and processes and procedure           449
    - and that although drift was unlikely to be the sole process behind
      the settlement, once Fiji or Western Polynesia had been occu-
      pied, drift could easily have been responsible for the settlement
      of Tonga and Samoa.

Clearly such a simulation could be extended to other major island
groups (e.g. the Caribbean) where similarly useful probabilistic
conclusions on the earliest settlement might be drawn.



Trend models

One of the complications arising in archaeological distribution and
diffusion maps is the transformation of the element plotted across the
map: the element or complex changes as it spreads. This property
means that the map of elements is not in fact a map of a single element
state but is a map of a range of transform states of a multi-state
element. Consequently, the elements dotted on one region of the map
are usually closely similar but jointly rather different from the 'same'
elements in another region. The full recognition of this complication
emphasizes the fundamental basis of regional trends and their great
importance for subsequent regional developments. The incipient
trends and residuals of a particular distribution situation will
frequently contain the key to later developing distribution patterns.
    A very frequent archaeological phenomenon is the diffusion or
intrusive spread of an assemblage in which, by an internal process,
certain components are increasing and others are decreasing. This is a
trending change, sometimes purely a fashion oscillation, sometimes
possibly correlated with environmental stimuli. Let us consider an
archaeological situation in which an assemblage or complex of ele-
ments is spreading in one main direction. As the assemblage spreads it
gets later in date and element A increases markedly, whilst element B
declines in frequency of occurrence at the same time (fig. 105). This is
a situation in which the distribution map is a vector of four changing
factors - time, space, percentage of A, percentage of B. Ordinarily it is
almost impossible to perceive these trends and changing factors on a
standard distribution map which plots multistate elements as single-
state constants and maps geographical space but not chronological
time. Trend maps provide the possibility of mapping and connecting
such dynamic factors and expressing them as the surfaces of solid
models.
                                                                               1000 miles
                                                                          1000 kilometres
                               West Hawaii

               •Wake                       •East Hawai


    Caroline Marshall
                                             North Line
    ^ m a r a n g i Gilbert Baker
    Bismarck "Ocean           Phoenix Jarvis
     • «Ontonq Javac m                 ,       »Maiden
    Ä^S.kaiana « f             i * e l a u North .       • Marquesas
            • \ iTikooia Wallis ,          «Cooks »Caroline
     Renneil Santa CrurSoSfma • S a . m o a ,     Society
       New Hebfides * F i j , , N Ä           PU
                                                  *   *Tuamotu
       Ree.s ; ^ ^ l T o ; g a N , U e # S ° U , S A C ^ I
            New                          j           »Rapa




                                         Drift contact probabilities-
                                       -*of 20 per cent or more
                    - F r o m main experiments * — F r o m wind shift experiments
                   • Island g r o u p s with           ° O t h e r island g r o u p s
                      starting points                    and c o a s t s



Fig. i04a-d A computer simulation of the drift contact probabilities
for the setlement of the islands of Polynesia.
Source: Levison, Ward and Webb 1972, pp. 238, 240.
                          E n t i t i e s a n d processes a n d p r o c e d u r e   451




                  s t a r t i n g points         and c o a s t s




    T h e simplest method of trend surface analysis consists of the
construction of a generalized contoured map of data collected by
gridded sampling methods. T h i s 'grid generalization method' suffers
from a lack of objectivity and depends heavily on the size of grid
selected for data collection (Hodder and Orton 1976, p. 159). A more
452    Analytical Archaeology
         Elxnut B                      Etanwnt A




      decreases as settlements penetrate the interior X from a uni-
      form front O-O.

complicated but more objective method proceeds by fitting poly-
nomial surfaces to the m a p p e d data, the polynomial surfaces being the
appropriate three-dimensional development generated by ordinary
two-dimensional functions, giving linear, quadratic, cubic, quartic,
quintic, etc. functions and surfaces (fig. 106). T h e s e are the abstract
surfaces which may be used individually, or in a composite way, to
model the complicated trends in the real m a p p e d data. In modern
practice the systematic trends in mapped variables may be separated
f r o m the local residuals b y direct computer analysis of the map data.
T h e residuals themselves, having been isolated, may display distinct
trends in their own patterning, which themselves may then be
                            •O
                            +                                                              C
                                                                                       O
                                                                                      'm
ir
<                                                                                      C
                                                               +                       u
                                                                                       E
3
O                                                              o
                                                               II
                            -Q
                            +                                  N
                            a
                            il
     N
                            Ni

                                                               to           po
                                                       +            o.           ï.    a
                                                                                       o
                                                       Ô            +        +


                                                                                       a.
o                                                                                      CO                  C
m                                                      i                     f         u.                  C
Z>
                                                                                       c
                                                                                                       Si
O
                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                           3
                                                       r s , ^               +                             u.
                                                                                      -a               «
                                                                                        c
                                                                    t>                 es
                                                                                                       •a
                                                                                       (n                c
                                                                                       C                ca
                                                                                       O                   *-»

                                                                                       o                   u
                                                                                       c                   be
                                                                                       3                   tao
                                                                                                           cd

                                                                                                       X
<                                                      + +                             C
                                                                                                           £
DU
                                                                                       o                   u
o                                                      ¿+           £«                "m                   u
<                                                                                      C                   O
z>                                                                                     u               JZ
o                                                          o
                                                        Il <Hj
                                                                        +
                                                                                       E               U

                                                       (si "O                         •6                u
                                                                                        i               V
                                                                                       o               *-*
                                                                                                           rt
                                                                                       ï
                                                                                                            _
                                                                                                           m
                                                                                       c

                                                                                       V                   «
                                                                                       •s
                                                                                       Í)
                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                _
                                                                                      •O               ist
                                                                                       co
                                                                                                       O
                                                               o                                           O
CE                                                                                     C                   H
<                                                              +
                                                                                       O
UJ                                                                                    •p

                                                               •Q                      es                  U
                                                               +                       4>

                                                               O                      05                   «
                                                                                                           de


                                                               II                                      X
                                                                                      vO
                                                               N                       o                   V
                                                                                                           u
                                                                                                 ai        Ui
                                                                                                  V        3
                                                                                                  u
         |DUO|SU3UJ|p-0MX        |DU0|SU3UJ|p-8ajL|X                                  £        ***ca   cn
                                                                                                           O
454    Analytical Archaeology




         Sado basin, central Portugal. (A) Original isarithmic
         surface. (B) Best-fit linear surface. (C) Residuals from
         B-surface. (D) Best-fit linear surfaces for the positive and
         negative anomaly areas on the C-residuals.
         Source: Haggett 1965, p. 272.


modelled, leaving further but fewer residuals which may receive the
same treatment - and so on, until the real data are 'exactly' accounted
for by a set of nested models (fig. 107). T h e whole procedure is an
extension of the routine for fitting a linear regression line to a linear
surface, to the matching of curvilinear surfaces by polynomial
functions (fig. 106). Details of this method may be obtained from two
important geological textbooks (Krumbein and Graybill 1965, Davis
1973), as well as from Hodder and Orton (1976).
   In this way, trend surface analysis can perform four very useful
functions in archaeological research:

      (i) for testing a conceptual distribution model against real data,
          in order to see whether the observed values or states are
          accurately met by the trend model predictions;
                         Entities and processes and procedure              455

     (ii) for the prediction of what may be expected to be found in
          assemblages from a certain area or locus, given certain trends;
    (iii) for the reconstruction from a scatter of surviving data the
          pattern of variation as it must once have existed over a given
          territory: the reconstruction of 'ghost' surfaces (Haggett 1965,
          P- 274);
    (iv) for the study of areal and spatial variation in a distribution
          pattern in order to develop a model for search and excavation
          procedure.
    T h e first edition of this book contained the first applications of
trend surface analysis in archaeology - a quadratic surface model of
trends in the ratio of rusticated/painted pottery in the earliest Balkan
Neolithic cultures (1968, fig. 82), a simplified trend map of the neck
angle on southern British Beakers c. 1 6 5 0 - 1 5 0 0 BC (op. cit. fig. 100)




Fig. 108 T h e location of the cultural assemblages in the Central Plains which
have been analysed by trend-surface analysis (see figs 109, n o ) .
Source: Roper 1976, p. 182.
456      Analytical Archaeology




  Fig. 109 T h e cultural assemblages shown in fig. 108 linked together on
  traditional archaeological grounds as different phases of the same tradition
  spreading from south to north.
  Source: Roper 1976, p. 183.

and a h y p o t h e t i c a l analysis of M e s o l i t h i c    flint   assemblages in the
W e a l d (op. cit. pp. 4 8 5 - 9 ) . S u b s e q u e n t a p p l i c a t i o n s have been varied
in scope, f r o m the analysis of intrasite p a t t e r n i n g (Bradley                      1970,
Clarke 1972a, L a r s o n 1 9 7 5 ) to e x a m p l e s of spatial diffusion w h i c h are
o u r i m m e d i a t e c o n c e r n in this c h a p t e r . H o d d e r and O r t o n (1976) g i v e
examples        which      illustrate      the    methods        used      and     the    kind     of
c o n c l u s i o n s w h i c h the archaeologist m i g h t d r a w f r o m their appli-
cation. T h u s the s t u d y of R o m a n o - B r i t i s h O x f o r d kiln pottery s h o w s
the use m a d e of s u c c e s s i v e l y m o r e c o m p l e x p o l y n o m i a l surfaces to
reveal trends and residual patterns in the data (op. cit. figs 5 . 5 2 - 5 . 5 4 ) ,
                         Entities and processes and procedure                457

as well as the problems encountered in dealing with small numbers of
irregularly scattered data points; the analysis of Bagterp spearheads in
Scandinavia and north G e r m a n y confirms an earlier interpretation of
the existence of workshop areas (op. cit. figs 5 . 5 5 - 5 6 ) ; and the map-
ping of the percentages of particular coins in the western Roman
Empire has been interpreted as showing the north and westward
spread of inflation f r o m the first to the third centuries AD (op. cit. figs
5.58-5.65).
    These examples fulfil various combinations of the functions of
trend surface analysis in archaeological research which are outlined
above (i-iv). T h i s is also the case with a recent analysis of Central
Plains radiocarbon dates published by Roper (1976). On traditional
archaeological grounds it had been suggested that the various cultural
assemblages in the American Central Plains represented the gradual




Fig. 1 1 0 Linear trend-surface contours showing the predicted south to north
spread of cultural assemblages in the Central Plains (see fig. 109). Dates are in
radiocarbon years BC.
Source: Roper 1976, p. 187.
458    Analytical Archaeology
south to north spread of agricultural villages with the same basic
tradition (figs 108, 109). T o test this hypothesis, Roper has gathered a
sample of 1 1 2 radiocarbon dates from fifty-eight sites in this area and
conducted a trend surface analysis. T h e results strongly support the
hypothesis (fig. n o ) , showing a linear trend surface from south to
north with no residuals which were too great to fit this general pattern.
It is an interesting possibility that such a study would also be pro-
ductive in analysing the initial Neolithic settlement of different parts of
E u r o p e (e.g. the Balkans, central Europe, Scandinavia).


iv    Procedure
T h e last of the three elementary models developed in the opening
chapter was a general model for archaeological procedure (fig. 2). T h i s
model attempted to sketch a general flow-chart for archaeological

J>rocedure and to suggest the discipline's organization within three
 nterconnecting spheres of analysis, arranged in such a way that newly
devised hypotheses or models are continuously fed back in conjunction
with the continuous influx of new information. In this constant
recycling of hypotheses, models, and new information the hypotheses
and models are continuously modified towards a better 'fit' with the
data observations by convergent oscillation about a stable yet dynamic
body of synthesizing propositions and theory (chapter 1 , via, fig. 2).
     T h e procedure commences with the recognition that the input of
the archaeological analytical system is a peculiarly collected and tiny
sample of the archaeological data yet concealed in the earth. Data
which themselves are but a small sample of former material culture
subsystems which have in part decayed irrecoverably; small samples of
incomplete subsystems which in turn were never more than segments of
complex sociocultural entities. T h e first message from the model
therefore emphasizes that archaeological data are sample observations
 of a sample and that in order to organize properly the ensuing experi-
 mental and analytical spheres of procedure these observations should
 be carefully controlled, with a sampling procedure designed to match
 the characteristics of the data and the questions asked of them (e.g.
 Binford 1964, Mueller 1975).
    The    three arbitrary    aspects of archaeological       procedure
incorporate the sphere of contextual analysis, the sphere of specific
analysis, and the central sphere of hypothesis and model construction
- leading to interpretation (fig. 2) (contextual and specific attributes,
                       Entities and processes and procedure            459

see chapter 1 , ill). Contextual analysis is here intended to convey the
controlled sampling observation, and accumulation of archaeological
data by excavation and collection. T h i s sphere of archaeology is mak-
ing very rapid progress towards a proper use of the experimental
method and is gathering an increasing body of knowledge about how
this technique may be applied in the field. At the same time, the
coupled sphere of specific analysis has made similarly great advances
by the increasing employment of feedback information f r o m ecological
and taxonomic models, as well as a growing use of statistical
methodology and computer techniques. T h e contextual analysis pro-
vides data on distribution, stratification, association, and includes
chronological and environmental data ranging from radio carbon dates
to pollen horizons and animal bones. T h e specific analysis digests the
specific attributes of the artefacts and assemblages recovered,
experiments with their further analysis and searches for regularities in
ordering, clustering, similarities, or correlations.
    T h e information f r o m both contextual and specific analysis is then
centralized in the sphere of comparative analysis and integrated in
building and rebuilding hypotheses and models. At this stage the data
are a mass of contextual and specific attributes with varying degrees of
already apparent regularities which may now be ordered to match an
existing model simulating the particular archaeological situation, or if
no such model exists then these data may suggest one for testing. T h e
store of existing models in the central sphere of archaeology is enor-
mously varied - some, as we have seen, are very old and rickety, others
are brand-new but little tested. T h e majority of these models in the
storage racks are iconic models for very specific situations - maps,
graphs, histograms and so on. A more useful category includes the
analogue models which range from historical and anthropological
analogues to abstract analogues and simulations. T h e most recent
shelf stores those very few and as yet rather limited symbolic models,
including deterministic, statistical, and stochastic structures (chapter
1 1 . I).
      One of the fundamental models in the central store is the
archaeological classificatory model which enables the archaeologist to
match his incoming observations and their regularities with the enti-
ties of the appropriate rank and order in the nested hierarchy. T h e
careful and rigorous use of the model and the observations will enable
the taxonomist to say something about the properties of the entities
concerned and the processes which might act upon them, with various
460    Analytical Archaeology

patterned results for which other models exist. A specific version of
this hierarchical and polythetic model, relating to a particular region at
a particular time, should contain sufficient information for the
archaeologist to match his entities in terms of specific affinities and
phylogeny. Such problems involve the continuous comparison, order-
ing, and reordering of assemblages until the new set of data and its
attributes match transformations and trajectories from one set of
developing cultural systems and differentiating that set from other
systems, which are claimed as separate and parallel transformations.
T h i s procedure requires the clustering of time and space system
transformations and the ever more accurate alignment of these clusters
to those respective axes. In particular this process has to differentiate,
assess and match the horizontal diffusion phase-system attributes of
the new data from the socially inherited tradition-system attributes; a
problem arising from the continuously interwebbed nature of cultural
phylogeny (fig. 28). Numerical taxonomy is an essential tool in this
procedure but does not of itself offer conclusive evidence of phylogeny
but only of phenetic relationships.
      When at last the particular set of new data has been analysed and
re-analysed by the three operational spheres it may release a series of
propositions, hypotheses, and models generated or modified by the
particular information of the particular set of new data. These pro-
ducts represent the 'interpretation' of the new data and will now pass
by different routes through the continuous recycling procedure. These
products are channelled back to the input of the system where they are
used to reframe and more accurately control the spheres of contextual
and specific analysis, modifying their orientation and direction of
search. Very occasionally, this constant recycling and re-comparison
of theoretical output with practical input will precipitate a set of
synthesizing propositions, or theories about the real world, as the data
leave the central system. T h e output of such synthesizing prop-
ositions and theories depends entirely on the discipline of the pro-
cedural system, the energy devoted to its activities, the intelligent
direction and channelling of those energies, and the quality of the
components in the system. It should be noted that any analytical
 system which denies the existence of synthesizing propositions about
 its input data has a preconditioned orientation such that it is most
 unlikely to discover any, even should they exist.
   So far, the only propositions about the archaeological world
capable of use in interpretative procedures are:
                               Entities and processes and procedure                              461
(1) The inherent space/time population regularities of archaeological
entities - those repeated regularities w h i c h can be m a d e to a p p e a r
w h e n certain data are arbitrarily o r d e r e d in a certain w a y :

     -   the u n i m o d a l distribution of attribute states f r o m a single
         multistate attribute w i t h i n a u n i t a r y archaeological population
         (figs 29, 30);
     -   the double lenticular d i s t r i b u t i o n of attribute states and t y p e
         states in p h a s e and tradition d e v e l o p m e n t (figs 5 5 - 6 0 ) ;
     -   the syntactical regularities of correlated attributes clustered
         within a r t e f a c t - t y p e s and t y p e s clustered w i t h i n cultural
         formats.

(2) The inherent system regularities of archaeological entities as related
kinds of special system - those general regularities w h i c h arise because
all archaeological entities are sets of e l e m e n t s w h i c h once f o r m e d part
of sociocultural u n i t s :

     (i) the general process m o d e l of archaeological s y s t e m s as semi-
         M a r k o v i a n s y s t e m s c o u p l e d with e n v i r o n i n g or contextual
         s y s t e m s ; e x p r e s s e d by a d y n a m i c m o d e l (fig. 1 1 ) and a set of
         sixteen postulates (postulates 1 - 1 6 , c h a p t e r 2, 11).
    (ii) the h y p o t h e s i s of m u l t i p l e factors and c u m u l a t i v e e f f e c t (chap-
         ter 2, III, fig. 1 2 ) .


(3) The inherent system regularities of archaeological entities as parts of
sociocultural information systems - those repeated regularities w h i c h
arise because archaeological variety is part of the stabilized variety in
f o r m e r sociocultural i n f o r m a t i o n s y s t e m s :

    the continuity h y p o t h e s i s - sociocultural s y s t e m s , and t h e r e f o r e
    archaeological s y s t e m s , c o n t i n u o u s l y a d j u s t e d their s y s t e m variety
    in such a w a y as to r e p e a t e d l y m i n i m i z e the m a x i m u m a m o u n t of
    immediate s y s t e m dislocation, in t e r m s of n e w , alternative,
    contradictive, or r e d u n d a n t variety in relation to that s y s t e m .


(4) The inherent distribution and diffusion regularities of archaeological
entities as parts of sociocultural population networks - those c r u d e
postulates and tentative a x i o m s w h i c h s u m m a r i z e and d e p e n d u p o n
the regularities arising f r o m constraints a f f e c t i n g d i f f u s i o n processes
(chapter 1 0 , III, postulates 1 - 7 , a x i o m s 1 - 5 ) .
462       Analytical Archaeology
Notes
    ( 1 ) Sherratt ( 1 9 7 2 , pp. 5 2 8 - 9 ) distinguishes three further processes of
change which he claims are reflected in the distribution of prehistoric cultural
assemblages in southeast E u r o p e . T h e s e are:

      (i) boundary readjustment - the acquisition or loss of small areas of
          advantageous land on the boundary of two neighbouring cultures;
     (ii) unit reorientation - the fluctuations in allegiance of small 'peripheral'
          population units between adjacent higher density 'core' areas;
    (iii) network linkage - the merging of two previously separate cultures.

   Another typology of non-seasonal human population m o v e m e n t s has been
proposed by Hill (n.d.). A r g u i n g that such movements never occur without
some f o r m of ecological pressure which threatens the population's survival,
he defines f o u r types of process:

       (i) range expansion - the result of local population pressure. H u m a n
           groups are compelled to expand into nearby areas (e.g. the T i v of
           Nigeria);
      (ii) range contraction - the result of sometimes drastically decreasing food
           supply approaching a critical level (e.g. drought, competition, dis-
           ease). T h e human groups are forced to contract their ranges into
           smaller favourable territories;
      (iii) range drift - less severe than ( 1 ) and (2) and the result of such factors as
            the decreasing productivity of local resources; shifting cultivation is
            given as an e x a m p l e ;
      (iv) range budding/migration         - the result of an increase in population
            pressure which cannot be offset by range expansion, of decreasing
            local productivity, of competition and of disease. Where types ( i ) - ( 3 )
            may be equated with continuous distibutions of archaeological
            material, range b u d d i n g results in a discontinuous pattern.


    T h e relationship between population movement and the diffusion of
cultural traits has been the subject of much debate in anthropological and
archaeological circles during the present century. In some cases large-scale
migrations were proposed by archaeologists on what now seem to be rather
insubstantial grounds. Within E u r o p e a n prehistoric studies the role of such
population movement has declined in popularity while the part played in
cultural change and distribution patterns by trade has received more
profitable attention. Within American archaeology some brave attempts to
relate migrations to archaeologically recoverable evidence were made in the
 1950s (e.g. Willey 1 9 5 3 , T h o m p s o n 1958), but the complexities involved
invite critical comment. T h e 'visibility' of a population m o v e m e n t in the
archaeological record may often vary with the degree to which a distinctive
cultural assemblage was preserved and d i f f u s e d b y the intrusive g r o u p . T h e r e
                              Entities and processes and procedure                         463

is a distinct contrast, for example, between the archaeological evidence for the
R o m a n conquest of Britain and for the rapid m o v e m e n t of the Philistines to
the coastal Canaanite cities, where only a new tomb type and some artistic
motifs distinguish them f r o m the local population ( T r i g g e r 1968, p. 43).
Further complications are introduced w h e n one considers the usual sizes of
samples of material culture or skeletal remains on which interpretations of
migration have been based. T h i s factor has been brought into focus by
i m p r o v e d m e t h o d s of data collection (e.g. fine sieving) and by the recognition
that changes in the cultural assemblages of successive occupation phases in a
single site m a y not be a representative reflection of total change at that site
through time. Instead the archaeologist may be recording some c o m p o u n d of
the changes in the spatial organization of that site during its occupation: what
at one period m a y be the location for a domestic structure, may later become
a livestock pen or a rubbish d u m p . On sites with shallow occupation deposits
a complete excavation or a suitably designed sampling strategy may alleviate
this p r o b l e m , but on large, deeply stratified settlements (e.g. the prehistoric
'tells' of southeast E u r o p e ) examination of the spatial organization of early
phases is made difficult by the constraints imposed by the excavator's limited
resources. E v e n when we have taken such p r o b l e m s into account, there
remains the question of c h r o n o l o g y : are the site occupation 'phases' dis-
tinguished b y the archaeologist of such a narrowly defined nature that
changes in population over a period of five, ten or fifty years can be recog-
nized in t h e m ? I n many cases honesty and field experience require a negative
answer. T h e c o m p o u n d nature of such 'phases' may often obscure significant
local changes and mislead the unwary archaeologist. S c h w e r d t f e g e r ( 1 9 7 2 ,
PP- S 5 S — h a s noted the change f r o m round to rectangular structures within
domestic c o m p o u n d s in Hauseland during the period 1 9 2 8 - 6 8 . T h i s
represents continuous change over a single generation, but to the archaeolo-
gist dealing w i t h organic building materials such as m u d b r i c k it may appear
to represent a drastic break with previous tradition.
      T h u s any interpretation of changes in population as a result of migration
has to be seen in terms of associated changes in material culture and then in
relation to the effect of the formation processes of the archaeological record.
E v e n if sufficiently fine control over these factors is established, it may still be
that we are misleading ourselves in expecting cultural change to have pro-
ceeded by a continuous and regular rate in any particular site or region, so
that 'breaks' in an occupation sequence necessarily have to indicate popu-
lation discontinuity (chapter 5, n. 2).

    (2) It s h o u l d be noted here that the author's concern is with d i f f u s i o n as a
process by w h i c h cultural traits and ideas are spread through time and space.
He is not involving himself in any general argument about the relative merits
of 'diffusion' and 'evolution* as explanations of cultural change.

    (3) B i n f o r d ( 1 9 7 2 , p. 239) has pursued this point even f u r t h e r in his study
of mortuary practices. He argues that
464   Analytical Archaeology
  it is only after we understand the organizational properties of cultural
  systems that we can meaningfully make comparisons among them in
  terms of culture content. T h e contemporary archaeologist's practice of
  making comparisons among cultural units in terms of inventories of
  culture content, while making no attempt to isolate and understand the
  variables affecting the frequency or distribution of content in the cultural
  units studied, is a fruitless and, I fear, meaningless pastime.
11       Discussion and speculation

         M i n d - l i k e B e h a v i o u r in A r t e f a c t s ,
         T i t l e of paper in Brit. J. Phil. S r i . , II, N o . 6, p p . 1 0 5 - 2 1
                                                                      D. M. MACKAY 1951



i    Theoretical background
T h i s chapter will be used to cover a selective appraisal of the primary
dispositions underpinning analytical archaeology and framing its
orientation. Most of the contents, it is true, will have been covered in
the preceding texts but the intention here is to draw together much
that has only been obliquely discussed. Most of these primary dis-
positions represent the diffusion into archaeology of major develop-
ments in allied disciplines; a derivation, however, that does not neces-
sarily make them peripheral to the organization of archaeology as a
discipline in its own terms and dimensions. Certainly, scientific aids
no more make archaeology a 'science' than a wooden leg makes a man
into a tree - isotope dating, chemical analysis, and proton
magnetometers remain adjuncts. By contrast, the primary attitudes
which now permit tentative formulations in generalizing archaeologi-
cal theory are central to the whole structure of the discipline-arising
for the most part from cybernetics, information theory, behavioural
studies, and not least from mathematics - symbolic logic, probability
theory, set theory, game theory, inductive statistics, topology and
numerical taxonomy (cf. Clarke, 1968, 1972, 1 9 7 3 ; Doran and Hodson
1975)-
    T h e primary contributions to analytical archaeology are for the
most part mathematical rather than scientific, symbolic and abstract
rather than tangible. T h i s simply emphasizes the important function
of mathematical apparatus as symbolic machinery for modelling
the central theory of organized disciplines in terms of structured
deductive systems. At the same time these external contributions
are possible because the relationship between analysts and their data
may be as much enlightened by simple changes in viewpoint as by
direct augmentation of the quantity of data. Archaeologists have
466    Analytical Archaeology

concentrated far too much upon increasing the quantity of their
data and far too little upon increasing the quality of their conceptual
apparatus.
    T h e main field of deployment for these primary contributions is in
the field of systematization and generalization - the detection and
organization of order, regularities, constraints and trends. T h e ele-
mentary advantage accruing from these activities being simply that
such regularities can be used to predict behaviour and to highlight
departure f r o m expected behaviour patterns, with the consequent
exposure of residual information. T h e s e primary attitudes stimulate
the discovery of relationships which give order and regularity to
otherwise heterogeneous material.
    S u c h an approach immediately introduces the philosophical prob-
lem about the existence or absence of order in the extra-sensory 'real'
world. Whether or not there is order or chaos in nature most philoso-
phers agree that the order we perceive and use is in part an arbitrary
order devised by man and extended by him into his interpretation of
the environment - where arbitrary means 'selected to produce order in
certain dimensions', not chance or random order. T h u s , in its most
elementary manifestations we have the psychological test drawings in
which some subjects see only lines, others see faces, and others a
goblet - the perception of order depending on the selective organiza-
tion of the receiver rather than the geometry of the object studied
 (Haggett 1 9 6 5 , p. 2 ; Cherry 1957, pp. 2 5 6 - 3 0 2 ) .
   Without embroiling ourselves too deeply in the problem of order
or chaos in the 'real' world we may notice that we have repeatedly
employed such an arbitrary organization of data into an order which
they need not necessarily possess.

     (i) T h e normal distribution curve - with its unimodal and bilateral
s y m m e t r y - has been much used as an expected model for the dis-
tribution of certain kinds of populations, with deviations from this
persistent 'regularity' as an important source of information (figs 29,
3°>    33—5;     chapters 4, I I I ; 5, I I I ; 6, I I I ) . However, even with the
appropriate categories of population it is only possible to extract this
'regularity' by selectively adopting a quite arbitrary ordering of the
d a t a - b y frequency of occurrence in classes deliberately arranged in
successive sequence on a certain scale. By using a different scale and a
different sequence of class intervals the vertical frequency bars of the
normal histogram could be redistributed in an irregular and non-
normal outline. Indeed, the converse procedure - transformation - is
                                   Discussion and speculation         467

often used to get a distribution 'regularity' out of 'irregular' data by
trying out various scales (Haggett 1965, p. 288). T h e same kind of
arbitrary requirements are equally necessary to obtain the 'regularities'
of the other standard distribution curves - Log-Normal, Binomial,
Poisson, Gamma, etc.
    (ii) T h e unimodal distribution curves and trend 'regularities' of
successive populations of archaeological entities may only be obtained
by selectively employing certain scales and orders, and not by
employing others (fig. 46; examine the effects of reordering the attri-
bute classes (o), (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) in this figure).
    (iii) It is only possible to model the 'regular behaviour' of the
infinity of networks in a complex system by arbitrarily selecting a
limited set of elements in the network - the strategic variables for the
arbitrarily selected 'frame of reference', or system of interest.

    These examples suffice to show that we are quite accustomed to
getting 'regularities' out of data where they are not immediately
apparent, by the deliberate manipulation of the observations involved
and the arbitrary but consistent selection of certain dimensions but
not others - the deliberate organization of the data into 'regularities'
for our own predictive convenience. Indeed, it is towards the dis-
covery of new relationships which consistently give order or regularity
to our perception of the real world that much research effort is
devoted. T h e accuracy and dependability with which a given
'regularity' may be obtained from the arbitrary but specified treatment
of specified classes of data expresses the utility of that procedure as a
model and tool. It is not so much a search for regularities in our data as
the deliberate organization of our data into powerful regularities
(chapter 1, iv).
    Whether or not there is order in the external world is a topic that
we can happily leave to the philosophers. We have seen that whether
order exists beyond our outward organization of it or not, we draw
great benefit from getting our perceptions into regularities and order,
so long as those qualities dependably arise from a selected procedure
upon selected aspects of the available data. Nevertheless, as
archaeologists we are not so much concerned with the natural world as
with the world of man and his artefacts and it is a characteristic of
man, as we have just observed, that he deliberately introduces ordered
relationships where none formerly existed. This is true of man's
theorizing on the nature of the extra-sensory world and it is true of
man's material handiwork - the artefacts.
468    Analytical Archaeology
   All living organisms seem to introduce order into the world but man
as a higher organism introduces a higher degree of order, extending
from the material world to the intangible realms of thought. Whether
or not there is order in the outside world is immaterial therefore to the
deliberate orderliness brought into it by man and fossilized in his
artefacts. This orderliness is the archaeologist's key to the material
culture of ancient societies - the selectively ordered attributes, arte-
facts, and assemblages from the past enshrine the percepta and
concepta of their fabricators - a message amidst the noise of disorder
(fig. H I ) .
     These deliberations suggest that the analytical archaeologist will
be confronted by order and regularity within his data in two forms.
Regularity and order which may be produced by certain standardized
manipulations and procedures used by the analyst and certain other
regularities and orders introduced by the deliberate activities of the
people who made the artefacts. It is not entirely clear at the present
time, how, and to what extent, the modern analyst can differentiate
between these two categories of ordered information - between the
message from the past and the characteristics of the receiver (fig. 1 1 1 ) .
 In many respects the garbled information gained by archaeologists
from the artefacts of ancient societies is disconcertingly similar to the
garbled impression of the real world gained by a child from the
artefacts of its own society. The analytical archaeologist's receiver may
be more powerful and sensitive but at least the child has the advantage
of redundant confirmations from other contemporary channels.
     T h e archaeologist may therefore expect to both find regularities in
 his data and to be able so to rearrange his data as to produce yet other
 regularities. Many of these regularities will depend upon the constant
 or regular conjunction, association, or correlation of particular vari-
 ables or even the association of lower-order regularities. If this
 repeated conjunction approaches a nearly constant relationship in all
 the observable data samples, such that all observed        are Bs, or all
 observed /Is have Bs, then these statements can be recognized as
 low-level laws — or rather accurate hypotheses. Even scientific laws
 rest upon no more extensive grounds than the assertion of the
 'constant' conjunctions of specified properties within the tested sample
 of the real world. 'The world is not made up of empirical facts with the
 addition of the laws of nature: what we call the laws of nature are
 conceptual devices by which we organize our empirical knowledge and
 predict the future' (Braithwaite i960, p. 339).
                                          Discussion and speculation               469




Fig. 1 1 1 Material culture as a communication system with three outputs -
source A to the environment, source A to culture A, source A to culture B. By
Shannon's theorem, effective communication may be established with the
environment and culture A, in that errors due to noise may be sufficiently
reduced by making the transmitter or receiver sufficiently complex. With
culture B, communication via material culture is likely to be unreliable by
virtue of the different tuning of receiver B.


    T h e realization that ' N a t u r a l L a w s ' are not deterministic, b u t only
statistical approximations of v e r y high probability, has led to the
a b a n d o n m e n t of the old ideas of the ' L a w s of N a t u r e ' as mechanistic
controls b e y o n d our senses. T h e replacement of n o r m a t i v e laws b y
47°    Analytical Archaeology
probabilistic laws now allows us to see that the raw material of the
outer world shows a gradation from the 'near constant' conjunctions of
certain properties in the physical world, down to the 'more than
chance' conjunctions in the world of man-organized things. T h e
degrees of 'conjunction' allow corresponding degrees of probabilistic
laws - almost deterministic in the laws of science, to almost stochastic
in the social sciences. Even in the physical sciences the gap between
'almost constant conjunction' and the old 'constant conjunction' laws
has been shown by Heisenberg to be a serious field for uncertainty, if
sufficiently large samples were employed (Heisenberg's Uncertainty
Principle, 1 9 2 7 ; see Haggett 1965, p. 25).
      In the activities and fossilized actions of man the conjunction of
properties is much less than constant but still much more than
chance - thus allowing probabilistic laws but making them much more
'probabilistic', much more difficult to isolate, and with a broader field
of uncertainty than the laws we organize for the physical world. On
this basis we can confidently look forward to the increasingly more
competent framing of increasingly more complex and powerful laws in
sociology, social anthropology, and in related studies. These general-
izing and synthesizing laws will so reorganize the archaeologist's
knowledge of the sociocultural system that it is likely that parallel
 developments will rapidly follow in the archaeological field also.
 Nevertheless, one must not imagine that this step is imminent nor that
 it can be accomplished without a very great deal more work. All that
 the archaeologist need note is that he will be most unlikely to make
 much sense out of the sociocultural/material culture interface until
 both sides of that surface have been reorganized.
      T h i s impression of the world provides a reasonably close fit to the
 world that we are accustomed to move in - a world of free-choice
 within bounds but bounds severally hedged by variously ranged limits
 (fig. 7) and yet allowing stochastic choice within those b o u n d s - a
 'structured chaos' (Arbib 1967). One might broadly observe that for
 every locus or state that an entity or attribute takes, there is still a
 limited set of loci or states that the entity or attribute might have taken
 with equal probability, even given the constraints limiting that set.
 T h i s permissible set becomes vanishingly small in the physical
 sciences but frustratingly large in the social sciences. Such is the case
 in the choice of a particular settlement site from among the many
 equally advantageous sites in an area, or in the selection and imposi-
 tion of an artefact attribute state from among the many equally
                                   Discussion and speculation         471

acceptable attribute states within the culturally accepted multistate
set. In this light, much sociocultural information or tradition can be
seen as providing a 'mind-making-up' procedure for narrowing the
selection to a 'preferable set' and then providing an arbitrary pro-
cedure for selection within that set - whether by augury, oracle, or
some other stochastic and cabalistic device. T h e first set is bounded by
the functional and culturally induced constraints, producing regulari-
ties of one of our categories, and the second set is the range constrain-
ing the statistical regularities of our second category.


11   Disciplined procedure

T h e part of the last section that informs us upon procedure might be
summarized by saying that we should organize our data into regulari-
ties both for convenience and for information. Furthermore, it appears
that by being selective, arbitrary, but consistent we can hope to learn
about very complex systems by modelling the successive aspects
which interest us, deliberately leaving out details which are irrelevant
to that system aspect and separating the key, essential, and inessential
variables. By starting with single aspect simulation models it should be
possible to additively evolve more complex and increasingly compre-
hensive ensembles - although it is to be doubted whether sociocultural
systems can ever be expressed by single model structures. In short,
disciplined procedure in analytical archaeology may be adequately
condensed in the words of Descartes - 'method consists entirely in
properly ordering and arranging the things to which we should pay
attention' (Oeuvres, vol. X , p. 379; Rules for the Direction of the
Mind, rule V).
     T h e general scaffolding for the procedure of archaeology as a
'learning' discipline has already been outlined in the recycling feed-
back model (fig. 2). In essence that procedure is based upon feeding a
constant flow of contextual and specific observations into the 'analy-
tical engine' in conjunction with the best available models appropriate
to the particular data. Within the engine the aspects of the data
satisfactorily accounted for by the models are redundantly used to
reinforce and elaborate those structures of hypotheses; the residual
data aspects not satisfactorily covered by the model are thus defined
and may be used to modify or destroy the model, or develop new
models. T h e output from this procedure is therefore - confirmed,
modified, or new models which are then returned to the input of the
472      Analytical Archaeology

procedural engine, to be fed in against appropriate new data. T h i s
procedure is effectively a multiple regression analysis system - an
organized procedure employing J o h n Stuart Mill's famous 'method of
residues'.
    However, the analytical engine is more richly networked than this
schematic model suggests and there are several other internal flow
patterns which may be employed successively or simultaneously to
generate hypotheses and test models. Before we progress to the prob-
lems of the techniques for generating archaeological hypotheses and
models it might be as well to run through an ordered procedural
sequence.


UNILINEAR       PROCEDURE

T h e sequential investigation of an archaeological problem may be
approached as outlined below. T h e terminology specifically refers to a
'syntactical approach' to archaeological data, along the lines pursued in
the discussion of archaeological entities (chapters 4-8). Nevertheless,
the same procedure is immediately applicable to the 'pragmatic' and
'semantic' aspects of archaeological problems if the mathematical
interpretation of the offending terms is replaced by the nearest sub-
jective equivalent, so long as one is fully aware of the gap between the
meanings of the two kinds of terms - they are usually overlapping but
not identical sets. It is precisely this gap which in future we must seek
to define in order that it may be diminished or allowed for. H o w e v e r ,
the outline procedure can be given by Chorofas ( 1 9 6 5 , pp. 2 5 - 3 0 ) :


Initial cycle

      ( 1 ) Choose and define the problem.
      (2) Collect the appropriate data with the appropriate sampling
            procedure.
      (3) Locate the strategic variables defining the arbitrary system
            aspect relevant to this problem - set up the system believed to
            contain the key, essential, and inessential variables.
      (4) Set up analytical experiments to determine the relation of
            these variables to one another and to the parameters of the
            system:
            (a) Devise preliminary analytical experiments - to determine
                the dependence of the operational variables; analyse sue-
                                      Discussion and speculation     473

            cessive examples of the system states to reveal the statisti-
            cal dependence of the results on the various operational
            variables; employ analysis of relationships - contingency,
            variance, covariance, correlation and regression analysis,
            factor analysis, etc. - wherever appropriate, to define the
            key and essential variables.
        (b) Devise further analytical experiments - for example, select
            various system states in which certain parameters are
            controlled, or may be held constant, in order to investi-
            gate the corresponding effect upon the other system
            variables.
        (c) Narrow the operational variables to those key variables to
            which the results and behaviour of the system are most
            sensitive.
    (5) Formulate a set of hypotheses, or construct a model, organiz-
        ing the results of these experiments within the frame of the
        selected problems. Attempt to escalate any such model from
        an iconic to an analogue, or preferably symbolic status with
        deterministic, statistical, and stochastic components.


Recycle

    (6) Design fresh experiments to test model or hypotheses, design
        appropriate sampling procedure, collection of data according
        to this plan, carry out these experiments.
    (7) Test model or hypotheses against these new results, isolate any
        area of residuals unexplained or unsatisfactorily covered by
        the original model or hypotheses.
    (8) Analyse residuals; accept, modify, or reject model or hy-
        potheses according to outcome. Predict relevance to wider
        sphere of problems and data.
    (9) Test the predictions by repeating the whole procedure in a
        new context: observe - hypothesize - predict - experiment -
        and, confirm, modify, or reject.


TECHNIQUES      FOR G E N E R A T I N G   HYPOTHESES

Hypotheses are developed to relate observed properties to one another
by means of a structural concept. In this way an hypothesis, or an
hypothetical model, is constructed for the sake of predicting certain
474       Analytical Archaeology
correlated        regularities.       Such      hypotheses          are    consequently            mere
i n s t r u m e n t s in specific c o n t e x t s and in this c a p a c i t y they m a y be
assessed as a c c u r a t e , partially a c c u r a t e , or i n a c c u r a t e , r a t h e r t h a n as
t r u e or false. A g o o d model or hypothesis p r e d i c t s m o r e a b o u t a
specific class of situations than does a less satisfactory alternative. T h e
i m p o r t a n c e of this a p p r o a c h t o h y p o t h e s e s is that it r e m o v e s         the
illusion of a unitary ' t r u t h ' and reveals that m a n y h y p o t h e s e s m a y all
be partially 'true' at o n e and the s a m e t i m e but that they m a y be
a r r a n g e d in a scale of a d e q u a c y . T h e 'truth' about a given situation
also d e p e n d s u p o n the line of a p p r o a c h that we arbitrarily a d o p t in
p r o b i n g that situation. O n e situation therefore has m a n y 'truths', s o m e
of which m a y be a r r a n g e d to degrees of a d e q u a c y along particular
a p p r o a c h e s but the best of w h i c h can only be judged to be t e m p o r a r i l y
the most effective in different a p p r o a c h e s to the s a m e situation (Nagel
1 9 5 8 , pp. 7 4 - 5 ) .
      O n e of the p r o b l e m s of the m o d e l or hypothesis a p p r o a c h                       is
therefore how to c o m p a r e the effectiveness of alternative h y p o t h e s e s
and how to g e n e r a t e an a d e q u a t e supply of r e p l a c e m e n t s . T h e prac-
tical answer overall, s e e m s to rely u p o n a ' s h o t g u n ' p r o c e d u r e , with a
multiplicity of different r e s e a r c h e r s involved in a multilinear stochas-
tic search.         Nevertheless        s o m e individual         procedures         have      proved
capable of m o r e explicit direction.


Method of total scrutiny

If there are no obvious hypotheses, or regularities w h i c h m a y be
utilized in such hypotheses, then the data m u s t be s e a r c h e d                                and
reorganized in o r d e r to obtain such an organization. T h i s p r o c e s s of
scrutiny and t r a n s f o r m a t i o n is described by Miller and K a h n ( 1 9 6 2 ,
PP- 3 r S _ 2 4 )   as   a   ' s h o t g u n ' or 'Pleiades' m e t h o d . L a r g e quantities of
data are assembled and then subjected to a study m e a s u r i n g                                    the
correlation b e t w e e n every aspect and every o t h e r aspect. T h e resulting
 m a t r i x of relationships m a y then be scanned for any latent s t r u c t u r e .
T h i s may be done rigorously and formally by m a t r i x inversion and
 canonical analysis in the case of m a t h e m a t i c a l data ( H a g g e t t 1 9 6 5 , p.
 2 8 5 ; K r u m b e i n and Graybill, 1 9 6 5 , pp. 2 4 8 - 7 5 ) .


Method of regularities

T h i s m e t h o d c o m m e n c e s with the d e l i b e r a t e , intuitive, or a c c i d e n t a l
discovery of r e g u l a r i t i e s r e l a t i n g p r o p e r t i e s w i t h i n t h e data. T h e pro-
                                   Discussion and speculation         475

cedure is then concerned with the explicit formulation of as many
examples of these regularities as is possible and a proof, by some null
hypothesis procedure, that the observed relationships are not arising
from chance factors. T h e correlated conjunction of properties which
define the regularity may then be explicitly formulated as an hy-
pothesis for testing.


Method of residues

T h i s method employs the comprehensive regression procedure
outlined earlier in this section (II, 1 - 9 ) . T h e insufficiency of the
conjectured factors to account for the observed effects allows the
definition and isolation of residual properties requiring an alternative
or a more extensive model. T h i s procedure is formalized in residual
and regression analysis (chapter 10, III).


Method of convergence and integration

In many studies there may already exist several hypotheses, each
supporting the contributive effect of different factors but the factors
and the hypotheses may prove not to be mutually exclusive. T h i s
situation then allows the employment of the hypothesis of multiple
factors and cumulative effect and the Occam against Converse Occam
procedure (chapter 2, III, fig. 12). If the individual factors are proved
to play a part in the system under investigation then they may be
integrated one at a time into the final model (Occam, too many-*
sufficient). However, on many occasions, although the named factors
and hypotheses may be operating and may indeed model much of the
system behaviour, yet careful search should still be made to see if
other unmentioned factors and hypotheses may not also be active
(Converse Occam, too few-» sufficient). T h e integration of the neces-
sary factors into an interacting system then allows a more comprehen-
sive hypothesis based on the system structure.
    Such a complex hypothesis or model may then best be tested and
further defined by the convergent integration of the separate evidence
from as many differently based experiments and analyses as is possi-
ble. 'Variety in the kinds of positive instances for a theory is a
generally acknowledged factor in estimating the weight of the evi-
dence. Experiments which are conducted in qualitatively different
domains . . . control features of the theory whose relevance in any one
476        Analytical Archaeology
d o m a i n may b e in q u e s t i o n ' (Nagel 1958, p. 69). I n an archaeological
s i t u a t i o n this m i g h t be r e p r e s e n t e d by t h e c o n v e r g e n t integration of
s e p a r a t e evidence f r o m each of t h e m a n y d o m a i n s c o n s t i t u t i n g single
c u l t u r a l assemblages - artefact taxonomies, d i s t r i b u t i o n s , a b s o l u t e
dates, stratigraphies, ceramics, m e t a l w o r k a n d so on. T h i s m e t h o d
d e v e l o p s f r o m t h e a s s u m p t i o n that archaeological situations are likely
t o be m a n y - f a c t o r r a t h e r t h a n single-factor systems a n d that
c o n s e q u e n t l y the d o m a i n of each factor m u s t b e allowed for in t h e
search for a c o m p r e h e n s i v e hypothesis.


Method of multiple alternative                  hypotheses

T h i s a p p r o a c h is similar to t h e last in that b o t h are designed to h a n d l e
m a n y f a c t o r s or h y p o t h e s e s relating to single situations. H o w e v e r , t h e
p r e c e d i n g a p p r o a c h is only a p p r o p r i a t e for the m a n i p u l a t i o n of f a c t o r s
a n d h y p o t h e s e s w h i c h are not m u t u a l l y exclusive. If a set of m u t u a l l y
exclusive, alternative h y p o t h e s e s exist to explain a single situation
t h e n t h e m e t h o d of ' m u l t i p l e w o r k i n g h y p o t h e s e s ' may be usefully
e m p l o y e d ( C h a m b e r l i n 1897).
      T h i s t e c h n i q u e suggests that if, at any o n e time, it is not possible
o n the existing evidence to decisively d i s c r i m i n a t e b e t w e e n alternative
h y p o t h e s e s , t h e n these h y p o t h e s e s s h o u l d be c o n t i n u o u s l y r u n in
parallel t h r o u g h t h e regression p r o c e d u r e , until such t i m e as t h e
probabilities of one hypothesis have c u m u l a t i v e l y increased a n d the
p r o b a b i l i t i e s of the alternatives have c o r r e s p o n d i n g l y d i m i n i s h e d to
v a n i s h i n g point. T h i s t e c h n i q u e is a s i m u l t a n e o u s and m u l t i p l e
version of the s t a n d a r d m e t h o d of residues - m u l t i p l e - r e g r e s s i o n
analysis as o p p o s e d to simple regression analysis.
      T h e different h y p o t h e s e s are in this case processed in parallel with
c o n s t a n t feedback of i n f o r m a t i o n b e t w e e n t h e c h a n n e l s p r o v i d i n g a
successive o u t p u t on the c o m p a r a t i v e probability states of t h e alter-
natives. T h i s c o m p a r a t i v e state can be e s t i m a t e d subjectively or
objectively by u s i n g Bayes's t h e o r e m of inverse probability ( C h e r r y
I
  9 S 7 . P- 63) or Fisher's m e t h o d of m a x i m u m likelihood (Nagel 1958, p.
36). Ideally, the individual probabilities of the alternative h y p o t h e s e s
will fluctuate as they m o r e or less effectively m i n i m i z e the residuals
p r e s e n t e d by the flow of fresh data, until t h e oscillating c o m p a r a t i v e
o u t p u t converges u p o n one or o t h e r h y p o t h e s i s . T h i s goal is r e a c h e d
w h e n t h e c u m u l a t i v e modifications r e q u i r e d to save the ' d i m i n i s h i n g '
h y p o t h e s e s b e c o m e m o r e u n p l a u s i b l e t h a n t h e rejection of those
                                    Discussion and speculation          477
hypotheses; hence one hypothesis should remain (Braithwaite i960, p.
20). Care must however be taken to establish that the hypotheses or
factors are really mutually exclusive, otherwise wasteful conflict will
be generated between partially satisfactory models that should have
been integrated by the method of convergence.


Method of isomorphism

T h i s approach is potentially the most interesting and useful technique
but in practice its abuse has tended to obscure its fundamental rele-
vance. Crudely speaking it is the technique of borrowing and modify-
ing models from other disciplines to suit a new context. T h e basis of
the technique has only become explicit with the recent extension of
system theory into diverse fields. T h i s procedure has produced a
crude taxonomy of system models which shows that many of the
models or hypotheses of quite different disciplines are related in such a
way that the homomorphism of a system model in one field is often
isomorphic with the homomorphism of a similar model in a quite
different field. Put more directly, it appears that models and hypotheses
in various disciplines exhibit latent structural isomorphisms - they
show surprisingly similar theoretical constructions operating as models
for quite different data. 'Many scientific concepts in different fields have
a logically equivalent structure. One can abstract from them a logical
form which is quite general and takes on different peculiar meanings
according to the context' (MacKay 1950).
      Many examples of such inter-disciplinary isomorphisms may be
collected - in some cases the isomorphisms have been brought about
by deliberate borrowing between fields of study:

    (a) The exponential relationship laws - in the physics of radioactive
        decay, in Malthusian population growth models, in economic
        production and consumption models, and in the various
        inverse square laws.
    (b) The mass action laws - in physics, in chemistry, in population
        dynamics and mechanical dynamics (Lotka).
    (c) The minimum potential energy equilibrium laws - in physics as
        Lagrange's principle, in geography as used by Losch, and in
        the social sciences as Zipf's principle, in physical chemistry as
        Le Chatelier's principle, in electrodynamics as Lenz's law, and
        in demography as used by Volterra.
478      Analytical Archaeology

      (d) The Gaussian distribution laws - in astronomy, in the physical
          sciences, in geography, in empirical psychology, genetics, and
          many other fields.
              Archaeological models homomorphic with many of these
          laws have been discussed in the course of this work (Haggett
          1965, pp. 3 2 - 3 ) .

    T h i s discovery of predictive isomorphisms has led to the optimis-
tic pursuit of fundamental inter-disciplinary models, hypotheses, and
laws. However, a more productive development has been the increas-
ingly systematic scrutiny and deliberate mutual scanning of the
deductive superstructures of the various disciplines, which has already
resulted in a most useful interchange of models and procedures. T h e
method of isomorphism must be used with the greatest care but if
properly controlled it offers primitive disciplines, such as archaeology,
the chance to borrow sophisticated, powerful, and beautiful pieces of
model machinery beyond their own temporarily limited powers of
fabrication. Where the disciplines are primitive and their fields exces-
sively complex, as in archaeology, sociology, and social anthropology,
then such a borrowing procedure is likely to save a great deal of time.
    T o conclude this section on 'disciplined procedure' one might
scrutinize the phrase itself. Discipline, as Descartes emphasized,
consists of choosing a sphere of interest, defining the system involved,
and arranging and ordering the observations concerning that system.
Procedure, in this context, is conveyed by our model of the analytical
engine which may be constructed for disciplining archaeological data
(fig. 2). In its fully networked form this procedural machinery will
process many sets of data in parallel and by simultaneous but varied
techniques for generating orders, regularities, and hypotheses. These
methods for model and hypothesis construction may be expressed
either in ordinary language for subjective application, or in symbolic
form for mathematical manipulation and testing. Ordinary language
 hypotheses and models are more readily conceived and understood
but tend to be very specific and restricted in scope, as well as rather
ambiguous and tacit in their implications. Symbolic hypotheses and
 models are immediately capable of more general application and test-
 ing and are usually fully explicit, as well as offering the possibility of
 development and transformation in a symbolic calculus. Both systems
 of hypothesis and model construction should be employed but
 wherever and whenever possible the ordinary language models should
 be converted into symbolic forms. 1
                                        Discussion and speculation             479
in   Archaeological grammar
G r a m m a r comprises the organized and ordered body of the relation-
ships of words as abstracted f r o m a very large n u m b e r of literary
contexts - the condensation of a large number of observed regularities.
It is clear that the outcome of the kinds of procedure that we have
been discussing should be some equivalent body of archaeological
grammar, similarly condensing a large n u m b e r of observed regulari-
ties in archaeological data. Y e t there seem to be not one archaeological
g r a m m a r but several 'rival archaeologies' based on what may appear to
be various incompatible basic propositions ( C h a n g 1 9 6 7 , pp. 1 3 7 - 4 3 ) .
T h e s e basic propositions of modern archaeology seem to exhort us to
take totally opposed views of the same data:

     Proposition 1 . Archaeological data were formerly an integral part of
       sociocultural entities - whole systems in which the artefacts
       were elaborately networked. Archaeological data cannot there-
       fore be adequately studied as an artificially discrete subsystem
       separated f r o m the whole circuitry of interaction which was its
       former context. Artefacts should be studied in a sociocultural
       and environmental context (e.g. Binford and Binford 1968).
     Proposition 2. Archaeological data are now detached from their
       contemporary       sociocultural and environmental       contexts.
       Archaeological data may therefore best be studied empirically as
       a material phenomenon with observable regularities. Artefacts
       should be studied in terms of their own attribute systems, away
       from the distortions of loose presuppositions about their f o r m e r
       contexts.

     T h e first proposition is f o u n d underlying the present activities of
the cultural ecology and cultural ethnology schools of archaeology.
T h e second proposition is the foundation of archaeological taxonomy
and morphology, employing the inductive statistics, numerical
taxonomy, and computer techniques which have been claimed to
'dehumanize' the discipline. T h e apparent c o n u n d r u m is that both
propositions seem to be true and certainly the rival archaeologies that
they have given rise to have each made most useful contributions in
recent years. If this is the case, how are they to be reconciled and what
are the respective roles and mutual relationships of these rival
approaches, each with its own domain and its vociferous advocates?
   T h e answer to the c o n u n d r u m of modern archaeology can best be
sought in the elementary structure of the discipline, in which the
480       Analytical Archaeology
i s o m o r p h i s m w i t h the s t u d y of i n f o r m a t i o n and sign s y s t e m s can be
f u r t h e r e x t e n d e d . T h i s is h a r d l y s u r p r i s i n g if w e v i e w language and
sign s y s t e m s t h e m s e l v e s as artefacts like any other h u m a n f a b r i c a t i o n .
T h e initial step can best be taken b y f r e e l y a d a p t i n g some ideas f r o m
the theory of signs ( C h e r r y 1 9 5 7 , p p . 8, 1 0 9 - 1 5 ) . T h e terms we w i s h to
use distinguish (fig. 4 8 ) :

      Designata - the set of roles or activities that a particular artefact
        w a s intended f o r .
      Percepta - the i n f o r m a t i o n c o n v e y e d to an o b s e r v e r in the act of
         p e r c e i v i n g an object or artefact.
      Concepta - the i n f o r m a t i o n contained in the abstract idea of an
        object or artefact c o n c e i v e d in the brain of a person or potential
        artificer, recalled f r o m m e m o r y .

      T h e s e t e r m s make it clear that artefacts m a y be i m a g i n e d as
presenting three kinds of relationship at three interfaces with the
outside w o r l d :
      - relationships with other artefacts (involving                         their     designata,
        percepta, and concepta)
      - relationships w i t h people ( i n v o l v i n g their p e r c e p t a and concepta)
      - relationships w i t h the p h y s i c a l         environment          at the time of
        m a n u f a c t u r e , i n v o l v i n g their designata (see fig. 1 1 2 ) .




                                                                     Fig. U 2 Artefacts and
                                                                     interpretation. T h e three
                                                                     grammars of
                                                                     archaeological
                                                                     interrelationships and
                                                                     their three domains -
                                                                     the consequences of the
                                                                     three outputs of material
                                                                     culture communications
                                                                     (see fig. H I ) .


        T h e relationships of artefacts at these three interfaces are in
different d o m a i n s - t h e y are interrelated but they operate in different
systems. T h e s e three classes of relationship will therefore have three
d i f f e r e n t but related ' g r a m m a r s ' c o n d e n s i n g their regularities. T h e
g r a m m a r s of these three relationship d o m a i n s are usually c a l l e d :
                                    D i s c u s s i o n and speculation   481

    Syntactics - relations between artefacts and attributes at every
       level of their organization (designata, percepta, concepta).
    Pragmatics - relations between artefacts and their users and
      observers (percepta, concepta).
    Semantics - relations between artefacts and their roles in the phy-
      sical world (designata).

     It is therefore apparent that if the archaeologist is constructing an
organized and ordered body of relationships that we might call
archaeological grammar - then that corpus of relations involves not
one but three separate and related grammars, those of archaeological
syntactics, archaeological pragmatics, and archaeological semantics.
T h e relationship between these separate grammars and their domains
is perhaps best expressed by simple diagrams (figs 1 1 1 , 1 1 2 ) .
     If we now return to the basic propositions of modern archaeology,
with their different approaches, we will find that they are the
complementary and interrelated approaches to the domains that have
just been described. T h e first proposition requires that artefacts
should be studied in terms of their sociocultural and environmental
context; the appropriate grammars for this domain are archaeological
pragmatics and semantics. T h e second proposition requires that arte-
facts should be studied in terms of their own attributes, as abstract
systems; here the appropriate grammar is archaeological syntactics. In
practice, the archaeologist wants to know and organize all these rela-
tionships of his data and to apply the integrated pragmatic and
semantic approach as much as the abstracted syntactic approach in
order that the evidence of all the domains might be brought together.
However, this procedure is most efficiently accomplished if the
archaeologist is aware of these separate sets of relationships and
systematically sets about the independent construction of the different
domain grammars. Otherwise the attempt at a single all-purpose
grammar of archaeological relationships will promote confusion
between procedures and introduce too many dimensions for effective
analysis.
   This section might close, therefore, with a brief outline of the
appropriate roles and procedure of the three domains.


Syntactics

Archaeological syntactics is concerned with the domain of artefacts as
phenomena suitable for empirical study in their own right; where the
482     Analytical Archaeology

term artefact is intended to convey every level in the s y s t e m s - f r o m
attribute state to technocomplex. T h e ideal is to organize and order
syntactical observations into s y m b o l i c models of ascending capacity.
T h e g r a m m a r developed f r o m this approach may h o p e to achieve a
calculus of relationships based upon observations of archaeological
systems and the s y m b o l i c representation of such systems. T h i s w o u l d
allow the manipulation and transformation of these s y m b o l i c
representations by means of a set of grammatical rules so that the
consequences of a set of calculus operations w o u l d be i s o m o r p h i c with
the consequences of a parallel set of operations in the real w o r l d .
      T h e ideal in syntactical archaeology is of course a very long w a y
f r o m being achieved. H o w e v e r , the possible b e g i n n i n g s of a g r a m m a r
are nevertheless b e c o m i n g apparent with the progressively more
p o w e r f u l use of s y m b o l i c models in archaeology and the increasing
refinement of our knowledge of their relationships and trans-
formations. T h e s e d e v e l o p m e n t s are very largely the result of the
developing contributions of quantification, statistical procedure, and
the impact of the computer. I n d e e d , it is a distinctive feature of
syntactic g r a m m a r that it is m u c h concerned with relative f r e q u e n c i e s
and statistical probabilities in the manipulation of its elements. T h e
development of a s y m b o l i c and axiomatic representation of
archaeological syntactics is at least possible - we have discussed the
potential classification and transformation of general constellation
models and a g r o w i n g knowledge of the taxa of such s y s t e m s in
archaeological data will surely yield more lines for d e v e l o p m e n t .
    Syntactic g r a m m a r in archaeology is therefore an abstract f o r m u -
lation, freely devised to enable a calculus of rules of f o r m a t i o n , deduc-
tion, and transformation to be developed. T h e s e rules are not neces-
sarily inherent in the data, they are simply a f o r m a l and s y m b o l i c
system devised to organize and exploit regularities in the data. A
language system used b y an observer to model and synthesize empiri-
cal observations in a real world system.


Pragmatics

Archaeological pragmatics covers the domain of artefacts and their
relations to the people w h o made them and the people w h o observe
them. T h i s observation immediately reveals an important dichotomy
within this field of studies (fig. 1 1 1 ) . On one hand artefacts convey
certain tacit information to the person w h o made them and closely
                                      Discussion and speculation           483

similar information to other persons of the same culture, since a
shared sociocultural programming will ensure that within broad limits
their filtering receivers are similarly interpreting the incoming
information (fig. m a ) . On the other hand the same artefacts will
convey rather different but overlapping information to persons of
other cultures, whose alien sociocultural programming will prevent
them 'seeing' the artefact in the same 'light' as that received by the
source group (fig. 1 1 i b ) . It is apparent that the archaeologist is firmly
placed in the latter class of alien observers with a biased filter inter-
pretation. T h e archaeologist parallels the New Guinea aboriginal in
his cargo cult interpretation of the alien artefacts (chapter 3, III).
      Archaeological pragmatics defines a field for the consideration, or
attempted consideration, of artefacts within sociocultural contexts - in
its recent aspect this constitutes cultural ethnology. T h e relations that
archaeological pragmatics can hope to investigate are those which may
suggest association between certain sociocultural organizations and
certain sets of attribute or artefact regularities. Most of these prag-
matic formulations have in the past been over naive - equating
longhouses or female figurines with matricentred societies for
example - but recently more sophisticated models have been erected
and tested. T h e s e pragmatic models have largely been concerned with
what archaeological configurations might be expected in connection
with certain social organizations (e.g. Deetz 1 9 6 5 ; Longacre 1968,
1 9 7 0 ; Hill 1968, 1 9 7 0 ; Whallon 1 9 6 8 ; chapter 3, n. 2). At a broader
level we have already considered some of the complex relationships in
the grammar relating archaeological entities and group ethnology
(chapter 9). At a minutely focused level archaeological pragmatics may
be concerned with the symbolism of ceramic motifs, artistic con-
ventions, heraldic codes, or written scripts. In all these levels the
fundamental problems include the dichotomous implications of the
archaeological data and the inevitable uncertainty about the actual
nature of the specific sociocultural context.
    Pragmatic g r a m m a r in archaeology may also in time come to be
expressed in an abstract formulation. Although archaeological prag-
matics must probe social/artefact relationships with the tools of
frequency counts, correlation, and statistical probabilities it also deals
with logical probaoilities in the sense of Bayes, Bar-Hillel, and Carnap
(Cherry 1 9 5 7 , p. 242). T h i s facet is shared by archaeological semantics
to a degree which distinguishes both semantics and pragmatics from
syntactical grammar. Carnap has already succeeded in illustrating the
484    Analytical Archaeology
way that a symbolic logic may be applied to kinship relations and this
problem is congruous with those of relating the various levels of
archaeological and sociocultural entities as well as to other pragmatic
problems (chapter 9, fig. 7 5 ; Carnap 1958, pp. 2 2 0 - 5 ) . From the
opposite direction Steward (1955) has organized and defined
significant regularities relating sociocultural categories and environ-
mental constraints, which together control certain pragmatic regulari-
ties. However, it is quite apparent that in this field little or no
archaeological progress can be made towards a symbolic and axiomatic
expression until the sociologists and social anthropologists have
themselves ordered their side of this interface.


Semantics

Archaeological semantics outlines the domain of relations between
artefacts and their roles in activities in the physical world. These
relationships are characteristically complex - the same roles may be
filled by different but limited sets of artefact-type families, the same
artefact will have many different roles within each culture (e.g. White
and T h o m a s 1972) and many more within a set of cultures. It is this
maze of intersecting sets and complex correlations that a semantic
grammar must try and express.
     In practice, artefacts are frequently used in polythetic sets which
comprise an artefact-type complex relating to a specific activity, set of
activities, or to a subcultural unit of some kind. T h e study of these
kits, accoutrements, equipments and trappings offers a wider scope for
the organization and detection of cross-cultural regularities. Such
artefact-type complexes combine to make up much of the equipment
defining the common ground of technocomplex entities - the compli-
cated way in which this combination may be effected has been
demonstrated by the Binfords' factor analysis of Mousterian techno-
complex equipment (Binford and Binford 1966). It is therefore prob-
able in terms of relating artefact complexes to certain roles in certain
environmental contexts that a semantic grammar of technocomplex
structure might be evolved.
    An archaeological semantic grammar is therefore a systematization
of observations in cultural ecology. Such a grammar would share with
archaeological pragmatics a need for expression in terms of logical
probability connecting the intersecting sets of conditions. T h i s
suggests the ultimate possibility of modelling the semantic 'behaviour'
                                      Discussion and speculation           485
of archaeological data in terms of a symbolic calculus but this goal
must lie in the distant future (Carnap 1958). In the meantime the
archaeologist must press on with the accumulation of the necessary
data. T e c h n o c o m p l e x e s must be explicitly defined in terms of their
artefact-type complex structures and this configuration must be
matched with the essential aspects of local ecology which induce the
overall regularity.


iv   Speculations

Analytical archaeology may perhaps be defined as the continuous
elucidation of the relationships which permeate archaeological data by
means of disciplined procedures directed towards the precipitation of
a body of general theory. T h e temptation to see this aspect of
archaeology as an archaeological science must be resisted. Analytical
archaeology is not a science but it is a discipline, its primary
machinery is mathematical rather than scientific. T h e archaeologist's
pursuit of the scientific mirage has long obscured the point that a
study may be based on empirical observation, experiment, induction
and the formulation of hypotheses without necessarily being a science.
T h e quality which distinguishes a science is the degree of certainty
marking the recurrent conjunction of the properties which comprise
the field of study and hence the degree of wide generality of its
empirical propositions. T h e quality which distinguishes archaeology is
the more than chance regularity marking the conjunction of certain
archaeological properties which are restricted to limited regions by
complex constraints and which may only be expressed in probabilistic
propositions.
    T h e relationships which analytical archaeology may hope to
elucidate are those found in the separate but interconnected domains
of archaeological syntactics, pragmatics, and semantics. T h e s e
domains are the archaeological views of cultural systematics, cultural
ethnology, and cultural ecology (the morphological anthropological
and ecological paradigms - Clarke 1972). T h e relationships within
each domain form independent grammars condensing the domain
regularities. One of the more interesting possibilities arises from the
chance that one or all of these separate grammars may eventually be
expressed in a symbolic and axiomatic calculus. At the moment the
abstract approach of archaeological syntactics, accelerated by its
computer assisted take-off, displays the most promising potential for
486    Analytical Archaeology

development in this way - perhaps employing a taxonomy of
archaeological systems and constellation models and operating upon
them by means of specified transformations. Nevertheless, archaeolo-
gical pragmatics and semantics are also gaining impetus from
computer studies and a combination of simulations with analogue
computers and a symbolic logic using probabilities may ultimately
model these grammars equally effectively. Unfortunately these
thresholds can hardly be achieved until both sociology and social
anthropology have fully reorganized and ordered their own grammars
in these respects. For these reasons alone it looks as though the
'observer language' or meta-language of archaeological syntactics will
be the first grammar to uncover a calculus of symbolic expression over
the next few decades.
     If the integrated 'wholeness' of sociocultural systems is accepted
then the domain of archaeology as one arbitrary approach to these
entities becomes complementary to the separate approaches and
domains of social anthropology, social psychology, and the other social
disciplines. In this view archaeology may have a very important role to
play as the testing ground for complex techniques which may be
sharpened against the artificially simplified data of archaeology before
their more sophisticated employment against the further complexities
of primary social data. It is already apparent that the statistical and
mathematical methodology of both archaeology and anthropology
could best be taught in a single course of lectures. A basic methodolo-
gical link of this kind would go a long way to redress the short-sighted
 divergence of the specialized branches of these studies and simul-
 taneously prevent the archaeologist from becoming too dilettante and
 the anthropologist from becoming too abstruse.
    In any event archaeology is being subtly infiltrated by concepts
from a multiplicity of disciplines and interstices between disciplines
(see section I). Archaeology and these New Studies constitute a
coupled system and therefore archaeology must adapt to the changing
output of this context if it wishes to make the most use of these
powerful arrivals. Archaeology must be rethought, reorientated, and
rewritten in order to facilitate these developments and in order to
reciprocally contribute to the modern context. It is too early and too
dangerous to venture to attempt this reformation yet and it is certainly
too great a task for any single author. Perversely therefore Analytical
Archaeology is a personal attempt to do just this -'anticipations, rash
and premature' as Bacon's description of scientific hypothesis pres-
                                      Discussion and speculation            487

cribes in the Xovum Organum. T o be justified only by the Preface to
this work and by Bacon's further dictum - ' t r u t h comes out of error
more readily than out of confusion'. With these caveats it is still to be
hoped that however transient its contents this work may be a
homomorphic model of a future class of archaeological textbook which
will repair these errors and elaborate analytical archaeology on a sound
basis.



Notes
     (1) The major thrust of this volume has been towards the analysis of
models for archaeological entities and processes, while the author's views on
procedure are expressed in less detail in this section and in earlier chapters
(chapter 2, vi, A and fig. 2; chapter 10, iv). However, the last decade has seen
a significant growth of interest in and debate about such matters as the
formulation and testing of hypotheses and the existence of 'laws' of human
behaviour. This matched the author's own interest in these subjects and it
seems a useful exercise to direct the reader towards some of the primary
sources.
     Archaeologists have turned to other disciplines and in particular to the
philosophy of science (e.g. Hempel 1966; Rudner 1966; Harvey 1969;
Medawar 1969; Harre 1972; other useful references in Morgan 1973) for
models of hypothesis testing and explanation. Apart from the need for a more
disciplined approach to procedure, which is an aim shared by many
archaeologists, there has been a more explicit commitment by younger
American archaeologists to a model of explanation derived from the works of
Carl Hempel: this is the 'covering law' model, and more specifically the
'deductive-nomological' method of explanation. This has been vigorously
propounded by Lewis Binford (1972) and further expressed by Fritz and Plog
(1970) and Watson, LeBlanc and Redman (1971). More practical considera-
tions of how this procedure can be operationalized in archaeological research
can be found in Hill (1972) and Plog (1974).
     These views on procedure have not escaped criticism, both from
archaeologists (e.g. Johnson 1972; Tuggle, Townsend and Riley 1972; Clarke
 1972b) and by a philosopher of science (Morgan 1973). While much of the
debate centres on detailed points of procedure, such as the deductive testing
of hypotheses and the discovery and use of laws (Plog 1973; Stickel and
Chartkoff 1973), two more general points have been emphasized by critics of
the 'Hempel school'. First there is the question of the other different forms of
explanation which have been discussed by philosophers of science and which
should also be considered by archaeologists. Tuggle, Townsend and Riley
criticize the Hempel school for treating the philosophy of science as a
'monolithic system of consensus on such problems in explanation as the place
488     Analytical Archaeology

of laws, the symmetry of explanation and prediction, the nature of causation
and the role of induction' (1972, pp. 3-4)- T h i s is expressed in a different but
more forceful way by Morgan, who writes that 'there is no position so absurd
that some philosopher has not propounded it at some time. T h u s it makes
little difference what doctrine you wish to support - you can always find some
philosopher who, in his infinite wisdom, supports that doctrine' (1973, p.
259). T h e second general point concerns the validity of extracting the
explanatory procedures of one discipline and imposing them on another.

    Any philosophy of science is thus merely a series of generalizations made
    by philosophers about the pattern of logical structures and concepts
    which relate the assumptions, observations, hypotheses, explanations and
    interpretations such as they observe in the work of natural scientists. It is
    therefore a fundamental mistake to impose any philosophy extracted from
    this limited set of disciplines upon a wider set of studies which were not
    included within the initial set from which the generalizations were made.
    (Clarke 1972b, pp. 2 3 7 - 8 )
Definitions

ARTEFACT. A n y object modified by a set of humanly imposed attri-
   butes.

ASSEMBLAGE. A n associated set of contemporary artefact-types. T o
   be distinguished rigorously f r o m the loose physical or geographical
   aggregate.

ATTRIBUTE. General attribute; any logically irreducible character or
   property of a system, having two or more states (present/absent),
   acting as an independent variable and assumed by the observer to
   be of significance with reference to the f r a m e of his study.

ATTRIBUTE. Artefact attribute; a logically irreducible character of
   two or more states, acting as an independent variable within a
   specific artefact system. A n epistemically independent variable
   (Sommerhoff 1 9 5 0 , p. 86).

ATTRIBUTE COMPLEX. Artefact attribute c o m p l e x ; a polythetic set of
   different attributes repeatedly f o u n d together on individual arte-
   facts within populations of artefacts.

CHANNEL. T h e behavioural relationships between two elements, or
  entities, conceptualized as a connection or coupling.

CLIMAX. T h e period following a variety florescence in a system, in
   which the dislocating alternative and contradictive variety pro-
   duced by integrative growth is first coherently stabilized in the
   newly emergent system format.

COACTION. Cultural system interaction; the exchange of                                                 variety
   between coupled sociocultural systems of any rank.

COHERENCE. T h e overall level of element or entity intercorrelation
  within a system population f r o m a given phase.

C O M P L E X . A r e c u r r e n t c o n f i g u r a t i o n of e l e m e n t s o r e n t i t i e s w i t h i n a
     larger s y s t e m .

CONGRUENCE. In general usage, a concordant relationship between
  entities. In relation to sociocultural systems, a relationship
49°    Analytical Archaeology
   between the sociocultural variety of separate systems such that
   no dislocation would arise from their coupling; their variety is
   mutually new, alternative or redundant but not contradictive.

CONSTRAINT. T h e relationship between two sets, when the variety
  that exists under one condition is less than the variety that exists
  under another.

CORRELATION. T h e average relationship between two or more vari-
  ables, each of which is a series of measures on a quantitative
  character. More loosely - the interdependence between variables
  such that when one changes so does the other, in a manner similar
  to that denoted by a mathematical function but not as explicitly
  defined.

COVARiANCE. T h e covariance of two variables in a population of
  entities is the summation of the products of their deviations from
  their mean values divided by the number of entities summed.

CULTURAL CLIMAX. T h e period following a variety florescence in an
  optimizer cultural system - thus defining the first coherent
  configuration of the newly emergent cultural format, stabilizing
   the new variety generated in the various cultural aspects.

CULTURE. Specific cultural assemblage; an archaeological culture is a
   polythetic set of specific and comprehensive artefact-type cate-
  gories which consistently recur together in assemblages within a
   limited geographical area.

CULTURE GROUP. A family of transform cultures; a group of affinally
   related, collateral cultures characterized by assemblages sharing a
   polythetic range but differing states of the same specific multistate
   artefact-types.
       A low-level affinity, perhaps 30 per cent or less, uniting the
   group in terms of shared sets of specific type states but a residual
   high-level affinity, perhaps 60 per cent or more, uniting the group
   in terms of sets of type families and specific multistate transform
   types.

DISJUNCTION. Alternative information variety in a given set - 'a or b'
   is a disjunction of variety a, b - 'alternative variety'.
                                                     Definitions    491

DISLOCATION.     T h e relationship existing between coupled systems or
   entities such that their output sets of information variety are in
   some part mutually contradictory and destructive - representing
   'disequilibrium'.

ENTITY.  A n integrated ensemble of attributes forming a complex but
   coherent and unitary whole at a specific level of complexity. A
   special class of system.

EQUILIBRIUM.    General equilibrium; the state of a system in which
   selectively specified velocities of transformation are zero - in
   which certain rates of change are minimized.

EQUILIBRIUM.     Information equilibrium; those successive system
   states that minimize the m a x i m u m amount of information variety
   destroyed by system changes - minimizing immediate dislocation.

EQUIVOCATION.    T h e receiver's uncertainty about a message contain-
   ing contradictory information variety - 'contradictory variety'.

FLORESCENCE.     T h e period of explosive rate of growth of new and
   comprehensive variety in many aspects of an optimizer cultural
   system - thus defining the cumulative and catalytic development
   of variety necessary to stabilize foci of system dislocation brought
   about b y the system's development.

FUNCTION.   Mathematical function; a quantity or dependent variable
   which takes on a definite value when a specified value is assigned to
   another quantity, quantities or independent variables; the
   mathematical expression of the dependent variable in terms of the
   independent variables so as to identify the relationship between
   them.

GAIN. The increase in information variety resulting from the receipt of
   a message - 'new variety'.

HOMOMORPHIC.       A partial similarity in behaviour between systems
   such that the relationships between some of the system
   components remain the same. If two systems are so related that a
   many-one transformation can be found that, applied to one system
   gives a system that is isomorphic with the other, simpler system,
   then this is a homomorphism of the first (Ashby 1956, p. 103).
492       Analytical Archaeology
INDEPENDENT CULTURES. T h e relationship existing between
   cultural assemblages, or cultural states, which are not transforms
   from a single cultural assemblage system trajectory.

INDEPENDENT TYPES. T h e relationship existing between artefact-
   types or type-states which are not transforms from a single arte-
   fact-type trajectory.

I N D U S T R Y . A set of single-material a r t e f a c t - t y p e a s s e m b l a g e s f r o m a
      continuous s p a c e - t i m e area, t a x o n o m i c a l l y linked b y the m u t u a l
      technological affinities.
          Frequently, a single material aspect from a technocomplex
      entity.

I N F O R M A T I O N . T h e c o m m u n i c a t i o n of constraint in variety b e t w e e n
      c o u p l e d s y s t e m s or entities.

INTERACTION. System interaction; the exchange of variety between
   coupled systems of any kind.

ISOMORPHIC. Similarity in behaviour between systems such that the
   relationships between the system components remain the same.
   T h e canonical representations of two systems are isomorphic if a
   one-one transformation of the states of the one system into those of
   the other can convert the one representation to the other (Ashby
   1956, p. 97).

MESSAGE. An ordered selection from a defined set of information
  variety.

MONOTHETIC. An aggregate of entities or systems are said to be
  monothetic if the possession of a unique set of attributes is both
  sufficient and necessary for membership of the aggregate (mono:
  'one', thetos: 'arrangement'; discussed in Sokal and Sneath 1963,
  p. 1 3 ; fig. 3).

NOISE. Variety which does not represent part of the essential
   information from a source to a receiver; this variety is in no
   intrinsic way distinguishable f r o m other categories of variety
   except in reference to the receiver.

ONTOGENY. T h e first appearance, development and disappearance of
   an entity system, or format.
                                                        Definitions        493

PARAMETER. A numerical characteristic of a population; a statistical
   value distinct from a 'sample statistic' which refers only to a value
   derived from a sample of a population.

PHASE. An archaeological unit constituting the smallest taxonomically
   homogeneous set of entity states, having a higher affinity within
   the unit than across its borders, which may be distinguished
   within a minimal time-slice of that entity's system continuum.

PHEN'ETIC RELATIONSHIPS. Relationship based on overall affinity
   assessed on the basis of the attributes of the entities concerned;
   without any necessary implication of relationship by ancestry.
PHENON. A quantitative and comparative estimate of the affinity
   between entities in a group, comparable only within the limits of a
   particular analysis.

PHYLOGENETic RELATIONSHIP. Relationship by ancestry; trans-
  form entities from a single multilinear time-trajectory, or tradition.

POLYNOMIAL     FUNCTION      MODEL.     Where     the variable   Y   is n o t   a
   linear function of X but a higher order function - a quadratic,
   cubic, quartic, etc., etc. polynomial; a /eth-degree polynomial
   model being:
           Y = /30 + /3,X +fi2Xz   + . . . + f}kXk+e    (see fig. 106)
   (Krumbein and Graybill 1965, pp. 299-301).
POLYTHETic. An aggregate of entities or systems are said to be
  polythetic if each individual possesses a large but unspecified
  number of the attributes of the aggregate, if each attribute is
  possessed by large numbers of these individuals, and no single
  attribute is both sufficient and necessary to the aggregate
  membership (poly: 'many', thetos: 'arrangement'; discussed in
  Sokal and Sneath 1963, pp. 1 3 - 1 5 ; fig. 3).

POPULATION. Any finite or infinite collection of measurements,
   attributes, artefacts, assemblages, cultures, individuals or things
   defined by some common characteristic; does not refer only to
   living things (statistical and demographic populations).

PRAGMATICS. T h e study of signs and their relationships to their users
   and observers - especially to the users.
494        Analytical Archaeology

PROCESS. A vector which describes the series of states of an entity or
      system undergoing continuous change in space or time.

REDUNDANCY. T h e                     p r o p e r t y of i n f o r m a t i o n v a r i e t y in a            message
      w h i c h p r e s e n t s an i d e n t i c a l set of v a r i e t y to that a l r e a d y h e l d b y
      the r e c e i v i n g s y s t e m ; t h e d e c r e a s e in u n c e r t a i n t y b r o u g h t a b o u t b y
      t h e r e p e a t e d r e i t e r a t i o n of the s a m e set of v a r i e t y - ' c o n f i r m a t i v e
      variety'.

R E G R E S S I O N . A statistical m e t h o d f o r i n v e s t i g a t i n g t h e r e l a t i o n s h i p s
      b e t w e e n v a r i a b l e s b y e x p r e s s i n g the a p p r o x i m a t e f u n c t i o n a l rela-
      t i o n s h i p b e t w e e n t h e m in an a l g e b r a i c e q u a t i o n , o r its g r a p h i c
      e q u i v a l e n t (fig. 1 0 6 ) .

R E G U L A R I T Y . T h e r e p e a t e d r e l a t i o n s h i p b e t w e e n t w o or m o r e sets,
      w h e n the s a m e c o n s t r a i n t in v a r i e t y is o p e r a t i n g .

S E M A N T I C S . T h e s t u d y of the i m p u t e d r e l a t i o n s b e t w e e n s i g n s a n d
      t h e i r d e s i g n a t a - the ' m e a n i n g ' of the s i g n s .

S E T . A c o l l e c t i o n of a t t r i b u t e s , e n t i t i e s or v e c t o r s w h i c h are c a l l e d the
      e l e m e n t s or m e m b e r s of the set.

S O C I O C U L T U R A L S Y S T E M . T h e i n t e g r a t e d e q u i l i b r i u m e n s e m b l e of
      v a r i e t y f o r m i n g the c o m p l e x b u t u n i t a r y s y s t e m g e n e r a t e d b v a
      s u c c e s s i v e l y r e g e n e r a t i n g n e t w o r k of i n t e r c o m m u n i c a t i n g i n d i v i d -
      uals and          communities.               The       polythetically            homogeneous                 social
      culture, material culture, religious culture, psychological culture
      a n d e c o n o m i c c u l t u r e of the l a r g e s t , r i c h l y i n t e r c o n n e c t e d           social
      unit.

S T A T E . G e n e r a l ; a s p e c i f i c v a l u e of an a t t r i b u t e , or t h e s p e c i f i c v a l u e s
      of a set of a t t r i b u t e s , in a s y s t e m .

S T A T E . A t t r i b u t e s t a t e ; a l t e r n a t i v e v a l u e s or q u a l i t i e s of an a t t r i b u t e
      w h i c h m a y be f o u n d at that a t t r i b u t e ' s l o c u s .

S U B C U L T U R E . A c u l t u r a l a s s e m b l a g e s u b p o p u l a t i o n ; an i n f r a - c u l t u r a l
      s e g m e n t or a c t i v i t y a l i g n m e n t c h a r a c t e r i z e d b y a s p e c i f i c a r t e f a c t -
      type complex.

SUBTYPE.             Artefact          subtype          or      variant;         an      homogeneous                 sub-
       p o p u l a t i o n of a r t e f a c t s w h i c h s h a r e a g i v e n s u b s e t w i t h i n a s p e c i f i c
       a r t e f a c t - t y p e ' s p o l y t h e t i c set of a t t r i b u t e s . A s u b - p o p u l a t i o n w i t h a
       high       level      of    affinity,        perhaps          60-90         per     cent,        uniting         the
       i n d i v i d u a l s as a w h o l e .
                                                                                         Definitions         495

SYNTACTICS. T h e study of signs and their relationships which may
   be summarized in a calculus of rules of formation and trans-
   formation - a freely invented language used by an observer for
   describing an observed system-language.

SYNTAX. Or syntactical format - the calculus or grammar expressing
   the canonical rules of formation and transformation governing a
   set of attributes and capable of modelling their behaviour.

SYSTEM. An intercommunicating network of attributes or entities
   f o r m i n g a complex whole. An ensemble of attributes.

TECHNOCOMPLEX. A group of cultures characterized by assemblages
   sharing a polythetic range but differing specific types of the same
   general families of artefact-types, shared as a widely diffused and
   interlinked response to common factors in environment, economy
   and technology.
       A negligible level of affinity, perhaps 5 per cent or less, uniting
   the group in terms of shared specific types but a residual medium
   level affinity, perhaps 3 0 - 6 0 per cent, uniting the group in terms of
   type families.

TRADITION. An archaeological unit constituting the overall system
  expressing the multilinear time-trajectory of an archaeological
  entity.

TRAJECTORY. T h e successive sequence of states of an attribute, entity
   or vector generated by successive transformations.

TRANSFORMATION. T h e set of changes or transitions brought about
   when an attribute, entity or vector is acted upon by some factor.

TRANSFORM CULTURES. T h e relationship existing between suc-
   cessive and collateral culture states from a single multistate
   cultural assemblage system trajectory.

TRANSFORM TYPES. T h e relationship existing between successive and
   collateral type-states from a single multistate artefact-type tra-
   jectory.

TRANSITION. T h e change that occurs when an attribute, entity or
   vector is acted upon by some factor.

T R E N D . A c o n t i n u o u s c o n s e c u t i v e m o v e m e n t in a s e r i e s o r s e q u e n c e of
      states -        whether         they      may      be time          series,      spatial   series or   an
      a b s t r a c t series i n v o l v i n g a r c h a e o l o g i c a l d a t a .
496      Analytical Archaeology

TYPE.    Specific artefact-type; an homogeneous population of artefacts
      which share a consistently recurrent range of attribute states
      within a given polythetic set. An intermediate-level affinity, per-
      haps 30—60 per cent uniting the population as a whole.

TYPE COMPLEX. Artefact-type complex; a polythetic set of different
   specific artefact-types repeatedly found together in assemblages
   within populations of assemblages. Subcultural assemblages are
   always type complexes but some type complexes are not sub-
   cultures, e.g. the accretion or chance selection of types found
   diffusing from culture to culture may provide a selection not
   necessarily interlinked by an activity alignment.

TYPE GROUP. Artefact-type group or f a m i l y ; a group of affinally
   related, collateral artefact-types characterized by a common
   component subset of attributes forming a complex constraining
   their functional usage and raw material. A low-level affinity, per-
   haps 30 per cent or less, uniting the group as a whole.

VARIABLE.      In general, any quantity or value which varies, or a quan-
      tity which may take any one of a specified set of values.

VARIANCE.      T h e variance of a population is a measure of dispersion
      within the population, expressed by the mean-square deviation of
      the distribution - the arithmetic mean of the squares of the devia-
      tion from the distribution mean.

VARIETY. T h e number of distinguishable elements in a given set.

VECTOR.       A   compound    entity,   having   a   definite   number   of
      components.
Bibliography

                                                           Scientific Method: opti-
A C K O F F , R. L., G U P T A . S. K. a n d M I N A S , J. S.
      mizing applied research decisions. New York, 1962.
ALLEE, w c et al. Principles of Animal Ecology. Philadelphia and
      London, 1950.
A L L E N , w . L. and R I C H A R D S O N , J. B. T h e reconstruction of kinship
      from archaeological data: the concepts, the methods and the
      feasibility. American Antiquity, 1971, 36, 4 1 - 5 3 .
A M M E R M A N . A. j . a n d c A V A L L I - S F O R Z A , L. L. M e a s u r i n g the rate of
     spread of early farming in Europe. Man, 1971, 6, 674-88.
A M M E R M A N , A.J a n d C A V A L L I S F O R Z A , L. L. A p o p u l a t i o n m o d e l f o r
   the diffusion of early farming in Europe. In The Explanation of
    Culture Change, edited by Renfrew, C., 343-57, London, 1973.
AN AST AS I, A, Differential Psychology: individual and group differences
   in behaviour (3rd edn). New York, 1965.
ARBIB. M. Models of the brain. Science Journal, 1967, 3, no. 5, 94-104.
ASHBY, w . R. An Introduction to Cybernetics. London, 1956.
AZOURY, I. and HODSON, F. R. Comparing Palaeolithic assemblages:
   Ksar Akil, a case study. World Archaeology, 1973, 4, 292-306.
BARKER, G. T h e conditions of cultural and economic growth in the
   Bronze A g e of central Italy. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society,
    1972, X X X V I I I , 170-208.
BARTH, F. T h e land use pattern of migratory tribes of South Persia.
   Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift, X V I I , 1959-60.
BENNETT, ]. w. Ecosystem analogies in cultural ecology. In Population,
   Ecology and Social Evolution, edited by Polgar, S., 273-303, T h e
   Hague, 1975.
BENNETT, J. w Anticipation, adaptation, and the concept of culture in
   anthropology. Science, 1976, 192, 847-53.
BERLYNE, D. E. Conflict and arousal. Scientific American, August 1966,
   215, 82-7.
BERTALANFFY, L. von An outline of general systems theory. British
   Journal of Philosophy of Science, 1950, I, 134-65.
BERTALANFFY, L. von General system theory - A critical review.
   General Systems, 1962, 7, 1-20.
498      Analytical Archaeology

BERTALANFFY, L von General System Theory, 1969.
BIBBY, G. The Testimony of the Spade. London, 1962.
BINFORD, L. R Archaeology as Anthropology. American             Antiquity,
   1962,28,217-25.
BINFORD. L R. ' R e d ochre' caches from the Michigan area: a possible
   case of cultural drift. South Western Journal of Anthropology,   1963,
    19,89-107.
B I N F O R D , L. R. A      consideration         of   archaeological         research       design.
   American Antiquity, 1964, 29, 4 2 5 - 4 1 .
BINFORD, L. R. Archaeological systematics and the study of culture
   process. American Antiquity, 1965, 3 1 , 2 0 3 - 1 0 .
BINFORD, L R. Archaeological perspectives. In Xew Perspectives in
   Archeology, edited by Binford, L. R. and S . R . , 5 - 3 2 , Chicago,
   1968a.
BINFORD, L. R. Post-Pleistocene adaptations. In New Perspectives in
   Archeology, edited by Binford, L . R. and S . R . , 3 1 3 - 4 1 , Chicago,
   1968b.
BINFORD, L. R. Mortuary practices: their study and potential. In
   Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, edited by
   Brown, J . A., Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology,
   no. 2 5 , 1 9 7 1 , 6 - 2 9 .
BINFORD, L. R. An Archaeological Perspective. London and New Y o r k ,
    1972.
BINFORD, L. R. Interassemblage variability - the Mousterian and the
   'functional' argument. In The Explanation              of Culture  Change:
   models in prehistory, edited by Renfrew, C . , 2 2 7 - 5 4 , L o n d o n ,
    I973-

BINFORD, L. R. Forty-seven trips. In Contributions to         Anthropology:
   The Interior Peoples of Northern Alaska, edited by Hall, E. S.,
   Archaeological Survey of Canada, paper no. 49, Ottawa, 1976.
BINFORD, L. R. and s R. A preliminary analysis of functional variability
   in the Mousterian of Levallois facies. American           Anthropologist,
   April, 1966, 68 pt. 2, no. 2, 2 3 8 - 9 5 ; Special publication: Recent
   Studies in Paleoanthropology,  edited by J . D. Clark and F. Clark
   Howell.
B I N F O R D , L. R. a n d C H A S K O , \v. j . N u n a m i u t d e m o g r a p h i c h i s t o r y : a
   provocative case. \ri Demographic Anthropology ,editedbyZubrov>- ,E.,
   6 3 - 1 4 3 , Albuquerque, 1976.
BIRMINGHAM, J. Traditional potters of the Katmandu Valley: an
   ethnoarchaeological study. Man, 1975, 10, 3 7 0 - 8 6 .
                                                              Bibliography          499
BORDES,    F and D E S O N N E V I L L E - B O R D E S , D T h e significance of
    variability in Palaeolithic assemblages. World Archaeology, 1970, 2,

BOSERUP, E        The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. London,               1965.
B R A D L E Y , R. T h e excavation of a Beaker settlement at Belle Tout, East
      Sussex, England. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 1970,
      XXXVI, 3 1 2 - 7 9 .
B R A I T H W A I T E , R. B. Scientific Explanation. New York, i 9 6 0 .
B R I A R D , J. Les dépôts Bretons et l'âge du bronze atlantique. Rennes,
     1965.
B R O O M , L. and S E L Z N I C K , P. Sociology ( 2 n d edn). Evanston, 111., 1 9 5 8 .
B R O S E , D. S. Locational analysis in the prehistory of northeast Ohio. In
     Cultural Change and Continuity, edited by Cleland, C. E., 3-18,
     New York, 1976.
B R O T H W E L L , D. and H I G G S , E. s . Science in Archaeology. London,
     1969.
B U C K L E Y , w. F. Sociology       and Modem Systems Theory. London, 1 9 6 7 .
B U C K L E Y , W. ( e d . ) Modern    Systems Research for the Behavioural Scien-
      tist. Chicago, 1968.
B U N G E , w. Theoretical Geography. Lund Studies in Geography, ser. C,
      General and Mathematical Geography, 1. Lund, 1962.
B U R G E S S , C. T h e bronze age. In British Prehistory. A New  Outline,
      edited by Renfrew, C., 1 6 5 - 2 3 2 , London, 1 9 7 4 .
B U R N H A M , P. T h e explanatory value of the concept of adaptation in
      studies of culture change. In The Explanation of Culture Change,
      edited by Renfrew, C., 9 3 - 1 0 2 , London, 1 9 7 3 .
B Y L U N D , E. Theoretical considerations regarding the distribution of
      settlement in inner north Sweden. Geografiska Annaler, i 9 6 0 , 4 2 ,
    225-31.
C A M P B E L L , J . M. Territoriality among ancient hunters:        interpretations
      from ethnography and nature. In Anthropological Archaeology in
      the Americas, edited by Meggers, B., 1-21, Washington, 1968.
C A R N A P , R. Introduction to Symbolic Logic and its Applications.            New
      York, 1958.
C A S E , H. Irish Neolithic pottery: distribution and sequence. Pro-
      ceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 1 9 6 1 , X X V I I , 1 7 4 - 2 3 3 .
C A S S E L S . R. Human ecology in the Prehistoric Waikato. Journal of the
      Polynesian Society, 1 9 7 2 a , 8 1 , 1 9 6 - 2 4 7 .
C A S S E L S , R Locational Analysis of Prehistoric Settlement in New
      Zealand. Mankind, 1 9 7 2 b , 8 , 2 1 2 - 2 2 .
5oo    Analytical Archaeology

CHAMBERLIN, T. C. T h e method of multiple working hypotheses.
   Journal of Geology, 1897, 5, 837-48.
CHANG, K. C. Rethinking Archaeology. New York, 1967.
CHAPMAN. R. w. Burial practices: an area of mutual interest. In
   Archaeology and Anthropology : Areas of Mutual Interest, edited by
   Spriggs, M., 1 9 - 3 3 , Oxford, 1977.
CHERRY. C. On Human Communication. New York and London, 1957.
CHEYNIER, A Jouannet - grand-père de la préhistoire. Paris, 1936.
CHILDE. V G The Danube in Prehistory. Oxford, 1929.
CHILDE, V. G. Piecing Together the Past : the interpretation of archaeolo-
   gical data. London, 1956.
CHILDE, V. G. Social Evolution. London, 1963.
CHISHOLM, M. Rural Settlement and Land Use: an essay in location.
    London,1962.
CHORLEY, R. J. Geography and analogue theory. Annals of the Asso-
    ciation of American Geographers, 1964, 54, 1 2 7 - 3 7 .
CHORLEY, R. J. and KENNEDY, B. A. Physical Geography : a systems
    approach. London, 1 9 7 1 .
CHOROFAS, D. N. Systems and Simulation. London, 1965.
CLARK, J. G. D. Excavations at the Neolithic Site at Hurst Fen,
    Mildenhall, Suffolk. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, i960,
    X X V I , 202-45.
CLARK, J. G. D. Traffic in stone axe and adze blades. Economic History
    Review, 1965, 18, 1 - 2 8 .
CLARK, J. G. D The Earlier Stone Age Settlement of             Scandinavia.
    Cambridge, 1975.
CLARKE, D. L. Matrix analysis and archaeology with particular
    reference to British Beaker pottery. Proceedings of the Prehistoric
    Society, 1962, X X V I I I , 3 7 1 - 8 3 .
CLARKE, D. L A Tentative Reclassification of British Beaker Pottery in
    the Light of Recent Research. 2nd Atlantic Symposium, Groningen,
    April, 1964. Published 1967.
 CLARKE, D. L. Analytical Archaeology (ist edn). London, 1968.
CLARKE, D. L. Beaker Pottery of Great Britain and Ireland. Cambridge,
     1970.
 CLARKE, D. 1.. Models and paradigms in contemporary archaeology.
     In Models in Archaeology, edited by Clarke, D. L., 1 - 6 0 , London,
     1972.
 CLARKE, D. L A provisional model of an Iron Age Society and its
     settlement system. In Models in Archaeology, edited by Clarke, D.
     L., 8 0 1 - 6 9 , London, 1972a.
                                                             Bibliography         501

CLARKE.      D   1.        Review of Watson, Leblanc and Redman 1 9 7 1 .
    Antiquity,        1972b, X L V I , 237-9.
C L A R K E , D. L. Archaeology: the loss of innocence. Antiquity,              1973,
      X L V I I , 6-18.
C L A R K E . D. L. T h e Beaker Network - social and economic models. In
      Glockenbechersymposion Oberied 1974, edited by Lanting, J . N. and
      van der Waals, J . D., Bussum and Haarlem, 1976.
C O L L I N S , D. M. Seriation of quantitative features in late Pleistocene
      stone technology. Nature, 1965, 205, 9 3 1 - 2 .
C O N K L I N , H. C. Hanundo Agriculture: a report on an integral system of
      shifting cultivation in the Philippines. Rome, 1957.
C O W E N , J. D T h e origins of the flange-hilted sword of bronze in
      Continental Europe. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 1966,
      X X X I I , 262-312.
C U N L I F F E , B . W . Iron Age Communities in Britain. London, 1974.
D A N I E L , G. E. The transepted gallery graves of Western France. Pro-
      ceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 1939, V, 143-65.
D A N I E L , G. E From Worsaae to Childe: the models of prehistory.
      Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 1 9 7 1 , X X X V I I , pt. I I , 1 4 0 -
      53-
D A N I E L , G E Stone, bronze and iron. In To Illustrate the Monuments,
      edited by Megaw, J . V. S., 36-42, London, 1976.
D A V I S , J. C. Statistics and Data Analysis in Geology. New York, 1973.
D E E T Z , J. The Dynamics of Stylistic Change in Ankara                 Ceramics.
      Illinois Studies in Anthropology, no. 4, Illinois, 1965.
D E E T Z , J. T h e inference of residence and descent rules from
      archaeological data. In New Perspectives in Archeology, edited by
      Binford, L. R. and S. R., 4 1 - 8 , Chicago, 1968.
D E T H L E F S E N , E. and D E E T Z , J . Death's heads, cherubs and willow
      trees: experimental archaeology in colonial cemeteries. American
      Antiquity, 1966, 3 1 , 5 0 2 - 1 0 .
D I X O N , R. B. The Building of Cultures. London, 1928.
DO RAN, J. E. Systems theory, computer simulations and archaeology.
      World Archaeology, 1970, 1, 289-98.
D O R A N , J. E. and H O D S O N , F. R. A digital computer analysis of Palaeo-
      lithic flint assemblages. Nature, 1966, 210, 688-9.
D O R A N , J . E. and H O D S O N . F. R. Mathematics and Computers in
      Archaeology. Edinburgh, 1975.
DRENNAN,           R. D       Religion and social evolution in formative
      Mesoamerica. In The Early Mesoamerican Village, edited by
      Flannery, K. V., 345-68, New York and London, 1976.
502       Analytical Archaeology

ELLSWORTH        HUNTINGTON.        Mainsprings    of Civilization.    New Y o r k ,
      1964.
F A G A N . B M. Southern      Africa during the Iron Age. London, 1965.
FARRAR,       R. A. H.     T h e techniques and sources of Romano-British
      black-burnished ware. In Current Research in                   Romano-British
      Coarse Pottery, edited by Detsicas, A., 6 7 - 1 0 3 , London, 1 9 7 3 .
FLANNERY, K              v. Archaeological systems theory and early
      Mesoamerica. In Anthropological             Archaeology    in the Americas,
      edited by Meggers, B., 6 7 - 8 7 , Washington, 1968.
F L A N N E R Y , K. V. T h e cultural evolution of civilization. Annual    Review
      of Ecology and Systematics, 1972, 3, 399-426.
F L A N N E R Y , K . V The Early      Mesoamerican      Village. New York and
      London,1976.
F O L E Y , R. Space and energy: a method for analysing habitat value and
      utilization in relation to archaeological sites. In                   Spatial
      Archaeology, edited by Clarke, D. L . , 1 6 3 - 8 7 , I^ondon and New
      York, 1977.
F O R D , J A. and W E B B , c       H. Poverty Point, a late archaic site in
      Louisiana. Anthropological         Papers of the American Museum of
      Natural History, 46, New Y o r k , 1956.
F O R D E , C D Habitat, Economy and Society. London, 1934.
FOX, c The Personality of Britain : its influence on inhabitants and
      invaders in prehistoric and early historic times. Cardiff, 1932.
FRAN'KEL, D Inter-site relationships in the Middle Bronze Age of
      Cyprus. World Archaeology, 1 9 7 4 , 6 , 1 9 0 - 2 0 8 .
F R E E M A N , j D. Iban Agriculture.     London, 1955.
F R I E D , M H. The Evolution        of Political Society : an essay in political
      anthropology. New York, 1967.
FRIEDMAN, j Marxism, structuralism and Vulgar Materialism.                     Man,
      J              6
        974- 9- 4 4 4 " 9 -
F R I T Z , J . and P L O G , F. T h e n a t u r e of archaeological explanation.
      American Antiquity, 1970, 35, 4 0 5 - 1 2 .
G I F F O R D , E w. Culture element distributions: X I I , Apache-Pueblo.
      Anthropological Records, 1940, 4 : 1 .
G I F F O R D , F. W. and K R O E B E R , A. L . Culture element distributions: I V ,
       Pomo.        University    of     California     Publications in    American
      Archaeology and Ethnology, 1937, 37, no. 4, 1 1 7 - 2 5 4 .
G I M B L T A S , M. The Gods and Goddesses of Old Europe 7000-3500              BC.
       London, 1974.
G L O V E R , 1. c . T h e use of factor analyses for the discovery of artefact-
       types. Mankind, 1969, 7, 3 6 - 5 1 .
                                                                   Bibliography          503

GLUCKMAN, M. Political institutions. In The Institutions                     of     Primitive
   Society : a series of broadcast talks, O x f o r d , 1963.
GOODY, J. R. Production and Reproduction. C a m b r i d g e , 1976.
GORMAN, c . F. Excavations at Spirit C a v e , North T h a i l a n d : some
  interim interpretations. Asian Perspectives, 1970, X I I I , 7 9 - 1 0 7 .
GOULD, P. R. M a n against his e n v i r o n m e n t : a game-theoretic frame-
  work. Annals of the Association of American Geographers,            1963, 53,
    290-7.
GOULD, P. R. Spatial       Diffusion.      Washington, 1969.
GOULD, R. A. S o m e current problems in ethnoarchaeology. In Ethno-
  archaeology,   edited by D o n n a n , C . B. and C l e w l o w , C . \V.,
    29-48, Los Angeles,          1974.
GREEN, E. L. Location analysis of prehistoric M a y a sites in Northern
   British Honduras. American Antiquity, 1 9 7 3 , 38, 2 7 9 - 9 3 .
GREEN, J. A. Sets and Groups.            L o n d o n , 1965.
GREEN, R. w. (ed.) Protestantism            and Capitalism       : the Weber thesis and its
   critics. L o n d o n , 1959.
HAGERSTRAND, T. The Propagation            of Innovation         Waves.                Lund
  Studies in G e o g r a p h y , ser. B, H u m a n G e o g r a p h y , 4,              3-19,
  L u n d , 1952.
HAGERSTRAND, T. Innovationsforloppet                   ur korologisk    synpunkt.     Lund,
    I
        9S3-
HAGERSTRAND, T. Migration and Area : survey of a sample of Swedish
   migration fields and hypothetical considerations in their genesis. L u n d
   Studies in G e o g r a p h y , ser. B, H u m a n G e o g r a p h y , 1 3 , 2 7 - 1 5 8 ,
   L u n d , 1957.
HAGGETT, P. Locational Analysis in Human Geography. L o n d o n , 1965.
HAGGETT, P. Geography : A Modern Synthesis. N e w Y o r k , 1972.
HAGGETT, P. and CHORLEY, R. J. Network Analysis in                           Geography.
   London,1969.
HALL, A. D. and FAGEN, R. E. Definition of system. General                      Systems
   Yearbook, 1956, 1, 1 8 - 2 8 .
HARRE, R. The Philosophies of Science. O x f o r d , 1972.
HARTLEY, K. F. T h e marketing and distribution of mortaria. In Cur-
   rent Research in Romano-British        Coarse Pottery, edited by Detsicas,
   A . , 3 9 - 5 1 , L o n d o n , 1973.
HARVEY, D. Explanation in Geography. L o n d o n , 1969.
HAWKES, C. T h e A B C of the British I r o n A g e . Antiquity,                  1959,
    XXXIII,        170-82.
HAYDEN, B. Population                control      among        hunter-gatherers.       World
    Archaeology,     1 9 7 2 , 4, 2 0 5 - 2 1 .
504      Analytical Archaeology
HEMPEL, C    Philosophy of Natural Science. New Jersey, 1966.
HENCKEV H Carp's tongue swords in Spain, France and Italy.
   Zephyrus, 1956, V I I , 1 2 5 - 7 8 .
HIGGS, E. S. (ed.) Papers in Economic Prehistory. Cambridge, 1972.
HIGGS, E. S (ed.) Palaeoeconomy. Cambridge, 1975.
HIGGS, E. s . a n d JARMAN. M. R. P a l a e o e c o n o m y . I n   Palaeoeconomy,
      edited by Higgs, E. S., 1 - 7 , Cambridge, 1975.
HIGGS, E. S. and VITA-FINZI, C Prehistoric e c o n o m i e s : a territorial
      approach. In Papers in Economic Prehistory, edited by Higgs, E. S.,
      2 7 - 3 6 , Cambridge, 1972.
H I L L , J . N. Broken K Pueblo: patterns of form and function. In Xew
      Perspectives in Archeology, edited by Binford, L. R. and S. R.,
      1 0 3 - 4 2 , Chicago, 1968.
HILL, j. N. Broken K Pueblo: prehistoric social organisation in the
      American Southwest. University           of Arizona,      Anthropological
      Papers, no. 18, 1970.
H I L L , J N. Seminar on the explanation of prehistoric organizational
      change. Current Anthropology, 1 9 7 1 , 1 2 , 4 0 6 - 8 .
H I L L , J . N. T h e methodological debate in contemporary archaeology: a
      model. In Models in Archaeology, edited by Clarke, D. L . , 6 1 - 1 0 7 ,
      London, 1972.
HILL, J N. A processual analysis of non-seasonal population movement
      in Man and other terrestrial animals, n.d.
HILL, J. N. and EVANS, R. K. A model f o r classification and typology. In
    Models in Archaeology, edited by Clarke, D. L . , 2 3 1 - 7 3 , London,
     1972.
H O D D E R , I. Regression analysis of some trade and marketing patterns.
     World Archaeology, 1974, 6, 1 7 2 - 8 9 .
H O D D E R , I. Some new directions in the spatial analysis of archaeolo-
    gical data at the regional scale. In Spatial Archaeology, edited by-
     Clarke, D. L . , 2 2 3 - 3 5 1 , London and New Y o r k , 1977a.
HODDER, I A study in ethnoarchaeology in western Kenya. In
     Archaeology and Anthropology,           edited by Spriggs, M., 1 1 7 - 4 1 ,
     Oxford, 1 9 7 7 b .
HODDER,         I. and O R T O N , C. Spatial       Analysis    in    Archaeology.
     Cambridge, 1976.
H O D S O N , F. R. Numerical typology and prehistoric archaeology. In
     Mathematics in the Archaeological and Historical Sciences, edited by
     Hodson, F. R . , Kendall, D. G. and T a r t u , P., 30-45, Edinburgh,
     1971.
                                                            Bibliography         505
H O D S O N , F. R., s N E A T H , P. H. Aand DOR A N , J . E. Some experiments in
      the numerical analysis of archaeological data. Biometrika, 1966, 53,
      nos 3, 4, 3 1 1 - 2 4 .
H U G H E S . G. B. and T . The Country Life               Collector's Pocket Book.
      London, 1963.
H Y M E S , D. (ed.) The Use of Computers in Anthropology. London, 1965.
I S A A C , G. Ll. Studies of early culture in East Africa.                    World
      Archaeology, 1969, i , 1 - 2 8 .
ISAAC, G. I.l. Chronology and the tempo of cultural change during
      the       Pleistocene.      In    Calibration    of     Hominoid      Evolution,
      edited by Bishop, W. W. and Miller, J . A., 3 8 1 - 4 3 0 , Edinburgh,
      1972a.
ISAAC, G. Ll. Early phases of human behaviour: models in Lower
      Palaeolithic archaeology. In Models in Archaeology, edited by
      Clarke, D. L., 167-99, London, 1972b.
I S A A C , G Ll. Early stone tools - an adaptive threshold? In Problems
       in Economic and Social Archaeology, edited by Sieveking, G. de G.,
       Ixingworth, I. H., and Wilson, K. E., 39-47, London, 1976.
J A Z D Z E W S K I , K. Atlas to the Prehistory of the Slavs. K o d z , 1949.
J O C H I M , M A Hunter-Gatherer          Subsistence and Settlement: a predictive
       model. New York and London, 1976.
J O H N S O N , G. A. Local Exchange           and Early State Development in
      Southwestern Iran. Anthropological Papers, University of Michi-
      gan, no. 5 1 , 1973.
J O H N S O N , L. Problems in 'avant-garde' archaeology.                   American
      Anthropologist, 1972, L X X I V , 366-75.
J O P E , E. M. T h e regional cultures of Medieval Britain. In Culture and
      Environment: essays in honour of Sir Cyril Fox, edited by Foster, I.
      Ll. and Alcock, L., 327-50, London, 1963.
J O P E . E. M. T h e transmission of new ideas: archaeological evidence for
      implant and dispersal. World Archaeology, 1973, 4, 368-73.
J U D G E , W. J . Systems analysis and the Folsom-Midland question.
      Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 1970, 26, 4 0 - 5 1 .
K L I N D T - J E N S E N , O. A History of Scandinavian      Archaeology. London,
     1975-
K N I F F E N , F. B. Porno geography. University of California Publications
     in American Archaeology and Ethnology, 1939, 36, no. 6.
K R O E B E R , A. L. Anthropology. London, 1948.
K R O E B E R , A. L. The Configurations of Culture Growth      (new edn).
     Berkeley, 1963.
506      Analytical Archaeology

K R O E B E R , A. L.. G I F F O R D , E. W . , D R I V E R , H L. et al.Culture element
     distributions, I - X X V I . I—IV = University                 of California        Pub-
     lications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, 1 9 3 5 - 7 , 37> n o s
     1 - 4 ; V - X X V I = Anthropological         Records, 1 9 3 7 - 5 0 , 1 , nos 1 - 7 ; 4 ,
     nos 1 - 3 ; 6 , nos 1 - 4 ; 7 , nos 1 - 2 ; 8 , nos 1 - 5 ; 9 , no. 3 .
K R O E B E R , A L and R I C H A R D S O N , J . T h r e e centuries of women's dress
     fashions, a quantitative analysis. Anthropological Records, 1940, 5,
     no. 2 .
K RUM BE IN". \v c. and G R A Y BIL I., F. A. An Introduction to Statistical
     Models in Geology. New Y o r k and London, 1965.
L A M I N G , A. (ed.) La découverte du passé. Paris, 1 9 5 2 .
LARSON, P. T r e n d surface analysis in archaeology: a preliminary study
     of intrasite patterning. Norwegian Archaeological Review, 1975, 8,
      75-80.
L A W I C K - G O O D A L L . H. and J    von Innocent Killers. London, 1 9 7 1 .
L A W I C K - G O O D A L L , J. von In   the Shadow of Man. Glasgow, 1 9 7 0 .
LEE, R. R. ! K u n g bushman subsistence: an input-output analysis. In
      Environment and Cultural Behaviour, edited by Vayda, A. P., 4 7 -
      79, New Y o r k , 1969.
L É V I - S T R A U S S . C. L'Analyse structurale en linguistique et en
     anthropologie. Word, 1945, 1 , 3 3 - 5 3 .
L E V I S O N , M . , W A R D , R. G . and W E B B , J . T h e settlement of Polynesia: a
      report on a computer simulation. Archaeology                          and   Physical
     Anthropology in Oceania, 1 9 7 2 , V I I , 2 3 4 - 4 5 .
L E W I N , K. Principles of Topological Psychology. New York, 1 9 3 6 .
i.ITVAK         K I N G , j. and G A R C I A         MOLL,      R. Set theory    models:
      an approach to taxonomic and locational relationships. In
      Models in Archaeology, edited by Clarke, D. L., 7 3 5 - 5 5 , London,
      1972.
L O N G A C R E , w. A Some aspects of prehistoric society in east-central
      Arizona. In Sew Perspectives in Archeology, edited by Binford, L.
       R. and S. R., 8 9 - 1 0 2 , Chicago, 1 9 6 8 .
L O N G A C R E , vv. A. Archaeology as anthropology: a case study.                  Uni-
      versity of Arizona, Anthropological papers, no. 17, 1970.
L O T K A , A. J Elements of Physical Biology. Baltimore, 1 9 2 5 .
MACK A Y, D. M. Quantal aspects of scientific information. Philosophical
       Magazine, 1950, 41, 289.
M A I M E R , M. P Jungneolithische studien. Acta Archaeologica                   Lunden-
       sia, no. 2. Lund, 1962.
M A N D E R , A. E . Clearer Thinking (Logic for Everyman).                London, 1 9 3 6 .
                                                                Bibliography           507
M A R U Y A M A , M. The second cybernetics: deviation-amplifying mutual
       causal processes. American Scientist, 51, pp. 164-79.
NlcARTHLR, M           Pigs for the ancestors: a review article. Oceania, 1974,
       X L V , 87-123.
M c B L R N E Y , C. B. M. The cave of Ali Tappeh and the Epi-Palaeolithic of
       Iran. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 1968, X X X I V , 385-413.
M E D A W A R . p. Induction and Intuition in Scientific Thought. London,
       1969.
M E L L A A R T , ]. £atal Hiiyiik: a Neolithic town in Anatolia. London,
       1967.
M E L L A R S , P. A. Some comments on the notion of 'functional vari-
       ability' in stone-tool assemblages. World Archaeology, 1970, 2,
       74-89.
M I L L E R , J . G. Living s y s t e m s : b a s i c c o n c e p t s . Behavioural Science,
       1965,10,193-237.
. M I L L E R . R L a n d K A H N , R. S. Statistical Analysis in the Geological
       Sciences. New York, 1962.
M O R G A N , C. G. Archaeology and explanation. World Archaeology, 1973,
      4, 259-76.
M O R O N E Y , M. J. Facts from figures. London, 1957.
M O R R I L L , R L. Simulation of Central Place Patterns over Time. Lund
       Studies in Geography, ser. B, Human Geography, 24, 109-20,
       Lund, 1962.
M U E L L E R , J. w ( e d . ) Sampling in Archaeology. Tucson, 1975.
M U R D O C K , G P. (ed.) Social Structure. New York and London, 1949.
N A G E L , E. Principles of the Theory of Probability, I and II. Foundations
      of the Unity of Science, I, no. 6, International Encyclopedia of
       Unified Science, Chicago, 1958.
NEEDHAM,           R.    Polythetic classification: convergence and con-
      sequences. Man, 1975, 10, 349—69.
N E U M A N N . j. von and M O R G E N S T E R N , o. Theory of Games and
      Economic Behaviour. Princeton, 1947.
P E A C O C K , D. P. S. A petrological study of certain Iron Age pottery
      from western England. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 1968,
      X X X I V , 414-27.
P E A C O C K , D. P. S. The scientific analysis of ancient ceramics: a review.
       World Archaeology, 1970, 1, 375-89.
P E A C O C K , D. P. S. Roman Amphorae in pre-Roman Britain. In The Iron
      Age and its Hill-Forts, edited by Jessen, M. and Hill, D., 161-88,
       Southampton, 1971.
508      Analytical Archaeology

PHILLIPS,        E . D. The Royal Hordes:                nomad peoples of the steppes.
      London,1965.
P I G G O T T , S . T h e Early Bronze Age in Wessex. Proceedings of the
      Prehistoric Society, 1938, 4, 52-106.
P I G G O T T , s . Ancient Europe: from the beginnings of agriculture to Clas-
      sical antiquity. Edinburgh, 1965.
P L O G , F. Laws, systems of law and the explanation of observed varia-
      tion. In The Explanation of Culture Change, edited by Renfrew, C.,
      London, 1973.
P L O G , F. The Study of Prehistoric Change. New York, 1974.
P L O G , F. Systems theory in archaeological research. Annual Review of
      Anthropology, 1975, 4, 207-24.
P O L A N Y I , K . , A R E N S B E R G , c. M. a n d P E A R S O N , H. w . ( e d s ) Trade and
      Market in the Early Empires. New York, 1957.
R A P P A P O R T , R . A . Pigs for the Ancestors. New Haven and London,
      1968.
R A P P A P O R T , R. A . Ritual, sanctity and cybernetics. American                     Anthro-
      pologist, 1971a, 73, 59-76.
R A P P A P O R T , R. A . T h e sacred in human evolution. Annual Review of
      Ecology and Systematics, 1 9 7 1 b , vol. 2, 23-44.
R A T H J E , w. L . Models for mobile Maya: a variety of constraints. In
       The Explanation of Culture Change, edited by Renfrew, C., 7 3 1 - 5 7 ,
      London,1973.
R E I C H E L - D O L M A T O F F , G . Cosmology as ecological analysis: a view
      from the rain forest. Man, 1976, 1 1 , 3 0 7 - 1 8 .
R E N F R E W C . The Emergence of Civilisation. London, 1972.
R E N F R E W C . Monuments, mobilisation and social organisation in
       Neolithic Wessex. In The Explanation of Culture Change, edited by
      Renfrew, C., 539-58, London, 1973a.
R E N F R E W C . Before Civilisation. London, 1973b.
R E N F R E W C . Beyond a subsistence economy: the evolution of social
      organisation in prehistoric Europe. In Reconstructing Complex
       Societies, edited by Moore, C. B., 69-95, Cambridge, Mass., 1974.
R E N F R E W c. Trade as action at a distance: questions of integration
      and communication. In Ancient Civilisation and Trade, edited by
       Sabloff, J . A. and Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. C., 3-59, Albuquerque,
       1976.
R E N F R E W , c. Alternative models for exchange and spatial distribution.
       In Exchange Systems in Prehistory, edited by Earle, T . K. and
       Ericson, J . E., 7 1 - 9 0 , New York and London, 1977.
                                                        Bibliography        509

RENFREW,         c.. D I X O N . J E and C A W , J. R. Further analysis of Near
     Eastern Obsidians. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 1968, 34,
     3I9-3I-
REYNOLDS, R. G. D. Linear settlement systems on the Upper Grijalva
     River: the application of a Markovian model. In The Early
     Mesoamerican Village, edited by Flannery, K. V., 180-93, New
     York and London, 1976.
R O B B I N S , L. H. Turkana material culture viewed from an archaeologi-
     cal perspective. World Archaeology, 1973, 5, 209-14.
ROE, D. A T h e British lower and middle Palaeolithic: some problems,
     methods of study and preliminary results. Proceedings of the Pre-
     historic Society, 1964, X X X , 245-67.
R O P E R , D C. A trend surface analysis of Central Plains radiocarbon
     dates. American Antiquity, 1976, 41, 181-9.
R O W E , J . H. Diffusionism and archaeology. American Antiquity,         1965-
     6, 3 1 ,   334-8-
ROWLANDS,          M. J.   T h e archaeological interpretation of prehistoric
     metalworking. World Archaeology, 1 9 7 1 , 3, 210-24.
R U D N E R , R. S. Philosophy of Social Science. New Jersey, 1 9 6 6 .
S A C K E T T , J . R. Quantitative analysis of upper Palaeolithic stone tools.
     American Anthropologist, April 1966, 68, pt 2, no. 2, 356-92; Spe-
     cial publication: Recent Studies in Paleoanthropology,        edited by J .
     D. Clark and F. Clark Howell.
SAH LI NS, M. D. Stone Age Economics. London, 1972.
S A N D E R S , w . T . a n d P R I C E , B. J. Mesoamerica: The evolution of a
     civilization. New York, 1968.
SAXE, A. A. Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices. Ph.D. dissertation,
     University of Michigan, 1970.
S C H I F F E R , M B. Behavioural        Archaeology. New York and London,
     1976.
S C H I L D , R. T h e
                    final Palaeolithic settlements of the European Plain.
   Scientific American, 1976, 234, no. 2, 88-99.
SCHOFIELD,       J.   F. Primitive    Pottery: an introduction to South
   African     ceramics, prehistoric and protohistoric. T h e South
   African Archaeological Society, Handbook Series no. 3, Cape
   T o w n , 1948.
SCHWERDTFEGER, F. w. Urban settlement patterns in northern
   Nigeria (Hausaland). In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, edited by
   Ucko, P. J . , Tringham, R. and Dimbleby, G., 547-56, London,
     1972.
5io     Analytical Archaeology

S C O L L A R , I. Regional groups in the Michelsberg              Culture. Proceedings
      of the Prehistoric Society, 1959, X X V , 5 2 - 1 3 4 .
S E R R A P U C H E . M. C. Los Diagramas de Venn en la Comparación De
      Tradiciones Culturales. Anales de Antropología, 1976, X I I I , 55-75.
S E R V I C E , E. R Primitive Social Organisation : an evolutionary              perspec-
      tive. New York, 1962.
S E R V I C E , E. R. Cultural Evolutionism. New York, 1 9 7 1 .
S H A C K L E T O N , N. and R E N F R E W , c . Neolithic trade routes re-aligned
      by oxygen isotope analysis. Nature, 1970, 228, 1062-5.
S H A W C R O S S , w An archaeological assemblage of Maori combs. Jour-
      nal of the Polynesian Society, 1964, 73, 382-98.
S H E N N A N , s T h e social organisation at Branc. Antiquity, 1975, X L I X ,
      279-88.
S H E R R A T T , A. G. Socio-economic and demographic models for the
      Neolithic and Bronze Ages of Europe. In Models in Archaeology,
      edited by Clarke, D. L., 4 7 7 - 5 4 2 , London, 1972.
SIMON, H. A. Models of Man. New York, 1957.
S M I T H , I. F T h e neolithic. In British Prehistory: a new outline, edited
      by Renfrew, C., 100—36, London, 1974.
S O J A , E. w. T h e political organisation of space. Association of American
       Geographers, Commission on College Geography, Resource paper 8,
       1971.
S O K A L , R. R. and S N E A T H , P H. A. Principles of Numerical             Taxonomy.
       San Francisco and London, 1963.
S O M M E R H O F F , G. Analytical Biology. London, 1950.
S P A U L D I N G , A. C. Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact-
       types. American Antiquity, 1953, 18, 3 0 5 - 1 3 .
S P O E H R , A. Marianas prehistory; archaeological survey and excava-
       tions on Saipan, Tinian and Rota. Fieldiana : Anthropology, 1957,
       48.
 S T A N I S L A W S K I . M B. Review of 'Archaeology as Anthropology: A
       Case Study'. American Antiquity, 1973, 38, 1 1 7 - 2 2 .
 STANISLAWSKI,              M. B. T h e relationships of              ethnoarchaeology,
      traditional and systems archaeology. In                            Ethnoarchaeology,
      edited by Donnan, C. B. and Clewlow, C. W., 15-26, Los Angeles,
       1974-
S T E I G E R , W. L. Analytical Archaeology? Mankind, 1 9 7 1 , 8, 67-70.
S T E W A R D , J H Theory of Culture Change. Illinois, 1955.
S T I C K E L . E . G . and C H A R T K O F F , j. L. T h e nature of scientific laws and
      their relation to law-building in archaeology. In The Explanation of
      Culture Change, edited by Renfrew, C., 6 6 3 - 7 1 , London, 1973.
                                                                    Bibliography      511

STII.ES,       I) Ethnoarchaeology: a discussion of methods and appli-
      cations. Man, 1977, 12, 8 7 - 1 0 3 .
S U L L I V A N , M. E Archaeological occupation site locations on the south
      coast of New South Wales. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology
      in Oceania, 1976, X I , 56-69.
T A I N T E R , J. A Woodland social change in west-central Illinois. Mid-
      Continental Journal of Archaeology, 1977, 2, 67-98.
T A Y L O R , w w. A Study of Archaeology.             Memoir no. 69, American
      Anthropologist 50, pt 2, 1948.
T E R R E L L , J Geographic systems and human diversity in the North
      Solomons. World Archaeology, 1977, 9, 6 2 - 8 1 .
T H O M A S , D. H Archaeology's operational imperative: Great Basin
      projectile points as a test case. Archaeological Survey          Annual
      Report, 27-60, Los Angeles, 1970.
THOMAS, D H A computer simulation model of Great Basin
      Shoshonean subsistence and settlement patterns. In Models in
      Archaeology, edited by Clarke, D. L., 6 7 1 - 7 0 4 , London, 1972.
THOMPSON, R. H. (ed.) Migrations in New World Culture History.
      Tucson, 1958.
THOMSON, D F T h e seasonal factor in human culture. Proceedings of
      the Prehistoric Society, 1939, X , 2 0 9 - 2 1 .
TRIGGER, B. G Beyond History : The Methods of Prehistory. New York,
      1968.
T R I G G E R , B. G. Archaeology and ecology. World Archaeology, 1 9 7 1 , 2,
      321-36.
TRINGHAM, R. Hunters, Fishers and Farmers of Eastern Europe 6000-
      3000 BC. London, 1 9 7 1 .
T L ' G G L E , H. D , T O W N S E N D , A. H. a n d R I L E Y , T. J   Laws, systems and
     research design: a discussion of explanation in archaeology.
     American Antiquity, 1972, 37, 3 - 1 2 .
TUSTiN.A. The Mechanism of Economics. London, 1954.
UCKO, P.J. Ethnography and archaeological interpretation of funerary
     remains. World Archaeology, 1969, 1, 262-80.
V E R T E S , L. Observations on the technique of production of Szeletian
     flint implements. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, i960,
     X X V I , 37-43.
VERTES, L Das Jungpaläolithikum von Arka in Nord-Ungarn. Quar-
     tär, 1965, 15/16, 7 9 - 1 3 2 .
VITA-FINZI, c. and HIGGS. E S Prehistoric economy in the Mount
     Carmel area of Palestine: site catchrijent analysis. Proceedings of the
     Prehistoric Society, 1970, 36, 1 - 3 7 .
512     Analytical Archaeology

V O E G E L I N , E. w. Culture element      distributions: X X : Northeast Cali-
     fornia. Anthropological Records, 1942, 7, no. 2.
W A S H B U R N , D. K. Nearest neighbour analysis of Pueblo I—111 settle-
     ment patterns along the Rio Puerco of the East, New Mexico.
     American Antiquity, 1974, 39, 3 1 5 - 3 5 .
W A T S O N , P. J., L E B L A N C , S. A. and R E D M A N . C. L. Explanation    in
     Archaeology:        an explicitly scientific approach. New Y o r k and
     London, 1 9 7 1 .
W A l ' C H O P E , R. Archaeological survey of Northern Georgia, with a test
     of some cultural hypotheses. Memoirs of the Society for American
     Archaeology, no. 2 1 ; American Antiquity, 1966, 3 1 , no. 5, pt. 2.
W E B S T E R , P V. Severn valley ware on Hadrian's Wall.             Archaeologia
     Aeliana, 1972, 50, 1 9 1 - 2 0 3 .
W E B S T E R , P V Severn valley ware on the Antonine frontier. In Roman
      Pottery Studies in Britain and Beyond, edited by Dore, J . and
      Greene, K., 1 6 3 - 7 6 , Oxford, 1977.
W H A L L O N , R. Investigations of late prehistoric social organization in
      New York State. In New Perspectives in Archeology, edited by
      Binford, L. R. and S. R., 2 2 3 - 4 4 , Chicago, 1968.
W H A L L O N , R. A       Computer Program for Monothetic               Subdivisive
      Classification in Archaeology. Michigan, 1 9 7 1 .
W H A L L O N , R. A new approach to pottery typology.                    American
      Antiquity, 1972, 37, 1 3 - 3 3 .
W H I T A K E R , I. Social Relations in a Nomadic Lappish              Community,
     9 7 - 1 0 4 . Samiske Samlinger, Bind II. Oslo, 1955.
W H I T E , J. P. and T H O V I A S , D. H. What mean these stones? Ethno-
      taxonomic models and archaeological interpretations in the New
      Guinea Highlands. In Models in Archaeology, edited by Clarke, D.
      L., 275-308, London, 1972.
W I E N E R , N, Cybernetics. New York, 1948.
W I L L E Y , G R. A pattern of diffusion - acculturation.             Southwestern
      Journal of Anthropology, 1953, 9, 369-84.
W I L L E Y , G. R An Introduction to American Archaeology.           New Jersey,
       1966.
W I L L E Y , G. R. a n d P H I L L I P S , P Method and Theory       in American
      Archaeology. Chicago, 1958.
WISSLER, c. Man and Culture. London, 1923.
W O B S T , H. M. Boundary conditions for paleolithic social systems: a
       simulation approach. American Antiquity, 1974, 39, 1 4 7 - 7 8 .
                                                         Bibliography        513

WOLPERT,            J T h e decision process in spatial context. Annals of the
      Association of American Geographers, 1964, 54, 537-58.
WOOD, J . J and M A T S O N . R . G . T W O models of sociocultural systems and
      their implications for the archaeological study of change. In The
      Explanation of Culture Change, edited by Renfrew, C., 673-83,
      London,1973.
W R I G L E Y , E . A . London and the great leap forward - II. The Listener, 6
      July, 1967, 7 - 8 .
W Y N N E - E D W A R D S , v . c . Animal   Dispersion in Relation to Social
      Behaviour. Edinburgh, 1962.
Y A D I N , Y The Art of Warfare in Biblical Lands. London, 1963.
Y U I L L , R S . A Simulation Study of Barrier Effects in Spatial      Diffusion
      Problems. Michigan Inter-University Community of Mathematical
      Geographers, Discussion Papers Vol. 5, Michigan, 1965.
Z A R K Y , A . Statistical analysis of site catchments at Ocos, Guatemala.
      In The Early Mesoamerican Village, edited by Flannery, K. V.,
      1 1 7 - 3 0 , New York and London, 1976.
Z U B R O W , E . B. w . Carrying capacity and dynamic equilibrium in the
      prehistoric Southwest. American Antiquity, 1 9 7 1 , 36, 1 2 7 - 3 8 .
z u B R O W , E B W. Prehistoric Carrying Capacity : A Model. California,
    1975-
Index




absorbing barriers to diffusion 427                      archaeology—continued
acculturation 106, 320-3 passim, 341, 349, 360,             I 4 2 n - i 4 3 n ; external contributions to 465-6,
   419                                                     477-8, 486; general theory of xvi-xvii, 10,
Ackoff, R. L. 31                                            •3. 37. >43°. '49- 465; g r a m m a r of 4 7 9 - 8 6 ;
activities as information 100                               history of 2-10, 25; nature of 10-13; nature
activity subcultures 254                                    of data 13-19, 479; new developments in
adaptation 57, 76; cultural information system              xvi; re-design needed in xvi
   89; culture and i 4 2 n ; essential variables 5 7 -   archaic range 193, 195
   8 ; religious subsystem 112                           artefacts: as data 13-19; Australian aboriginal
affinity relationships 165, 226-8, 249, 300,                334; behaviour and 85-6, 153, 409, 4 1 1 - 1 2 ;
   3 ' 7 . 329. 33°. 338. 379. 4 U - I 5 . 49°. 493.        celestial theory 4, 5, 6 ; classical theory 3 - 4 ,
   495, 496; see also phenetic relationships                5; coded messages and 100; de Jussieu on 6;
agrarian technocomplex 351-4, 360-2                         defined 35, 152, 206, 489; distribution
agriculture: agrarian technocomplexes 351-4,                4o6n~4o8n, 425-35, 443; distribution or
   356; crop yields (q.v.); food production                 dispersion in terms of each attribute 187-
   I44n, 4 3 5 - 8 ; pastoral n o m a d s 345-51;           91; elaboration (q.v.); Goguet on 6 ;
   productivity 94-5, 114, 127                              Mahudel on 6 ; Mercati on 5, 6, 8 ; Mont-
Aldrovande U. 4, 5                                          faucon on 6; oscillation (q.v.); patterning
Allee, W. C. 84, 152, 357                                   i 3 9 n ; relationship 4 8 0 - 1 ;      Renaissance
Allen, W . L. 61, I39n                                      theory 4 - 5 ; roles of 409-10, 480, 484; study
alternative variety 89-92 passim, 105, 114, 115,            of 479; system model for 39-40, 196; see also
   129, 196-8, 237, 286, 355, 418, 489, 490                 cultural elements
American Central Plains 457-8                            Ashby, W. R. 21, 42, 44, 45, 47, 52, 54, 59. 63,
American Indians 374-7 passim,               380-94         88, 90, 113, I44n, I47n, 155, 355, 410. 491,
   passim                                                   492
A m m e r m a n , A. J. 435, 436, 437                    assemblages: American Indian 380-94 passim;
analogue models 31, 33, 38, 180; in procedure               changes in stone tools 2 4 2 n - 2 4 4 n ; charac-
   model 32, 35, 459; social organization I39n             teristics of grouped assemblages 266-7;
analytical archaeology, defined 485                         defined 35, 206, 245-6, 489; diffusion 264,
Anastasi, A. 171, 172                                       265, 368, 449, 452, 455, 456, 457; dis-
animals see fauna                                           tribution 263-6, 368; equated with g r o u p s
anthropology: effect on archaeology I 4 2 n -               of families 369; in culture g r o u p s 306, 307-
   >43"                                                     9; levels of similarity 249; subsystems 286;
Arbib, M. 470                                               t r e n d s 277-8; Urnfield culture g r o u p 396-8
archaeological culture see culture                          passim, 402; see also cultural assemblage
archaeologists: prehistorians and 10-11, 22;                systems, culture, material culture, sociocul-
   varying aims of 19, 2 0 - 1 ; Victorian 26               tural systems, systems
archaeology: aims 19-23; complementary to                attributes: attribute complexes 153, 158, 160,
   other social disciplines 486; defined 10, 12;            231, 489; behaviour and 15, 18, 156;
   desiderata in xv, 486; effect on anthropology            contextual 13, 14, 15, 156; core 212, 215,
                                                                                                   Index            515
attributes—continued                                         Briard, J . 169
   2 1 7 ; correlation (q.v.); definition 1 5 4 - 6 ,        British beaker pottery i 4 5 n , ts8, 1 9 3 , 194,
   2 0 3 n - 2 0 4 n , 206, 489; distribution or dis-          2 1 1 , 2 1 2 , 2 1 3 , 4 5 5 ; subculture 2 5 2 , 277
   persion in terms of each artefact 1 8 2 - 7 ;             Broom, L. 282
   essential see essential variables; exotic and             Brose, D. S . 1 1 6
   occasional characters 2 1 0 ; functional and              Broth well, D. 4o6n
   idiosyncratic freedom t 6 o - i . 184, 186, 2 1 0 ,       Buckley, \V. F. 42, I47n
   2 1 5 , 228, 229, 230; inessential see inessential        buffers 1 3 5
   variables; inter-communicating 43, 4 5 - 6 ;              Bunge, W. 439
   key see key variables; logically irreducible              Burgess, C . 256
    1 5 5 , 156, 203n-204n, 489; multidimen-                 burial practices 28-9, i4on, 256, 2 5 7 - 8 , 396,
   sional constellation 2 1 0 - 1 7 passim, 226;               463°
   multistate (q.v.); of individuals 1 1 3 , 3 6 3 - 4 ;
                                                             Burnham, P. I48n
   personality 1 1 3 ; regularities (q.v.); selection
                                                             Bvlund, E. 440
   for use 14, 1 5 5 , 1 5 6 ; social subsystem 103,
   106, 1 0 7 , 109; specific 1 3 , 14, 1 5 , 1 5 6 ; sub-   Campbell, J . M. 1 1 4 , 1 2 2
   jectivity in selection for study 14, 18, 1 9 ;            Cann, J . R. 429
   variance in type populations 278; variation               canonical models 44, 59, 63, 64, 66, 67, 474
   within artefacts 3 7 , 1 5 7 - 6 0 passim, 1 6 5 - 8 0    Carnap, R . 4 8 3 - 4 , 485
   passim                                                    cascading system t45n
Australian aboriginal artefacts 334                          Case, H . 1 7 0
axes 169, 1 7 2 - 5 , 178, 1 7 9 , 186, 2 3 2 - 4 , 242n     Cassels, R. 1 2 7 , 128
Azoury, I. 258                                               catalytic values 49
                                                             Cavalli-Sforza, L . C. 435, 436, 437
Bacon, F . 486-7                                             celestial theory 4, 5, 6
Bantu entity 3 7 1 - 4                                       Celts 396, 398, 399, 400, 402, 403, 404
Bar-Hillel 483                                               centralization I44n, 14611, 29811
Barker, G . 1 2 1 , 125, 1 2 7                               Chamberlin, T . C. 476
Barth, F . 120, 1 2 1 , 1 2 2                                Chang, K . C. 479
Bayes 476, 483                                               Chapin, F. S . 282
beaker pottery see British beaker pottery                    characterization levels 1 0 9 - 1 0
beaker subculture 2 5 2 , 277                                characterization studies 405n, 4 2 7 - 8
behaviour: artefacts and 8 5 - 6 , 1 5 3 , 409, 4 1 1 -      Chartkoff, J . L. 487n
  1 2 ; attributes and 1 5 , 18, 1 5 6 ; early               Chasko, W. J . I44n, 438
  hominids 86; entity systems 4 1 5 ; patterns as            Cherry, C. 63, 88, 90, 4 1 3 , 466, 476, 480, 483
  survival code 8 7 ; systems 5 1 - 3 , 59, 63, 64,          Cheynier, A. 4 - 7 passim
  7 3 , 86, 1 4 9 - 5 0 ; variability in 405n                Childe, V. G . 36, 4on, 4 m , 203n, 205, 245,
Bennett, J . W. I47n                                            299, 3 1 9 , 326n, 328, 405n, 4o8n
Berlyne, D. E. 1 1 4                                         Chisholm, M . M. 1 2 5
Bertalanffy, L. von 42, M 7 n                                Chi-square 4 m , I39n, 1 7 0
bimodality 1 7 2 - 4                                         Chorley, R . J . 32. 35, I45n, 442. 4 5 3
Binford, L. R. 16, 19, 42, 98, 14cm, I42n,                   Chorofas, D. N. 472
   I 4 3 n , I44n, I46n, I48n, 1 7 8 , 205, 242n,            Christian, V. 7
   2
     4 3 n > 255. 258, 279, 284, 407n, 438, 458,             circuits 46, 47, 56, 60, 61
  46311. 479. 484. 4 8 7 "                                   Clark, J . G . D. 168, 4 o6n
Binford, S . R. 19, 205, 243n, 255, 258, 279,                Clarke, D . L . 3 1 , 1 2 2 , 128, 1 3 8 , I 4 3 n , 1 4 4 0 ,
  284, 479, 484                                                 I45n, I46n, 158, 203n, 239, 242n, 243n,
Birmingham, J . 203n                                            244n, 2 5 2 , 255, 277, 407n, 4o8n, 4 1 2 , 4 3 1 ,
Black Box 58-62, 74, 94, 107                                    4+2. 444. 456. 465. 4 8 s . 487n. 488n
blending strategy 9 3 , 94, 95, 124, 198, 2 1 8 ,            classical theory 3 - 4 , 5
  268, 3 3 3                                                 classification: meanings of, 4 m ; model, 4 5 9 -
Bordes. F. 19, 4 m , 168                                        60; problems in, 163, 1 6 5 , 3 0 5 ; tools, 2 0 3 0
Boserup, E. i43n                                             climate 1 3 2 - 5 passim, 375
Bowden 440                                                   climax 2 9 2 - 7 passim; agrarian technocom-
Bradley, R. 456                                                 plexes 3 5 1 - 4 passim; defined 489; hunter-
Braithwaite, R. B. 16, 1 7 , 22, 3 1 , 33, 34, 9 4 , 9 5 ,      fisher-gatherer    technocomplexes 343, 344,
  468, 476                                                      3 4 5 ; pastoral nomad technocomplexes 3 4 8 -
516        Index

climax—continuid                                                correlation—continued
    Si passim; strategies 34475. 349. 3 5 ' . 354;                 3 1 7 ; coefficients of attributes            210-13
    system ontogeny 292, 3 4 1 ; technocomplex                     passim; correlated constraint 69, 77, 107,
    3 4 ' . 343. 344. 345. 348 54 passim                           109, I 3 9 n ; correlated regularities 109-10,
clothing 1 9 1 - 2 , 400, 401                                      i n ; defined 490; directive (q.v.); hierar-
clusters: analysis 149; attribute complexes                        chical entities of sociocultural dimensions
     153, 158, 160, 2 3 1 , 489; attributes 153, 155.              366; rates of change of system components
     1 6 1 , 1 7 1 , 174, 176-7, 2 1 2 , 214, 2 1 7 , 2 3 1 ,      285
    4 6 1 ; core attributes 2 1 2 ; entities as 3 5 ;           coupled systems 49-SO, 57, 76, 92, 130, 138,
     inventions 294; social and               economic             354-5. 4>7. 486, 490
    subsystem components 107, 109; tribal                       covariance 7 1 , i4on, 2 0 1 , 473, 490
     assemblages 378-9, 389,                                    'covering law' model 487n
 types 207, 208                                                 Cowen, J. D. 197
Clyde/Carlingford tombs 28-9                                    crop yields 94-5. 1 1 4 , 1 1 6 - 1 9 passim, 1 2 1 , 122.
coaction 358-62, 489                                               124, 127. ¡45n
coherence 2 3 1 - 3 , 236, 284, 291, 319, 3 4 1 ;               cultural assemblage phases 272-8 passim, 288-
    defined s8, 2 3 1 , 489; 'maturity' t r e n d s 289;           90
    measure of 232, 284                                         cultural assemblage systems 2 4 9 - 6 1 ; emer-
Collins, D . M. 224, 225                                           gent 282, 283; i n d e p e n d e n t 280, 319-24
communication 84, 86-7, 88, n o , 4o6n, 4 1 0 -                    passim, 492; oscillation 272-83                 passim;
     12, 428                                                       phase pattern regularities 2 6 1 - 7 2 ; system
 comprehensive interchange 357-60 passim,                          pattern regularities 2 8 5 - 7 ; termination of
     362                                                           trajectory 2 8 1 - 3 ; ' ¡ m e pattern regularities
complex systems 46-7, 52-3, 56, 57, 60-1. 7 9 -                     272-97; see also assemblages, culture,
     8 1 , i o i , 138; adaptive systems I47n, I48n                 material culture, sociocultural systems,
 composite b a n d s 355. 356                                       systems
 c o m p u t e r s : as isomorphic models 59-60;                 cultural assimilation 4 1 9
     pragmatics and 486; semantics and 486;                      cultural brick theory 263-5
     syntactics and 482, 485                                     cultural change model 2 4 2 n - 2 4 4 n
 concentric exploitation zones model 125                         cultural diffusion 438
 concepta 200, 468, 469, 480, 481                                cultural ecology 84-5, 101, 1 3 3
 concepts, systems theory as source of I 4 3 n -                 cultural elements 374-7, 379-80, 383-7
      '44"                                                          passim, 389-94 passim, 4 2 1 , 4 2 2 - 4 ; see also
 Conklin, H . C. 121                                                artefacts
 constellation analysis (inter-assemblage rela-                 cultural m o r p h o l o g y 84-5, 1 0 1 , 1 3 3
     tionships) 258-60                                          cultural networks 253, 270
 constraint(s): c o m p o u n d e d 55; constrained             cultural ontogeny 272-97 passim
     sets 7 0 - 1 , 77; continuous systems 45, 7 5 ;            cultural phylogeny 164, 165, 460
      correlated 69, 77, 107, 109, i 3 9 n ; defined            culture: adaptation and 1 4 2 0 ; a m b i g u o u s use
     490; range of 54-5; regularities and 2 1 - 2 ,               of term 30, 247-9, 299-300, 328; areas 267-
      75, 77, 1 1 1 , 4 1 5 ; religious 114                       9; as an information system 86-7, 8 8 - 1 0 1 ,
  contagious subtype 426                                           150, 4 1 0 - 1 2 , 4 6 1 ; as system with subsys-
 contextual analysis 32, 34-5, 458, 459                            tems 1 0 1 - 3 1 ; as temporal and spatial analy-
  contextual attributes 1 3 , 14, 15, 156                          tical unit 4on; declining use of concept
  continuous variables 158                                         4 0 5 n - 4 0 8 n ; defined 490; differences 2 7 1 ;
  contradictive variety 1 1 4 , 1 1 5 , 129, 1 3 1 , 1 9 6 -       entity 279; infiltrating 3 1 5 ; information
      8, 200. 237, 286, 333. 354, 355, 418,489, 491                content 299; states 285; see also assem-
  control see regulation                                           blages,          cultural    assemblage       systems,
  convergence 3 1 8 - 2 3 , 338, 340, 348; and                     material culture, sociocultural systems,
      integration method 475-6                                     systems
  Converse-Occam 7 9 - 8 1 , 475                                culture climax 290-7, 490
  Corded Ware/Battle-axe culture g r o u p 3 0 7 - 1 0 ,        culture g r o u p s : American I n d i a n s 385-6, 389,
                                                                   393; assemblages in 306, 3 0 7 - 9 ; Bantu 372,
   3>3. 3>4. 315. 321-2. 346. 365. 403
                                                                    373-4; convergent and divergent trajec-
 core attributes 2 1 2 , 2 1 5 , 217
                                                                   tories 3 1 8 - 2 3 ; Corded            Ware/Battle-axe
 correlation: between attributes 2 1 0 - 1 3 passim,
   2 1 7 , 224, 225, 226, 229-32 passim, 236, 239,                 (q.v.); defined 35, 206, 300, 490; demo-
   240, 4 6 1 ; between types 283-4, 289-90,                       graphic relationships 3 1 6 - 1 7 ; displacement
                                                                                       Index          517
culture--ronfiinini                                    directive correlation— continued
  323-4; distribution area model 3 1 1 - 1 5 ;             107, 117; types and 153. 229, 233, 238, 281,
  dynamic model 3 1 7 - 1 8 ; in Europe 300-2,            282, 287. 339
  326n-327n; language 302-4 passim, 312,               disciplined procedure 471-8, 487n
  370; links 312, 369-70; non-contiguous and           discrete variables 157-8
  non-continuous distribution 312, 3 1 3 ;             dis-elaboration 99-100, 105
  ontogeny 318-24; parallel trajectories 322,          disjunction see alternative variety
  323; peripheral cultures 326; phase pattern          dislocation 76, 96-8, 237-8; defined 491;
  regularities 305-15; range of areas 3 1 3 ;             economic subsystem 286; material culture
  repatterning 418-19; static model 305-10;               subsystem 130, 286; psychological subsys-
  system pattern regularities 324-6; systems              tem 1 1 3 - 1 4 , 286; religious subsystem 1 1 0 -
  302-5; time pattern regularities 315-24;                1 1 , 286
  trajectories 304-5, 318-24 passim-, transient        disoperative interchange 357, 358, 359, 362
  320, 321; TRB 315, 321-2. 403; Urnfield              dispersion: Late Bronze Age socketed axes
  396-9, 402-4                                            169; Mousterian flint leaf-points 167; of
cumulative effect 49, 68-9, 76, 78-81 passim,             artefacts in terms of each attribute 187-91;
  287, 461                                                of attributes in terms of each artefact 182-7;
Cunliffe, B. W. 4 o6n                                     population entity characteristic 152, 414
Cuvier, G., baron 15                                   displacement: culture groups 323-4; equili-
cybernetics see systems theory                            brium 76; loss of sociocultural variety 420;
                                                          termination of type system 230
                                                       distance decay models 427-35
Daniel, G. E. 28, 4on, 405n                            distribution: artefacts 187-91, 4o6n-4o8n,
Darwin, C. 15, 24                                        428-35, 443; assemblages 263-6, 368;
data 13-19, 458, 466-7; collection 12-13, 3 2 -           attributes in terms of each artefact 182-7;
   4Ó3n; see also excavation                             cultural elements 422-3; curves 165-78
dating 162, 307, 405n, 438, 457, 459                     passim-, entities at sites 440; fall-off (q.v.);
Davis, J. C. 454                                          models 263-6, 424-6; specific types 368
De Perthes, Boucher 7                                  distribution areas 81-3, 165; culture group
De Sonneville-Bordes, D. 19, 168                          model 3 1 1 - 1 5 ; diffusion of cultural ele-
'deductive-nomological' explanation 487n                  ments 422-4; technocomplexes 338-9
Deetz, J. I39n, 186, 199, 234, 244n, 483               divergence 252, 253, 270-1, 318-23
demic diffusion 437-8                                  Dixon, J. E. 429
demography see population                              Dixon, R. B. 263, 420, 421, 425, 426
descent groups I39n-i40n                               Doran, J. E. 13, 23, 4m, 143m I46n, I47n,
determinate systems 54, 59, 61, 63                        161, 168, 203n, 204n. 205, 212, 213, 214,
Dethlcfsen, E. 186, 199                                  244n, 259, 379. 46s
diffusion: assemblages 264, 265, 449, 452, 455,        Drennan, R. D. 14m, 298n
   4S6, 457; axioms 423-4; barriers 426-7,             Driver. H. L. 374, 387
   435. 443. 444. 445: cultural 438; demic 437-        dynamic equilibrium, 49-50, 75-6, 78, 93,
   8; diffusing elements 422-3; exchange and             417-18, 444; between system and environ-
   420, 428-31, 443; expansion 426; gain from            ment 134-5, 333; economic subsystem 115-
   131, 196, 293, 319, 320, 418; information              16, 1 2 1 ; psychological subsystem 1 1 3 - 1 4 ;
   flow 89; models 426-58; organized 418,420;            subsystems in 103, 104; three level debate
   postulates 422-3; preconditions for 424-6;            93-4. 113
   preferential 419, 442; radial contour theory
   264-5; regional rates 437; secondary 420,           economic subsystem 102, 114-29; dislocation
   421-2; social 106, 270; stimulus 420; tech-           286; dynamic equilibrium 1 1 5 - 1 6 , 1 2 1 ;
   nocomplex and 340; trade and 420, 428-35,             environment and 116, 121-2; extractive
   443                                                   source of system energy 291; gain 116;
dimorphism 257-8                                         oscillation 116-17,
directional/redistributive trade 430-1, 432            Einstein, A. 33
directive correlation: agrarian technocom-             Ellsworth Huntington 116
   plexcs 352-3; defined 58; essential variables       entities 15, 20, 21; areas 81-2, 83; cultural
   107, 131, 180, 202, 229; future conditions            279; defined 22-3, 491; dispersion of 152,
   58, 61; key variables 117, 1 3 1 , 180, 202, 229,     414; distribution at sites 440; implications
   230; processes model 77; trajectories 70,             of polythetic nature 37; interaction 417;
518       Index
entities—continued                                       Fisher's maximum likelihood method 476
  inter-communicating 43, 4 5 - 6 ; migration            Flannery, K. V. 98, 1 1 2 , 125. 127, 128, i44n,
  4 1 7 ; model 3 5 - 7 , 206, 4 1 2 - 1 6 ; ontogeny       I46n, I47n,298n
   1 5 1 - 2 , 4 1 4 , 4 1 7 ; properties and nature,    flora 1 3 2 - 5 passim, 344, 345. 348, 350. 3 5 1 , 352
   1 5 1 - 2 , 180, 4 1 4 , 4 1 5 ; structure and        flow charts 32, 34, 14411-1450, 444-5, 458
  composition 1 5 1 , 4 1 4                              fluorescence 292-7 passim, 489, 491
environment: as complex system in moving                 Foley, R. 127
  equilibrium 1 3 8 ; as system with subsystems          food production 1440, 435-8
   1 3 2 - 8 ; attributes of 1 3 3 , 1 3 5 ; changes     F o r d , J . A. 222
  affecting land use 1 2 s ; defined 1 3 2 ;             Forde, C. D. 345, 346
  economic subsystem and 1 1 6 ,                121-2;   format: area 267; artefact 200, 201, 230;
  insulating system from 53-4, 90, 9 1 , 135,               blending contradictive variety 200; cultural
  3 3 2 - 3 . 409; processes model 74-5, 76;                75. 9 ' . 93. 99. 279, 280, 282. 285, 286. 287,
  subsystems of, 1 3 3 - 5                                  4 6 1 ; culture group 3 1 8 - 1 9 , 3 2 2 ; essential
equilibrium 4 7 - s i , 198; basin 5 0 - 1 , 55. 7 5 ;      variables and 99, 2 0 1 - 2 ; information 9 1 ;
  definition of 78, 4 9 1 ; dislocation 76; dis-            integration of attributes into 229; social
  placement of 76; dynamic (q.v.); informa-                 subsystem 105; stability 75; syntactical 93,
  tion 4 9 1 ; metastable 49, 68, 76, 330; pro-             99; type 229
  blem of definition 4 7 - 8 ; stable 48, 68, 70,        formative system phase 289, 292-4, 341
  76, 129; state of 7 5 ; statistical 50; steady         Fox, C. 269
  state 49 ; types of 4 8 - 5 1 ; unstable 48            Frankel, D. 258
equivocation: defined 4 9 1 ; information flow            Freeman, J . D. 1 2 1
   89-92 passim ; social subsystem 105                    Fried, M. H. 103, i39n
essential types 262, 280, 285, 287, 306, 3 1 7 ,          Friedman, J . i42n
   323. 338, 339. 340-1                                   Fritz, J . 487n
essential variables: adaptation 5 7 - 8 ; as             frontier innovation/invention 423
   information 88; as relevant attributes 56-7,
   7 1 ; directive correlation (q.v.); dynamic           gain: continuity and 4 6 1 ; coupled systems
   system 230; environment 1 3 3 ; nature of 7 0 -         490; cultural assemblage subsystem 286;
   2, i 4 ; n , 155, 2 0 1 , 2 1 0 ; ontogeny 99, 180,     defined 4 9 1 ; economic subsystem 1 1 6 ;
   202; processes model 7 2 - 3 , 7 5 ; selection in       formative system phase 292-4, 3 4 1 ; from
   Black Box problems 61 ; social subsystem                diffusion 1 3 1 , 196, 293, 319, 320, 4 1 8 ;
   107; unilinear procedure 4 7 2 - 3 ; wide con-          growth of new cultural format 285;
   straints and 54                                         information flow 89-93 passim, 97-8, 99;
ethnic subcultures 2 5 1 - 2 , 261, 320                    material culture subsystem 1 3 1 , 196-7, 198;
ethnographic studies 370-94; historical 394-               psychological subsystem 1 1 4 ; technocom-
   404                                                     plexes 3 3 3 ; see also fluorescence
Evans R. K . 203n, 20411                                 game theory 6 6 - 7 2 ; strategy in 94-6, 1 1 7 - 2 1
excavation 1 2 - 1 3 , 3 2 ; see also data collection      passim
exchange: communication and 428; diffusion               Gaussian distribution laws 478
   and 420, 4 2 8 - 3 1 , 443; exchanged items           general models 3 4 ; entities 35-7, 206, 4 1 2 - 1 6 ;
   405n-406n, 427                                          procedural 32, 3 4 - 5 , 458-60; processes
exponential relationship laws 477                          (q.v.); social organization i39n
                                                         general system ontogeny 292
Fagen, R. E. 42, 132                                     geographical models 266-9
fall-off 3 8 1 , 383-7 passim, 389, 390, 392-4           geology 1 3 2 - 5 passim
   passim. 4 2 8 - 3 1 passim, 435, 442-3, 444, 445      Gerard, D. R. W. 409
families (artefacts) see type(s)                         Gifford, E. VV. .374, 376, 380, 3 8 1 , 389, 391,
Farrer, R. A. H. 431                                       393
fauna 1 3 2 - 5 passim, 1 4 m , 344-9 passim, 3 5 1 ,    Gimbutas, M. 1 1 2
   352, 353, 360, 361                                    Glover, I. C. 2 1 2
feedback: as system property 4 5 - 7                     Gluckman, M. 326
basis of control and regulation 76; information          goal-seeking 5 1 - 2 ,     70,   76,   98;    see   also
   9 1 - 2 , 476; material culture subsystem 130;          homeostasis
   negative 47, I47n; networks and 46; positive          Goguet 6, 8
   47, i44n, 14611; regulating subsystems 5 2 - 3 ;      Goody, J . R. 16
   subsystems 46-7                                       Gorman, C. F. 335
                                                                                                              Index              519

G o u l d , P. R . 1 1 7 , 1 1 8 , 1 1 9 , 1 2 2 , 420, 426         induction 1 5 . 1 6 . 18, 1 1 2
G o u l d , R . A . 2030                                            inessential t>pes 2 6 2 , 2 8 1 , 285, 307, 3 1 8 , 3 3 8
gravity models 4 3 1 - 4                                            inessential variables: as noise 8 8 ; defined 7 1 ,
G r a y b i i l , F. A . 1 7 0 , 4 5 4 , 474, 493                      I 4 5 n , 1 5 5 ; d y n a m i c s y s t e m 2 3 0 ; environ-
G r e e n . E. L . 1 2 7 , 1 2 8                                      ment 1 3 3 ; presence in all artefacts 2 1 0 ;
G r e e n . J . A. 55, 83                                             processes model 7 5 ; unilinear procedure
G r e e n . R . W. 1 1 1                                              472
grid generalization method 4 5 1                                    i n f o r m a t i o n : acceptance of 9 7 ; activities as
g r o u p ethnology 3 6 3 - 4 0 8                                        1 0 0 : defined 4 9 2 ; e q u i l i b r i u m 491 ; essential
g r o u p e d trends 2 8 7 - 9 0                                         variables as 8 8 ; feedback 9 1 - 2 , 4 7 6 ; noise
g r o u p s , networks of 1 0 4 - 5                                     and 58, 88, 4 1 0 , 4 1 1 ; oscillation and 9 1 - 3 ;
                                                                        rejection of 9 7 ; state evolution and 2 9 8 n ;
Hagerstrand, T . 427, 4 3 8 - 4 0                                       variety in 8 9 - 9 3 passim, 1 1 2 , 1 1 3
Haggett, P. 1 1 8 , 1 1 9 , 426, 4 3 9 - 4 2 passim, 4 5 3 ,        information system 8 6 - 7 , 8 8 - 1 0 1 , 1 5 0 , 4 1 0 -
   4 5 4 . 4 5 S . 466. 467, 470. 474. 478                             1 2 , 461
Hall. A . D. 42, 1 3 2                                              initial state 6 9 - 7 0
Harre, R . 487n                                                     insulation of system f r o m environment 5 3 - 4 ,
Hartley, K . F. 4 3 1                                                  9 0 . 9 1 . 1 3 5 . 3 3 2 - 3 . 409
H a r v e y , D. 487n                                               integral definition 58
H a w k e s , C . 268                                               intercommunicating                  attributes/entities    43,
H e m p e l , C . 487n                                                 45-6
Hencken, H. 197                                                     invention 89, 97, 99, 1 3 0 - 1 , 184, 196, 1 9 8 , 230.
'heredity' of population entities 64, 65, 66, 88,                      2 7 8 . 293. 3 3 3 . 340. 348. 4 1 8 . 420, 4 2 3 , 4 3 9 -
   89, 1 5 2 , 3 2 S . 4 1 4                                           40
hierarchical subtype 426                                            Isaac, G . LI. 1 3 6 , 1 3 7 , i 4 8 n , 1 6 1 , 1 7 8 , 1 7 9 ,
H i g g s , E . S . 1 2 5 , I 4 6 n , 4 o ; n , 4o6n                   1 9 8 , 2 3 4 , 242n, 243n
Hill, J . N. 16, 1 3 8 , 13911, 14011, M 7 n , 2 o 3 n ,            isomorphism 5 9 - 6 0 , 7 3 , 4 7 7 - 8 , 480, 482, 492
   204n, 4 6 2 n , 4 8 3 , 487
H o d d e r , 1. 1 2 5 . 1 2 8 . 40611, 4 0 7 n , 4o8n, 4 3 1 - 5
                                                                    Jarman, M . R. i46n
   passim, 4 4 2 - 8 passim, 4 5 1 , 454, 456
                                                                    J a z d z e w s k i , K . 402
Hodson, F. R. 1 3 , 2 3 , 4 m , I46n, i 4 7 n , 1 6 1 ,
                                                                    Jochim, M. A. 122, 1 2 3 , 124, 128
    1 6 8 , 203n, 204n. 205, 2 1 2 , 2 1 3 , 2 1 4 , 244n,
                                                                    J o h n s o n , G . A . 2g8n
   258, 259, 379, 465
                                                                    J o h n s o n , L . 487n
homeostasis 5 1 - 2 , 76, i 4 7 n - 1 4 8 1 1 ; see also
                                                                    J o p e , E . M . 2 5 3 , 4o6n, 440
   goal-seeking
                                                                    J u d g e , W. J . 201
hominids 8 6 - 7
                                                                    J u s s i e u , A . de 6
h o m o m o r p h i c 94, 491
H u g h e s , G . B. and T . 185
human g r o u p networks 1 0 4 - 5
                                                                    K a h n , R . S . 474
hunt and stick 52, 76, 92, 1 0 5 , 1 3 0 , 200, 3 3 3
                                                                    K a n s k y 442
hunter-fisher-gatherers 98, 1 1 4 , 1 2 1 - 4 , I 2 5 .
                                                                    Kemp i45n
    1 2 8 , I 4 3 n , 294; American Indians 3 7 5 , 3 8 5 -
                                                                    K e n n e d y , B. A . i 4 5 n
   93 passim; enaction with agrarian svsteins
                                                                    key types 2 6 2 , 280, 2 8 5 , 2 8 7 , 3 0 6 - 7 , 3 2 3 , 4 2 3
   3 6 0 - 1 ; coaction with pastoral nomad g r o u p
                                                                    key v a r i a b l e s : blending strategy and 1 9 8 ;
   3 5 8 - 6 0 ; technocomplex 3 4 2 - 5 , 348, 3 5 2
                                                                        covariance (q.v.); defined 7 1 - 2 , i 4 5 n , 1 5 5 ;
hypothesis generation 4 7 3 - 8 ; convergence and
                                                                        directive correlation ( q . v . ) ; d y n a m i c system
   integration 4 7 5 - 6 ; isomorphism            477-8;
                                                                        2 3 0 ; economic s u b s y s t e m 1 1 7 ; environment
   multiple alternative hypotheses                476-7;
                                                                         1 3 3 ; ontogeny 1 8 0 , 2 0 2 , 2 4 0 ; processes
   regularities 4 7 4 - 5 ; residues 4 7 5 ; total scru-
                                                                        model 7 5 ; social s u b s y s t e m 1 0 6 ; system
   tin\ 474
                                                                        pattern regularities 2 3 8 ; unilinear pro-
'hypothetico-deductive method' 1 6                                      cedure 4 7 2 , 4 7 3
iconic model 3 1 , 3 2 , 3 5 , 459                                  kinship 1 0 2 , 1 0 3 , 2 6 9 - 7 0 , 3 4 3
illusory skewness 167                                               K l i n d t - J e n s e n , O . 4on
independent cultures 280, 3 1 9 - 2 4 passim, 492                   K r o e b e r , A . L . 1 1 3 , 1 6 4 , 1 9 1 , 1 9 2 , 268, 2 9 3 ,
independent systems 54, 56, 2 8 2 , 283                                 294, 296, 297, 3 7 4 , 380. 3 8 1 , 3 9 3 , 420
independent types 2 2 8 . 236, 492                                  K r u m b e i n , W. C . 1 7 0 , 4 5 3 , 4 5 4 , 474, 493
individuals and attributes 3 6 3 - 4                                kurtosis 1 6 5 , 289
520           I n d e x


lag and lead 7 3 , 76, 92, 9 8 ; artefact s y s t e m                 Mellaart, J . 1 1 2
    198, 200; economic subsystem                      115-16;         Mellars, P. A. 19
    social s u b s y s t e m 1 0 5                                    m e m o r y : incompletely observed Black Box
L a g r a n g e ' s principle 4 7 7                                      system 6 1 ; processes model 7 4 ; serni-
L a m i n g , A. 6                                                       M a r k o v i a n s y s t e m s 65
language:             American     Indian      377,    385-94         Mercati, M . , 4 - 5 , 6, 7, 8, 4on
    passim; Bantu 3 7 1 - 4 ; culture g r o u p s 3 0 2 ,             m e s s a g e s : coded 1 0 0 ; defined 4 9 2 ; informa-
    3 0 3 , 304, 3 1 2 , 3 7 0 ; d i f f u s i o n and 4 2 1 ;           tion s y s t e m s 88, 4 1 0 - 1 1 ;     sociocultural
    d i v e r g e n c e 2 7 1 ; psychological s u b s y s t e m          s y s t e m s 86, 89
    102,         113;    technocomplexes          337,   341;         metastable e q u i l i b r i u m 49, 68, 76, 3 3 0
    U r n f i e l d culture g r o u p 398, 399, 4 0 2 , 4 0 3 ,       micro-strategy 201
    404                                                               m i g r a t i o n : entity 4 1 7 ; h u m a n populations
L a r s o n , P. 4 5 6                                                   4 6 2 m 4 6 3 n ; S o u t h Persian nomads 1 2 0 - 2
L a w i c k - G o o d a l l , H . and ] . 1 8 , 1 9                   Mill, J . S . 4 7 2
l a w s : exponential relationship 4 7 7 ; f o r social               Miller, J . G . 4 2
    studies 4 7 0 ; G a u s s i a n distribution 4 7 8 ;              Miller, R . L . 474
    L e n z ' s law 4 7 7 ; m a s s action 4 7 7 ; m i n i m u m      m i n i m a x : g r o u p size 1 3 7 - 8 ; strategy 9 5 - 6 ,
    potential e n e r g y e q u i l i b r i u m 4 7 7 ; M o n o -         1 1 9 , 1 2 0 - 1 , 1 3 0 , 198, 2 0 1 , 3 3 3 , 345
    tonic D e c r e m e n t 4 2 8 - 9 ; natural 4 6 8 - 9 ;           m i n i m u m potential e n e r g y e q u i l i b r i u m laws
    requisite variety 54                                                 477
L e Chatelier's principle 4 7 7                                       m i x e d strategy 9 3 , 94, 95, 1 1 6 - 1 9 passim, 124,
Leakey, M. 242n                                                           1 2 5 , 1 3 1 , 1 9 8 , 2 1 8 , 3 3 2 , 3 3 5 , 347
L e Blanc, S . A . 487n                                               mpdal range 1 9 3 , 1 9 5
L e e , R . B. 1 2 2                                                  m o d e l s : analogue ( q . v . ) ; b r a n c h i n g dicho-
lenticular patterns 190, 1 9 2 - 5 passim,                   199,        t o m o u s 4 1 3 ; canonical ( q . v . ) ; cascading
    2 2 0 - 5 passim, 2 3 6 , 2 7 3 , 4 6 1                              s y s t e m I 4 5 n ; classificatory 4 5 9 - 6 0 ; complex
L e n z ' s law, 477                                                     adaptive i 4 7 n , I 4 8 n ; cultural change 2 4 2 0 -
L e v i s o n , M . 446, 4 5 0                                           2 4 4 n ; culture g r o u p distribution area 3 1 1 -
Lévi-Strauss, C. 104                                                      1 5 ; culture g r o u p s 3 0 5 - 1 0 , 3 1 7 - 1 8 ; dangers
Lewin, K. 1 1 3                                                           in model b u i l d i n g 3 4 ; defined 3 1 ; diffusion
linear model, culture g r o u p distribution                313-         4 2 6 - 5 8 ; distance decay 4 2 7 - 3 5 ; distribution
    14                                                                    263-6, 4 2 4 - 6 ; entities ( q . v . ) ; general (q.v.);
L i n e a r b a n d k e r a m i k settlements 446, 4 4 7 , 448           geographical                 266-9;           gravity       431-4;
Loire tombs 28-9                                                         homeostatic I 4 7 n - i 4 8 n ; iconic 3 1 , 32, 35,
long b a r r o w s 2 8 - 9                                               4 5 9 ; i n f o r m a t i v e 20, 2 1 - 2 ; intuitive pro-
L o n g a c r e , W. A . i 3 9 n , i 4 o n , 2 o 3 n , 483               c e d u r e 3 1 ; i s o m o r p h i c see isomorphism;
Losch 477                                                                 material culture system ontogeny 288-90;
L o t k a , A . J . 49, 477                                               model b u i l d i n g as archaeological activity
                                                                          1 2 - 1 3 ; morphological system 1451); multi-
                                                                         dimensional 4 1 3 ; polynomial function 493;
McArthur, M. I42n
                                                                          polythetic ( q . v . ) ; p r o c e d u r e 3 2 , 3 4 - 5 , 4 5 8 -
M c B u r n e y , C . B. M . 1 3 8
                                                                         6 0 ; processes ( q . v . ) ; social organization
M a c k a y , D. M . 465, 477
                                                                          I 3 9 n ; stochastic I 4 6 n , 4 3 8 - 4 9 ; symbolic
M a i m e r , M . P. 1 7 2 - 4 , 1 7 5
                                                                          ( q . v . ) ; s y s t e m s ( q . v . ) ; s y s t e m s theory as
Mander, A. E. 15
                                                                         source of I 4 4 n - i 4 6 n ; three ages 4 - 1 0
M a r k o v , A . A . 6 3 ; chain 6 3 - 4 , i 4 5 n , 1 4 6 0
                                                                         passim, 22, 3 0 - 1 , 3 2 9 , 3 3 1 , 4 1 2 ; trend 449,
Maruyama, M. I47n
                                                                         4 5 1 - 8 ; w a v e of a d v a n c e 4 3 5 - 8 ; see also
material culture 1 8 , 4 o n ; f u n c t i o n s 4 0 9 - 1 2
                                                                         simulation
   passim ; ontogeny 2 8 8 - 9 0 ; role of the sub-
                                                                      M o l l , G . 83
   culture          2 5 0 - 6 1 ; social        basis      269-72;
   s u b s y s t e m 1 0 2 , 1 1 5 , 1 2 9 - 3 1 , 2 8 6 ; see also   monothetic, 3 5 - 6 , 4 i n n , 492
   cultural          assemblage          systems,          culture,   Monte Carlo methods i 4 5 n , 439-42
   sociocultural s y s t e m s , s y s t e m s                        M o n t e l i u s , O. 1 0 , 4on
matrilineal band 3 5 5 , 3 5 6                                        M o o r e , G . E . 22
matrix inversion 474                                                  M o r g a n , C . G . 4 8 7 ^ 488n
Matson, R. G. I47n                                                    M o r g e n s t e r n , O. 67
m a x i m i n strategy see m i n i m a x strategy                     M o r o n e y , M . J . 27, 188
M e d a w a r , P. 4 8 7 n                                            morphological s y s t e m I 4 5 n
                                                                                                                                Index               521

Morrill, R. L. 440, 4 4 1 , 442                                                   organic phylogeny 164
motifs 1 5 6 , 160, 199, 2 5 5 , 334, 46311, 483                                  organized diffusion 4 1 8 , 420
Mousterian assemblages 1 6 7 , 168, 260                                           Orton, C. 1 2 5 , 128, 4o6n, 407n, 435, 4 4 2 - 5
M u e l l e r , J . \Y. 2 7 8 , 4 5 8                                               passim, 4 5 1 , 4 5 4 , 4 5 6
multidimensional analysis 2 5 8 - 6 0                                             oscillation: artefact system 198, 200, 2 1 8 , 2 1 9 ,
multidimensional                  constellations 210-17                             2 2 1 , 224, 230, 236, 2 3 8 ; cultural assemblage
   passim, 2 6 2                                                                    s y s t e m s 2 7 2 - 8 3 passim ; e c o n o m i c s u b s y s -
m u l t i l i n e a r d e v e l o p m e n t 68, 7 6 , 92, 94,           105,        tem 1 1 6 - 1 7 ,               elaboration and 1 8 4 - 7 ;
   1 1 7 , 1 1 9 , 193, 2 2 5 - 6 , 229, 238                                        g o a l - s e e k i n g 5 2 , 9 8 ; i n f o r m a t i o n trans-
multimodality 1 6 5 - 6                                                             m i s s i o n 9 1 - 3 ; material c u l t u r e s u b s y s t e m
multiple alternative hypothesis m e t h o d 4 7 6 - 7                                1 3 0 ; n e t w o r k s a n d 7 7 ; o c c u r e n c e of 7 6 - 7 ;
multiple factors and cumulative effect 7 8 - 8 1 ,                                  population              entity      151-2;       psychological
 461                                                                                subsystem 1 1 3 ; religious subsystem                            111;
multiple regression analysis 476                                                    social s u b s y s t e m 1 0 5 ; s u b s y s t e m s 7 7 ; t i m e
multiple subcultural aspects 258                                                    pattern regularities i 8 o f f ; trajectories 68;
multiplier effect I46n                                                              w o m e n ' s f a s h i o n s 1 9 1 - 2 ; see also q u a l i t a t i v e
multistate attributes 1 5 6 - 9 , 1 7 8 , 1 8 7 , 1 9 0 , 1 9 1 ,                   c h a n g e a n d oscillation, q u a n t i t a t i v e c h a n g e
   192, 197, 461                                                                    a n d oscillation
multistate t y p e s 2 2 8 , 2 3 8 , 2 8 0 , 3 0 6 , 3 0 9 , 3 1 6 ,
  3 1 7 , 3 1 9 , 3 2 5 , 490                                                     palaeolithic cultural systems 1 3 6 - 7
M u r d o c k , G . P. 6 2 , 1 0 6 , 1 0 7 , 1 0 8 , i 3 8 n , 268                parallel t r a j e c t o r y 3 2 2 , 3 2 3
                                                                                  parallel t r a n s f o r m a t i o n 3 2 3
Nagel, E. 474, 476                                                                pastoral n o m a d t e c h n o c o m p l e x 3 4 5 - 5 1 , 3 5 8 -
Needham, R. 37, I38n                                                                60, 3 6 1 - 2
negative feedback 47, i 4 7 n                                                     patrilineal b a n d 3 5 5 , 3 5 6
networks: cultural 2 5 3 , 2 7 0 ; feedback and 4 6 ;                             patterning: artefactual i 3 9 n ; assemblage 264,
  human groups 1 0 4 - 5 ; network                    linkage                       266; burial practices i 4 o n ; distortion factors
  4Ó2n; oscillation a n d 7 7 ; q u a n t i t y a f f e c t i n g                   4o8n
  r e g u l a t o r y potential 9 1 ; social 2 7 0 ; s y s t e m s                P e a c o c k , D . P. S . 4 o 6 n , 4 2 7 , 4 3 1
  as 56                                                                           perceived resources 1 1 5
N e u m a n n , J . v o n 67                                                      percepta 1 0 2 , n o , 1 5 3 , 200, 2 0 2 n - 2 0 3 n , 267,
n e u t r o n activation a n a l y s i s 4 0 5 n , 4 2 7 - 8                          4 6 8 , 469, 4 8 0 , 4 8 1
nodes 5 6 - 7                                                                     peripheral cultures 326
n o i s e : attributes as 1 5 ; c o n c e p t of 88, 4 9 2 ;                      p e r m e a b l e b a r r i e r s to d i f f u s i o n 4 2 6
    inessential v a r i a b l e s as 8 8 ; i n f o r m a t i o n a n d            phase pattern regularities 1 6 2 - 8 0 , 2 0 9 - 1 7 ,
    58, 88, 4 1 0 , 4 1 1 ; s e p a r a t e d f r o m i n f o r m a -               261-72, 305-15, 337-9
    tion in m o d e l s 3 1                                                       phenetic relationships 164,                        493;     see      also
nomads 3 4 5 - 5 1                                                                    affinity relationships
normal probability curves 165, 166, 167, 170,                                     Phillips, E. D. 347, 349
  1 7 1 , 1 7 6 , 1 7 8 , 466                                                     P h i l l i p s , P. 4 o n , 1 6 2 , 3 6 3
numerical taxonomy 23, 33, 460                                                    phytogenetic relationship 493
Nyerup, R. 8                                                                      p h y t o g e n y , c u l t u r a l 1 6 4 , 1 6 5 , 460
                                                                                  Piggott, S. 256, 4 3 1 , 432
Occam's Razor 7 9 - 8 1 , 475                                                     'Pleiades' method 474
occupational subcultures 2 5 3 - 5 , 2 6 i                                        Plog. F . I 4 3 n , I 4 4 n , I 4 5 n , I 4 6 n , I 4 8 n , 4 8 7 n
Olduvai Gorge 2 3 2 - 3 , 2 4 2 n - 2 4 4 n                                       p o l a r i z e d d i f f u s i o n 4 3 1 ; see also r e d i s t r i b u -
o n t o g e n y 68, 69, 99, 1 5 1 - 2 , i 8 o f f , 2 0 2 , 2 1 8 - 4 3               tive/directional t r a d e
    passim ; c u l t u r a l 2 7 2 - 9 7 passim ; c u l t u r e                   Polyani, K . 428
    g r o u p 3 1 8 - 2 4 ; d e f i n e d 4 9 2 ; entities 1 5 1 - 2 ,            polynomial function model 493
    4 1 4 , 4 1 7 ; essential v a r i a b l e s 99, 1 8 0 , 2 0 2 ;               p o l y t h e t i c g r o u p s : A m e r i c a n v i e w s of 4 m ;
    key v a r i a b l e s 1 8 0 , 2 0 2 , 2 4 0 ; m a t e r i a l c u l t u r e       attributes within artefacts 182, 183, 187,
    s y s t e m m o d e l 2 8 8 - 9 0 ; s y s t e m s 68, 69, 99,                     2 0 1 , 2 0 8 ; B a n t u entity 3 7 2 ; c u l t u r a l a s s e m -
    292; technocomplex 3 3 9 - 4 1 ; type 2 i 8 f f ,                                 blage systems 246, 249; culture g r o u p s 306,
    238-42                                                                            308, 309; defined 3 6 - 7 , 4 9 3 ; intersecting
operational v a r i a b l e s 4 7 2 - 3                                               sets 8 1 - 3 ; origin of c o n c e p t 4 m ; s y s t e m s
optical e m i s s i o n s p e c t r o s c o p y 4 0 5 n , 427—8                       t r a n s f o r m a t i o n 68, 6 9 ; t y p e o n t o g e n y 2 3 9 ,
o p t i m i z e r s t r a t e g i e s 94, 1 9 8 , 2 9 1 , 3 3 2 , 3 5 4               240
522         Index

polythetic model 3 5 - 7 , 206, 264, 266, 3 1 1 — 1 5 ,       rates of change 5 1 , 6 1 , 99, 285, 2 8 9 - 9 0
  338,412-16                                                  Rathje, W. L. I44n
population: arrangement 1 2 4 ; defined 493;                  reciprocity and redistribution 428, 443
  entity see entities;         fluctuations   277-8;          redistributive/directional trade 4 3 0 - 1 , 432
  growth      444-5;       movement      4620-463^,           R e d m a n , C. L . 487n
  pleistocene I 4 5 n ; resources and 4 4 4 - 5 ; size        redundant variety 89, 90, 9 1 , 1 1 4 , 1 1 5 , 129,
  regulation I 4 3 n - i 4 4 n                                   1 9 6 - 8 , 230, 2 3 7 . 286, 3 5 5 , 4 1 8 , 490, 494
positive feedback 47, i44n, 14611                             regression analysis 4o6n, 4 3 1 - 2 , 4 3 3 , 4 7 3 , 4 7 5 ;
post-coherent—'decline' trends 289-90                            defined 494
pottery 26, 4o6n, 4 5 5 - 6                                   regularities: as tests for real data 1 5 0 ; Black
preferential diffusion 4 1 9 , 442                               Box investigation 59; constraints and 2 1 - 2 ,
prestige chain exchange 4 2 9 - 3 1                              7 5 , 77. h i , 4 1 5 : contrived 4 6 6 - 8 ; cor-
Price, B. J . I39n                                               related 1 0 9 - 1 0 , 1 1 1 ; correlated constraint
primary diffusion 420, 4 2 1 , 422                               and 6 9 - 7 0 , 77, 1 0 7 , 1 0 9 ; defined 494; hypo-
probabilistic laws 470                                           thesis procedure 4 7 4 - 5 ; inherent 4 6 1 ;
probability: alternative hypotheses 4 7 6 ; pro-                 nature of 2 1 , 4 6 1 ; phase pattern (q.v.);
  positions 1 7 - 1 8 , 3 6 5 - 6 ; transition 6 3 - 6           search for 20, 1 5 0 ; social organization 109,
  passim, 76, 1 0 7 , 108                                         i 3 9 n ; system pattern (q.v.); systems tra-
procedure: disciplined 4 7 1 - 8 , 4 8 7 ^ , models              jectories 45, 6 9 - 7 0 , 7 7 ; time pattern (q.v.)
  32, 3 4 - 5 , 4 5 8 - 6 0 ; unilinear 4 7 2 - 3             regulation: cultural assemblage systems 262,
processes: defined 494; general processes                        3 3 3 : economic subsystem 1 1 6 , 1 1 7 ; goal-
  categories 4 1 7 ; hierarchy 4 1 9 - 2 0 , 46211;              seeking 5 1 - 2 ; population size I 4 3 n - i 4 4 n ;
  terminology 4 1 8                                              processes model 7 6 ; ritual and 1 4 m , 14211;
processes model 3 8 - 4 0 , 7 2 - 8 1 , 4 1 6 - 5 8 passim,      simple system 65, 7 1 ; subsystems 48. 5 2 - 3 ,
  461                                                            65, 74, 4 1 2 ; types as measure of 1 3 5 - 7 ;
productivity, agricultural 9 4 - 5 , 1 1 4 , 127                 variety and 5 3 - 4 , 90, 91
prototypical range 1 9 3 , 195                                Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. 14 m
prudential strategy see minimax strategy                      religious subsystem 102, 1 1 0 - 1 2 , I 4 0 n - i 4 3 n ,
psychological field space 1 1 3                                  286, 298n
psychological subsystem 102, 1 0 3 , 1 1 2 - 1 4 , 286        relocation diffusion 426
Puche, S . 83                                                 R e n f r e w , C. 102, I39n. 14611, I47n, 4 2 8 - 3 1
                                                                 passim, 435
qualitative change and oscillation: cultural                  residence groups i 3 9 n - i 4 o n
  assemblage system as a structured system                    residues method 475
  272, 2 7 8 - 8 3 ; cultural group system as a               resources: annual rota 344; exploitation 1 1 4 -
  structured system 3 1 6 , 3 1 7 - 1 8 ; entity                  16, 3 4 3 - 5 . 3 5 2 , 3 5 4 ; perceived 1 1 5 ; popu-
  system as a structured system 1 5 2 , 4 1 4 ;                  lation and 4 4 4 - 5 ; resource use schedule
  technocomplex system as a structured                            1 2 4 ; unexploited 1 1 4
  system 3 3 9 ; type system 224ft, 236, 237,                 responses see transformation(s)
  289-90                                                      reversion 9 9 - 1 0 0 , 105
qualitative multistate attributes 1 5 7 , 174                 Reynolds, R. G . I). 14511
quantitative change and oscillation i ; i , 1 5 2 ,           Richardson, J . B. 6 1 , 1 3 9 m 1 9 1 , 192
  276-8,      288-90,        316.          339,    414;       Riemann, G. F. B. 33
  attribute/artefact changes 1 8 2 - 9 1 ,         236;       Riley, T . J . 4 8 7 n
  number of type families in technocomplex                    rituals 1 0 2 , i i o . 1 1 2 , 1 4 1 1 1 - 1 4 2 1 1
  3 3 9 ; number of types 2 7 2 - 6 , 288-90, 3 1 6 ;         Roe. D. A . 1 5 6 . 168
  type population 2 1 7 - 2 1 , 2 2 3 - 4 , 236, 288-90       Roper, D. C. 455. 456. 4 5 7 - 8
quantitative multistate attributes 1 5 7                      route networks 442
                                                              R o w e , J . II. 425
radial contour theory 2 6 3 - 5                               Rowlands, M. J . 2 5 5 , 2970
radial model, culture group distribution 3 1 3 -              R u d n e r , R. S . 487n
  14
random walks 4 4 2 - 3 , 444, 446                             Sackett, J . R. 149, 158. 159
randomized strategy 93, 94. 95. 198                           sacrifices 14111. I42n
range expansion, contraction, drift, budding                  Sahlins. M . D. 427, 428
  and migration 4Ö2n                                          sampling 167--8, 458, 459, 46311
Rappaport, R. A. 39, 14011, 1 4 m , 14211                     Sanders. \V. T . 13911
                                                                                        Index          523

satisficer strategies 94-6, 1 1 4 , 1 1 9 , 198, 291,   social structure 106-10 passim-, burial prac-
   332. 34S                                                tices and I40n
saturating diffusion see acculturation                  social subcultures 255-6, 261
Saxe, A. A.. i4on                                       social subsystem 102, 1 0 3 - 1 0 ; equivocation
scanning 52, 93, 130                                       105; nature of 1 0 3 - 5 ; oscillation in 105;
Schiffer, M. B. 4011, 14511, 40811                         structural sub-types 106-7, 108, i38n
Schild, R., 335                                         sociocultural programming 483
Schwerdtfeger, F. W. 463 n                              sociocultural systems: collapse of 98-9;
scientific laws 468                                       configuration categories 355-6; defined 42,
Scollar, I. 3 1 3                                         84, 494; elements as forms of information
Scythian climax system 349-50                              100; environment and 1 3 3 - 5 , 332-3 ; inter-
seasonal variation 405n                                   change 354-6; 'memories' 1 1 2 ,            130;
secondary diffusion 420, 4 2 1 - 2                        messages 86, 89; model of change 242n-
sedentism I44n                                            244n; nature of 85-8, 369; role of individual
segregation i44n, I46n, 29811                             96-7; see also assemblages, cultural assem-
self-regulation see regulation                            blage systems, culture, material culture,
Selznick, P. 282                                          systems
semantics 469, 481, 484-5, 486, 494                     socioeconomic level 138
semi-Markovian system 64-6, 74, 106, I38n,              Soja, E. W. 407n
   3 3 i . 461                                           Sokal, R. R. 23, 36, 157, 164, 216, 270, 2 7 1 ,
sequences see trajectories                                 492. 493
Service, E. R. 103, i39n                                 Sommerhoff, G. 58, 153, 155
sets: ambiguity and 27-9; boundaries of                  Spaulding, A. C. 4 m
   55; constrained 7 0 - 1 , 77; defined 494; inter-    specialist subcultures 254, 261
   secting 8 1 - 3 ; Lmearbandkeramik 446, 447,         specific analysis 32, 34-5, 458, 459
   448                                                  specific attributes 13, 14, 15, 156
settlement 124, 352; patterns 128-9, '46n,              Spoehr, A. 221
   4o6n, 440-2, 443-9; Polynesia 440-9, 450-            stable equilibrium 48, 68, 70, 76, 129
    1 ; pre-classic settlements I45n; residence         stable region 5 0 - 1 , 55, 75
   and descent groups I39n-I40n                         standard deviation 187-90 passim
Severn/Cotswold tombs 28-9                              standard distribution curves 467
sex: male/female role allocation 343, 350-1,            Stanislawski, M. B. Mon
   356; subcultures 256-8, 261                          staples 344-7 passim, 349, 351, 352, 353, 356.
Shackleton, N. 431                                         360
Shawcross, W. 223                                       state (community): configuration 355; evolu-
Shennan, S. 257                                            tion I44n,298n
Sherratt, A. G. 462n                                    state (value), defined 494
'shotgun' method 474                                    statistical equilibrium 50
Simon. H. A. 94                                         steady state equilibrium 49
simulation i4Sn-i46n, 438-49; see also                  Steiger, W. L. i47n, 203n, 204n
   models                                               Stevens, S. S. 84
site-catchment analysis 125, 126-7                      Steward, J . H. 62, 90, 107, 109, 138, I45n,
site location strategies 124-9; criticisms of              256. 291, 338. 343, 354, 355, 419, 484
    125, 1 2 7 - 8 ; multiple occupation and            Stickel, E. G. 4 87n
   functions 4 6 3 ^ non-subsistence factors            Stiles, D. 12
    128; specific location and resources 127-8          stimulus diffusion 420
skewness 163, 165-70 passim, 178, 187, 188,             stochastic sequence 52, 59, 63
   466, 467                                             stochastic simulation models i46n, 438-49
Smith, I. F. 26                                         stone industries 136-7
Sneath, P. H. A. 23, 36, 157, 164, 214, 216,            strategy: blending (q.v.); climax, (q.v.); game
   270, 271, 492, 493                                      theory 94-6, 1 1 7 - 2 1 passim-, minimax
social confederations 303-4                                (q.v.); mixed (q.v.).
social diffusion 106, 270                               stratigraphy 4on
social models 269-72                                    subcultural kits see type complexes
social networks 270                                     subcultural segmentation 258
social organization 109, !39n-i4on, 342, 350,           subcultures: activity 254; aristocratic 255-6;
   368, 372; model i39n                                    defined 250, 494; ethnic 2 5 1 - 2 , 2 6 1 , 320;
524        Index
subcultures—continued                                            t a x o n o m y : as archaeological activity 1 2 - 1 3 ;
  identified with tribal subdivision                374;              numerical 23, 3 3 , 460
  intrusion/insertion 4 1 9 ; intrusion/substitu-                T a y l o r , W. W. 4on
  tion 4 1 9 ; occupational 2 5 3 - 5 , 2 6 1 ; regional         technocomplex: A m e r i c a n Indian 3 8 5 ; Bantu
  (q.v.); role of 2 5 0 - 6 1 ; varieties of 251                      3 7 2 ; basin 3 3 0 - 1 , 3 3 9 , 3 4 0 ; categories 3 4 1 -
subsistence organization strategies 1 1 7 - 2 4 ,                     5 4 ; defined 4 9 5 ; d i f f u s i o n and 340; dis-
    MS". 4051                                                         tribution areas 3 3 8 - 9 ; ethnology and 370,
'substantivist' economic anthropology 428                             3 7 2 , 3 8 5 ; examples 3 3 3 - 7 ; gain 3 3 3 ; nature
subsystems 39, 42, 1 0 1 - 3 1 ; arbitrary choice of                  of 206, 3 2 8 - 3 0 ; ontogeny 3 3 9 - 4 1 ; « p a t -
    1 0 1 - 2 ; cultural assemblage 286; dynamic                      terning         419;    system         330-62      passim-,
    equilibrium 1 0 3 , 1 0 4 ; economic (q.v.);                     Tardenoisian 3 3 1 - 2
    environmental            133-5;     feedback      46-7;      terminal state 6 9 - 7 0
    general postulates and 1 5 0 ; material culture              terminology 2 3 - 3 0 , 3 5 7 , 3 7 0 , 4 1 6 ; ambiguity
    (q.v.); oscillation and 7 7 ; psychological                      2 7 - 3 0 , 2 4 7 - 9 , 2 9 9 - 3 0 0 , 328, 3 3 2 ; non-
    (q.v.); regulating 48, 5 2 - 3 . 65. 74, 4 1 2 ;                specific generalizations 1 7 - 1 8 , 2 7 ; processes
    religious (q.v.); social (q.v.)                                 4 1 8 ; value judgements 2 6 - 7
subtypes 2 1 3 , 2 1 5 - 1 7 passim, 238, 426, 494               T e r r e l l , J . 375
 Sullivan, M. E . 1 2 8                                          T h o m a s , D. H. 4 m , 1 1 5 , i 4 5 n , 178, 203n,
 supra-cultural metal trade 248, 2 9 7 n - 2 9 8 n                  243",484
 supra-entity 235                                                T h o m p s o n , R . H. 4Ô2n
 symbiosis 268, 349, 3 5 7 - 6 1 passim                          T h o m s e n , C. 8 - 1 0 , 22, 30, 40n, 4 1 2
 symbolic calculus 485                                           T h o m s o n , D . F. 405^
 symbolic logic 484                                              Thorlacius, S. 8
 symbolic models 32, 33, 35, 459, 482                            three ages system 4 - 1 0 passim, 22, 3 0 - 1 , 329,
 syntactics 469, 4 8 1 - 2 , 4 8 5 - 6 , 495                         3 3 1 . 4>2
 synthesizing principles 20, 2 1 - 2                             three level debate 9 3 - 4 , 1 1 3
 system pattern regularities: attributes within                  thresholds; 'birth/death' trends 2 8 8 - 9 ; con-
    artefacts 1 9 5 - 2 0 2 ; cultural        assemblage            strained sets as 7 0 ; cumulative effect and 49,
    system 2 8 5 - 7 ; culture groups 3 2 4 - 6 ; key               6 8 - 9 , 76, 7 8 - 8 1       passim,   105-6,     287;
     variables 2 3 8 ; technocomplex system 3 5 4 -                  'death/birth' trends 2 9 0 ; definition of 2 0 1 - 2 ,
    6 2 ; type system 2 3 7 - 4 2                                    2 3 8 ; differentiating culture states 2 8 5 ;
 systems: as networks 56; behaviour (q.v.);                          differentiating transform cultures                285;
     cascading I 4 5 n ; circuits (q.v.); classification             nature of 49; survival of information
     problem 44; common properties 4 5 f f ;                         systems 9 1 ; systems transformation 6 8 - 9 ;
     complex (q.v.); coupled (q.v.); cultures as                     technocomplex 3 4 0 - 1 ; type ontogeny 2 3 9 -
     1 0 1 - 3 1 ; defined 43, 4 9 5 ; described 4 3 - 4 ;           4°
     determinate (q.v.); environment as system                   T h i i n e n , von 1 2 5
     1 3 2 - 8 ; independent 54, 56, 282, 2 8 3 ;                time lag and lead 92
     insulation from environment 5 3 - 4 , 90, 9 1 ,             time pattern regularities 1 8 0 - 9 5 , 2 1 7 - 3 7 , 2 7 2 -
     1 3 5 , 3 3 2 - 3 , 409; isomorphic see iso-                    97. 3 1 5 - 2 4 . 3 3 9 - 5 4
     morphism; model 39-40, 1 9 6 ; ontogeny 68,                  time-trajectories: cultural assemblage systems
     69, 99, 2 9 2 ; simple 6 2 - 7 2 passim; simul-                 52, 162, 2 7 8 - 8 3 passim, 2 8 3 - 4 , 285, 3 2 5 ,
     taneous membership of multiple systems                          340; culture groups 3 1 5 , 3 1 6 , 3 1 7 ; models
      56; synergy in 4 6 - 7 , 56, 60, 1 0 1 , 1 5 0 ; tech-         7 3 , 74, 1 8 9 - 9 1 , 2 2 8 - 3 1 ; supra-entity 2 3 5 ;
      nocomplex (q.v.); see also assemblages,                        technocomplex 339, 3 4 0 ; type population
     cultural          assemblage     systems,     culture,          52, 162. 1 6 3 , 182, 1 8 3 . 184, 187, 1 9 1 - 5
      material culture, sociocultural systems                        passim, 2 1 8 , 224, 236, 2 3 9 , 2 4 1 . 242n
  systems theory 38, I 4 3 n - i 4 8 n ; approach to              tolerative interchange 3 5 7 - 6 1 passim
      explanation I 4 6 n ; burial data and i 4 0 n ;             tools classifications 2030
      outline of 4 2 - 7 2 ; reception in America and             total scrutiny method 474
      Britain 1 4 2 1 1 - 1 4 3 0 ; source of concepts            T o w n s e n d , A . H. 48711
      I 4 3 n - i 4 4 n ; source of models I 4 4 n - i 4 6 n ;    trade 420, 427, 4 2 8 - 3 5 , 443
      source of propositions/principles                n6n;       traits 3 7 4 - 5 , 4070, 4o8n, 4Ô2n
      theory of archaeology I43n                                  trajectories: cultural assemblage systems 44,
                                                                     45, 63, 64, 68, 69, 70, 7 4 - 7 passim. 2 8 1 - 3 ,
 T a i n k e r , J . A . i 4 o n , i46n                               3 3 1 ; culture groups 3 0 4 - 5 , 3 1 8 - 2 4 passim ;
 Tardenoisian technocomplex 3 3 1 - 2                                 definition 43, 4 9 5 ; directive correlation
                                                                                                                                     Index                525
trajectories—continued                                                              type(s)—continued
     (q.v.); divergent 3 1 8 - 2 3 ; economic subsys-                                  c h a n g e a n d oscillation 2 2 4 f f , 2 3 6 , 2 3 7 , 2 8 9 -
     t e m 1 1 7 ; g a m e t h e o r y 6 7 - 7 0 passim,                    72;        9 0 ; q u a n t i t a t i v e c h a n g e a n d oscillation in
     o s c i l l a t i n g 6 8 ; parallel 3 2 2 , 3 2 3 ; p r e v i o u s              n u m b e r s of 2 7 2 - 6 , 2 8 8 - 9 0 , 3 1 6 ; q u a n t i t a -
     64, 6 5 , 66, 88, 89, 1 5 2 , 3 2 5 , 4 1 4 ; p r o c e s s e s                   tive c h a n g e a n d oscillation in p o p u l a t i o n of
     m o d e l 7 4 - 7 passim; r e g u l a r i t i e s in 4 5 , 6 9 -                  2 1 7 - 2 1 , 2 2 3 - 4 , 2 3 6 , 2 2 8 - 9 0 ; 'real' 2 0 3 n ;
     7 0 , 7 7 ; social s u b s y s t e m 1 0 6 - 8                  passim;           relationship categories 2 2 8 ; socioeconomic
     t e c h n o c o m p l e x 3 3 1 , 3 4 7 ; t e r m i n a t i o n of                level 1 3 8 ; s p e c i f i c 2 1 3 , 2 1 5 , 2 1 7 , 3 0 6 , 3 0 9 ,
     c u l t u r a l s y s t e m t r a j e c t o r y 2 8 1 - 3 ; time-                 3 1 9 , 3 6 7 - 8 , 3 6 9 ; ' s t r e n g t h ' of s y s t e m 2 3 2 ;
      ( q . v . ) ; transition p r o b a b i l i t i e s a n d 64                      s y s t e m p a t t e r n r e g u l a r i t i e s 2 3 7 - 4 2 ; tech-
t r a n s f o r m c u l t u r e s 2 7 9 - 8 0 , 2 8 2 , 2 8 5 , 3 1 9 , 495            n o c o m p l e x s y s t e m of f a m i l i e s 3 3 8 ; t e r m i n a -
t r a n s f o r m t y p e s 2 2 8 , 2 2 9 , 2 3 2 , 2 3 6 , 495                        tion of s y s t e m 2 3 0 , 2 4 1 , 2 8 3 ; t i m e p a t t e r n
transformation(s): closed 62, 6 3 ; continuity                                         regularities             180-95,         217-37;          transform
     and 45, 62, 63, 74, 7 5 ; convergent, divergent                                   (q.v.); two cultures compared 9 0 - 1 ; usage
      a n d parallel 3 2 3 ; d e f i n e d 4 3 - 4 , 4 9 5 ; g a m e                   p a t t e r n s 2 0 7 ; use of the t e r m 2 1 4 - 1 5 ; vari-
      t h e o r y 6 7 - 7 2 passim;                   many-valued           63;        a n c e of a t t r i b u t e s w i t h i n p o p u l a t i o n 2 7 8 ;
      m a t r i x 6 2 - 7 , 69, 7 4 , 1 0 6 , 2 3 8 ; p r o c e s s e s                v a r i a t i o n in a t t r i b u t e s 3 7 , 1 5 7 - 6 0      passim,
      m o d e l 7 6 ; s i m p l e s y s t e m 6 2 - 6 ; single-                        1 6 5 - 8 0 passim
      v a l u e d 6 2 - 3 ; type s y s t e m t e r m i n a t i o n 2 3 0 ;
      see also q u a l i t a t i v e c h a n g e a n d oscillation,                 U c k o , P. J . i 4 o n
      q u a n t i t a t i v e c h a n g e and oscillation                           unilinear procedure 4 7 2 - 3
transient c u l t u r e g r o u p s 3 2 0 , 3 2 1                                   u n i m o d a l p a t t e r n s 1 6 3 , 1 6 5 - 7 0 passim,              178,
transition 6 3 - 6 passim, 7 6 , 1 0 7 , 1 0 8 , 495                                    1 8 7 , 1 8 8 , 466, 467
T R B culture g r o u p 3 1 5 , 3 2 1 - 2 , 403                                     unit r e o r i e n t a t i o n 4 6 2 n
trend s u r f a c e a n a l y s i s 4 o 6 n , 4 3 8 , 4 5 1 - 8                     u n s t a b l e e q u i l i b r i u m 48
t r e n d ( s ) ; d e f i n e d 4 9 5 ; material c u l t u r e onto-                Urnfield culture group 396-9, 4 0 2 - 4
      g e n y 2 8 7 - 9 0 ; m o d e l s 449, 4 5 1 - 8
t r i b e s : A m e r i c a n I n d i a n 3 7 4 - 7 passim, 3 8 0 - 9 4             variables: continuous 1 5 8 ; defined 496; essen-
      passim ; as social units 3 6 9 ; B a n t u 3 7 2 , 3 7 4 ;                        tial ( q . v . ) ; inessential ( q . v . ) ; key ( q . v . )
      c h a r a c t e r 1 1 3 ; f l u c t u a t i o n s in tribal p a t t e r n s   v a r i a n c e : d e f i n e d 4 9 6 ; of a t t r i b u t e s in t y p e
      1 0 5 - 6 ; interaction 4 0 7 n ; spatial limits 4 o 8 n ;                        populations 278
      s u b d i v i s i o n s identified w i t h s u b c u l t u r e s              v a r i a t i o n : of a t t r i b u t e s w i t h i n a r t e f a c t s 3 7 ,
      3 7 4 ; Urnfield culture g r o u p 399, 402, 403,                                  1 5 7 - 6 0 passim,             1 6 5 - 8 0 passim\         o n e attri-
      404                                                                               bute/one type population 1 6 5 - 7 4                              passim;
T r i g g e r , B. G . 1 3 2 , 4 6 3 n                                                  one attribute/several type populations 1 7 7 ;
Tringham, R. i39n, 332                                                                  seasonal 4 0 5 n ; several a t t r i b u t e s / o n e t y p e
Tuggle, H. D. 487n                                                                      population 1 7 6 - 7 ; several attributes/several
Tustin, A. 1 1 6                                                                        type populations 1 7 7 - 8
t y p e ( s ) : ' a g g r e g a t e ' of 2 4 5 - 6 ; A m e r i c a n I n d i a n    v a r i e t y : a l t e r n a t i v e 8 9 - 9 2 passim,           105, 114,
     3 7 7 . 3 7 8 , 3 8 0 - 9 4 passim;               as m e a s u r e of               1 1 5 , 1 2 9 , 1 9 6 - 8 , 230, 237, 286, 355, 4 1 8 ,
    insulation 1 3 5 ; c o m p a r i s o n of r a n k 2 1 6 ;                           489, 4 9 0 ; c a t e g o r i e s of 4 1 4 - 1 5 ; c o n t r a d i c -
    complexes 250, 2 5 1 , 252, 258, 2 6 1 , 279, 284,                                  tive 1 1 4 , 1 1 5 , 1 2 9 , 1 3 1 , 1 9 6 - 8 , 2 0 0 , 2 3 7 ,
     330, 3 5 5 , 484, 496; concepts 203n, 207, 208;                                     2 8 6 - 7 , 3 3 3 , 3 5 4 , 3 5 5 , 4 1 8 , 489, 490, 4 9 1 ;
     d e f i n e d b y a t t r i b u t e s and their r a n g e s 1 5 3 ,                cultural assemblages 2 5 0 ; culture g r o u p s
     2 0 0 ; d e f i n i t i o n s 3 5 , 206, 2 0 8 - 9 , 496*, direc-                   3 2 5 ; defined 4 9 6 ; economic strategies 1 1 5 ;
     tive correlation ( q . v . ) ; d y n a m i c s y s t e m 2 2 5 -                    fluctuations           in 4 1 7 - 1 8 ; g o a l - s e e k i n g 5 1 , 5 2 ;
     30 passim ; essential ( q . v . ) ; essential f a m i l i e s                       in i n f o r m a t i o n 8 9 - 9 3 passim, 1 1 2 , 1 1 3 ; n e w
     3 3 8 , 3 3 9 . 3 4 0 " 1 ; g r o u p 2 1 5 - 1 7 passim, 4 9 6 ;                   see g a i n ; noise as 4 9 2 ; r e d u n d a n t 89, 90, 9 1 ,
     i n d e p e n d e n t 2 2 8 , 2 3 6 , 4 9 2 ; inessential 2 6 2 ,                    1 1 4 , 1 1 5 , 129, 1 9 6 - 8 , 230, 2 3 7 , 286, 3 5 5 ,
     2 8 1 , 2 8 5 , 3 0 7 , 3 1 8 ; inessential f a m i l i e s 3 3 8 ;                 4 1 8 , 490, 4 9 4 ; r e g u l a t i o n a n d 5 3 - 4 , 90, 9 1 ;
     key ( q . v . ) ; key f a m i l i e s 3 3 8 , 3 3 9 , 3 4 1 ; lack of               technocomplex 340
     a n a l y s e s 2 0 9 ; material c u l t u r e s u b s y s t e m               vectors: defined 496; diffusing elements and
     1 2 9 , 1 3 0 , 1 3 1 ; multistate ( q . v . ) ; n e w t y p e                      4 2 2 ; incompletely observed system                                  61;
     2 3 4 - 6 , 3 2 3 ; not ' c u l t u r a l l y - b o u n d ' 4 o 6 n ;               M a r k o v i a n t r e a t m e n t of states as 6 4 - 5 ; n o d e
     ontogeny 2 i 8 f f , 2 3 8 - 4 2 ; phase pattern                                    as s y s t e m s v e c t o r 56
     regularities (q.v.); population 1 3 0 , 2 3 8 ;                                Venn diagrams 8 2 - 3
     p r o b l e m s of definition 2 0 5 - 6 ; q u a l i t a t i v e                 Vertes, L . 1 6 7 , 1 7 0
526       Index

Vita-Finzi, C . 1 1 5                       Wissler, C. 263, 264, 268, 4 0 1 , 420
Voegelin, E. W. 394                         Wobst, H. M. i 4 5 n
                                            Wolpert, J. 94, 1 1 4
Ward, R. D. 446, 450                        Wood, J. J. I47n
Washburn, D. K . 1 1 6                      W o r m , O. 7
Watson, P. J . 16, 4870                     Worsaae, J. J. A 10
Wauchope, R . 275                           Wrigley. E. A. 353
W e b b , C . H. 222                        W y n n e - E d w a r d s , V. C. 18, I43n
W e b b . J . 446, 450
Whallon, R . 4 m , i 3 9 n , 483            Y a d i n , Y . 129, 349
Whitaker, I 361                             Yuill, R. S. 440
White. J . P. 1 7 8 , 203n. 243n, 484
White, L. i 4 2 n , i48n                    Zarky, A. 1 2 7
Wiener, N. 42                               Z i p f ' s principle 477
Willey, G. R. 4on, 162, 3 3 5 , 363, 462n   Z u b r o w , E. B. \V. i46n, 4 4 4 - 6
