===== PAGE 55 (index-58_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

communities are known, after their favoured burial mode, as the Catacomb
culture.

Inthe eastern hinterland, roughly centred on the middle stretches of the Vol-
ga River, another semi-nomadic group developed, adopting a different burial
rite, a wooden cabin-like grave set in a pit beneath a barrow mound. These
burials typified the Timber Grave culture. The archacological evidence suggests
that the Timber Grave culture expanded westwards during the carly centuries
of the first millennium, eventually taking over much of the Pontic Steppe
region previously occupied by the Catacomb culture. The Histories of Herod-
otus written in the carly fifth century gc describe a group known as the Cim-
merians who originally occupied the northern shores of the Black Sea and were
ousted by Scythians coming from the east. It is tempting to relate the Cim-
merians with the archacologically defined Catacomb culture and the Scythians
with the Timber Grave culture, though the exact chronology of the events, or
whether it was as simple as the literary account suggests, remains unclear. Some
additional support for the turbulent nature of the times is given in Assyrian
tablets which refer to both the Cimmerians and Scythians as hordes of warlike
horsemen serving as mercenaries in the conflicts played out in Asia Minor in
the eighth and seventh centuries.

From the point of view of our present concerns, what is of particular interest
is that there should be evidence of unrest and folk movement among the horse
riders of the Pontic Steppe, building to a peak in the eighth century when some
moved south-cast into Asia Minor. Given the geography of the region and the
fact that the western shores of the Black Sea, including the Lower Danube
region, are really an extension of the Pontic Steppe, it is not unreasonable to
suggest, as many archacologists have done, that there was a parallel movement
of Cimmerians eastwards along the Danube into central Europe, It is a sugges-
tion to which we shall return,

The western fringe of Europe, facing the Atlantic, was altogether different.
Here in a broad arc, stretching from Scotland to south-western Iberia, the
maritime communities were linked in a complex of exchange networks proba-
bly stretching back in time at least to the Neolithic period. By the Bronze Age
metals were among the more important commodities shipped, copper from
Ireland, Wales, and western Iberia, tin from Cornwall, Brittany, and Galicia,
and gold from Ireland, Wales, and north-western Iberia. This metal-rich arc
will have provided much of the bronze and gold circulating in western Europe,
and the enhanced consumption of metal in the Aegean may well have provided
amarket eager for gold and tin from the Atlantic zone. With the collapse of the
Mycenacan-Minoan centre, demand would have slackened, but there is ample
evidence for a still-vigorous zone of contact along the sea-ways. In so far as the
archaeological evidence allows us to estimate, there seems to have been an
intensification of activity in the eighth century, occasioned, as we will suggest,
by developing Phoenician interests in the south-west of Iberia.

In the heart of Europe, stretching from eastern France to Hungary and from

42


===== PAGE 56 (index-59_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

northern Italy to Poland, in the period from about 1300 to 700 8¢, there devel-
oped a considerable degree of cultural uniformity indicative of convergent
development. The period is called the Urnfield period and the broadly defined
culture which it represents shares the name (Map 1). The characteristic which
serves to give the impression of uniformity is the burial rite, which, as the cul-
tural name implies, involves the burial of the cremated remains of the dead in
cinerary urns in well-defined cemeteries. In addition to this the varied array of
cast and beaten bronze-work, normally personal ornaments, tools, and
weapons, shares considerable stylistic similarities over large areas.

Within the broad zone exhibiting these generalized characteristics it is possi-
ble to define regional groupings, and within each subregions can be recognized,
usually on the basis of decorative styles of pottery. Many of the groupings which
first appear at this time retain a degree of identity throughout the Urnfield peri-
odand into the Hallstatt Iron Age which follows. In other words, the social and
economic processes which can first be detected in the period 1300-1000 BC over
much of central Europe create a structure which is largely maintained over the
next half millennium or so, by which time Greek historians have identified
*Celts” as living within this region.

The origin and development of the Urnficld cultural continuum is a much
debated issue. It is probably best to see within the Transalpine core zonean ini-
tial phase of development in the period 1300-1150 B¢, responding to the dis-
locations and reorderings occasioned by the decline and collapse of the
Mycenacan-Minoan world. To what extent the communities of the castern
part of this zone, centred in what is now the territory of Hungary, played an
active role in the events across the Balkan mountains to the south is an impor-
tant but still ill-focused issue. Some similar weapon and armour types are
found in both regions, while alien pottery forms from Bulgaria and the Troad
are highly reminiscent of vessels more normally found further north. Another
observation of some significance is that the long-established tell settlements in
the Middie and Lower Danube region were widely abandoned during this for-
mative period when an entirely new settiement pattern emerged. The evidence
as it comes down to us in its fragmentary form suggests a phase of disruption
and upheaval in the Middle and Lower Danube which must, in some way, be
related to events in the Aegean. To what extent folk movement was involved,
and in what direction populations may have moved, are questions at present
beyond the limits of reasonable conjecture.

Urnfield developments in the Hungarian region preceded those in the
Alpine zone to the west and may indeed have helped to exacerbate changes
amongindigenous groups already setin train as a result of the breakdown of the
older trade routes which had developed to serve the consumer needs of the
Acgean. In this zone there is no direct evidence of major disruption but rather
an internal development linked to an intensification of contact southwards
through the Alps to the Po Valley and beyond, across the Apennines, deep into
peninsular Italy. By 1000 sc Italy, the Alps, and Transalpine Europe from east-

43


===== PAGE 57 (index-60_1.jpg) =====
30 The Late Bronze Age
fortified settlement of
Wittnaver Hom, Aargau,
Switzerland. The site occu-
pieda ridge-end protected
by a massive rampart. The
houses inside were arranged
in a regular fashion around a
central open area.

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

0 %0 100 Meves
ern France to Slovakia were closely interlinked, as similarities in material cul-
ture vividly demonstrate.

Within the Alpine and Transalpine zone of the Urnfield culture the evidence
suggests a degree of social and economic stability. In such conditions it is pos-
sible to understand something of the changes which begin to take place. In sev-
eral areas there appears to have been a marked rise in population, with the
appearance of new settlements closely spaced in an increasingly farmed land-
scape. In parallel with this, copper production intensified, particularly in the
castern Alpine metal-rich zone. Hill forts, quite often spurs cut off by massive
timber-laced ramparts, were constructed in some number, indicating that the
coercive power of some sector of the population was now able to command
surplus labour to aggrandize or protect a chosen settlement. That this power
may have been that of a leading individual or lineage is suggested by the occur-
rence of certain burials more elaborately furnished than others and, in particu-
lar, by the appearance of horse trappings representing the riding horse or
horse-drawn vehicle of the warrior or aristocrat.

The Foundation of the New Order: 800-650 BC

The cighth century sc was a formative period in the history of Europe: in the
Mediterranean it saw the beginnings of the Greek colonial adventure and the
development of the far-flung Phoenician trading system, while in barbarian

44


===== PAGE 58 (index-61_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

Europe the infiltration of Pontic Steppe communities into the Great Hun-
garian Plain made the horse even more readily available to the emerging Hall-
statt aristocracy of central and western Europe. These various threads need to
be explored, for together they provide the essential basis for developments
throughout the rest of the millennium.

Towards the beginning of the century the two lonian city-states of Chalcis
and Eretria on the island of Euboea, at first together and later separately, began
tosail through the Straits of Messina to explore the resources of the coasts of the
Tyrrhenian Sea between the Halian peninsula and the islands of Corsica and
Sardinia (Map 6). In doing so they were echoing journeys made centuries
before by travellers from the Mycenaean world. Among the attractions they
discovered were the rich metal resources of Etruria and the adjacent island of
Elba. By about 770 nc they had founded a colonial settlement at Pithecusae on
theisland of Iscia in the Bay of Naples, admirably sited as a forward post to trade
with the Etruscan metal producers. A little later a new establishment was set up
on the nearby mainland coast at Cumae,

From these early beginnings followed the rapid colonization of Mezzogiorno
and Sicily. Zancle (Messina) was founded on the north-castern extremity of
Sicily, with Rhegion (Reggio) on the opposite Italian coast. Naxos was estab-
lished further down the coast. Soon other Greek city-states joined in. Rhodes
may have been early on the scene, while Megara founded an establishment at
Megara Hyblaca in the mid-cighth century south of Naxos. The primary colo-
nization of the cast coast of Sicily was completed by the Corinthian foundation
of Syracuse, traditionally in 733 sc. In the following two centuries many more
Greek colonies claimed intervening territories, until the region could justify its
name of Magna Graecia.

The establishment of a Greek presence just beyond the southern fringe of
Etruscan territory provided a significant stimulus to the development of
Etruscan culture, but it would be wrong to assume that the colonists were the
sole contact. A more likely scenario is that the foundation of the Greek colonies
encouraged maritime trade to develop rapidly, providing a framework of safe
havens to allow sailors and merchants from many countries to explore and to
trade. In this way Corinth was able to play a significant part in introducing
Greek culture to the Etruscan aristocracy, and in the seventh century, accord-
ing to Pliny, Corinthian artists were well established in Etruria. Along with the
Greek merchants would have come others, including Phoenicians, bringing a
range of exotic goods and ideas from the east Mediterranean in return for iron,
copper,and silver from Elbaand the Colline Metallifere just north of Populonia
and Vetulonia.

The appearance of a range of luxury goods added a stimulus to social devel-
opment in the late Villanovan culture of Etruria. Cities began to grow, provid-
ing an opportunity for the aristocracy to manipulate the newly available
prestige goods and thus to consolidate and enhance the status of themselves
and their lincages. Towards the end of the eighth century sc these ‘orientaliz-

45


===== PAGE 59 (index-62_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

ing' influences were well underway in Etruria. The coastal cities, growing com-
mercially stronger every minute, began to develop maritime interests of their
own, which, in the seventh century, were to expand through the Tyrrhenian Sea
and westwards to the coasts of Gaul and Iberia.

In parallel with the expansion of Greek influence in the western Mediter-
ranean and the rising power of the Etruscans, the Phoenicians of the Levant
were rapidly establishing their own trading enclaves as far west as the Atlantic
(Map 7). Traditionally Phoenicians had already founded a port-of-trade on the
Atlantic island of Cidiz, just off the coast of Andalucia, in 1104 sc. Another
intermediate port was established at Utica on the northern coast of Tunisia at
about the same time and served as a primary port of call until Carthage was set-
tled nearby in 814-13. If these traditional dates are to be believed, little time
elapsed between the end of Mycenacan involvement in the west and the begin-
ning of Phoenician. There are, however, uncertainties about the historical
dates, since there is as yet little reliable archacological evidence to suggest a
Phoenician presence much before the eighth century, though an early Phoen-
ician inscription found at Nora on Sardinia has been dated to the mid-ninth
century by some authorities. Lack of archacological evidence cannot, of course,
be taken as proof of the absence of early Phoenician enterprise in these regions.

Whatever the origin of Phoenician penetration in the west, it is abundantly
clear that the eighth century saw a consolidation of the sea routes, via Tunisia,
western Sicily, and Sardinia to southern Andalucia and Cidiz (Phoenician
Gadir) and a dramatic intensification of trade with the west. The main attrac-
tion appears to have been metals and in particular silver produced in huge
quantity from the metal-rich pyrite zone of the Rio Tinto and Sierra Morena.
This region—the kingdom of Tartessos—developed close links with the
Phoenicians at Cidiz, and the amount of silver exported from there became
legendary. In return, castern goods and craft skills became available to the
Tartessian aristocracy, and Tartessian culture, like that of Etruria, experienced
a rapid phase of ‘orientalization’, most readily apparent in the luxury goods
found in the graves of the local aristocracy in the eighth and seventh centuries.

While the port at Cidiz was admirably sited to exploit Tartessian resources,
by virtue of its Atlantic position it was also able to tap into long-established
Atlantic trade routes along which gold, copper, and, most important, tin were
transported. Phoenician exploitation of these sea-ways, northwards along the
Iberian coast and southwards along the Atlantic shores of Morocco, was to
develop in later centuries, but by building the trading node at Cadiz in the
cighth century the Phoenicians created a new interface between the Mediter-
rancan and Atlantic systems, The effect was to intensify activity along the Atlan-
tic sea-ways in the final stages of the indigenous Bronze Age.

Turning now to the eastern approaches to Europe, we saw how the semi-
nomadic communities of the Pontic Steppe—known to classical writers as the
Cimmerians—were undergoing a phase of turbulence and disruption resulting
in folk movement. The Cimmerian penetration of eastern Europe is a complex

46


===== PAGE 60 (index-63_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

issue which has been much debated in the past. The principal argument for the
presence of a ‘Pontic’ element rests on sets of bronze horse gear—Dbits, side
pieces, and phalarae from the harness found extensively distributed over much
of the territory of Hungary, often in contexts with local material of the eighth
and seventh centuries. The castern (Pontic) inspiration, if not the production,
of this material is clear. Other *eastern’ items, found less frequently, are short
bronze daggers and bird-headed rattles from the tops of ceremonial staffs,
Recent work at Mezocsat and nearby, in the north of the Great Hungarian
Plain, has identified a series of cemeteries which may well belong to immigrant
groups, while similar enclaves in the south of the Plain suggest that settlement
may have been widespread.

Interpretation of this kind of archaeological evidence is not straightforward,
but the simplest explanation would be to see groups of people moving from the
turbulent areas of the Pontic Steppe westwards along the Danube Valley into
the Great Hungarian Plain, an area geographically similar to their homeland,
bringing with them their breeding stock of horses superior in speed and
strength to the west European type. Once established to the east of the Danube,
and maintaining their links with their ancestral homelands, these new neigh-
bours to the Urnfield cultures of central and western Europe would have been
well placed to trade superior horses and their gear to the Hallstatt aristocracies,
introducing at the same time new concepts of horse-riding. Although, as we
have seen, the horse was already a symbol of status among the Urnfield com-
munities, the folk movements of the eighth century established the culture of
the horse and a ready supply of beasts, close to the eastern frontier.

Within the old Urnfield zone of western central Europe, bounded on the
west by the communities of the Atlantic ar¢, on the east by the ‘Pontic’ com-
munities of the Great Hungarian Plain, and on the south by the Alps, significant
changes can be detected after the middle of the eighth century sc. This period,
dating from ¢.750~600 BC, is referred to as the Hallstatt C culture—a general-
ized term which reflects a broad cultural continuum shared by a variety of dis-
tinctive regional groupings. It is at the aristocratic level that the culture is at its
most universal, being reflected in the widespread distribution of warrior gear,
in particular the Hallstatt long sword of iron or bronze (Maps 3 and 4), a dis-
tinctive array of chapes with which the sword sheath terminated, and the trap-
pings for horses both as cavalry beasts and yoked in pairs for pulling vehicles.
The distribution of these various artefacts demonstrates a core area stretching
inabroad zone from central France to Bohemia and Hungary, but with a num-
ber of more isolated finds beyond indicating the huge peripheral territory
linked by systems of exchange to the core.

Within the Hallstatt C cemeteries it is possible to distinguish different sets of
grave goods. Warriors might be accompanied only by a sword and other per-
sonal gear, while a mounted warrior might also have been provided with his
horse's tackle. The highest social level was probably that represented by vehicle
burials, which, in this period, were restricted to a zone stretching from the

47


===== PAGE 61 (index-64_1.jpg) =====
1 Reconstruction of the
wayin which horse trap-
pings of the seventh and
sixth centurics nc were
probably arranged, based on
evidence from graves in
southern Germany.

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

Middle Rhine to Bohemia (Map 5). The vehicles involved were four-wheeled
and comparatively heavy and unwieldy, as would befit a ceremonial or funer-
ary cart. Their spoked wheels, strengthened by iron tires shrunk on and nailed
to the composite wooden felloe, represent a high level of technical achieve-
ment. In some burials, like the Bohemian graves of Hradenin and Lovosice,
wooden yokes studded with decorative bronze nails survive,

The long slashing sword suitable as a cavalry weapon,
horses, ceremonial vehicles, the rite of inhumation, and
the widespread use of iron for weapons mark a distinct
break with traditional Urnfield culture. None of these
characteristics (except for abundant iron (Map 2)) was
entirely unknown earlier, but taken together they demon-
strate a significant change. The élite was now attempting
to distinguish itself by employing exotic modes of burial
adopted from beyond their homeland. The horses and the
style of trappings are essentially eastern in origin, The
inspiration for the vehicle is more difficult to determine,
Vehicle burial was widespread among Pontic communi-
ties, but the technology of the Hallstatt carts with their
spoked wheels and composite felloe is more likely to have
been transmitted from the east via the Mediterranean. Similar vehicle burials
have been discovered at Salamis in Cyprus dating to the late seventh century 8¢
and one likely possibility is that knowledge of the technology spread via Etruria
to the Transalpine communities. A similar route is possible for the introduc-
tion of iron technology, though iron trinkets are also known in the early Pontic-
style graves of the Great Hungarian Plain.

Perhaps a simpler way to view the emergence to archaeological visibility of
the Hallstatt C aristocracy is to see it as an élite eagerly absorbing cultural
influences from the east via the mid-Danube, and from the south, through the
cast Alpine passes, and adapting the ideas and technologies to its own social
needs. It was a time of energy and innovation, The fine iron sword and the iron-
tired wheels can reasonably be regarded as Hallstatt C developments of some
originality. This readiness to adopt new exotic ideas as a means of displaying
¢lite status was to intensify still further in the sixth and carly fifth centuries, as
contact with the Mediterranean systems developed.

The Western Mediterranean: 650-450 BC

Greek and Phoenician interest in the trading potential of the western
Mediterranean was well underway by the seventh century e, as spheres of
commercial activity began to crystallize. At this stage Etruria seems to have
played a leading role in the trans-shipment of goods around the northern part
of the west Mediterranean and some way down the coast of Italy, but in the sec-
ond half of the seventh century certain of the castern Greeks, from the coasts of

48


===== PAGE 62 (index-65_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

Asia Minor, began to explore more widely. One of these adventurers, Kolaios of
Samos, is reputed to have travelled to Tartessos about 630 8¢, finding the mar-
ket ‘untouched'—untouched, that is, by Greeks, That he was said by Herodotus
to have been sailing south for Africa when he was blown off course is not par-
ticularly convincing but may hide a different reality. At the trading station of
Naucratis in the Nile delta, where eastern Greeks as well as Phoenicians regu-
larly met, the Samians may well have learned of the lucrative Phoenician con-
tacts with Tartessos and decided to explore for themselves.

Soon to follow were the Phocacans from the Acolian coast. According to
Herodotus, they set sail in their pentekonters (warships), exploring the Adri-
atic region, Etrunia, Iberia, and Tartessos, establishing friendly relations with
the Tartessian King. Their route almost certainly took them along the north
shores of the west Mediterranean, where they would have become aware of the
Etruscan entrepots along the littoral of Provence and Languedoc, possibly to
the port of Rhode in north-west Spain, which may have been established as
carly as the eighth century. Years of seasonal sailing in these waters would have
fa ized them with the best harbours and landfalls, and in c.600 sc the first

Phocaean colony was founded at Massalia (Marseilles). Others followed: Emp-
orion and Agde in the fifth century and Tauroention, Olbia, and Nice in the
fourth. In this way the Greek presence began to impose itself within the tradi-
tional preserve of the Etruscan cities.

Theattractions of Massalia were many. Not only was it an excellent well-pro-
tected anchorage in the heart of a comparatively productive territory, but it also

49

33 The Greek portof
Massalia (Marseiles) was
founded on the southern
<coast of Gaul about 600 sc
by colonists from Phocaca.
An casily defended
promontory was chosen,
overlooking a large almost
land-locked harbour.
Massalia was well sited 1o
control trade along the
Rhone: it lay conveniently
close to the Rhane mouth
but clear of the marshy
delta,


===== PAGE 63 (index-66_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

lay close to the mouth of the Rhone, which provided access into the barbarian
hinterland, from which a variety of commodities could be obtained. More
significant, at least in the first decades of the colony’s existence, was its conve-
nient location in the centre of the long coastal route linking the productive
Spanish Levant with Etruria and Magna Graecia. The quantity of Etruscan pot-
tery found in early deposits in the city are impressive indications of the impor-
tance of Etruscan-dominated exchanges at this time (Map 8).

Before looking at the impact of the colonization on the Hallstatt communi-
ties of the hinterland, we must continue to consider in outline the history of the
western Mediterranean in so far as it is likely to have had an impact on temper-
ate Europe.

Towards the middle of the sixth century Bc major political events in the east
were to send shock waves throughout the west Mediterranean. In 574 s the
great trading cities of Phoenicia were overrun and incorporated into the
expanding Babylonian empire. The effect was to sever long-established links
between the mother cities of Tyre and Sidon and their overseas trading systems.
Henceforth, with the umbilical cord cut, Carthage became the leading power in
the Phoenician, now Punic, west Mediterranean. A few years later, in 545, Persia
expanded its influence westwards to the Aegean, absorbing into its state system
the castern Greek cities of the coastal zone. The opposition of the Greek states
encouraged the Persians to undertake a further westward advance to the Greek
mainland, where, at Salamis in 480 and Plataea in 479, the Persian forces were
soundly beaten.

Many of the eastern Greek cities accepted Persian sovereignty, but the
Phocaeans, agreeing that subservience was intolerable, decided to migrate en
masse to the west Mediterranean to build upon their maritime enterprises
already well rooted in the colony at Massalia. The site chosen for the migrant
population to settle was Alalia on the eastern coast of Corsica. Such a move was
perceived by the Etruscans to be a direct threat to Etruscan trading enterprises,
and the opposition, led by the city of Caere, amassed a fleet of sixty Etruscan
and sixty Carthaginian vessels to oppose the Phocaeans. The ensuing battle, in
the Sardinian Sea, probably between Sardinia and Corsica, was a Phocaean vic-
tory, but such was the cost that the Phocacans decided to abandon Alalia, even-
tually founding their colony on the Italian mainland at Velia in the territory of
Posidonia.

The Battle of the Sardinian Sea, which took place about 540 BC, was a major
event in west Mediterranean history, in that it significantly changed the politi-
cal geography of the region, isolating Massalia and throwing her far more on
her own resources, leading to the establishment of further colonies along the
southern French coast. The greatly strengthened Etruscan-Carthaginian coali-
tion now began to pose a serious threat to the commercial interests of the Greek
cities of Magna Graecia. The establishment at the Etruscan port of Pyri of a
place sacred to the Phoenician goddess Astarte by the ‘king’ of Caere (recorded
on gold plaques in a bilingual text) is an indication of the close relations which

50


===== PAGE 64 (index-67_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

existed between Carthage and Etruria, a point further emphasized by large vol-
umes of Etruscan goods found at Carthage.

However, the growing power of Magna Graecia began to tell. An Etruscan
expedition against the Greek enclave at Cumae in 525 se failed, thus preventing
Etruscan expansion southwards. The pressure continued, but fifty years later
the destruction of an Etruscan fleet off Cumace in 474 marked the end of Etrus-
can expansionist policies in the south.

Increasing pressure on the Etruscan thalassocracy in the Tyrrhenian Sea
throughout the sixth century was a significant factor in the landward expansion
of Etruscan interests northwards through the Apennines into the southern
reaches of the Po Valley. New cities like Marzabotto and Felsina ( Bologna) were
established on the major routes, and there was a significant Etruscan involve-
ment in the development of the two Adriatic ports of Spina and Adria. By the
middle of the fifth century the northern frontier of Etruscan settlement had
extended to the north bank of the Po and the ports were providing outlets of
growing importance to the Adriatic shipping lanes. In parallel, Etruscan
influence in the Tyrrhenian Sea declined. The Syracusan-led offensive against
coastal Etruria in 454 and 453, though inconclusive, was symptomatic of the
pressures besetting the once-flourishing maritime cities.

The developing Etruscan interests in the Po Valley in the century ¢.550-450
sc brought them into increasingly close contact with native communities
occupying the territory from the Po to the Alps, where two archaeologically
defined cultures can be identified (Map 17): the Este culture in the east, occupy-
ing a broad zone from the sea to Lake Garda in the valley of the Adige, and the
Golasecca culture, the main focus of which lay around Lakes Como, Lugano,
and Maggiore. Both groups were deeply rooted in the indigenous cultures of
the Late Bronze Age and by virtue of their geographical location dominated the
routes through the Alps which linked the Etruscan south with the Hallstatt
north. The development of an urban agglomeration at Como in the fifth centu-
1y, extending to some 150 hectares, must, in part at least, be due to the intensity
of commercial activity and the model of urbanism derived from the Etruscan
zone. As we will see, the Golasecca culture formed a significant bridge between
the Mediterranean states and the changing Hallstatt world.

The Hallstatt World: 650-450 BC

In order to discuss the rapidly developing social, economic, and political sys-
tems of the west central Hallstatt zone in this crucial period it is necessary to
introduce the chronological framework that will be adopted. A great deal has
been written on the subject and there are still areas of debate, but the following
is now widely accepted as a serviceable scheme:

Hallstatt C  ¢.750~¢.600 BC Hallstatt D2~3  ¢.530/520-¢.450/440 BC
Hallstatt D1 c.600-c.530/520 8¢ LaTéne A €.450/440~¢.370/350 BC

51


===== PAGE 65 (index-68_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

13 Right: The barial mound
of b
Heun
late sixth ¢
shown here under excava

tion in 19378, The style of

hmichele, near
dating to the

ptury 8¢, is

The scheme usefully correlates with the princi-
pal events in western Mediterranean history,
with Hallstatt D1 beginning at the time of the
foundation of Massalia and the beginning of
Hallstatt D2~3 coinciding with the turmoil fol-
lowing the Battle of the Sardinian Sea and run
ning parallel with a major phase of Etruscan
expansion northwards,

We have already seen how in the Hallstatt C
period the zone of élite burials, represented by
wagons and horse gear, or harness and yokes
gons, extended in a broad, and dis-
continuous, zone from Bohemia to southern

without wi

Germany, apart from rare exceptions seldom
spreading west of the Rhine (Map 5). At this
time the principal concentration lay in southern
Germany (Baden-Wirttemberg and Bavaria),
where more than ninety élite burials have been
identified. In addition to vehicle and horse-
related accoutrements, élite lifestyle was fre-
quently represented by pottery and bronze
vessels of various kinds related to feasting
accompanying the dead to the Elite buri-
als continued to be found in southern Germany

ave.

34 Aboye, lefi: The great burial mound of Magdalenenberg bei
Villingen, Schwarzwald-Baar-Kreis, Germany
central burial in a log-bailt chambe
century ne. A number of other burials we

mound over the next two

35 Lefr: The barrow of Mag

ected beneath a caien of

2 well-peeserved ti
stoes


===== PAGE 66 (index-69_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

during Hallstatt Dy, but no longer appear in
Bohemia. Some of them, like the barrow buri-
als of Hohmichele near Hundersingen and
Magdalenenberg near Villingen, were colossal
structures requiring much effort in the inter-
ests of monumentalizing the lincage of the
dead aristocrats, and the Chinese silk used to
embroider the dress of the woman buried at
Hohmichele indicates the ability of the élite to
acquire rare trade goods,

To what extent the foundation of Massalia
about 600 Be influenced the growing power of
the west Hallstatt chieftains is difficult to say.
Certainly some exotic products, such as the
hydria found at Grichwil, ‘Rhodian’ flagons
(Map 9), and bead-edged bronze basins from
Magna Gracecia, were becoming available as
grave goods, and these may well ha
transported via Massalia and the Rhone corri-
dor to add a touch of the exotic to the Hallstatt
feast enhanced by Massilliot wine (Map 10).

That Greek ideas were being readily accep-
ted is vividly demonstrated by the hill fort of
Heuneburg overlooking the Danube, The earliest Hallstatt rampart was con-
structed in the middle of the seventh century, and the site continued in use for
some 200 years. During Hallstatt D1 the defences were completely remodelled
in a style unique in Transalpine Europe: stone wall footings were laid with hol-
low, forward projecting bastions regularly spaced along its west side. Above the
foundations the wall was built of carefully squared mudbricks of regular size
and shape. This alien structure, so clearly the concept of a Greek mind, and pre-
sumably overseen by a Greek architect, is a striking example of the willingness
(and ability) of the local Hallstatt élite to adopt totally foreign modes of expres-
sion in the interests of displaying status and power.

That the colony of Massalia was now contributing to the aristocratic culture
of the west Hallstatt zone is clear, but the intensity or duration of this contribu-
tion is not. All that can safely be said is that there is no evidence to suggest that,
at this stage, the Rhone corridor saw a massive movement of goods and com-
modities. Massalia was still part of an extensive Mediterranean network and
there would have been little impetus actively to seek markets in the hinterland.

A major change came about at the beginning of Hallstatt D2-3, that is about
530-520 BC. In the west Hallstatt zone this can best be characterized as a ‘con-
centration of power’ in fewer centres. The phenomenon can be recognized in
two ways: by the increasing exclusivity of the élite burial rite and by the aban-
donment of a number of hill forts, leaving fewer sites to develop as strong cen-

53

36 The Greek bronze
hydria, found in a burial at

Grachwil, Switzerland, was
imported from the
Mediterrancan in the sixth
century s¢. [t may have been
a diplomatic gift to.a local
chieftain. Historisches
Museum, Berne.


===== PAGE 67 (index-70_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

37 The hilltop settlement of \
Heuneburg, Baden Heuneburg
Wirttemberg, Germany, 2 Period IVb
swing the situation in the 77> | ¢85

late sixth century wc (Period
1Vh), when the walls were
built in Greek stybe of mud.
brick on a stone-rubble
foundation. The barre
nearby

y above an carlier

settlement

2 f the hill fort
of Heuncburg overlooking
the River Danube. Th
was used and fortified ir
mittently from the Late
Bronze Age and in the late
sixth century became a 200 Motres
centre of princely power .

ter



===== PAGE 68 (index-71_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

of the Heun
strusted in Gr
st

30 Metres

55


===== PAGE 69 (index-72_1.jpg) =====
43 Above: The hill fort of
Ipf, Bopfingen, Germany,
dominates the surrounding
countryside. In all probabil
ity it served as a centre of
princely power in the late
sixth century s

44 Right: The location of
four of the 'princely centres
of the late sixth century s¢
The focus of each is a
fortified hilltop often com
manding a major river
route. Rich burials cluster
nearby.



===== PAGE 70 (index-73_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

tral foci. In southern Germany, for example, the core of aristocratic power, the
number of known burials with wagons or harness decreases from forty-six to
twenty, and in some areas of the Swabian Alps élite burials disappear altogeth-
erafter the end of Hallstatt D1, In the region of Breisgau, of the twelve hill forts
occupied in Hallstatt Dy, only one continued in use in the subsequent period.

The archacological data imply a rapid social change, but one which would be
entirely understandable within the context of indigenous development. In par-
allel with the emergence of fewer, richer centres of power in the core area of
southern Germany, there was a marked expansion of the system westwards
from the Rhine into northern and eastern France. A glance at Map 5 will show
that the focus of power now occupied a swath of territory to the north of the
Alps linking the river systems of the Rhone/Sadne, Seine, Rhine, and Danube.
It could fairly be said that the nexus of west central European communications
was now dominated by a single cultural and social system, and the amount of
gold found in the burials (Map 15) is an indication of its productive capacity.

The élite systems of Hallstatt D2-3 are characterized by the appearance of
comparatively large quantities of Mediterranean imports found in both the
major hill forts and the princely burials (Maps 10-12). That the range of goods
is limited to wine-drinking equipment appropriate to the Greek symposion
strongly suggests that it was the idea of the symposion that was accepted and
adopted by the élite, as an extension, no doubt, of their long-established feast-
ing rites. The rich female burial at Vix neatly exemplifies the range of imports
with its huge krater for wine-mixing, jug for pouring, basins, and Attic cups for
drinking. The discovery of numerous fragments of Attic cups in the nearby hill
fort of Mont Lassois isan indication of the princely residence. A similar array of
Attic pottery from Heuneburg 111, found together with the Massilliot amph-
orae in which the wine was transported, shows that after the rebuilding which
followed the violent destruction of the mudbrick defences of Heuneburg IV in
about 530/520 BC, contact with the Mediterranean world developed even more
strongly. Itis to this period that the rich chieftain burial of Hochdorf near the
hill fort of Hohenasperg belongs.

While it could reasonably be argued that this late phase of Hallstatt develop-
ment was little more than an intensification of social trends deeply rooted in the
indigenous Urnfield culture of the region, it would be perverse to say that the
economic impetus of the Greek littoral, after the traumas of the 540-530s Bc,
had nothing to do with the sudden appearance of Mediterranean trade goods in
the barbarian hinterland. The most satisfactory explanation would be to accept
that both socicties had needs—the Greeks to develop new trading partners, the
Hallstatt élite to find new modes of expression consistent with their aristocrat-
ic systems, For a brief period, 530-450, these needs coincided and the Rhone
corridor provided the principal axis of communication between the two zones.
How the exchanges were articulated is uncertain, but the identification of a
major trading centre at Bragny-sur-Saone, close to the confluence of the Saéne,
Doubs, and Dheune, dating to this crucial period, is of considerable interest.

57


===== PAGE 71 (index-74_1.jpg) =====
45 The princely burial
found beneath a substantial
barrow at Vix, Chatilion-
sur-Scine, France, was con-
tained in a wood-tined
chamber, The female burial
was accompanied by per-
sonal ornaments, a set of
imported Mediterranean
wine-drinking gear, and a
dismantled funerary vehicle.
The burial dates to the end
of the sixth century s,

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

Here, in the carliest phase (late sixth and early fifth century), Massilliot amph-
orae and other Mediterrancan-produced pottery together with Attic imports
and polychrome glass vessels were found in some quantity. Bragny, situated on
the interface between the Hallstatt north and the southern Mediterranean
sphere, is very well sited 1o have been the principal port-of-trade through which
exchanges could have been articulated. In the ready accessibility of luxury
goods from the south may lie the reason for the westward extension of the
Hallstatt élite zone after c.530.

The rich burials of the Late Hallstatt zone have been characterized as



===== PAGE 72 (index-75_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

46 The chicftain’s grave at
Hochdorf, Stuttgar,
Germany, dates to the
second half of the sixth
century ne, After the roof
had been added. the inner
grave chamber was
surrounded by stone rubble
laced with horizontal
timbers to hinder grave-
robbing. and buried beneath
alarge barrow,

47 Reconstruction of the
interior of the timber-built
grave chamber of the chief
tain’s burial at Hochdorf

48 Below: Funerary wagon
from the princely tomb of
Hochdorf. The wooden
structure was cased in iron
sheeting, Wirttemberg-
wches Landesmuseum,
Stattgan



===== PAGE 73 (index-76_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

60


===== PAGE 74 (index-77_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

reflecting a prestige goods economy—that is, a socio-economic system in which
élite status was maintained by the manipulation of rare and valuable com-
modities available only to the paramount chieftains (Map 16). They would
retain their power by making gifts of lesser value to those below them in the

social hierarchy in return for goods and services. So longas the supply of exotics

was kept up and the paramounts held the monopoly, the system would remain
relatively stable, Such a theoretical scheme provides a useful model for under

standing Late Hallstatt society. It gains support from the graded status

differences which can be recognized in the burial record, and from the evidence
for the manufacture of lower value personal ornaments, such as brooches and
bracelets, useful in gift exchange, in the princely hill forts of Mont Lassois and
Heuneburg.

So far we have assumed that the Mediterranean wine-drinking gear which
was imported into the Hallstatt sphere at this time all came via Massalia. This
may well be, but a significant number of items were of Etruscan manufacture,
riffon-headed cauldron and tri-

vessels such as the stamnos from Gurgy, the g
pod from Sainte-Colombe, the beaked flagons and dishes from Vix, and the

amphora from Conliege. The list is impressive, but there is nothing inherently

unlikely in supposing that those entreprencurs seeking to trade with the inter
ior should have put together sets of wine-drinking gear deriving from a variety
of sources. The most reasonable explanation for these exotic Etruscan bronzes

of the period 540/530~480/470 BC, therefore, is that they were, indeed, chan

61


===== PAGE 75 (index-78_1.jpg) =====
51 One of the nine drinking
homns from the Hochdorf
burial bound with bronze
and gold. Wrttemberg:
isches Landesmuscum,
Stuttgart.

52 Facing The stone statue
found at Hirschlanden,
Baden-Warttemberg,
Germany, probably once
stood on 1op of the burial
mound excavated nearby. It
dates ta the second half of
the sixth century nc and
compares in style to statues
from northern Italy. The
nakedness of the warrior,
wearing oaly a sword belt
and peck tore, wasto
become a characteristic of
the Celts in battle in the fifth
century and after. The coni-
<al hat which the figare
wears is very similar to the
birch bark hat worn by the
Chicftain buried at
Hochdorf, Worttemberg-
isches Landesmuseum,
Stuttgart,

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

nelled through the Greek port of Massalia. This should not, however, be con-
fused with the direct Etruscan trade which developed at the very end of the
Hallstatt period, 480/470-450/440, as a direct result of the consolidation of
Etruscan commercial interests in the Po Valley. In this development, the Gola-
secca communities, commanding the Italian lakes and the central and west
Alpine passes, served as the middlemen.

An assessment of the nature of the
contacts through the Alps depends
entirely upon archaceological evidence.
Links between the Transalpine commu-
nities and the Golasecca culture (Map
17) were long established and are most
dramatically exemplified by the four-
wheeled funerary wagons of the seventh
and sixth centuries sc found at Sesto
Calende and Ca’Morta as well asa num-
ber of broadly contemporary sword
types which have Transalpine origins or
antecedents. A similar pattern of contact continuing into the middle of the fifth
century is reflected in the second four-wheeled vehicle from Ca'Morta, which
sharesa number of structural details with the somewhat carlier vehicle found in
the Late Hallstatt burial of Vix. Whether the persistence of the use of funerary
vehicles at Ca’Morta and Sesto Calende was the result of diplomatic gifts from
the north or the adoption of alien burial rites by the Golaseccan élite is impos-
sible to say, but at the very least the vehicles must reflect constant cultural con-
tact over a long period. These long established systems of communication and
exchange facilitated Etruscan trade in the period after c.480/470. It is in this
period that the settlement at Como developed rapidly into an extensive proto-
urban agglomeration, probably as a direct response to an intensification in
commerce,

The settlement at Bragny-sur-Sadne was re-established at this time following
a phase of destruction. Numerous items of north Italic origin were recovered,
together with Golasecca-type pottery, thus demonstrating the continued use of
an established port-of-trade. The presence of Massilliot amphorae in the same
layers, however, shows that the Rhone corridor continued to function.

Among the most prolific of the Etruscan exports of the period 480-420 8¢
was the beaked flagon used as a wine-pouring vessel (Map 14) sometimes
accompanied by bronze stamnoi (Map 13). Made in Etruscan cities such as
Vulci and exported through the Golaseccan middlemen, they travelled far into
barbarian territory. A particularly dense concentration in the élite graves of the
Middle Rhine dating to the later half of the fifth century—the La Téne A peri-
od—suggests a very deliberate and well-focused axis of exchange which no
doubt contributed to the emergence of a discrete zone of power on the north-
ern fringe of the old west Hallstatt cultural zone, The impression given by this

62


===== PAGE 76 (index-79_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

startling phenomenon is that Etruscan trade through the Alpine passes rather
than being directed by the producers was, by this stage, being drawn by newly
emerging élites in the north. The southern link is further demonstrated by the
stone statue found near the barrow at Hirschlanden in Baden-Wiirttemberg,
ies to north Italian statues.

which has very close stylistic similar

New Centres of Power: The La Téne Elite, 450/440-380/370 8¢

In the middle of the fifth century the political geography of barbarian Europe
changed dramatically. While the processes and precise chronology of thes
changes are not easy to define, the broad picture stands out with clarity, and it
is from this point that the discussion is best begun. Simply stated, over much of
the west central Hallstatt élite burial zone rich burials ceased and the hill forts
y came toan end, in the case of Heuneburg witha cat-

occupied by thearistocra
astrophic fire. Meanwhile, in a broad zone to the north stretching from the
Marne to Bohemia there developed in the course of the La Téne A period a war-
rior aristocracy which frequently buried its dead with their spears and swords.
Itwas in thiszone that the highly distinctive Celticart style developed (Map19).

One of the difficulties of studying this change is the imprecision of our
od begin immediately after the end of the
, or was there an overlap of a generation

chronologies. Did the La Tene pel
Hallstatt in c.450, as some would argu
orso, with the earliest La Tene beginning c.4807 On balance, a period of overlap
seems more likely.

Early La Téne culture differed in many significant ways from that of the old
Hallstatt chiefdoms; the geographical focus of the two barely overlapped. In the
La Tene burials fighting weapons were frequent, in contrast to the Late Hallstatt
¢lite, whose only weapons were for hunting or display; moreover, the
y favoured the two-wheeled vehicle as a funerary cart in contrast to

aristocra
the traditional four-wheeled vehicle. The one important similarity was that
both had a system of élite burial employing the funerary cart together with s
of wine-drinking equipment derived from, or inspired by, the accoutrements
of the Mediterranean symposion.

A plausible explanation for the evidence, so far discussed, is that towards the
middle of the fifth century Bc centres of power and innovation shifted from the
old west central Hallstatt core 1o its immediate northern periphery. Why this
should be is a matter to which we shall return.

That there was a cant degree of continuity between the Late Hallstatt
and Early La Téne social systems is evident. This is particularly true of the
Middle Rhineland. In the Late Hallstatt period the focus of power was in the
valley of the Neckar between Stuttgart and Heilbronn, centred on the hill fort of
Hohenasperg, around which there clustered a remarkable group of élite burials
including Hochdorf, Grafenbiihl and Romerhiigel, all dated to the Hallstatt
D2-3 phase. Little is known of the chronology of the Hohenasperg settlement,
but the possibility that it continued in occupation into Early La Téne times is

ts

63



===== PAGE 77 (index-80_1.jpg) =====
53 Map showing the shift of
centres of power from c700
10 400 ne- The rich "horsy'
burials of the Hallstatt C
period focused on the region
from Bohemis to the Upper
Danube. Hallstart ) power
represented by the west
Hallstatt chiefdom zone

further west in
the sixth century, Early La
Tene aristocratic cultures
emerged in three zones—
the Marne, Moselle, and
Bohemia—on the northern
periphery.

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

suggested by the date range of the élite burials in the area. Both Grafenbiihl and
Romerhiigel were later used for La Téne burials. Similarly at Kleinaspergle the
barrow mound contained a grave chamber with a burial accompanied by gold-
mounted drinking horns, four bronze vessels including an Etruscan stamnos,
and two Attic cups, dating to the La Téne A period. The continuity of power in
this arca throughout the fifth century is impressive.

Another focus of power lay some 150 kilometres north-west in the valley of
the Moselle close to its confluence with the Rhine. Here several élite burials
of the Late Hallstatt period have been discovered, including the well-known
vehicle burial of Bell. During the fifth century the number of rich graves in the
region increases dramatically. Many of the tombs contain bronze vessels
imported from Etruscan workshops at Vulci and elsewhere, These include the
characteristic beaked flagons, stamnoi, amphorae, and bowls. The number and
density of these exotics vividly demonstrate the close links between the
Rhineland and Etruria at this time (Maps 13 and 14). Even more impressive are
the array of locally manufactured gold-work and the inventiveness of local
craftsmen in adopting and adapting Etruscan motifs in a highly selective man-
ner to create an entirely new art form.

If we take the Middle Rhine as a single region, we can suggest that in the carly
fifth century Bc there were probably two centres of power, one in the Neckar
valley and one (possibly) in the Moselle, with the Neckar region being the more
prominent. By the end of the century a distinct shift had taken place, with the
Moselle region now being not only rich but vibrant and innovative. Through-
out, economic links were maintained with the Etruscan world to the south,



===== PAGE 78 (index-81_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

though whether the impetus for trade came directly from the Etruscan cities or
was instigated by entrepreneurs in the now-thriving Golasecca centres is a
debatable point.

The second major centre of innovation in the Early La Téne period was the
valley of the Marne lying some 150 kilometres north of the Late Hallstatt centre
focused on Vix. Already in this period occupation was intense and the rite of
vehicle burial is known from a tomb containing a four-wheeled cart at Les
Jogasses. The number of burials increased dramatically throughout the fifth
century, and élite burial became more common (though rare compared with
the Moselle region). Characteristically, the dead aristocrat was buried in a pit
accompanied by a two-wheeled vehicle, a range of harness trappings, and a
drinking set. Etruscan bronze vessels have been recovered from burials at
Somme-Bionne, Somme-Tourbe, and Sept-Saulx, while Somme Bionne also
contained a red-figured Attic cup dated to c.420. If the archacological evidence
is a fair reflection of the actual percentage of élite burials in the region, then it
was significantly poorer than the Moselle and evidently had less access to luxu-
ry goods from the south. In spite of this, Marnian culture displays a high degree
of stability during the fifth century and its craftsmen play a significant part in
the development of a distinctive style of Celtic art.

The relationship between the Moselle and Marne groups in the later part of
the fifth century raises a number of questions. Both shared a common warrior-
dominated social system and at some levels a common material culture based
on patterns of exchange, but by any standards the Marnians were the poor rela-
tions and may indeed have depended for their Mediterranean prestige goods
on reciprocal exchanges with the Moselle communities whose access to the
south was direct. It is interesting to speculate what commodities the Marne
may have been able to contribute. One possibility is that its links with the Seine
provided a means of tapping into Atlantic systems producing the much-desired
tin. Another is that the warrior society was able to supply a flow of slaves, useful
in exchanges with the south. Direct evidence is, however, lacking.

A subsidiary focus of power in the fifth century lay in western France, at
Bourges, at the confluence of the Auron and the Yévres, tributary of the Cher.
Settlement levels have produced quantities of Massilliot amphorae together
with a range of Attic black- and red-figured wares spanning the fifth century.
Contemporary technological innovations included the local adoption of the
potter’s wheel. A range of élite burials has also been found containing import-
ed vessels. Judging by the date range of the imported pottery recovered, it is
clear that Bourges was established as a significant trading centre in the Late
Hallstatt period but continued to function throughout the Early La Téne. Itis
well sited to control the movement of goods from the Atlantic corridor.,

The fifth century also sees the development of an axis of communication
extending from the Po Valley through the territory of the Veneti and along the
castern fringes of the Alps to the valley of the Vitava and the North European
Plain beyond. This long established route saw the transport of Baltic amber

65


===== PAGE 79 (index-82_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

southwards to the Adriatic. From about 1000 &¢, salt, mined at Hallstatt, would
have contributed to the flow of commaodities passing along the east Alpine cor-
ridor. About 600 nc the rich salt deposits at Diirrnberg (near Salzburg) began
to be worked in parallel with the Hallstatt mines, both ceasing about 400 uc.

The community at Ditrrnberg began to increase in size and prosperity at the
beginning of the fifth century and a cemetery of several hundred burials was
established. Among them were two élite burials, each with a two-wheeled
funerary vehicle. One produced a locally made bronze beaked flagon inspired
by Etruscan prototypes; the other a range of elaborate locally made wine-drink-
ing equipment together with a pottery Attic kylix made in about 470. The occu-
pant, a male, was also provided with his warrior equipment including a bronze
helmet, an iron sword, three spears and bows and arrows. The Diirmberg finds
are particularly interesting in that, like those of the Moselle and Marne, they
demonstrate trade links to the Po Valley providing goods and inspiration for
highly inventive local craftsmen. The difference, however, is that some of the
concepts incorporated by the craftsmen were learned from the already well-
developed bronze-working skills of the Venetic community to the south.

To the north of Diirrnberg the amber route leads through the valley of the
Vitavaand the territory of Bohemia. Here, one of the principal sites was the set-
tlement of Zavist, south of Prague. It was established in the Hallstatt period and
developed throughout the fifth century asa major cult centre. Thata number of
Bohemian cemeteries also show continuity throughout the sixth and fifth cen-
turies indicates a degree of social and economic stability. It was during the lat-
ter part of the fifth century that élite burials began to appear, characterized by
Etruscan wine-drinking equipment. Some of the graves also produced items of
gold and silver. Although the exact form of the Bohemian graves is not known
in detail, their number (eight at present) and the range of imports indicate a
distinctive enclave with close contacts via the Dirrnberg region to the Adriatic,

Standing back from the evidence, briefly summarized here, we can see that
during the course of the fifth century there arose two zones of power and inno-
vation: a Marne-Moselle zone in the west with trading links to the Po Valley via
the central Alpine passes and the Golasecca culture, and a Bohemian zone in the
cast with separate links to the Adriatic via the eastern Alpine routes and the
Venetic culture. Both zones, and their constituent regions, had already begun
to develop as significant foci of power towards the end of the Late Hallstatt
phase, but what stands out as particularly dramatic is that most of the core of
the west Hallstatt élite zone, so dominant in the late sixth and early fifth cen-
turies, was now a cultural backwater. In other words, as the centre decayed, its
northern periphery flourished—in much the same way as a mushroom ring
grows.

To offer explanations for the phenomenon is not easy. On the one hand, it
could be argued that readjustments in trading pressures from the Mediter-
ranean states caused social dislocation north of the Alps upsetting the delicate
balance of the prestige goods economy. Perhaps the interests of the Greek cities

66


===== PAGE 80 (index-83_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

of the Golfe du Lion turned more to the west as the lucrative Iberian market
developed leaving the northern markets open to exclusive Etruscan manipula-
tion. It could also be that internal social dynamics in Transalpine Europe were
the prime cause. The peripheral zone, so long producing the supplies of raw
materials such as furs, amber, iron, gold, and slaves for the core, may have
developed a penchant for southern luxuries. Given the warrior nature of
peripheral society, reflecting no doubt the practice of raiding, then aggressive
moves against the west Hallstatt core may have destabilized and destroyed the
old system. Perhaps it was a combination of all these factors which brought
about the dramatic changes of the fifth century. At any event, by about 400 BC
the scene was set for a new act in the story of Europe—the Celtic migrations.

67


===== PAGE 81 (index-84_1.jpg) =====
V' Facing The Battersea
shicld, found in the River
Thames at Battersea,
London. The shield facing
of copper alloy sheeting is
elaborately decorsted and
enhanced with inset red
glass, The date is uncertain
but probably lies in the first
century s or early first
century A, although an
carlier dating is passible.
The shickd was probably
ritually deposited. British
Museum, London,

4
The Migrations

400-200BC

ON 18 July 390 BC the army of Rome was soundly defeated by a horde of Celts
on the banks of the River Allia not far from the city. It was a devastating
moment for the Romans, as they saw their city ransacked by these little-known
northern barbarians. According to tradition, the Consul M. Popillius Laenas
had told the citizens before the event: ‘These are not civilized people who will
become your ally when you have taken their city but wild beasts whose blood we
must shed or spill our own." The attack remained a vivid folk memory in
Rome’s collective consciousness, and stories about the Celtic migrations from
beyond the Alps would have been told to every schoolchild. It is appropriate,
therefore, to begin a consideration of the migrations by exploring how they
were viewed by Greek and Roman historians writing well after the event.

The Graeco-Roman Tradition

The classic Roman view of the Celtic migrations is provided by Livy writing
towards the end of the first century sc and deserves to be quoted in full.

The Celts, who make up one of the three divisions of Gaul, were under the domination
of the Bituriges and this tribe supplied the Celtic nation with a king, Ambigatus was then
the man and his talents . . . had brought him great distinction; for Gaul under his sway
grew so rich in corn and so populous, that it scemed hardly possible to govern so great
amultitude. The king, now old, wishing to relieve his kingdom of a burdensome throng,
announced that he meant to send Bellovesus and Segovesus, his sister’s two sons, two
enterprising young men, to find such homes as the gods might assign to them by augury;
and promised them that they should head as large a number of emigrants as they them-
selves desired, so that no tribe might be able to prevent their settlement, Whereupon to
Segovesus were by lot assigned the Hercynian highlands [the Black Forest and
Bohemia, but to Bellovesus the gods proposed a far pleasanter road, into Italy. Taking

68


===== PAGE 82 (index-85_1.jpg) =====
.

S \,~':-V ¥
e e
VN W
Wi, 9

i A/')\ 1;')«)@?(?:,'
n'; \‘;: t’;‘%;\ f,'; t‘i v’ A J‘"
s


===== PAGE 83 (index-86_1.jpg) =====
§ ,HS, ]


===== PAGE 84 (index-87_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

with him the surplus population—Bituriges, Arverni, Senones, Aedui, Ambarri, Car-
nutes, Aulerci—he set out with a vast host, some mounted, some on foot,  (Hist. 5. 34)

He goes on to describe how they passed through the Alps by the passes of Tau-
rine and Duria and defeated the Etruscans near the River Ticinus. Thereafter
they established a settlement at Mediolanum (Milan).

Pompeius Trogus, a native of southern Gaul who composed his histories at
the time of the Emperor Augustus, adds that, in addition to Mediolanum, the
first Celtic settlements included Como, Brescia, Verona, Bergamo, Trento, and
Vicenza. His understanding of the initial stages of the migrations was similar to
that of Livy in that he believed overpopulation to have been the reason for the
Gauls sending ‘300,000 men to seek new territories”. ‘Some’, he said, settled in
Italy... some were led by birds, spread through the head of the Adriatic and set-
tled in Pannonia.’

Livy dates these events to the reign of the Roman king Tarquinius Priscus,
which would place the migrations in the period about 600 Bc. The Greek histo-
rian Polybius, who wrote in the carly second century s, firmly believed them
1o have taken place some 200 years later. Livy was clearly aware of this discrep-
ancy when he went on to say:

it was two hundred years before the attack on Clusium and the capture of Rome that the
Gauls first crossed over into Italy: neither were the Clusini the first of the Etruscans with
whom they fought: but long before that the Gallic armies had often given battle to those
who dwelt between the Apennines and the Alps.

Livy's remarks raise questions which will be considered again below when the
archacological evidence is examined.

While it is generally agreed by the ancient authors that overpopulation in the
Celtic homeland was the initial prime cause of the migrations, the reason for
the movement to Italy was seen to be the lure of the products of the south. The
point is explicitly made by Pliny:

The Gauls, imprisoned as they were by the Alps .. . first found a motive for overflowing
into Italy from the circumstance of a Gallic citizen from Switzerland named Helico who
had lived in Rome because of his skill as a craftsman, [and| brought with him, when he
came back, some dried figs and grapes and some samples of oil and wine: consequently
we may excuse them for having sought to obtain these things even by means of war,
(Nat. Hist. 12. 2. 5)

Much the same point is made by Livy—that it was the attraction of ‘delicious
fruits and especially wine' that drew the Celts south. He adds the unlikely anec-
dote that the Celts were deliberately enticed by an Etruscan, Arruns, from Clu-
sium, in order to bring retribution on those who had seduced his wife ( Hist. 5.
34).

As one might expect, the historical tradition has a degree of cohesion.
Against this we may now consider the archacological evidence,

69

VI Facing Statue of a Gaul-
ish chief wearing a tunic of
chain mailand a tore and
carrying a shield. From
Vachéres, Basses- Alpes,
France. Late first century nc.
Musée Calvet, Avignon.


===== PAGE 85 (index-88_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

A Prelude to the Migration of 400 Bc?

Livy’s considered view, that there was a Celtic penetration of the Po Valley in
the two centuries before the main migration in ¢.400 B¢, is not, on the face of it,
unreasonable, A foreknowledge, based on raid and trade, is usually a precursor
to migration and settlement. The obvious place to look for evidence is the
Golasecca culture of the Upper Po Valley.
The language spoken in the region covered archaeologically by the
Golasecca culture was 'Lepontic'—an Indo-European tongue
closely related to 'Celtic’ which can be traced back, by
means of inscriptions, 10 as carly as the sixth century nc.
Here, at least superficially, is evidence which might be
used in support of earlier Celtic folk movements,
but, since no break in culture can be recognized at
this time, it is generally assumed that the ‘Lepon-
tic’ language dates back much carlier, perhaps to
the time of the genesis of the culture as defined
archaeologically in the late second millennium.
The similarity of the languages on both sides of
the Alps would, however, have facilitated inter-
course between the two zones over a long period.
That active contact was, indeed, maintained is
abundantly clear from the archacological evidence.
Vehicles found in the burials at Ca’Morta and Sesto
ende are vivid demonstrations of an exchange of
ideas and possibly even of goods at an aristocratic
level, Weapons too, in particular the short swords
and daggers of the Golasecca region, have close affini-
ties to those found in the region from Burgundy to
southern Germany in the period from the seventh to
the fifth centuries sc. Many similarities can also be rec-
ognized among pottery types. Reciprocal influences can
be claimed based on the distribution, in the Transalpine
area, of small trinkets such as bronze pendants com-
mon in the Golaseccan cultural zone and we have
already referred to the range of Golaseccan material
54 Stane funcrary siela found at the trading port of Bragny-sur-Sadne in the fifth century. Taken
::r;:‘|;“t‘“"“::::‘“;;: ¥ together, the evidence suggests that close links between the two zones existed
towest puncl shows & for at least three centuries before 400 Be. One might even go so far as to argue

mounted Elruscan attacking— that the Golasecca culture underwent a degree of ‘Celticization” during this
anaked Celtic foot soldicr iiod

Museo Civico Arqucologico,  PEFIOd.

Botogna. The point at issuc is to what extent Celtic peoples from the north moved

south to establish enclaves of their own among the Golaseccan communities or,
more likely, beyond their southern border in land disputed by the advancing

70


===== PAGE 86 (index-89_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

Etruscans. Some evidence for such groups has been claimed on the basis of
weapon types found with burials at Casola Valsenio near Bologna and at San
Martino further to the south-east, both cemeteries being dated by Attic pottery
to within the fifth century. Also of late fifth-century date are the famous grave
stelac from Bologna depicting Celtic-style warriors in battle. The evidence is
not extensive but is sufficient to suggest the presence of warriors, adopting
Transalpine weapon types and fighting methods, in the Po Valley in the fifth
century.

A closer reading of the classical texts may provide a further insight to the
problem. Polybius (Hist. 2.17), in a somewhat enigmatic sentence, speaks of
Celts as neighbours to the Etruscans. Envying the beauty of the Etruscan terri-
tory they ‘gathered a great host and expelled the Etruscans from the valley of the
Padus’. This might suggest a phase of Celtic settlement preceding the main
migration. In another passage Livy (Hist. 5. 34) mentions that the invading
Celts, *having learnt that they were in what was known as the territory of the
Insubres, the same name as one of the cantons of the Aedui, took it as a
favourable omen and founded the town of Mediolanum’. A possible implica-
tion of this is that the Insubres, who occupied the territory south of the
Golasecca culture just north of the Po at the time of the main migration, may
have been a Celtic community long established in the region.

The whole question of a pre-400 Be Celtic settlement in the Po Valley is
impossible to resolve with certainty, though, on balance, the evidence would
allow there to have been an carly settlement of Celtic warrior groups in the

n

35 The principal
mavements of the Celts,
400-270 B


===== PAGE 87 (index-90_1.jpg) =====
56 The Celtic tribes of the
Po Valley and the migration
routes by which they
arrived, The Ligurians and
the Veneti were indigenous
peoples.

THE MIGRATIONS

frontier zone between the Golaseccan domain and the Etruscans, Such
enclaves, perhaps encouraged to come initially as mercenaries by the Golasec-
can communities, may have been sufficiently numerous to have retained a
degree of ethnic identity sufficient to have impressed the sources upon which
Livy based his History. Their presence and links with the homeland would have
provided the context for the massive influx which began about 400 sc.

The Initial Settlement: c.400 BC

Polybius provides an outline of the course of the migration. The lands near the
Po were occupied by the Laevi and Lebecii, then came the Insubres, and, to the
east of them, on the north bank of the river, settled the Cenomani. Further pen-
etration eastwards was halted by the Veneti, a long established indigenous tribe.
South of the Po, in the west, close to the Apennines, the Ananes established
themselves, with the Boii to the cast and the Lingones along the Adriatic coast.
To the south of them, along the littoral, the Senones appropriated territory. At
a later date Polybius mentions that the two largest tribes, the Insubres and the
Boii, sent messages to tribes living ‘about the Alps and on the Rhone” calling for
additional forces. These mercenary bands, called Gaesatae, arrived in formida-
ble numbers ‘furnished with a variety of armour’,

Polybius (Hist. 2.17) then goes on to provide a sketch of the life of the Celtic
communities. They occupied open villages and lived simple lives following



===== PAGE 88 (index-91_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

‘no pursuit other than war and agriculture’. Wealth was measured in gold and
cattle which could be casily transported when ‘they wandered from place to
place and changed their dwelling as their fancy directed’, Hospitality was
important and a man’s status was gauged by the size of his entourage of clients
or ‘companions in his wanderings’. This characteristic is one which persists in
the works of classical writers whenever Celts are described.

Archacological evidence for the Celtic settlement of the Po Valley is already
considerable and is growing rapidly, and it is now possible to identify cultural
differences reflecting the different tribal groups. One notable characteristic—
the prevalence of cremation among the Boii—serves both to distinguish them
from other Celtic communities in the Po Valley and to link them to the
Bohemian homeland from which they came, The Boian inhumation burials
also generally lacked ankle rings and torcs, while their arm rings were often
arranged in a distinctive asymmetric way. These, too, are characteristics of con-
temporary communities in Bohemia. The burials of the Senones and Ceno-
mani, on the other hand, reflect more closely styles already apparent in the
Marne region. Distinctive belt hooks were found in both regions, females often
wore torcs, and arm rings were symmetrically arranged. Taken together the evi-
dence emerging for regional patterns and their Transalpine parallels is begin-
ning to offer a striking confirmation of the traditional account of the
settlement.

In their new homeland the Celtic communities came into close contact with
Graeco-Etruscan culture, and inevitably there was a degree of assimilation.
This was most noticeable in the artistic field, where Celtic craftsmen began to
incorporate new motifs into their decorative creations. The dissemination of
Celtic items made in Italy, and quite possibly the migration of craftsmen, to the
Transalpine homelands introduced a new vitality to the now flourishing work-
shops of temperate Europe. Thus, albeit through a different social mechanism,
the Graeco-Etruscan world continued to influence the Transalpine communi-
ties,

The Celtic Homeland at the Time of the Migrations

It is reasonably clear from a variety of archacological evidence that in
the fourth century two principal axes of communication existed between the
Transalpine regions and the Po Valley, a western route funnelling from the
Seine, Marne, and Rhine, through the Great St Bernard Pass, to the upper
reaches of the valley and an eastern route from the Upper Danube, and
Bohemia bevond, via the River Inn and the eastern Alpine passes, to the lower
reaches of the plain. It isalong these traditional routes that migrating bands are
likely to have passed, filtering off surplus population from the Marne, Moselle,
and Bohemian regions, where, as we have seen, the principal innovatory cen-
tres were developing at this time.,

Of the two reasons given by the classical writers for the folk movement—

73


===== PAGE 89 (index-92_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

overpopulation and the lure of southern luxuries—the first is more likely to
have been the prime cause, An increase in population, especially in societies
which had created warrior systems as an essential part of the social structure,
would inevitably have led to instability, which could best have been alleviated
by the thinning-down of population by migration. But the situation may have
been more complicated. The warrior élites, represented in the archacology of
the three core Early La Téne territories—the Marne, the Moselle, and
Bohemia—probably maintained themselves by acts of prowess and their abil-
ity to command sizeable entourages at times of social display. One structure
within which this could be done was the raid, which, if successful, would reward
both the leader and his followers. This is the kind of system which Polybius
recorded among the Cisalpine Celts, We have already seen that, within the
northern ‘peripheral’ zone, raiding may have developed asan economic neces-
sity to provide resources for the prestige goods system of the ‘core to distribute.
Once established, it may have become embedded in the social system of the
Early La Tene periphery, generating a momentum of its own, particularly after
the collapse of the west Hallstatt chiefdoms. In this way, one of the defining
characteristics of early Celtic society was created,

In such a situation, the problem of a growing population could be dealt with
inseveral ways. Atits simplest, a small entourage under a leader could move out
from the homeland to find a new ecological niche to occupy. A process such as
this would have led to the establishment of enclaves of élite warriors, distant
from the homeland, who might, at least for a generation or two, have retained
their identity in an archaeologically-visible form. It is possible that the clusters
of Early La Tene vehicle burials along the Lower Seine, in the Ardennes and the
Haine, and even the group who emerged in Yorkshire, may have owed their ori-
gin to this kind of small-scale warrior exodus.

Attheother end of the scale, larger bands of roaming warriors having no par-
ticular territorial base may have come together under one or more charismatic
leader. It is quite possible that the Gaesatae—warriors who, according to Poly-
bius, were ‘available for hire’ and were decked out in “a variety of armour’ and
were to be found “about the Alps and on the Rhone'—were itinerant fighters of
this kind. Growing population and rigid social constraints in the homelands
could well have swelled their numbers. In such a turbulent and unstable situa-
tion, it would need only the decision on the part of one leader to take his
entourage to the rich pickings of the south for the news to spread and others to
follow, swelling the numbers to a migration and creating a momentum which
drew in the ambitious young from the home regions. A rapidly escalating social
upheaval of this kind could explain the apparently rapid movement of Celtic
populations into the Po Valley: it might also be expected to have left traces in
the home territories.

The most convincing evidence for an exodus of population comes from the
Marne region. A study of the rich burial data shows that during the fifth century
a large stable population occupied the region, its élite buried in state with their

74


===== PAGE 90 (index-93_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

two-wheeled vehicles and wine-drinking equipment. But some time about 400
8¢ the population suddenly declines. Thereafter, only one major focus devel-
oped, in the Reims area, while much of the rest of the Champagne region
appears to have been deserted. Taken at face value, the evidence strongly sug-
gests thata very high proportion of the population must have moved out, leav-
ing only one lineage to maintain a single power centre.

Much the same kind of evidence can be seen in the Rhineland. Although
there was a marked degree of continuity between the distribution and range of
burials from the fifth to the fourth centuries, a sharp reduction in the actual
number of burials is recorded, particularly of warrior burials normally accom-
panied by swords. The evidence from Bohemia is rather less clear-cut, but a
number of cemeteries came to an end at the end of the fifth century and élite
burials disappeared. The archaeological data are therefore consistent with there
having been a major social change in Transalpine Europe at the time of the carly
migrations,

From what has been said it is reasonable to suppose that the three most devel-
oped centres of Early La Tene culture—the Marne, the Moselle, and Bohe-
mia—contributed to populations which made their way through the Alpine
passes about 400 B¢ to set themselves up in the lush lands of the Po Valley. But
the Celtic tribes mentioned by name by Livy as taking part were numerous. The
names of many still appeared on the political map of Gaul, sketched by Julius
Caesar in the middle of the first century 8¢, occurring within the broad terri-
tory stretching from the Marne south to the Massif Central and from the Rhone
to the Middle Loire Valley—the core of Caesar’s Celtic zone of Gaul. While it
might at first sight be tempting to suggest that it was from this huge territory
that the migrating tribes came, tribal mobility in subsequent centuries is likely
to have confused the picture. Indeed, it may be that many of the tribes encoun-
tered by Caesar in central Gaul arrived in their traditional territories at the time
of the initial migrations as sectional groups from diffuse migratory bands. The
situation is likely to have been confused and the archacological evidence is too
ill focused yet to throw much light on it.

The Celts in Italy: 400-180 BC

The initial Celtic settlement of the Po Valley at the end of the fifth century
brought the invaders hard up against the barrier of the Apennines—a barrier
permeated by well-trodden routes linking the Etruscan-dominated north to
the Etruscan homeland backing onto the Tyrrhenian Sea. Inevitably Celtic war
bands were drawn southwards into the heart of Etruria. This occurred at the
moment when Rome, expanding her power northwards, was taking over the
old Etruscan cities one by one. The clash that followed is recorded in some
detail by Polybius and by Livy, though with slightly differing chronologies.
The first stage of the southern thrust brought the Celts to the Etruscan town
of Clusium in 391 B, where their principal demand was to be assigned land to

75


===== PAGE 91 (index-94_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

settle. Roman ambassadors were sent to act on behalf of the city, but negoti-
ations broke down and in the ensuing battle the ambassadors, in breach of
accepted custom, joined in the mélée, one of them killing a Celtic warlord. The
Celts’ demand for recompense was ignored by the Roman authorities, thus has-
tening the next stage of the Celtic advance—the march on Rome.

In July 390 (Livy's date; Polybius says 386), at the Tiber tributary, the Allia,
the Roman army was destroyed and the city, all except the defended Capitol,
fell. The sack of Rome was followed by months of uncertainty, with the Celtic
warriors camped around growing increasingly restive as they suffered waves of
disease. Eventually a compromise was reached and the Celts departed with
1,000 pounds of gold given by the thankful Roman authorities. It is possible
that news of aggressive moves by the Veneti on the eastern border of the Po Val-
ley settlements may have encouraged their departure. A more likely explana-
tion is that the rapid advance of 391-90 was little more than a series of
exploratory raids from the home base north of the Apennines, and, with
honour, curiosity, and the desire for spoils assuaged, the warring bands could
return satisfied.

The devastating blow to Rome's power and authority was in part responsible
for the unrest which gripped central Italy throughout the next half century or
50, during which time Celtic raids and Celtic mercenary forces made intermit-
tent appearances. The raids can best be understood in the context of the Celtic
social system, which employed the raid as a way of maintaining and enhancing
prestige. Expeditions of this kind may have been constantly mounted by the
tribes settled on the Apennine flank. Those raids, which were more ambitious
and deep thrusting than others, brought the Celts into episodic contact with
Roman forces.

The presence of Celtic mercenary forces was an altogether different matter.
Bands of warriors willing to fight were available for employment and were seen
as useful complements to the fighting force by aspiring tyrants. One such man
was Dionysius of Syracuse, who, having gained control of the Etruscan port of
Adria, established a colony further down the coast, at Ancona, in the territory
occupied by the Senones. Ancona provided a convenient base from which to
enlist Celtic mercenaries. An alliance was struck in 385, and one band of merce-
naries, returning from service in southern Italy, joined Dionysius” naval expe-
dition in a joint attack on the Etruscan port of Pyrgi in 384-3. Thereafter
Ancona continued to provide Dionysius and his son with mercenaries for thirty
years. For the most part they served in Italy, but one force was transported to
Greece in 367 to take part in the conflict between Sparta and her allies against
Thebes. Livy specifically mentions the presence of Celtic armies in Apulia, one
of which moved against Rome in 367. The fact that another attack came from
the same area in 149 might suggest that there may have been a long-established
Celtic enclave in the area, but there is little archacological evidence for this,
except for the rich grave of Canosa di Puglia with its extremely fine Celtic hel-
met dated to the late fourth century sc.

76


===== PAGE 92 (index-95_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

By the 3305 Rome had recovered sufficiently to begin a new expansionist
drive,and, tosecure its northern frontier, a peace treaty was negotiated with the
Senones in 334. The peace was short-lived and Celtic attacks became more fre-
quent and serious, but the situation was temporarily stabilized when, following
a defeat of the Senones in 283, Rome founded a colony at Sena Gallica at the
estuary of the River Misa on the Umbrian coast. The Boii reacted by joining
with the Etruscans in a move on Rome, but were defeated and cut to pieces near
Lake Vadimone. The peace treaty which the Boii were persuaded to sign with
Rome was to last.for forty-five years.

After the First Punic War (264-41 8¢) Rome’s attention turned once more to
the north, and in 232 the territory of the Senones was confiscated and made over
to Italian settlement. Further Roman activity in the western Apennines
alarmed the neighbouring Boii. Strengthened by a large force of Gaesatae—
mercenary Celts from beyond the Alps—the Boii, the Insubres, and the Tau-
risci began a long march on Rome through Etruria. In 225 at Telamon on the
Tyrrhenian coast they were caught between two Roman forces. Polybius'
account of the battle (Hist. 2. 28-3. 10) provides a vivid impression of Celtic
warfare. He describes how the Celtic army drew up its ranks to face the attacks
coming from two directions, with the wagons and war chariots on both wings
and their booty stacked on a nearby hill well protected. The Insubres and Boii
wore their breeches and light cloaks, but the Gaesatae fought naked. The
Romans were

terrified by the fine order of the Celtic host and the dreadful din for there were innu-
merable trumpeters and horn-blowers and . . . the whole army were shouting their war
cries at the same time, Very frightening too were the appearance and gestures of the

57 Naorthern Italy in the
second century s¢, at the
time when the Celts were
coming under pressure
from the advancing
Romans.



===== PAGE 93 (index-96_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

naked warriors in front, all in the prime of life and finely built men, and all the leading
companies richly adorned with gold torcs and armlets.

The Romans, impressed by the sight of the gold, took courage and battle com-
menced. Eventually Roman might prevailed and the Celtic force was destroyed.
Estimates of numbers taking part in ancient battles are notoriously unreliable,
but Polybius records that the Celtic force comprised 50,000 infantry and 20,000
horse and chariots. Of these about 40,000 were slain and 10,000 taken prisoner.
It was a defeat on a grand scale: thereafter Celtic attacks from the north were
much reduced.

The Roman triumph was quickly followed up with campaigns in Boian terri-
tory in 224 nc and among the Insubres in 222. The foundation of two Roman
colonies, in 218, among the friendly Cenomani who had taken no part in Tela-
mon, marks a tightening of the Roman hold on the Celtic Cisalpine homeland.

After the Second Punic War, in which Celts had been employed by Hannibal
assomewhat ineffective mercenaries, the Roman armies moved quickly to sub-
jugate the Po Valley. The Cenomani made their peace in 197 sc, Como was
taken in 196, and in 189 a colony was founded at Bononia (Bologna). Asa result
of these campaigns, many of the Boii decided to migrate northwards, back into
Transalpine Europe. But Celtic migrations from the Transalpine region were
not entirely at an end, for in 186 a Celtic horde including 12,000 fighting men
moved through the Carnic Alps intent to plunder and settle. The Roman army,
which marched against them in 183, forced those who survived to return home.
While not a major event in itself, it was a reminder to the Romans that history
might repeat itself and that the only sure defence was the thorough italianiza-
tion of Cisalpine Gaul,

The Danube Corridor in the Fifth and Fourth Centuries

The valley of the River Danube provided the principal corridor of communica-
tion between west central Europe and the east. At two points the valley is con-
stricted by the proximity of mountain ranges. In the west, in the vicinity of
modern Bratislava, the western Carpathians on the north and the Alpine Bur-
genland on the south create a comparatively narrow gap but east of this the
landscape opens up into the Carpathian Basin roughly equivalent to present-
day Hungary and parts of Serbia with the hilly countryside of Transdanubia to
the west of the river and the flatter Great Hungarian Plain to the east. The
eastern extremity of this huge and desirable territory is marked by the narrow-
ing of the valley once more when the eastern Carpathian mountains come close
to the Balkan range at the Iron Gates, now on the border between Serbia and
Romania. Culturally the region divides into two: the western zone from the
Danube to the eastern fringes of the Alps was occupied by indigenous commu-
nities sharing in the generalized Hallstatt culture, while to the east, in the Great
Hungarian Plain, the distinctive Vekerzug group, closely related to the horse-

78


===== PAGE 94 (index-97_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

riding communities of the east, may be regarded as part of the extensive
“Thracian’ culture which, in the sixth century, occupied much of eastern
Europe.

The ancient authors, writing about the Celtic expansion, were broadly
agreed that some part of the migration of ¢.400 s¢ moved eastwards (Fig. 55).
Geography dictates that the principal route used would have been along the
Danube corridor into Moravia, Slovakia, and Hungary. Certainly, by 335 sc,
Celtic groups are historically attested in the Balkans and it is simplest to inter-
pret them as settlers or raiders who had moved through the Middle Danube
region, though an alternative view—that they were an offshoot of Celts moving
eastwards via the Po Valley—should not be too readily rejected.

“The nature of the celticization of the Carpathian Basin can be approached
only through archaeological evidence—primarily the evidence of cemeteries. It
is convenient to divide the material culture of the period into two horizons, the
Vorduchcov (¢.400-370/360 8¢ ) and the Duchcov-Miinsingen (¢.370/360-300
8C), the latter being typified by distinctive brooch types found in a votive
deposit at Duchcov in Bohemia and at a prolific cemetery at Miinsingen near
Berne.

It needs to be stressed at the outset that the movements of Celtic peoples
throughout the Transalpine region in the fourth century are likely to have been
highly complex, varying from large-scale folk migrations, on the one extreme,
to the simple exchange of wives and warriors, on the other. Similarly we must
allow that some of the changes recognizable in the archacological record need
be nothing more than the adoption of new styles and new behaviour patterns
by indigenous communities. An attempt to give historical meaning to these
shades of cultural variation is a hazardous procedure. Having said this, certain
broad interpretations seem valid.

In Bohemia, for example, following the phase of migration, there are indica-
tions of new cultural infiltrations in the first part of the fourth century affecting
north-western, central, and eastern areas. A little later, at the end of the Vor-
duchcov phase, a more significant cultural change is apparent. It is at this time
that the hilltop settlement of Zavist was destroyed and flat-grave cemeteries,
with a new range of grave goods, make a comparatively sudden appearance.
Cultural similarities with material found in western Switzerland and Baden-
Wiirttemberg is generally taken to imply an immigrant warrior population
moving in from the west to take up lands previously vacated by the move of the
original Bohemian population to the south, In the Rhineland during the fourth
century there is a noticeable reduction in the number of settlements and ceme-
teries. Some of these populations presumably travelled south into the Po Val-
ley, but others may well have joined a general movement to the east to Bohemia
and beyond.,

The fourth century sees the development of Celtic communities across a sub-
stantial and diverse territory comprising Moravia, Lower Austria, western
Hungary, and south-west Slovakia. The earliest settlements date to the first half

79


===== PAGE 95 (index-98_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

of the fourth century, but a second phase, in the latter part of the century, can
be distinguished, typified by the flat-grave cemeteries, and characterized by a
material culture closely similar to that found in the Bohemia-Bavarian region
but with elements reflecting contacts further west in Switzerland and the Mid-
dle Rhine and the Marne, This complex spread of Celtic culture, presumably
reflecting successive movements of people, filled up the northern part of Trans-
danubia and extended to the northern fringes of the Great Hungarian Plain
during the fourth century. There is some evidence to suggest that some Celtic
settlers reached Transylvania, in the heart of modern Romania.

Standing back from the dimly perceptible eastward ‘movement’ of Celts, the
general situation developing during the fourth century can be appreciated from
Map 20 showing the European-wide spread of various Early La Tene groups
dominated by the burial of warriors. It demonstrates, with great clarity, a
degree of cultural uniformity brought about in this century of migration,
stretching from the Marne to Transylvania. Though there are distinct regional
variations, it is reasonable to regard this uniformity as a cultural continuum
through which ideas and people moved freely.

The Celts in the Balkans and Greece in the Fourth and Third Centuries

Celtic war parties had penetrated the mountains of llyria by the early fourth
century gc and were in conflict with the Ardiaioi of southern Dalmatia in 380,
It was, however, the expansion of Macedonian power under Alexander the
Great that occasioned the first recorded contacts between the Celtic and Mace-
donian leaders when, in 335 ¢, Celtic emissaries from the Adriatic region vis-
ited the court of Alexander to negotiate a treaty of ‘friendship and hospitality".
Strabo's famous description of the event is worth repeating in full:

The king reccived them kindly and asked them, when drinking, what it was that they
most feared, thinking that they would say himself, but they replicd they feared nothing
except that the sky might fall on them, although indeed, they added, they put above
everything else the friendship of sucha manashe,  (Geog.7.3.8)

The record of a second embassy is recorded by the Greek historian Arrian in
323, when agroup of Celtic leaders visited Alexander, who was then in Babylon.
It may well have been on this journey that the wealth of Asia Minor was noted
for future reference.

Little is heard of the Celts in Ilyria for the next fifty years or so, but the break-
down of Alexander's empire after his death, and the dissipation of the energy of
the Macedonians in the political turmoil which followed, so weakened Mace-
donia and its Greek outpost that the south-east Balkans must have begun to
look like an attractive prospect to the more energetic of the Celtic leaders based
in Illyria and southern Pannonia. In 298 B¢ a force had been led into Macedo-
nia and Thrace under the war leader Cimbaules, but it met substantial resis-
tance. In 280 another attempt was made, this time by Bolgius leading a Celtic

S0


===== PAGE 96 (index-99_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

and Thracian force: the leader of the Macedonians was kKilled and his head
paraded on a Celtic spear.

Whether or not these were exploratory expeditions designed to pave the way
for the massive folk movement which was to follow or were skirmishes caused
by a build-up of population in the Celtic homeland in southern Pannonia is
impossible to judge. One further possibility which has to be borne in mind is
that the Romans were at this time moving against the Senones on the Adriatic
coast of Italy, winning two decisive battles in 295 and 283. The disruption
caused by the Roman aggression may well have encouraged groups of Celts
from the Po Valley to move eastwards through Slovenia to seek new land,
swelling the numbers of dislocated warriors.

Matters seem to have come to a head in 279 Bc. In the previous year, while
Bolgius was involved in Macedonia, some Celtic groups, led by Kérethrios, had
been operating in Thrace and others under Brennus and Achichorius were in
Peonia. Bolgius’ victory over the Macedonian army opened the way for a more
concerted thrust to the south-east.

The onslaught was headed by Brennus moving southwards from central Bul-
garia. An account of what followed was provided by Pausanius, a second-cen-
tury Ap writer who seems to have made use of an carlier, now lost, history
compiled by Hieronymus of Cardia. Allowing for the potential inaccuracies
and bias of the sources, the main events are tolerably clear. The lure, says Pau-
sanius, was the ‘wealth of the Greek states and the even greater wealth in the
sanctuaries including votive offerings and coined silver and gold™. This is notan
unreasonable assumption, but his estimate of the size of the Celtic force—
152,000 infantry and 20,400 horse—is likely to be an exaggeration.

At an early stage in the advance there was discord, and, according to Livy,
some 20,000 men led by Leonorios and Lutorios moved off on their own, even-
tually settling in Asia Minor. The remainder under Brennus and Achichorius
first suffered heavy losses against a Macedonian force before continuing south-
wards to enter Greece through the pass of Thermopylae. Thermopylae was well
defended by the Greeks, but, by splitting forces in an outflanking movement,
the Celts overcame the opposition, though not without considerable losses.
Not pausing for the troops commanded by Achichorius 1o join him, or even to
bury his own dead, Brennus pushed on towards Delphi. What ensued is not
immediately clear. One tradition records that the sanctuary was pillaged, some
of the treasure obtained eventually ending up in the sacred enclosures of the
Volcae Tectosages at Tolosa (Toulouse), where it was appropriated by the
Roman commander Caepio in 106 sc. According to the Greek tradition, on the
other hand, the presiding deity, Apollo, came to the defence of the sanctuary.
Thunder and lightning accompanied by earthquakes caused rocks to roll down
from the heights onto the discouraged Celts, while the Phocians, used to the
stark and sudden nature of the countryside, employed guerrilla tactics in
attacking the Celtic rear. [t may have been these events, combined perhaps with
news that a large part of the force led by Achichorius had been left to guard bag-

81


===== PAGE 97 (index-100_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

gage and spoil at Heraclea, while the remainder had been attacked by the Acto-
lians and Phocaeans, who had captured their supplies, that disheartened the
forces of Brennus. In the event, the retreat began after the wounded had been
put to death. In the night of panic which followed fighting broke out among the
Celts and the next day constant Phocaean sniping prevented the forage parties
from collecting the necessary food,

Eventually the two Celtic armies were reunited but such was the effectiveness
of the growing Greek opposition that Brennus, who had been wounded, suc-
cumbed to the despair of a failed leader and committed suicide, either by drink-
ing undiluted wine or by some other means when drunk (depending upon
the source). The remaining force retreated through Spercheius, where Thes-
salians and Malians were waiting to fall on them in retribution for the brutali-
ties which the Celts had inflicted on the local population on their way south to
Delphi. The depletion of the Celtic force must have been considerable, but it
was surely an exaggeration of Pausanius to say that hardly one escaped safely
from Greece.

The thrust into Greece and the subsequent retreat probably took place
within the single year 279 Bc. It seems to have been no more than a raid
designed to obtain treasure. What distinguishes the attack on Delphi is that the
Celts had chosen to move against a literate people who could record events and
present them according to their own concepts of history. Thus it survivesasone
of the great stories of brutality and heroism. While a notable event in the history
of the Celtic expansion, it may have been no more significant than many such
events for which no written records exist. It is a sobering fact that, had we had
to rely entirely on the archacological evidence, no trace of the events of 279
would have been suspected (Map 21).

Whatever the effectiveness or otherwise of the raid in gaining spoils, the
event was celebrated at Delphi by a regular four-yearly festival of salvation—
the Soteria.

In the immediate aftermath some part of the Celtic force seems to have
moved back northwards to the Middle Danube Valley, contributing to the large
tribal complex which jelled there to become the Scordisci. Some, according to
Polybius, moved eastwards through Thrace and carved out for themselves a
territory around Tyle (Tylis), which became the capital. Here they were con-
veniently sited to demand, and reccive, regular protection money from Byzan-
tium until the enclave was annihilated by the Thracians ¢.212 sc. Another band
under Kérethrios was defeated by Antigonus Gonatus in 278-7 at Lysimacheia.
Of the rest, many will have stayed in Greece and Macedonia to serve as merce-
naries, where there was ample employment to be had. Some were active in the
army of Antigonus in 274, and their shields were among the trophies of victory,
dedicated in the temple of Athena Itomia near Larissa following Antigonus’
defeat by Pyrrhus. Another, very considerable, force was invited to cross the
Hellespont into Asia Minor to fight in the army of Nicomedes of Bithynia in
278. Their passage opens up a new chapter in Celtic history.

82


===== PAGE 98 (index-101_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

The Celts in Asia Minor, Third Century 8¢ to Fourth Century Ap

The Celts who crossed the narrow strip of water between Europe and Asia were
a varied group comprising three separate tribes, the Tolistobogii, the Tec-
tosages, and the Trocmi. They had separated from the main force which
attacked Delphi and were led by Leonorios and Lutorios. What is particularly
interesting is that half their total number of 20,000 were non-combatants—the
women, the children, and the aged. This suggests that, unlike the warriors who
chose to follow Brennus on his raid, the groups who stayed with Leonorios and
Lutorios were migrant populations in search of new land to settle.
In Asia Minor the various Celtic groups were referred to collectively as Gala-
tians and their history was recorded in the lost books of Demetrios of Byzan-
tium, which probably served as the source used by Polybius and for Livy.
Nicomedes employed them in his conflict with Antiochus I, settling them in
disputed territory between his own kingdom of Bithynia and that ruled by
Antiochus. The period of instability which followed culminated in the defeat of 53 The Celtsin Asia Minor,
the Celts in 2754 8¢ in the famous ‘Elephant Battle'. Thereafter the Celts were Shwiong the principal afees

i . o of settlement and the sites of
moved to a barren highland area flanking the Halys, From here, for the next  the major conflicts.

Alml‘"lt
<

77 >

@ w8 B

% 'Ate 2118 0C )

i
\_/a.-n-—: .,-. w-v-unm ~____..__\

.nev—uncm LR ..."""c. S

{g \//

8


===== PAGE 99 (index-102_1.jpg) =====
VIl Facing Statue of a Gaul
carrying a shield of Celtic
type. From Mondragon,
Vaucluse, France. Late first
century e, Musée Calvet,
Avignon,

THE MIGRATIONS

forty-five years or so they became a scourge to the surrounding cities, organiz-
ing frequent raids from their home base particularly against the rich hellenized
cities, where plunder or bribes could easily be had. According to Livy, each of
the three Galatian tribes had their own territory to raid: the Tolistobogii raided
Aeolis, the Trocmi focused on the Hellespont, while the Tectosages regarded
inland Asia Minor as their sphere of activity. Eventually an alliance with
Mithridates | of Pontus encouraged them to move to a new land around
Ancyra.

From the middle of the third century the Celtic raids against the cities of the
Acgean coastal area began to intensify, and Eumenes | of Pergamum (263-41),
now the prime power in the west, decided to buy them off. His successor,
Attalus 1 (241-197), however, chose instead to stand his ground, eventually win-
ning a decisive battle at the Springs of Kaikos in about 233 sc. It was to
celebrate this victory that a monument was erected on the acropolis of Perga-
mum, some statues of which survive in Roman copies, the most famous being
the ‘Dying Gaul',

In the later part of the third century Celts were used extensively as mer-
cenaries in the armies of the Seleucid and Ptolemaic rulers, though from the
fragmentary accounts that survive they appear to have been unruly and some-
what unreliable. One group who became demoralized at an eclipse of the moon
had to be returned with their wives and children to the Hellespont in case they
had decided to change sides. The incident is interesting, because it shows that
some at least of the Celtic mercenaries may have been arriving in fresh groups
from Europe. It was during this period that Celtic warriors were in action as far
afield as Egypt. In 218 Attalus Il employed a European tribe, the Aigosages, to
take part in his campaigns in Acolis and Phrygia and afterwards gave them land
on the borders of Phrygia, from where, under their own initiative, they began to
carry out extensive raids until the entire Celtic population was slaughtered by
Prusias of Bithynia,

In 191 B¢ the Romans were drawn into the political turmoil of Asia Minor as
allies of Pergamum against the Seleucid king Antiochus 111 At Magnesia, in 190,
the Seleucid army, together with its Galatian mercenaries, were soundly
defeated by a combined Roman and Pergamene force, and in the next year the
new Roman commander Cn. Manlius Vulso set out for central Anatolia to deal
with the Galatians in their home territory. In preparation for the onslaught the
Tolistobogii and the fighting men of the Trocmi rallied at Mount Olympos,
three days” travel west of Ancyra, while the Tectosages and the families of the
Trocmi made for Mount Magaba just cast of Ancyra. In a lightning strike Man-
lius defeated first the Tolistobogii and the Trocmi, selling 40,000 men, women,
and children as slaves, and then moved quickly on to defeat the Tectosages. In
the peace which was concluded, the Galatians agreed to stop all raids in the
western parts of Asia Minor. Apart from an abortive attempt by Ortiagon, the
Tolistobogian chief, to unite Galatia and in doing so to make war on Perga-
mum, comparative peace prevailed, the Romans ensuring that the Galatians

84


===== PAGE 100 (index-103_1.jpg) =====
\ ‘:("‘N N AN
i


===== PAGE 101 (index-104_1.jpg) =====
’.5 F:
P o
Wi e
. i g 4
«\“
N
&
'
3 I {


===== PAGE 102 (index-105_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

remained free from Pergamene control. However, in 167 the Galatian attacks
began again and Eumenes 11 was forced to engage in vigorous campaigns
against them, Two years later a new peace treaty was agreed.

The Pergamene victory was widely celebrated. At Pergamum a great sculp-
tured fricze was added to the altar of Zeus, while on the Athenian acropolis a
victory monument was dedicated by the Pergamenes proclaiming, in sculp-
tured allegory, that the rulers of Pergamum, like the Greeks, were the saviours
of the civilized world (see p. 7).

Thereafter the raid, so necessary for the maintenance of Celtic society, was
deflected away from the territory controlled by the western powers towards
other states. Cappadocia was first to suffer and later Pontus, but gradually the
Celtic communities—known universally as the Galatians—absorbed the ways
of Greece and Rome and of their Asiatic neighbours. When, in the middle of the
first century ap, the Christian apostle Paul wrote his letter to the Galatians, he
treated them no differently from any other community in the now Roman
world.

In the formative century following the first incursion of Celts into Asia
Minor in 278 B¢, the Celtic tribes, fed by new bands arriving from time to time
from Europe, maintained a distinctive lifestyle in which the raid, and its more
extreme form, mercenary activity, remained an essential part of the social
system,

The maintenance of a Celtic social structure, and indeed a sense of ethnic
identity implied by the widespread use of the name ‘Galatian', are a remarkable
reflection of the deep-rooted strength of the Celtic tradition. An even more
impressive reminder of this is the persistence of their language. When, in the
fourth century Ap, St Jerome offered the observation that the language used by
the Galatians around Ancyra was similar to that he had heard among the
Treveriat Trier, he was recognizing, though perhaps with the hindsight of a his-
torian, the Celtic ancestry of both people.

The North Pontic Regions in the Fourth and Third Centuries

The north Pontic region, lying both east and west of the Sea of Azov in the basin
of the Kuban River, has produced an array of artefacts which can be regarded as
Celtic. Celtic-style weapons, such as shields and anthropomorphic-hilted
swords, are also depicted on coins minted in the Bosporus in the second half of
the third century (Map 22). Equally significant is a group of Etruscan helmets,
found in Sarmatian graves, the manufacture of which can be dated to before the
middle of the third century, Other finds include a La Téne iron sword from
Neapolis, a Celtic helmet from Boiko-Ponura in the Krasnodar region, which
has close similarities to helmets from Slovenia, and horse gear of Bohemian
type from a grave at Marjevka.

To suggest a historical context for these finds presents some difficulties. One
possibility is that some were introduced by Celtic mercenaries from Asia Minor

8

Villa Facing, abows: Stone
head of a Celtic deity found
close 1o a rectangular
ditched sanctuary at Miccké
Schrovice, Bohemia, Crech
Republic. Note the
characteristic swept-back
hair, drooping moustache,
and neck tor ond or
first century sc? Narodni
Muzcum, Prague.

VIlb Below: Celtic helmets
sometimes had attachments
on the crest either to signify
lineage or status or, more
likely, as religious symbods
to protect the wearer. These
two small boars may well
have been used in such
way, They were found at
Hounsdow in Middlesex,
England and may possibly
have been part of a votive
offering, The bour was &
frequently used image
suggesting that it was.
endowed with particular
potency.


===== PAGE 103 (index-106_1.jpg) =====
E] k bronze kantharos
of the late fourth century w
found at Szob, Pest,

ry. It is very similar

din the
d may

y have been among
poils from the attack
on the sanctuary. Magyar
Nemzeti Muzeum,
Budapest

THE MIGRATIONS

who are recorded to have served in the campaigns of Mithridates Vlaround the
carlier and require a different explanation. It is possible, therefore, that they

northern shores of the Bla

in 63 s, but many of the finds are significantly

reflect a separate incursion from the Balkans or from Transylvania.

European Celts in the Third and Second Centuries

Intheaftermath of the Celtic expulsion from Greece there appears to have been
a period of some turmoil among the Celtic communities roaming south-east-
ern Europe. Historical sources are few and vague, One thread which can be dis
tinguished suggests that one of the returning groups, led by Bathanatos, finally
settled in the Middle Danube region at the confluence of the Sava, Drava, and
Danube, whence they had originally come, creating an extensive confederation
thereafter known as the Scordisci, forming the southernmost extremity of what
can be regarded as the settled core of Celtic Europe. Over succeeding centuries
the Scordisci were responsible for intermittent raiding against neighbouring
Macedonia and Greece.

To the north of the Scordisci, in Transdanubia and the Gr
Plain, the third century Be saw a steady incre:
LaT

the north as well as groups returning from the south-e

cat Hungarian
number and density of

se in the

ne

ettlements and cemeteries resulting from movements of Celts from

. Itis tempting to see
the Greek bronze kantharos found at
Szob in Hungary, which has its closest
s at Galaxidi near Delphi, as a
y brought back from the cam-
paigns. The tribal configuration is not
clear but much of Transdanubia was

in the hands of the Taurisci. The Vol-
cae Tectosages are also mentioned and
it is possible that the Boii were est-
ablishing some enclaves in the north.

In the Great Hungarian Plain the
burials of the native Siginni continued
until the mid-third century, but there-
after La Tene influence became more
apparent, possibly
“eltic groups, and it is in this period that some of the

a result of the

ttlement of infiltrating
La Téne cemeteries extending from the Hungarian border into Transylvania
begin to develop. Taken together, the archaeological evidence suggests that the
broad swath of territory stretching from the eastern fringes of the Alpsto Tran-
sylvania was rapidly becoming celticized. It was in this zone that the classic La

Tene styles and the artistic concepts of indigenous peoples rooted in an eastern
tradition of animal art interacted to create an eastern La Tene art distinguish-

able from that developing in the west.

86


===== PAGE 104 (index-107_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

The distribution of La Téne material extends northward of the Suddetin
Mountains into southern Poland. Finds have been made in sufficient quantity
to suggest that migrant populations may have moved northwards from north-
ern Bohemia in the late fourth and early third centuries to settle in Lower Sile
sia in the present region of Wroclaw, Okawa, and Strzelin, where cemeteries,
presumably indicating the distribution of settlements, are found to occupy the
. in the valleys of the Rivers Cyna and Troja,

most fertile lands. In Upper Silesi
the initial La Teéne settlement is a little later, dating to the second half of the

third century, and may have originated as the result of the movement of peoples

from Moravia. Both communities were ideally located to command trade in
desirable commeodities, such as amber, furs, wax, salt, and graphite, acquired
from the north European zone for exchange with the communities of the south,
where such materials were avidly sought.

The possibility that Celtic groups from the Balkans may have moved west-
wards through Europe and settled in the west is suggested by archacological

and literary evidence. In the Marne region, for example, a new range of warrior

burials accompanied by well-furnished female graves makes a sudden appear-

ance towards the middle of the third century. New cemeteries were established
and old burial sites reused. It is now that areas long abandoned are reoccupied.
The implication is that new Celtic groups had moved into the Champagne
region to augment the thinly scattered indigenous Celtic population. That
these new settlers may have come from the Carpathian Basin is suggested by
similarities in dress between the two areas, in
particular the use of anklets by women, and

by the prevalence of small funerary enclo

sures which now appear.

In southern Gaul there isalso evidence sug-
gestive of an influx of new people from the
Danube region. The southern Gaulish histo
rian Pompeius Trogus, quoted by Justinus,
records that a number of the Tectosages, who
were involved in the retreat from Greece,
moved west eventually to settle in the vicinity
of Toulouse, bringing with them treasure
from the sack of Delphi which they deposited

in sacred lakes. When, in 106 sc, Caepio was sent in charge of a Roman force to

put down a revolt among the Volcae and Tectosages, he had the lakes drained
and the treasure seized with the intention of keeping it for himself. The later
disasters which befell him were believed by Strabo and Justinus to have been the
result of Apollo’s wrath, angered that the sacred treasures of Delphi were again
disturbed.

Some potential archaeological confirmation for this suggested influx is to be

ance of La Tene material in the Languedoc region
At the hilltop settlement of Ensérune, near Béziers,

found in the sudden appe:
and in the Garonne Valley

&

6o Gold tore from Fenouil
let, Haute-G:
d century

nine, France
The

te style of decora:

al of tores from

m

have been introduced
the Middle Danube regior
perha
Musée
Toulouse

s by migrating



===== PAGE 105 (index-108_1.jpg) =====
61 Gold tore from Gajic,
Vojvodina, former
Yogoslavia. Third century
ue. The style is very similar
to those found in south-
westeen France, Magyar
Nemzeti Mazeum,
Budapest.

THE MIGRATIONS

from the carly third century, a high percentage
of the burials contain Celtic warrior gear,
including swords, spears, chain mail, and
shields. Although some La Téne material i
found in carlier contexts, this sudden appear-
ance of warrior panoply may indicate more
than just trade. Further west in the Garonne
Valley, in the general region of Toulouse,
highly decorated gold torcs and armlets made
their appearance in the third century, many
being deposited in hoards such as those at
Fenouillet and Lasgraisses. Stylistically they
can becompared to items found in the Danube
region. Although the density of the distribu-
tion suggests local manufacture, the strong
possibility is that they were made by migrant
craftsmen coming from the east.

The third century was evidently a time of
great mobility in Celtic Europe when coherent
groups of people moved vast distances and
were frequently able to maintain their ethnic identity. The extent of flux and
ferment is only dimly recognizable in the works of the ancient historians, while
the archacological evidence, as is so often the case, is ambiguous and opento a
variety of interpretations. Yet the huge sweeps of territory over which a distine-
tive La Téne culture spread in the third century, and the similarity of artistic
style and behaviour represented in grave goods and burial practice, are a dra-
matic demonstration of a fluidity of ideas caused in some considerable part by
an equal flux of population.

The Mechanisms of Movement

To understand the nature of the motivation behind this remarkable phase of
migration, it is necessary to return to the phenomenon of ‘the raid”. For a Celt
to enhance his status, it was necessary to engage in acts of prowess—to demon-
strate ability to lead, to provide the context for acts of valour, and to acquire
booty for distribution in displays of largess. We have seen above how the socio-
economic system at the end of the Hallstatt period created a situation in which
the raid could develop, but in all probability it was endemic throughout Europe
over a long period, rising to prominence from time to time as conditions
demanded. Late Bronze Age Greece, manifest in Mycenaean culture and refl-
ected in the Homeric literature, provides one such example.

Once the raid had become an established part of the status system, there was
an inbuilt imperative to intensify. A successful raid with spoils to distribute
provided enhanced status for the leader so that on the next occasion he would

88


===== PAGE 106 (index-109_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

attract more followers and there would be increased expectations. Younger
men, wishing to aspire to greatness, would feel compelled to compete, and so
the cycle would feed itself, growing all the while. In such a situation it is easy to
see how the limited raid on neighbours would need to give way to more adven-
turous expeditions, and how, for some sectors of the community, raiding could
have become a full-time occupation. In this context the long-distance raid,
requiring the absence from home for many months, becomes readily under-
standable: mercenary activity, notionally in the employ of others, is simply a
further extension. It is against this background that the long periods of rai
ing—from Cisalpine Gaul into Italy, from the Middle Danube into Macedonia
and Greece, and from central Anatolia to the Aegean coasts—must be seen. The
imperative to raid was the central focus of Celtic society.

The social ‘transhumance’ embodied in the system created the context for
entire populations to move when the territory became too constricted either
for the population to grow or to provide suitable marcher zones around for
small-scale military activity. The situation is vividly demonstrated in one of the
last and most fully documented migrations—that of the Helvetii in 59 and 58
e, Although we see the situation develop only in the words which Julius Cae-
sar chooses to provide for us ( De Bello Gallico1), his account contains a ring of
truth.

The Helvetii lived in Switzerland hemmed in by mountains and the Rhine.

These geographical features meant that they could not range over a wide area and had
greater difficulty in making war on neighbouring tribes. Since the Helvetii enjoyed
fighting, they bitterly resented the restrictions, They considered that the territory they
had did not match the size of their population or its reputation for bravery in war: it was.
toosmall, ..

Caesar goes on to describe the preparations for migra-

tion, the buying of draught animals and wagons, the Nolghoourd

sowing of as much land as possible to provide food for
the march, and the establishment of diplomatic rela- twrm
tions with neighbours through whose territories they

62 Theraid A disgram to
illustrate the dynamics of
the raid as an integral part
of the Celtic social system.
Campetitive emulation
among aspiring leaders will
have created a situation in
which raiding might esca-
late. Mercenary activity and
migration are extreme
muanifestations of the same
system.

Mercanary activity

wished to travel. “They thought two years would be Scale of rakd

enough for completing their preparations and passed a
law declaring that they would set out on the third .. ."
When they were ready to start the migration, they set
fire to their twelve oppida and 400 villages as well as the
surplus grain to prevent any possibility of return and,
with several like-minded neighbouring tribes, they set |
off for a new territory on the Atlantic coast of Gaul.
Their march was intercepted by Caesar, who with
massive force stopped the advance and drove the rem-
nants to return, except for the Boii, who were invited to

i

settle in the territory of the Aedui. Caesar claims to have { Prosige of loader


===== PAGE 107 (index-110_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

found documents in the Helvetian camp listing, in Greek, the migrants, distin-
guishing them by tribe and by gender and age. In total there were 368,000:
263,000 Helvetii, 36,000 Tulingi, 14,000 Latovici, 23,000 Raurici, and 32,000
Boii. Of these 92,000 were armed. After the battle those forced to return num-
bered only 110,000, How reliable these figures are will remain unknown, but at
the very least Caesar’s account gives some idea of the reasons, magnitude, and
organization of a Celtic folk movement.


===== PAGE 108 (index-111_1.jpg) =====
5
Warfare and Society

Tue Graeco-Roman world had many opportunities to observe Celtic armies
in action. Their viewpoint was usually, though not invariably, that of oppo-
nents, and those who recorded the confrontations did so to communicate more
than just ethnographic observations and the facts of history. The writing of
Greek and Roman history was formulaic, Pausanius would write of the Celtic
attack on Greece in the third century Be using the same structure and balance
as did Herodotus when writing of the Persian Wars two centuries earlier. This
equation of Celts with Persians—two enemies of the civilized world—is found
in a fragment of poetry preserved on a papyrus of the third century and again
recurs in sculptured form on the great victory monument erected by the
Pergamene king Attalus I in Athens in the second century. The message is the
same: the enemy from without is fierce and brutal but can be overcome by the
Greek peoples working together for the common good. Pausanius was writing
in the second century ap and was therefore using a variety of earlier sources,
among them Hieronymus of Cardia, who served the Pergamene king Eumenes
in the late fourth century se, and Timacus, who was in Athens during the Celtic
raids, as well as other writers, including, perhaps, Menodotus of Perinthus and
Agatharchides of Cnidus. The range of information available to him was varied,
but the constraints of his selection and presentation were rigidly circum-
scribed.

One of the key figures in the Roman historical tradition was Polybius, a citi-
zen of the Greek town of Megalopolis who was deported to Rome in 168 sc.
Polybius” intention was to present the Celts as a formative influence on the
development of Roman military power. In his view the initial invasion in the
carly fourth century and the continuous threat created by the Celtic settlement
in the Po Valley were instrumental in the honing of Rome's military compe-
tence. For him the Celts are to be presented as a contrast to the calm efficiency
of the Roman army. While the Romans are steadfast, level-headed, well-led,

9


===== PAGE 109 (index-112_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

and achieve victory by dogged determination, the Celts are volatile and unpre-
dictable and, though fierce in the initial onslaught, can casily lose heart and
panic. It is, therefore, their antithetical qualities to the Romans that he gives
most attention to. Polybius’ writings provide one of the prime sources used by
Livy (59 Bc-Ap17) for his History, and, while it is evident that Livy had other
sources of information on the Celts, the influence of Polybius' thes
Onge more the Celts are presented as impulsive barbarians with an inal
plan rationally.

The narrative history of Polybius was continued by Poseidonius for the
period 145-82 sc. The importance of Poseidonius (135-51 5¢) is that he travelled
widely in the Alps, Gaul, Spain, and possibly also Britain, observing for himself
different Celtic societies in different states of development. His description of
the Celts has survived only in the works of other writers, notably Strabo,
Diodorus Siculus, Athenaeus, and Caesar, but when these are taken together it
is clear that Poseidonius was a keen observer with the eye of an anthropologist
and that he was well aware of the changes that were taking place. From his view-
point asa Stoic he may be critical of many of the more irrational and exuberant
aspects of Celtic society and tend to overemphasize them, but what he offers has
a ring of truthful reporting. His approach is to present the Celt as a Noble
Savage—a natural man untouched by civilization—but in pointing up the con-
trast to the civilized world he was prone to overemphasis.

Julius Caesar probably used Poseidonius as a source, but he also had the
unique opportunity of observing a variety of Celtic tribes from close hand dur-
ing his eight years of campaigning. His war Commentaries are, by their very
nature, biased sources. Caesar is at pains to present the Celts ina way that would
have been familiar to his audience, playing on old prejudices, not least by
emphasizing the fierceness and unreliability of the enemy, thereby enhancing
his own achievements and providing a justification for his action. While his
descriptions of Celtic society in Gaul and his picture of Britain and the Britons
may be selective interpolations, culled from the sources available to him, there
is much in his general accounts of military and political matters that is highly
informative about the Celtic communities he was confronting.

Of the later sources, Tacitus offers new insights particularly about the Brit-
ons. Once more there is a reliance on stock stercotypes and the bias inherent in
using the concept of the Noble Savage to point up the iniquities of the times, but
behind the selection and the rhetoric there are many useful insights into native
customs and social and political organization.

Clearly all the historical sources available to us are biased in one way or
another—such is the nature of historical sources—but it should not prevent us
from using them in an attempt to characterize Celtic society and warfare. The
greatest difficulties concern chronological and regional variation. To imply
that any generalized description has universal application is evident nonsense.
Most of our sources concern Celtic groups in the fourth to second centuries liv-
ing in, and raiding from, those parts of Europe that were in proximity to the

92


===== PAGE 110 (index-113_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

Mediterranean world. Within these parameters we may legitimately attempt to
reconstruct a generalized picture of classic Celtic culture. Of the more remote
Il that can be said is that some of them may
n their history. There are, however, real

Celtic regions, ve shared aspects
of the classical model at some time
difficulties in extending the model. Thus, while the troops led by Calga
against Agricola in northern Scotland in ap 84 appeared to have behaved in

many ways like Celtic armies in Italy in the fourth and third centuries Bc, it is

us

not easy to decide whether these apparent similarities are a manifestation of

archaic "Celtic behaviour” in remote and backward areas or the use by itus
of a series of familiar Celtic stereotypes. A further possibility, that primitive
warfare exhibited many similarities irrespective of time, place, and ethnicity,

has also to be borne in mind.

The Warrior and his Equipment
The classic Celtic image is provided in Strabo's oft-quoted description:

The whole race . .. is madly fond of war, high spirited and quick to battle, but otherwise
straightforward and not of evil character, And so when they are stirred up they assem-
ble in their bands for battle, quite openly and without forethought, so that they are cas-
ily handled by those who desire to outwit them,

When they are aroused, he says,

they are ready to fa

¢ danger even if they have
nothing on their side but their own strength and
courage ... their strength depends on their mighty
bodies, and on their numbers . . . to the frankness
and high-spiritedness of their temperament must
be added the traits of childish boastfulness and
love of decoration. They wear ornaments of gold
torques on their necks, and bracelets on their arms

and wrists, while people of high rank wear dyed

garments besprinkled with gold. 1t is this vanity
which makes them unbearable in victory and so

completely downcast in defeat.  (Geog. 4. 4.2)

Here then are displayed all the characteris-
tics of the Greek or Roman vision of a Celtic
warrior: he is ferocious, impetuous, boastful,
flamboyant, and mercurial—not a foe to be
lightly tangled with,

The weapons carried by the warrior were a
sword, usually fastened on the right side, and
aspear. Some used bows and arrows, slings, or

throwing clubs. The normal means of protec-
tion was the shield, but sometimes helmets

63 Detail of a brooch,
parssibly of berian orig
showing a naked Celtic

rioe complete with &
typical set of armaur, attack-
sllection.

inga lion. Private



