===== PAGE 111 (index-114_1.jpg) =====
64 Spearheads recovered
from the site of La Tene in
Switzerland, The variety of
forms suggests a degree of
specialization in the use of
the spear in the hunt and in
warfare.

65 The excavation of
Maiden Castle, Dorset,
England, exposed a pit
containing about 20,000
carcfully chanen pebbles
to serve as sling stones for
the defence of the fort in
the first century Ap. The
ammunition dump lay
just inside the strongly
fortified cast gate.

WARFARE AND SOCIETY

were worn and less often tunics of ring mail,
All these pieces of equipment, mentioned in
the texts, are reflected in the archacological
record and in the surviving iconography,
though it is sometimes possible to detect
regional variations. Among the Parisii of
Yorkshire, for example, the sword was some-
& times worn across the back and had therefore
) ). > to be drawn over the shoulder from behind
the head.

Iron swords in sheaths of iron, bronze,
wood, or leather were the symbol of the war-
rior and as such were often personalized by
elaborate decoration applied to the sheath or by stamps beaten into the blade
(Fig. 87). Polybius is scathing of the quality of the swords used at Telamon in the
third century. They were good for cutting but not thrusting and became easily
bent during battle, requiring the warriors to pause and bend them back into
shape with the foot, he reports. While there was, indeed, a variation in quality,
and some made of softer iron may have been ineffective, the description may
owe something to the fact that swords were often deliberately bent before being
ritually deposited and it may have been the results of ritual activity rather than
battle that Polybius was noting.

Throwing and thrusting spears were equally important, and a considerable
variety of spearheads have been found, the different weights and shapes suiting
them to different purposes. The large collection recovered from the ritual site
of La Téne presents a variety of lethal designs with serrated, flame-shaped, and
hollow ground blades designed for easy penetration. One version, with a
notched blade, conforms to the type described by Diodorus Siculus with
‘breaks throughout the entire length so that the blow not only cuts butalso tears
the flesh, and the recovery of the spear rips
open the wound’ ( Hist. 5. 30).

Bows and arrows are not often mentioned
and are rare in the archacological record, but
a scatter of bronze arrowheads of trilobate
kind, a type common among the Scythians,
may have been brought back to western
Europe by mercenaries and migrants who
had learnt to use them in the east. That it was
not used in any of the recorded conflicts
implies, however, that archery never ach-
ieved much favour in the Celtic world.

Theslingis also only mentioned in passing
and does not feature in any set-piece battle.
In Britain, however, there is ample archaco-

94


===== PAGE 112 (index-115_1.jpg) =====
Actial view of the __MAIDEN CASTLE DORSET FAST _ENTRANCE
Maiden Castle,

by the Second Le
Ab 43,

67 Right The cast entrance

of Maiden Castle ingthe

arrangemcnt of the sling
platforms



===== PAGE 113 (index-116_1.jpg) =====
logical evidence for its use asa defensive weapon at hill forts. Huge stockpiles of
carefully selected sling pebbles found near the gates of Maiden Castle and
Danebury were kept in readiness, and the design of the gates and earthworks
seems to reflect the use of the sling to drive away attackers, That slings were also
used in attacks upon hill forts is specifically mentioned by Caesar in describing
Gaulish warfare, in which the missile volley was employed to drive defenders

from the ramparts, In such contexts, slings would have been particularly

effective, but much less so in open warfare.

T'he principal form of personal protection used by the warrior in battle was
the shield, described by Diodorus as man-sized and decorated in individual
fashion, some with projecting bronze animals of fine workmanship. A visual
impression of the variety of decoration achieved is provided by the piles of
armour depicted on the Roman arch at Orange. The most effective form of
shield was made of leather or wood or a combination of the two. The ritual
deposit found in a bog at Hjortspring on the Danish island of Als contained a
number of wooden shields made out of planks with circular holes to take hand
holds with the knuckles protected by wooden umbos. Shields of this kind
would have been effective but heavy. A far more efficient model is that typified

96



===== PAGE 114 (index-117_1.jpg) =====
e shiclds are made fi

ks of wood with
covered by umbo

provide a hand-}

Nationalmuscet, Copen

hagen

perary,
is made
4

covered with beather and
bound around the edge with
leather strips. T

s that

whd, while very

sars. N
Ireland, D

7 Lefe The Chertsey shickd
recovered from the R
Thames at Chertsey, Surrey
England. Elsborate metal
elds of this k

ond century ne. British
Museum,


===== PAGE 115 (index-118_1.jpg) =====
72 Helmet found in a

s grave at Ciumesti
Romania. It bears a fear
some bird with movable

uld flap

when the wearer ran, a

staring eyes of red glass,
Early third century n
Muzeul National de Is
Bucharest. Th
helnset from the Th

rmed

would akso
wearer ook d

British Museum, |

WARFARE AND SOCIETY

by the shield found ina bogat Clonoura, Co. Tipperary, in Ireland. [t was com

posed of a thin sheet of wood covered back and front with leather providing a

light and highly resilient form of protection, the umbo was also of leather. A

shield of similar structure can be reconstructed from the archacological evi-

dence surviving in a burial at St Peter Port, Guernsey, but in this case the pro-
tective umbo was of iron, in the corrosion products of which traces of the wood
and leather body of the shield were preserved. In all probability this type was in
widespread use, though it is usually only the metal fittings that survive. Among
the more claborate examples are those covered in sheet bronze with bronze
umbos, often highly decorated. Examples from the Thames, at Chertsey and
Battersea (Pl V) and from the River Witham were probably votive offerings
and may indeed have been made as such. Such pieces were more appropriate to
the parade than to warfare.

Bronze helmets were a feature of warrior
equipment. Diodorus mentions that some
possess ‘long projecting figures, lending the
appearance of enormous stature to the
wearer. In some cases horns form one piece
with the helmet, while in other cases it is relief
figures or the foreparts of birds or quadru-
peds’ (Hist. 5. 30). This is amply borne out in
the archaeological record, with finds of hel
mets with sockets for projecting elements
and, in the case of one helmet from Ciumesti
in Romania, with an attached bird complete
with flapping wings. The horned helmet from
the Thames

at Waterloo Bridge conforms to
the general description, while small castings
of bronze boars found in many parts of Eur
ope are most likely to have been helmet
attachments. Boar-crested helmets as well as
others with birds and horns are shown worn
by the warriors depicted on the Gunderstrup
cauldron.

Diodorus also mentions that some war-
riors wear iron breast plates of chain mail.
S

ted figures of stone from the sanctuary of
Roquepertuse (Fig. 163) and a stone statue of
Alpes) (PL VI),
dating to the late first century gc, are shown

a Gaul from Vacheres (Basse

wearing chain mail, and actual examples have
been found in a few burials, including that of
the warrior provided with the bird-crested
helmet, who was buried at Ciumegti.

98


===== PAGE 116 (index-119_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOC

ETY

One of the features of Celtic warfare which impressed itself upon the classi-
cal mind was the fact that some warriors fought naked except for the sword belt
and a gold neck torc, In his description of the battle of Telamon in 225 8¢
Polybius distinguishes a particular detachment—the
Gaesatae—who fought in this way. 'Very terrifying, too,
were the appearance and gestures of the naked warriors
in front, all in the prime of life and finely built men, and
all in the leading companies richly adorned with gold
torcs and armlets’ ( Hist, 29. 5-9). Polybius believed that
they discarded their clothes because they thought that
they would be a hindrance in battle, but this is likely to
be a rationalization. In all probability nakedness had a
ritual significance. The Gaesatae (‘spear-men’) were
distinguishable as a distinct group and at Telamon
appear to have been a lately arrived mercenary force. Their ritual nakedness
may have been a demonstration of their oneness as a fighting body. Nakedness
in battle is again referred to in Galatia in 189 Bc, when the Tolistobogii and
Trocmi took off their clothes before battle with the Romans exposing their
podgy white bodies, which enhanced the vividness of their wounds as they were
cut to pieces by the Roman force.

The vision of the naked Celt is a recurring theme in Graeco-Roman art, as is
witnessed by the copies of the Pergamene statues, but it also appears much ear-
lier on the Bologna funerary stela of the fifth century nc, which shows a naked
Celtic foot soldier in conflict with a mounted Etruscan (Fig. 54). In sum, the
evidence leaves little doubt that to fight naked was a comparatively common
occurrence in the Celtic world.

Another recurring theme in the literature and in art is the wearing of the torc
in battle. The torc had a deep religious significance. Deities are usually shown
wearing torcs ( PL, X1) and the seated god on the Gunderstrup cauldron, in addi-
tion to wearing a torc, holds one in his hand. Torcs are also a component of rit-
ual deposi as is witnessed, in particular, at Snettisham in Norfolk (PL
XXI15). The tore will have given the wearer the sense of being protected by the
gods—it was a symbol of his life and being. When, in 361 nc, the Roman Man-
lius confronted a Celtic chieftain in single combat, the Celt fought naked but
for his shield, two swords, and his torc and armlets. Manlius killed him and
took his torc, acquiring, in doing so, the name ‘Torquatus’. Nearly 200 years
later, in 191, when the Roman army defeated the Celts at Bologna, the spoils
included 1,500 gold torcs. Even as late as A 60, when the British queen, Boud-
ica, led her troops into battle, she wore a cloak and a gold torc, and carried a
spear.

The Celtic war chariot impressed a number of observers. Diodorus describes
how ‘for journeys and in battle they use two-horse chariots, the chariot carrying
both charioteer and chieftain. When they meet with cavalry in battle they cast
their javelins at the enemy and then descending from the chariot join battle

99

73 Detail from the caukdron
found at Gunderstrup,
Denmark, showing
maunted warriors wearing
helmets, one with a bied
crest, the ather with a boar,
First century nc? National-
museet, Copenhagen.


===== PAGE 117 (index-120_1.jpg) =====
Chariot depicted,
somcwhat stylistically, on a
<oin of the northern Gaglish
tribe, the Remi. First half of
first centary ne..

7% Below: A Celtic war
chariot shawn in action on
the reverse of a Roman
denarius minted in 48 &
The charioteer drives the
horses, while the noble war
rior, naked but armed, looks
for action.

WARFARE AND SOCIETY

with their swords’. The absence of any reference to chariot warfare in Gaul dur-
ing Caesar’s campaigns suggests that as a means of fighting it was no longer of
significance. When, however, he crossed the Channel to Britain, he found the
chariot much in evidence. He was sufficiently impressed by the novelty of the

ng in particular the agility of the charioteer, who, by virtue of long
could run out along the chariot pole between the horses and
could check and change direction in a moment. The speed with which
chariots could move the combatant from one point of the field to
another was particularly effective and led Caesar to make the shrewd
observation of a military man that “They combined the staying power of
infantry with the mobility of cavalry.’ In Britain his chief opponent
Cassivellaunus was able to muster 4,000 chariots, which, if used together,
must have been a formidable sight.
Sufficient is known of these machines from the
their metal fittings and from depiction on contemporary coinage to appre-
ate their lightness and efficiency. The chariot was essentially a platform,
carried on a pair of iron-tired, spoked wheels c.0.9 metres in diameter,
linked by a pole and yoke to two small ponies. The sides were low dou-
ble hoops of bent wood or wickerwork, while the front and back were
open for case of access, The war chariot of this kind was a specialized
version of the two-wheeled vehicle which became popular in the Celtic
world in the fifth century sc and was used from then on in funerary rit-
ual. Its ultimate inspiration may well have come from the Etruscan world.

There is no reason to assume that the funerary vehicles were war chariots,
Structurally they
ial was a parade vehicle symbolizing the high status of the deceased, though it
might have been possible to convert one to the other.

Diodorus, as we hav vs that, when the chariot teams meet with
opposing cavalry, the combatants first throw their javelins and then descend
from the chariot to join battle with their swords. Caesar adds that the chariots
then moved off but returned when necessary to pick up the warrior and carry
him to another part of the field. The chariot driver was evidently a skilled per-
sonand of vital importance to the well-being of the warrior he served. Diodorus
records that the élite *bring into battle as their attendants free men chosen from
among the poorer classes whom they use as charioteers and shield bearers in
battle’ (Hist. 5. 29).

A remark of Pausanius’ throws some further light on the battle order. He
mentions the trimarcisia (literally ‘three riders') asa Celtic fighting unit, imply-
ing that the warrior élite were accompanied by two supporters. In this case we
are dealing with a cavalry unit. y behind the ranks as
battle proceeded ready to dash to their master’s assistance if he needed a fresh
horse or was wounded and, if he were seriously injured, to take his place in the
battle line.

chacological remains of

were similar, but it is more likely that the vehicle used in bur-

seen,

he supporters would s

100


===== PAGE 118 (index-121_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

The chariot team and the trimarcisia imply a
close and practised relationship between fight-
ing men bound by obligation and honour, much
as a knight and squire worked together in med-
ieval warfare. In this context it is possible to un-

derstand the depth of the antagonism between

the British queen, Cartimandua, and her hus-
band Venutius when she left her husband in
favour of Vellocatus, who was described as his
‘armour bearer', Not only was she publicly dis-
honouring Venutius, but she was weakening
him by removing a trained and trusted member
of his fighting entourage.

The Battle

The most informative description of the anthro-
pology of the Celtic battle is provided by Dio-
dorus Siculus (presumably using Poseidonius as
asource):

When the armies are drawn up in battle-array, they [the chiefs] are wont to advance
before the battleline and 1o challenge the bravest of their opponents to single combat, at
the same time brandishing before them their arms so as to terrify their foc. When some-
one accepts their challenge to battle, they loudly recite the deeds of valour of their ances-
torsand proclaim their own valorous quality, at the same time abusing and making little
of their opponent and generally attempting to rob him beforehand of his fighting spirit.
(Hist. 5. 29)

A further detail is added by Athenacus (also quoting Poseidonius) when he
notes that “The Celts have in their company even in war, companions whom
they call parasites. These men pronounce their praises before the whole assem-
bly and before each of the chieftains in turn as they listen.” It was no doubt this
pattern of behaviour that led Diodorus to the generalization that “They fre-
quently exaggerate with the aim of extolling themselves and diminishing the
status of others. They are boasters and threateners and given 1o bombastic self-
dramatization’ (Hist. 5. 31).

Taken together, and rid of the prejudice inherent in the style of the sources,
these statements provide a vivid insight into the nature of Celtic warfare in its
classic form, before frequent contact with Mediterranean armies brought
about changes. Conflict was endemic: it was embedded in the social system, but
was constrained, as it was and is in many societies, by conventions which
attempted to limit hostilities to selected heroes. Through them all society
could, vicariously, indulge in battle. The drawing-up of the two opposing
forces, with women and children looking on from the rear, provided the occa-
sion. The individual heroes would then issue their challenges, the tension

101

76 Reconstruction of a
Celtic chariot (after Stuart
Piggott). The essence of the
vehicle is its light flexible
construction designed for
spoed and casy manceuy-
rability.


===== PAGE 119 (index-122_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

heightened by eulogies of prowess. In these tirades the satirizing of an oppo-
nent in public could be a potent weapon. Once the challenge was accepted, the
combatants would engage in full view of the assembled mass. It is quite con-
ceivable that in such a situation, after a succession of contests, the result would
be obvious and all could disperse. On other occasions growing tension could
give rise to a more widespread engagement.

This pattern of structured aggression leading to a general mélée is evident in
the gladiatorial contest held in the amphitheatre of Pompeii during the reign of
Nero between contestants provided by Pompeii and Nucria. Dissatisfaction
with the result led the spectators supporting the two sides to engage in open,
and bloody, conflict. It is much the same chemistry that today leads supporters
to invade the football pitch.

The theme of single combat in the battle situation recurs in Livy’s History. In
361 e the Roman Manlius engaged in single combat with a Celt who goaded his
opponent by poking out his tongue and laughing. Manlius used his short
Spanish stabbing sword to good effect against the heavy Celtic slashing sword.
Inanother tale, referring to 348, the tribune Valerius confronted a Celtic chief-
tain, having first gained permission from the consuls to take up his opponent’s
challenge. As battle commenced a crow perched on Valerius” helmet and
attacked the Celt’s eyes and face before returning to the helmet to watch the
resulting combat. The Celt, weakened by the demonstration of divine dis-
favour, collapsed and was killed. For this Valerius gained the cognomen *Cor-
vinus'. The parallelism between the two stories may suggest the repetition of a
single incident or even a fictitious embroidery, but the fact that Livy had access
to the tradition suggests that single combat was a feature of fourth century
Celtic behaviour in Italy. As Celtic forces faced the armies of Mediterranean
states, so fighting tactics will have changed and single combat will have become
increasingly irrelevant. The general onslaught now became the norm, and the
fierceness and power of the Celtic charge became legendary.

One of the recurring themes in the classical sources is the noise of the Celts in
battle. The Celt who faced Manlius preceded the combat with a war dance and
battle chant which almost certainly had a magico-religious significance. Simi-
larly the war trumpets—carnyxes—used in the opening stages of conflict were
probably employed as much for ritual reasons as to strike fear into the enemy.
Diodorus’ description is brief. “Their trumpets again are of a peculiar barbarian
kind; they blow into them and produce a harsh sound which suits the tumult of
war’ (Hist.5. 30), but the theme is taken up more dramatically by Polybius in his
description of the battle of Telamon (225 8c). He tells how the Romans were
terrified by the fine order of the Celtic army and ‘the dreadful din, for there were
innumerable hornblowers and trumpeters and, as the whole army were shout-
ing their war-cries at the same time, there was such a tumult of sound that it
seemed that not only the trumpeters and the soldiers but all the country round
had got a voice and caught up the cry’ (Hist. 29. 5-9). While it is too easy to read
things into this picturesque description, it may have been intended to commu-

102


===== PAGE 120 (index-123_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

nicate the idea of the Celtic troops calling up the gods of the land in their cause.
This same sense of panic was instilled into the Roman force who faced a Celtic
mob supported by their Druids shouting dreadful imprecations as they pre-
pared to attack the Druidic sanctuary on Anglesey in ap 59.

There is nothing specifically Celtic about the use of horns or battle cries,
After all, Joshua used musical instruments to good (no doubt symbolic) effect
when he paraded around the walls of Jericho. Why the classical sources tend to
emphasize this raucous noise is that it was alien to the more ordered and con-
sidered Greek and Roman approach to battle—it served to characterize the bar-
barian.

The strength of the Celtic attack lay in the ferocity of the first onslaught. It
was a power generated by many things, a belief in an afterlife, a desire to gain
glory, and a battle hysteria created by the building crescendo of noise and
chanting, often enhanced still further by alcohol—in fact the usual methods
which fighting forces through the ages have used to give courage at the moment
of battle. But the fury, by its very nature, lacked control: it was impetuous but
without any forethought or planning. Thus, when the onslaught was held and
turned, there was no strategy in reserve (o cope, and desperation set in. The
misery of the Celt in defeat was recorded on a number of occasions. At
Telamon, after Roman successes, some of the Celts, ‘reduced to utmost distress
and complexity . . . in their impotent rage rushed wildly on the enemy and
sacrificed their lives, while others, retreating step by step on the ranks of their
comrades, threw them into disorder by their display of faint-heartedness”. This
same theme recurs in the aftermath of the battle between Agricola and the
native war leader Calgacus and is told vividly by Tacitus:

On the enemy’s side cach man now followed his bent. Some bands, though armed, fled
before inferior numbers, some men, though unarmed, insisted on charging to their
deaths. Armour, bodics, severed limbs lay all around and the carth recked of blood; and
the vanquished now and then found their fury and their courage again.  (Agricola 37).

The unpredictability and unreliability of the Celt who could at one moment
be fierce and bombastic and at another flee in a deranged panic were part of the
stereotype which classical writers chose to perpetuate, but that there were many
occasions of steadfast heroism is not in doubt. Caesar’s description of his battle
against the Nervii in the second year of his Gallic War serves to redress the bal-
ance:

When their front rank had fallen, the next stood on the prostrate forms and fought from
them: when these were cast down and the corpses were piled up in heaps, the survivors,
standing as it were upon a mound, hurled darts at our troops, or caught and returned
ourjavelins,  (De Bello Gallico 2. 27)

As a result of this engagement, the tribe was almost annihilated. Of the 60,000
who could bear arms, only 500 survived. Even allowing for Caesar's exaggera-
tion, the battle of the Sambre was an heroic last stand.

)
1 oo f:

77 Abore Parts of war
trumgpets (carnyxes) from
Deskford. Banfishire,
Scotland (left), and
Tattershall Ferry,
Lincolnshire, England
(right), Trumypets of this
kind are shown on the
Gunderstrup cauldron and
on various Celtic coins.

78 Belom: Detail from the
Gunderstrup cauklron
showing three men blowing
war trampets (camyxes).
First century nc? National-
musect, Copenhagen.



===== PAGE 121 (index-124_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

Heroism is a leitmotif in classical accounts of Celtic warfare. Wounds were a
source of pride and might even be opened up further by the bearer if considered
to be too insignificant. Failure, particularly of a war leader, was unacceptable.
The stark sculpted image of the Celt committing suicide by the body of his wife,
adorning the temple of Athene at Pergamum (PL 11), would have reminded the
Graeco-Roman world of the Celtic moral code. The recorded suicides of failed
Celtic leaders are many: Brennus flecing from Delphi, Florus and Sacrovir after
the failed rebellion in Gaul, and Boudica in Britain dre among the more famous.
Against the social context of Celtic warfare, this is easily understood. The battle
wasameans of creating and enhancing warrior prowess. It wasa public event in
which achievement could be seen, judged, and remembered: failure subjected
to the same scrutiny was socially unacceptable and demanded the honourable
solution,

Celtic warfare evolved in different places at different rates. Boudica and
Calgacus were using methods and equipment abandoned in the more central
areas of the Celtic world several centuries earlier, and it is doubtful if the war
chariot was ever seen in Ireland, in spite of its frequent appearance in the heroic
vernacular literature. Similarly, the Nervii who so bravely opposed Caesar
would have developed their fighting methods against neighbours and Ger-
mans, in contrast to the Volcae Tectosages of southern Gaul, whose ancestors
were conversant with the hoplite army of the Greeks. Although Celtic warrior
equipment remained remarkably similar across considerable areas and
through time, subtle changes can be detected. By the third century s the stan-
dard panoply became increasingly heavy, involving, it is estimated, up to five
times more metal per man than two centuries earlier. The Celt at this stage was
a heavily armed infantryman. The shield had developed a more elaborate and
efficient umbo, and the chain by which the sword was slung from the belt had
become a heavy complex structure brilliantly designed to keep the sword in
place, however the body moved, to prevent the sheath from encumbering the
warrior’s feet. Thus equipped, and adopting the technique of the furious
frontal onslaught, the Celts were able to deal efficiently with Mediterranean
armies organized on the model of the Macedonian phalanx.

During the third century cavalry began to play a significant part in Graeco-
Roman warfare, and the Celts’ familiarity with the horse, which was long
established, made them a sought-after addition as specialized mercenaries.
Hannibal was to make good use of heavily armed Celtic cavalry during the
Second Punic War. The growing importance of the cavalry is reflected in a
marked increase in the length of the sword, many examples of which, by the end
of the century, had reached 80-90 centimetres—too long for comfort in
infantry fighting.

The battle of Telamon in 225 B¢ in many ways marks a turning-point. Itis the
last recorded battle on the continent of Europe in which the chariot appeared,
and one in which Celtic cavalry, separately deployed, was to play a significant
part. Thereafter, as cavalry became increasingly important, it is likely that the

104


===== PAGE 122 (index-125_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

chariot began to decline, disappearing altogether by the beginning of the first
century Bc exceptamong the Insular Celts. During Caesar's campaigns in Gaul,
detachments of Gallic cavalry were widely used on both sides, and after roman-
ization Gaul provided some of the most effective cavalry auxilia in the Roman
army.

The Feast

Central to the establishment and maintenance of the social equilibrium was the
feast. The feast was a social gathering at which status and prestige were demon-
strated, flaunted, and challenged. The Poseidonian tradition provides an out-
line of procedure. On a formal occasion the men sat in a circle with the most
influential member, judged on the basis of military prowess, nobility of birth,
or wealth, occupying the central position. Beside him sat the host and next, on
cither side, the others in the order of their distinction. It appears that each man
had two retainers present: his shield man, who took up a position behind his
master, and his spear man. The spear men dined together but in the same room
as their masters.

Poscidonius (in Athenaeus, Deipriosophistae 4. 40) records three behavioural
practices. The first is the hero's portion, in which the beast is cut and served
according to status, “When the hindquarters were served up, the bravest hero
took the thigh piece and if another man claimed it they stood up and fought in
single combat to death.” This, he notes, was the practice in ‘former times”. Itisa
motif which is to be found several times in the vernacular tradition of Ireland,
in famous stories like Bricriu's feast and Mac Datho’s pig. The second, which
may have grown out of the first, was outright aggression. Sometimes single
combat took place, as a result of which people could be wounded or killed. The
third practice was more extreme. A man might pledge his life for gifts of gold,
silver, or amphorae of wine, When the deal had been done, he would distribute
the gifts among family and friends and would then lie stretched out face up-
wards on his shield, ‘while another standing by cut [his] throat with his sword'.

These anecdotal scraps belie the social complexity of the feast but provide
some indication of its importance in Celtic society. The feast was evidently a
highly structured affair organized rigorously according to status. The arrange-
ment of the participants and the serving of the meat provided the occasions for
the definition of the social hierarchy and its public affirmation. If anyone felt
demeaned by the ordering, he would contest it, and the ensuing conflict could
lead 1o single combat and death. In any event, the contest would be resolved in
the public arena, and thereafter the new order would be known and observed.
Clearly, then, the feast provided the opportunity for the aspiring young man to
make his claim and to demonstrate the power and the following to sustain it.
The feast may well have been the moment when a warrior would propose to
lead a raid and would gather support from those present. The size of his follow-
ing would depend upon his status and the degree of inebriation of the assembly,

105

79 Bronze cauldron with
itsiron suspension chain
and hooks found at the site
of La Téne, Neuchitel,
Switzerland. Third or
second century s,
Caubdrons of this kind
would have formed the
focus of the feast. Musée
Cantonal d'Archéologie,
Neuchitel, Switzerland.


===== PAGE 123 (index-126_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

Just such a practice is recorded by Tacitus among the Germans. Failure to meet
assurances made at the feast would bring disgrace.

In such a context the need for the individual to proclaim his virtues is evid-
ent. The Poseidonian tradition is possibly referring to this in recording that the
Celts frequently exaggerate with the aim of extolling themselves and diminish-
ing opponents. Others could be employed to do it for them, such as the ‘para-
sites’ who accompanied their masters in war and peace to pronounce their
praises to the whole assembly and, no doubt, to denigrate their lord’s rivals by
satire. The bards are to be distinguished from these dependent followers. They
were part of the skilled élite—the entertainers and ‘poets who delivered eulo-
gies in song’. The value of the praises of such men would be greater than that of
the subservient parasites, and one can anticipate the tension that there must
have been at a feast when the bard started to perform to see whom he would
choose 1o praise and how he would use his skills to balance his culogies between
those he considered to be worthy of them. Part of his skill would have been to
keep his audience on tenterhooks until the last moment. To cultivate such men
was important to an aspiring leader. The Arvernian chief Louernius was well
aware of this when the bard who arrived late at his feast composed a song to the
chief’s greatness, lamenting his own late arrival. Louernius was sufficiently
judicious to throw the bard a bag of gold as he ran behind his chariot and was
rewarded by another song based on the theme that even the ‘tracks made by his
chariot on the earth gave gold and largess to mankind’, It would have been in
Louernius’ interests that this song remained prominent in the bard’s reper-
toire!

The feast which Louernius prepared and the gold which he liberally distrib-
uted is a fascinating demonstration of the ‘potlatch’—the system by which an
individual's status was enhanced by the public dispersal of wealth in the form of
gifts, often, but not invariably, of food and drink at feasts. The more that was
given away, the greater the giver’s reputation, and the more he would, in turn,
acquire through gift. At its most basic level, the potlatch provided a simple
redistributive mechanism by which surpluses could be spread throughout the
community. Often, however, it necessitated the destruction of wealth. The ded-
ication of works of great craft skill, like the Battersea shield, or of great value,
like the Snettisham gold, to the gods provides an example of wealth destruction
within the religious context. Similarly, the burial of valuable goods with the
dead was the public affirmation of the lineage’s ability to destroy wealth, The
feast itself, with the consumption of huge quantities of expensive imported
wine, of which the Celts were so inordinately fond, was another form of public
wealth destruction.

In a system in which individuals used the potlatch as a means of competing
for status there would, inevitably, have been a tendency towards escalation. Itis
probably in this context that we should attempt to understand the Poseidonian
account of the individuals who submitted themselves to death having acquired
and distributed rich gifts. By sacrificing their lives solely in the interests of being

106


===== PAGE 124 (index-127_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

able to redistribute the gifts they had received to their friends and kin, they were
indulging in an extreme form of potlatch. The heady competitive atmosphere
of the feast, the liberal consumption of alcohol, and a belief in the afterlife will
all have contributed to the individual’s willingness to submit to death in the
interests of renown.

Hospitality to strangers is another leitmotif of Celtic society, and the Posei-
donian tradition refers to the need to offer food and drink before finding out
about a visitor's business. The rigorous rules which no doubt covered hospital-
ity were manipulated by the Romans more than once in tricking and slaughter-
ing Lusitanians and Celtiberians in Spain and by Mithridates in the massacre of
the Tetrachs in Galatia. In all these cases the Celtic peoples were bound by cus-
tom and tradition 1o a system involving trust which their opponents simply
abused for their own advantage.

The Social Hierarchy

That Celtic society was strongly hierarchic is evident from the archacological
record of burials, Itisalso reflected in Caesar’s stark generalization that in Gaul
only two classes were of any significance, the Druids and the knights, the rest
being little better than slaves. The knights were constantly involved in warfare,
their status being reflected by the number of dependants and clients they could
command. Caesar’s sketch is a gross oversimplification, but it reflects a simple
basic structure which may well have lain behind the social systems of many of
the Celtic communities. The social hierarchy graded from those who could
command huge entourages, men like the Helvetian Orgetorix whose *house-
hold’ numbered 10,000 excluding his dependants and debtors, to the semi-free,
who were roughly equivalent to a medieval bondman. Within this spectrum
would have been carefully distinguished social classes about which little is
known. No doubt the law gave a degree of rigidity to the system, but there
would have been much visual symbolism to make the social distinction readily
apparent in such things as settlement style and dress. These symbols of status,
and indeed the social system itself, would have differed with place and time, but
one may suppose that the possession of a panoply of arms was a ready and uni-
versal means of distinction, similarly the wearing of a torc and arm rings.
Another hint is provided by Poseidonius when, describing tonsorial styles, he
remarks that ‘the nobles shave the cheeks but let the moustache grow freely so
that it covers the mouth’, This may well have served to distinguish the élite from
the others who shaved entirely or grew short beards. The prominence of the
moustache on Celtic iconography and Graeco-Roman representations of Celts
may suggest that the practice was widespread among the Celtic élite. Caesar’s
reference to the fact that the Britons painted their bodies with woad allows that
body decoration may have been common and carried with it social messages.
The use of tattooing among many societies, including the contemporary
Scythians, is a reminder of the significance of this form of communication.

107


===== PAGE 125 (index-128_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

The importance of bonds of obligation among the Gauls, operating at a
number of different levels, is frequently referred to by Caesar, At one level,
clientage in its various forms could bind retainers to individual members of the
élite, but ata different level it could relate tribes one to another. This was clearly
the case in Gaul in the first century nc. By Caesar's time the Sequani had estab-
lished themselves as paramount, with the help of the Germans, and thus had
acquired as clients many of the smaller tribes, who previously had looked to the
Aedui, taking the sons of their chieftains as hostages. When Caesar appeared
and offered the Aedui the support of Rome, the hostages were returned and the
clients flocked back to the Aedui, together with new clients impressed by the
power the Aedui derived from their friendship with Rome. At the same time,
the Remi, thought to be clients of Rome, received clients of their own who
wished to ally themselves to the Roman cause but were not prepared to doso as
clients of the Aedui. This broad pattern of changing allegiances seems to have
been the norm in Gaul and was probably widespread in the Celtic world.

Clientage, at the tribal or personal level, implied obligations on both sides. As
Caesar succinctly put it: “The leaders do not allow their clients to be oppressed
or defrauded, otherwise they lose their influence with their clients.” The clear
implication here is that clientage was an agreement entered into willingly by
both parties. Both were probably bound by strict rules as well as by the antici-
pation of mutual benefit.

The taking of hostages, referred to above, was equally widespread. It should
not, however, take with it the connotations of the modern world. Among the
Celts, hostages were usually young men of noble families from one tribe who
lived and served with another asa guarantee of agreed behaviour: it was, in fact,
a bonding mechanism. Caesar made ample use of the system during his con-
quests in Gaul, accepting or requesting hostages whenever agreements were
reached. The case of the Treveri is instructive. In s4 B¢, suspicious of the
motivesof one of the Treverian leaders, Indutiomarus, Caesar ordered the chief
to attend his camp and to bring 200 hostages with him. “The hostages were
delivered, and included his son and all his relatives who had been specified by
name. | reassured Indutiomarus about their safety and encouraged him to stay
loyal." At the same time 4,000 Gaulish cavalry arrived from all parts of Gaul,
each group with its own leaders in charge. Those whose allegiance to Rome was
inany way in doubt Caesar decided to take with him, as hostages, on his British
campaign. Dumnorix, a chieftain of the Aedui, refused to join and fled with his
cavalry, but was pursued, captured, and executed, even though he was brother
of the Aeduan leader Diviciacus, a staunch Roman ally.

Although it can fairly be argued that Caesar’s use of hostages may have been
extreme because of the unusual nature of events, he was simply adapting a prac-
tice common among the Gaulish tribes to his own benefit.

Two other aspects of the bonding system—fosterage and marriage—deserve
to be mentioned. The placing of children with foster parents is a theme con-
stantly referred to in the Irish vernacular literature, where the close bonds

108


===== PAGE 126 (index-129_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

between foster brothers are used to heighten literary effect. In all probability
fosterage was adopted by Celtic communities quite widely, though there is very
little positive evidence for it outside the Insular literature. There is, however,
one somewhat obscure reference by Caesar. In writing of the Gauls he says that
they differ from other peoples in “that they do not allow their sons to approach
them in public unless they have grown up to the age of military service, and they
think it a disgrace for a boy under this age to sit in public within sight of his
father’ ( De Bello Gallico 6.18). Poseidonius, however (through Diodorus Sicu-
lus), mentions that at meals they are served by their youngest grown-up chil-
dren, both boys and girls. The apparent contradiction can be resolved if the
meal is considered to be a private occasion, when such intimacy is permissible.
Whether or not this passage of Caesar’s is an ill-understood observation of the
taboos associated with active fosterage is unclear, but it could equally be that
fosterage had, by this stage, died out in Gaul and all that remained were pale
echoes reflected in symbolic behaviour patterns.

Women clearly occupied a more significant position in Celtic society than
they did in the Graeco-Roman world and for this reason the classical sources
give some prominence to observations about them, though in no systematic
way. The Poscidonian tradition notes the beauty of Gallic women, describing
them to be as tall and as strong as their husbands though the fourth-century
Roman writer Ammianus Marcellinus, in a memorable piece of descriptive
writing of the Celtic woman raised to anger, implies that as a fighter she is more
than equal to the male. A tendency to promiscuity is noted. “They generally
yield up their virginity to others and this they regard not as a disgrace, but
rather think themselves slighted when someone refuses to accept their freely
offered favours' (Diodorus Siculus, Hist. 5. 32). To this, Cacsar, writing of the
Britons, adds that wives are shared between groups of ten or twelve men, espe-
cially between brothers, fathers, and sons. Once more the literary referencesare
likely to be ill-observed and misleading, content simply to convey an impres-
sion of ‘the barbarian’. Behind this probably lies a complex structure of
male-female relationships beyond the comprehension of monogamous Medi-
terraneans, Something of the intricacies of these bonds are preserved in the
Irish vernacular literature. In the Tain Queen Medb is prepared to offer inter-
course in the interests of friendship or gain without any sense of shame, while
in the Old Irish Laws three grades of wife are recognized.

In Gaul, females had legal rights in marriage. A joint account was kept of the
marriage wealth, composed of the bride’s dowry, an equal sum contributed by
the husband, and any interest accruing. Whoever survived the marriage inher-
ited the total. The equity of the arrangement must, however, have been some-
what diminished by the fact that the husband had the power of life or death over
his wife and children and if husbands died in suspicious circumstances wives
could be interrogated under torture. We owe this insight to Caesar without
being able to test the veracity of his account or the extent of the practice.

Marriage provided an important means of social and cross-tribal bonding.

109


===== PAGE 127 (index-130_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

The Helvetian Orgetorix, for example, in attempting to consolidate his power
base, gave his own daughter in marriage to the Aeduan leader Dumnorix, while
Dumnorix married his half-sister and other female relatives to prominent men
in other tribes. A little earlier, the sister of the king of Noricum had been mar-
ried to the German leader Ariovistus to cement a political alliance in the face of
the Dacian advance, This use of the female relative, in the manner of a hostage
bonded by marriage, was no doubt as widespread among the Celts as it was later
to become among the royal households of Europe.

Women do not appear in positions of overt political power in Gaul at the
time of Caesar's campaigns, unless he chooses not 10 record the fact, but in
Britain Cartimandua of the Brigantes and Boudica of the Iceni were potent
leaders, and the large bulk of Boudica, her harsh voice, and the mass of red hair
falling to her knees, resplendent in gold torc and bright cloak, remains a lasting
image of Celtic female power. Whether we are looking at the aberrant behav-
iour of a peripheral backwater in a time of unnatural stress or the survival of a
phenomenon once more widespread throughout the Celtic world, it is difficult
to say. The dominance of females in the Insular literature might, however, be
thought to support the latter.

It must readily be admitted that any consideration of Celtic social systems is
likely to be biased, not only by the prejudices and preconceptions of the
Graeco-Roman sources but by the narrow time span and geographical area
over which they range. None the less it is possible to construct an outline of the
way in which society articulated itself. We must, however, constantly remind
ourselves that no general scheme can ever hope to apply to all Celtic societies at
all times,

no


===== PAGE 128 (index-131_1.jpg) =====
6
The Arts of the
Migration Period

Two things in particular stand out from viewing the entirety of the
archaeological record from the La Tene period in Europe, the broad cul-
tural similarity that can be seen over vast tracts of country and the daz-
zling inventiveness of what can broadly be called La Téene (or Celtic) art.
We must be careful here to distinguish the technology of construction
and manipulation of materials from the love of pure decoration. The two
are strictly separate but they may come together to enhance cach other
and create a greater whole. Take, for example, the simple functional fire-
dog—a piece of wrought-iron furniture for the hearth. It was essentiall

framework for controlling roasting spits, but its projecting ends were fre
quently decorated with enormous skill to create the spirited essence of

horned bulls’ heads. In another medium, the large pottery jar from Saint-

Pol-de-Léon in Finistére is an elegant and functional vessel, but it has
been transformed into an object of beauty by a series of flowing scrolls
and arabesques lightly incised on the body before firing.

T'he fire-dog and the pot are both visually highly satisfying to the mod-
ern eye—there is something about Celtic art with which we can easily
f that
simply by describing and classifving we can understand. The quintessen-
tial bovine head on the fire-dog is a symbol, but of what? The sanctity of
the hearth? The spirit of the beasts being roasted? The power of fire and of
the smith’s mag|  know. So it is with the decorated pot. To
the archacologist it is an item first to admire and enjoy and then to analyse
stylistically, but the response of the original owner would have been
totally different. One has only to consider decorated pots from Africa,
whose meanings have been transmitted to us in language by their makers
or users, to understand that form and decoration can have an immense
subtlety of significance in their contemporary society, symbolizing func-

empathize—but this should not persuade us into the facile beli

?We canne

80 &1 Iron furniture from a rich
grave at Welwyn, |
England, second half
century b, The lower piture

shows the detail of a fire-dog, a pair
of which w
cither side

d have stood on
the hearth. British
Museum, London.



===== PAGE 129 (index-132_1.jpg) =====
Kerneve
de-Léon, Fi

closely similar to that

adopted by metalworkers

in the fourth century nc

six

ve, right: Stc

ty wearing a neck

Marne, France. The b
ved in relief

Antiqu

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

tion, status of owner, gender, sexual relationship, and so on. Itis totally beyond
the abilities of the art historian or archacologist to say what the owner of the
Saint-Pol-de-Léon pot was attempting to communicate. All that we can be tol
crably sure about is that communication was intended.

If, then, we reject ‘art for art’s sake” as a starting-point (and with it the even
less acceptable ‘art for art historians’ sake’), it is pertinent to ask how readily

?Wasitknown toall oronly toa few,

understood was the symbolism at the tim
like the skilled men whose magic went into its creation?
The remarkable iron helmet of the early third century 8¢ found in the chief

wides an interesting example, On its crest

tain’s tomb at Ciumesti (Fig. 72) §
stands a bird of prey, with articulating wings, staring fixidly with its violent red

eyes atanyone who approached the wearer. It isa startling reminder of the story

of the single combat between Valerius and the Celt (see p. 102). The symbolism
of the bird on the helmet of the Ciumesti chieftain would have been widely
understood. So, too, would the symbol of the boar, found on helmet crests (Fig
73), on the Witham shield (PL. X), on a sword blade from Switzerland, on the
statue of the god from Euffigneix, and in a variety of other contexts. The
primeval strength and ferocity of the beast would have been considered to give

strength and protection to the wearer, and it islikely that the boar, like the crow

"


===== PAGE 130 (index-133_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

would have been understood to be a war god in animal form. The shape-shift-
ing of gods and the semi-divine to appear as animals is a recurring theme in the
Irish and Welsh vernacular literature.

Herein might lie a clue to another aspect of Celtic art—the appearance of
human and other faces either directly or obliquely and half hidden in Celtic
designs on, for example, the Battersea and
Witham shields (Pls. V and X), but also on a
host of other items when carefully observed.
The art historian Paul Jacobsthal once referred
to this as the ‘Cheshire Cat Style'—sometimes
the cat appears in the tree, sometimes just the
grin of the cat. He went on to describe it as the
mechanism of dreams. Perhaps here, too, we
are seeing the shifting shapes of Celtic myth-
ology where visions appear and disappear and
nothing is quite as it seems.

The skilled men, who were able to design and execute these timeless works of
art, were clearly far more than just craftsmen. They carried with them a deep
knowledge of mythology. The symbols which they used and the combinations
in which they used them were a form of communication. They were the repos-
itory and the perpetrators of ancient skills and beliefs and as such they them-
selves would surely have been regarded as being above normal men.

Materials and Methods

The skills of the metalworker in bronze and gold were already long established
by the beginning of the Iron Age. They involved casting, sheet working, and
other forms of hammer working. Casting was normally by the cire perdue (lost-
wax) method, best exemplified by the collection of metalworking debris found
in an early first-century Bc context at the settlement at Gussage All Saints in
southern England, where sets of horse harness and vehicle fittings were being
manufactured. The first stage involved the modelling of the desired item in
beeswax using small bone spatulac. When complete, the wax form was invested
with a refractory clay with at least two vents, one surrounded by a funnel or
‘gate’. Next the whole would have been warmed, to melt the wax so that it could
be poured out for reuse, before the clay mould was baked. Once the mould was
hardened, molten bronze could be poured through the gate to fill the interior
void. When it had cooled, the mould would be broken open and the cast item
remaved for fine trimming, filing, and polishing. What is perhaps most note-
worthy is the comparative simplicity of the process, given the skill of the crafts-
man. Wax was reusable, and bronze could be melted down from scrap in
crucibles. The only materials consumed were charcoal for the fire and clay for
the moulds. In this way, using closed moulds, or, for more simple items, open
moulds, a wide range of artefacts could be produced.

"3

%4 Human faces hidden in
the decoration of two terret
rings from northern France,
now in the Musée Nationale
des Antiquités, Saint-
Germain-en-Laye, Paris.
The half-visible face has
been referred 1o as ‘the
Cheshire Cat Style’. After
drawings by Paul Jacobsthal.


===== PAGE 131 (index-134_1.jpg) =====
85 Bone tria

bly used by a craftse
work ¢

metal object, F

caim Hat [ Crew, Co.

Nationa
ndl. Dublin.

Meath, Irelans

Museum of Ir

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Sheet bronze working was in some waysa more skilled process. To begin with
the sheet of appropriate size and thickness had to be beaten out by hand froma
metal billet, constantly annealing the metal to prevent it from becoming brittle

In the process the sheet might be moulded into vessel shape or kept flat. The

most common form of decoration was by inscribing, chasing, or repoussé
working. In the last two cases the sheet being worked would have had to be
attached to a suitably pliable backing material. A necessary preliminary to dec
oration of whatever kind would have been the laying-out of the design with
li

rate constructions, as the intricate pattern on the open-work discs from the

htly scribed lines, often using compasses, sometimes involving highly elabo

Marne vividly demonstrates, Bone trial pieces found at Lough Crew, Co.

Meath, in Ireland show how craftsmen tried out designs in rough first.
Other items such as brooches could be made by hammering out a billet, con-

stantly annealing to retain malleability, drawing out, winding, flattening, and

folding as required.
Finished items could be further enhanced by attaching or insetting other
out most of the

materials of which coral and red glass were favoured thro
period. These substances were either attached with small pins or fixed, cloi
sonné-style, in pre-made cells. In the later stages the art of enamelling was

developed, allowing elaborate multicoloured finishes to be achieved which

were particularly favoured for horse harness mounts. The skills of the bronze

workers were also those used by goldsmiths and silversmiths,

14


===== PAGE 132 (index-135_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Iron became of increasing importance
after its first widespread introduction into
barbarian Europe in the eighth century.
Though occurring naturally over far more
extensive areas and in far greater quantity
than copper and tin, its extraction required a
and a higher tem-
perature for the chemical change to take
Once this had been achieved, the
spongy iron bloom had constantly to be
reheated and beaten to remove slag. Finally,
when the iron was pure enough, a number of
blooms would be beaten together to form an

more complex technolog

plac

ingot of sufficient size to allow tools and
weapons to be forged.

Large numbers of ingots are known, most of them dating to the later stages of

and western Ei
thick in the centre with the ends drawn out. In

A common form in centra

the La Tene period (Map 23 ropeis
the double pyramidal typ
Britain the most common form is the sword-shaped bar, with the flanges of one
end beaten round to form a hollow tube. Both forms and others were developed
to demonstrate the quality of the iron, because if the metal had been too impure
it would have been impossible to beat out ends or form the tube without cracks
appearing.

It is clear that ironsmiths had a detailed understanding of the qualities of
their material and the appropriateness of different qualities to different func-
tions. This is particularly apparent in the swords of the La Tene period.
Metallurgical analysis has shown that for cutting blades different qualities of
iron were used, layering it to provide a high-quality cutting edge of steel which
was usually well tempered. The boars’ stamps on the sword from Port in
Switzerland and the name Korisios with its attached stamp on a sword from the

same site are possible examples of craftsmen’s personal marks being a guaran-
tee of quality. There is no better example of the ironsmith’s technical skills than
the tunics of ring mail which o come to light in graves, but for the

smith asan artist the fire-dogs are pre-eminent.

sionall

In addition to the metalworker’s products, one must not overlook those of

the other men of skill: the glass workers, the wood carvers, the sculptors, the
potters, and the woad painters (or tattooists). All created original works which
in their different way transmitted the rich images of
and symbolism.

eltic artistic expression

The Origins of Aristocratic Art

The carliest examples of Celtic art appear in the fifth century, accompanying
the élite burials of the Moselle and Marne. Inevitably, in the first faltering

us

86 A schection of iron
semith’s tools fro
Nikolausberg, Austria,

dating from the hor
third century ac, fron §
ing skills developed durin
the La Téne period have

been little improved upon
since. Museum Carolino
Augusteum, Salzburg.

stamp on an
iron sword blade found at
1, Bern, Switzerland.
the stamp is the
inscribed name KORISIOS.
Whther the marks indicate
the maker
some other meaning is
unclear. First century ne
Bernisches Historisches
Muscum, Berne.

owner, or have



===== PAGE 133 (index-136_1.jpg) =====
IX Facing One of a pair

of wine flagons from &
barial(?) at Basse-Yutz,
Moselle, France. They are
examples of carly native
craftsmanship of the early
fourth century ne, reflecting
the initial stages in using
Etruscan forms and decora-
tive matifs, together with
ideas from the cast and from
the traditional repertoire, to
create something distine-
tively ‘native’. The vessels
are inlaid with red enamel
and coral. British Museum,
London,

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

stages, it was the imported Mediterranean wine-drinking equipment which
provided the model and the stylistic stimulus. The bronze beaked flagons from
the burials of Kleinaspergle, Diirrnberg, and Basse-Yutz (PL 1X), all clearly
based on Etruscan ideas, differ in form and in the treatment of the decorative
detail to such a degree that they must all have been manufactured by local
craftsmen working for aristocratic patrons. Yet all three are sufficiently
different in their interpretations to show that a variety of regional influences
were at work.

The grave from Kleinaspergle (found in a side chamber, the main grave hav-
ing been robbed) provides an interesting range of items reflecting the develop-
ment of Early Style art. The grave goods included an Italic cordoned bucket, an
Etruscan stamnos, a locally made beaked flagon, two gold drinking horn termi-
nals, a gold-repaired Attic cup, and a fitting probably for a belt. The drinking
horn terminals were ornamented with rams’ heads in a style that is reminiscent
of ‘eastern’ animal art, while the flagon, even with its highly original interpre-
tation of the human head at the base of the handle, is clearly of Etruscan inspi-
ration. The gold patching on the Attic cup and the belt plaque incorporate plant
motifs—palmettes, lotus-buds, and lotus-blossom, which, though original in
their transformation, are 2 grammar learnt from the Greek world. In this one
burial then, dating to the middle of the fifth century, we can see the first stages
in the use of disparate inspirations from the classical Mediterranean world and
the cast being brought together and moulded into something new.

The Basse-Yutz flagons (PL 1X) (a pair possibly from a single grave) were
accompanied by two Etruscan stamnoi and probably date to the second half of
the fifth century. The general concept of the flagons is evidently Etruscan, but
the sharp high shoulder and concave sides are very unclassical. From its
Hallstatt ancestry comes a band of coral interlace set around the base and a
small duck riding on the spout. Less certainty attaches to the inspiration for the
animals shown on the rim and handles of the flagon, but the dashed pellets and
spiral joints may point to an eastern ancestry.

The Darrberg flagon shares the high-shouldered shape of the Basse-Yutz
vessels butis otherwise altogether different. The handle attachment embodies a
stylized head, with bulbous nose, lentoid eyes, and swept-back hair of a kind
that was to recur many times in Celtic art, framed by vegetal renderings which
have evolved from the classical palmette. On the handle a beast appears to hold
asevered head in his mouth, while further around the rim a curious quadruped
lurks. Once again we might see in the beasts some inspiration from the east.

Taken together, these fifth-century flagons provide a glimpse of an art style
in the making—Etruscan vessel forms are mutating and already Greek pal-
mettes and lotuses are disintegrating into more loosely structured plant forms.
Echoes from the Hallstatt past are still dimly to be discerned; a new distinctive
animal menage is beginning to intrude and the iconography of the ‘Celtic head”
is now becoming defined.

The Marne region at this time, while sharing in the general development,

né


===== PAGE 134 (index-137_1.jpg) =====
e R S
NGRS N
. P
| —— 7
b
RN
S


===== PAGE 135 (index-138_1.jpg) =====
. el /A PEEEINN ;
A Noe,

S LA rCE &l
A o I U, (SR R 1‘
aar N B RS AR


===== PAGE 136 (index-139_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

develops characteristics of its own, most notably an emphasis on plant motifs
and a preference for open-work ornaments, This is particularly clear on the
open-work mounts for the chariot pole or yoke from the burial at La Bouvan-
igns also develop, while a different tradi-
tion of highly accomplished engraving incorpor:
recognized on a few élite items such as the pointed helmet from Berru (PL XIV)
in the Marne and the Etruscan beaked flagon, enhanced by a Celtic engraver,
now in the muscum at Besangon.

In the Moselle region the high point of artistic achievement in the fifth cen-
tury was attained by the goldsmiths, whose masterpieces included the open-
work gold covering of a hemispherical wooden bowl, found in barrow 1 at
Schwarzenbach in Saarland (PL Xllla), with its two registers and a basal disc
decorated with transformed palmettes, lotus motifs, and triskels. A similar
piece, possibly once ornamenting a drinking horn, from Eigenbilzen in the
Belgian Limburg, is closely related in style and craftsmanship and
could be taken for the work of'a Moselle ‘master’. Schwarz-
enbach has also produced four gold plaques displaying
clean-shaven human faces framed by a ‘comma
shaped” headdress similar to the depiction of the
head on the handle of the Kleinaspergle flagon.
Closely related items of gold-sheet decora-
tion have been found further east at Dirrn-
berg and at the warrior grave of Chlum in

deau. ymetric compass-work de:

g classical palmettes can be

Bohemia.

The pre-eminence of the Middle Rhen-
ish goldsmiths is further demonstrated
by a brilliant array of neck and arm rings
which combine the plant motifs of the
sheet-gold workers with superbly mod-
elled fabulous and semi-fabulous beasts
and human heads. One of the most spectacu-
lar of their products is the arm ring from
Rodenbach found with an Etruscan flagon and
basin and an Attic kantharos. The arm ring has
central moustached face, closely similar to that on the
handle attachment of the Basse-Yutz flagon, flanked on
her side by pairs of recumbent carpids looking over their backs to another
human head behind them. The style of the beasts, with their legs folded up
beneath them and their turned-back heads, vividly recalls Scythian gold-work
of the sixth and fifth centuries, some items of which found their way as far west
as Hungary,

The Rodenbach arm ring is not alone. Related pieces have been found in
female graves at Besseringen and Reinheim and in a hoard of seven gold rings
from Erstfeld in Switzerland, all seven evidently the product of a single work-

nuy

X Facing Bronze shickd
found in the River Witham
near Washinghorough,
Lincolnshire, England, The
end roundel illustrated in
detail shaws the careful
interplay of repoussé and

mscribed decoration. The
roundel is ‘carried” on the
head of & fabulous beast.
Third or second century ne
British Museum.

tk bronze disc
from the vehicle burial at
me-Bionne, Marne.
fifth century
e The disc, which was part
of a set of harness fittings,
demonstrates the skills of
the bronze-worker in setting
out complex geometric
designs, British Muscum,
London.



===== PAGE 137 (index-140_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

89 A diagrammatic repre-
sentation of the decoration
ona flagon from an
unkaown location but prob.
ably north-esstern France,
The flagon is Etruscan in
form but the decoration is
Celtic, Early fourth century
. Musée des Beaux-Arts,
Besangon, France,

grave of Roden
iserslautern,

Germany. The decoration is
characteristic of Early Style
and incorporates squatting
backward-looking cervids
similar in form to Scythian
animal art. The disembod

sed heads are common in shop. The iconography of the Erstfeld rings is complex in the extreme, with a
Cetife art of this periad. variety of humanoid, animal, or bird figures bound interminably in apparent
Historisches Muscum der Y ’

Plalz, Speyer. contlict. That it had a meaning we cannot doubt, but how to interpret the con-

ns

torted scenes is beyond recovery.

Together the items of ¢lite art, created by
master craftsmen in the Marne-Moselle
region in the fifth century, represent the first
innovative steps in the development of a
Celtic art style. Though they display an evi-
dent variety, there is a sufficient degree of
cohesion for art historians to use such port-
manteau phrases as Early Style or Early Strict
Style to contain the full repertoire. The
influence of the Graeco-Etruscan world is
still easily discernible. The much debated
‘animal art’ or ‘eastern influence’ is less cer-
tain. It could have been inspired by a few
imported items, perhaps of carved wood, for
which the Scythian artists were famous, but,
as some commentators have emphasized,
fabulous animals were very much a part of
the Etruscan repertoire and there is little



===== PAGE 138 (index-141_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

need at this early stage to suppose there to have been a strong eastern compo-
nent.

Celtic Art in the Fourth Century: Influences from the Po Valley

The development of Celtic art styles in the fourth century sc have been vari-
ously characterized. Earlier attempts used the rich ‘princ grave from
Waldalgesheim, near Bonn, as a type assemblage against which to compare
fourth-century products, and some observers even went so far as to propose a
‘Waldalgesheim master’. Others have been content with a less constricting ter-
minology, referring to the development as an Early Free Style. However, the
more descriptive phrase, Vegetal Style, best captures the principal and distinc-
tive characteristics of the products of the period, since the overriding motif is
the running tendril or linked band of lyre-palmettes. Animals and human
heads recede into the background. They do not entirely disappear but rather
lurk in the vegetation, from which, disguised, they occasionally peer out.

The centre of innovation is no longer the Rhine-Moselle region but the
Marne, Switzerland, Hungary, and the Po Valley, and it is the relationship of
the last with the broad northern zone that raises interesting questions. It is now
widely believed that the Celtic groups in the Cisalpine region, notably the Boii
¢ responsible for integrating Graeco-ltalic ideas with
Celtic and transmitting the result back to the innovating centres north of the
Alps. This interpretation would imply that close social links were maintained
between the Celts who had emigrated to the south and those who remained in
their northern homelands.

One artefact type which well exemplifies this is the jockey-cap helmet witha
neck-brim, hinged side pieces, and central plume attachment. Helmets of this
kind were usually made of iron, with an internal fabric lining and an exterior
decoration of bronze or gold panels ornamented in repoussé. Three have come

and the Senones, wi

ng

91 Gold neck rings from a
hoard found at Ensteld,
Canton Uni, Switzerland.
dating to the late fifth or
carly fourth century we. The
complex interweaving of the
figures and motifs is  theme
running throughous Celtic
ant. Schweizerisches
Landesmuscum, Zurich



===== PAGE 139 (index-142_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

g8 A S

La Tene artefacts.
Nos. +-7, Early Style, all

LaTenel. =/, 2
+ Bronze disc, Ecury-sur-

Coole, Mare; 2 Bronze

bowl, Saulces-Champen-

oises, Ardennes; 3 Helmet,
Amfreville-sous-les-Monts,

Eure: 4 Pot, Prunay, Marne:

5 Bronze flagon in Besangon

Museunt: 6 Beonze strainer

in Morel Collection;

7 Bronze brooch from

Prosues. Mamne. s

O

Nos. $-11, Vegetal Style.
& Flagon, Waldalgesheim, 7
Mainz-Bingen: 9 Tore,
Jonchery-sur-Saippes,
Marne: 1o Pot, Saulces-
Champenoiscs, Ardennes:
1 Bucket, Waldalgesheim,
Mainz-Bingen.

from northern Italy, from Monte Bibele, Gottolengo, and an imprecisely
located example from Umbria, and another was found in an elaborate grave at
Canosa di Puglia in Apulia (PL [Va). All four, which were evidently made in
northern Italy, display the Vegetal Style of decoration, which is at its most lux-
uriant on the Canosa example. The lower register shows, alternately, reversed
palmettes linked in a continuous band with fleshy S-shaped leaves, while in the
upper register half palmettes alternate with lyre palmettes. The style is closely
similar to that displayed on a disc from Auvers in the Marne, and on the flagon
at Besangon (Fig. 89), as well as the painted pot from Prunay (Marne), imply-
ing a close relationship between the craftsmen of the Po Valley and Marne in
the fourth century.

Two jockey-cap helmets of very similar kind have been found in France, one

120


===== PAGE 140 (index-143_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

from Agris (Pl XIIIb) near Angouléme and another from the Seine at
Amfreville-sous-les-Monts, the latter being made of bronze, while the former,
of iron covered with gold, could, technically,
be a north Italian product.

Another item which serves to link the
Celtic communities north and south of the
Alpsis the buffer-headed gold torc. An exam-
ple found in the cemetery of Filottrano in the
Italian territory of the Senones, decorated
with a central palmette combined with twin
ned foliage, is of a type found widely in tem-

perate Europe, with ¢
Bohemia, Austria, the Rhineland (Waldal
gesheim), and probably the Marne region.

amples coming from

Within this closely related series the Filot-

trano torc is seen to be an early example,
showing the initial stages in combining Greek
and Celtic motifs. The suggestion that the
style developed and spread north from Italy is
further supported by scabbard decoration
found at Filottrano and Moscano di Fabri-

ano, which is considered to be the origin of a type displayed on several scab

bards in northern France and on one from Bohemia, Taken together, the
evidence is strongly suggestive that artistic developments among the Italian
Celts were readily transmitted northwards to enhance the work of the crafts-
men who served the Transalpine Celtic élite and in whose schools many
regional variations began to develop. The vast spread of territory over which
the Vegetal Style is found is a reflection of a social mobility occasioned by the
warrior movements of the time.

Developments in the Third and Second Centuries

Formuch of the third and carly second centuries nc the society of Celtic Europe
was characterized by small communities whose menfolk equipped themselves
as warriors and may well have spent time away from the home base engaged in
raiding expeditions. There was, therefore, a high degree of mobility in both the
geographical and the social sense: some archacologists have even gone so far as
to characterize this as a period of democratization. In such a context it was the
swords of the warriors and the ornaments of their women that were to carry
forward the development of the metalworker's art,

The large numbers of decorated sword scabbards that survive allow distinct
schools or styles to be proposed, though inevitably in such cases art-historical
classifications are at best broad oversimplifications.

One of the most distinctive series of swords is found concentrated around

93 Bronze di red in

sheet gold decora

di
d inlaid with

repou

coral. From Auvers-su
Olise, Val d'Olise, France
Early fourth century n

Médailles, Bibliotheue
Nationake



===== PAGE 141 (index-144_1.jpg) =====
94 Examples of the
Hungarian Sword Style of
scabbard decoration.
Swords (lefi to right) from:
Batina, Croatia: Sremska(?),
Setbia; and Bolcske-
Madocsahegy, Hungary

(both right-hand examples).

Various scales. (After R.and
V. Megaw.)

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Lake Balaton in Transdanubia and is accordingly referred to as the Hungarian
Sword Style. Of the various motifs used, ‘dragon- pairs” are the most distinctive.
The two facing S-shaped dragons are really a variant of the simple lyre motif.
Dragon-pair swords, though concentrating in Hungary, are very widely dis-
tributed, reaching as far afield as England, Spain, Romania, and Italy. By the
second century the rigid bisymmetric motifs merge, giving way to more asym-
metric designs, which flow across and down the scabbard.

Another school of swordsmiths was at work at the same time in Switzerland
(Fig. 26). One of the favoured motifs here is that of birds” heads which grow out
of triskel or lyre motifs. The Swiss compositions are more symmetrical and
restrained than the Hungarian.

The Hungarian and Swiss Sword Styles are little more than the archacologi-
cally recognizable manifestations of a specific form of craft production which
spread across Europe and, over two centuries or so, will have been practised and
developed by a multitude of craftsmen, their individual creations being carried
farand wide by their warrior patrons to be admired and sometimes emulated in
distant lands,

The sword styles and related pieces are sometimes referred to as the Free
Graphic Style, to distinguish it from its more three-dimensional manifestation,
the Free Plastic Style. Plastic decoration is the method appropriate to the deco-
ration of neck, arm, and ankle rings and for decorative fittings attached to vehi-
cles or bronze vessels.

Knobbed anklets, hinged for case of fitting, are especially distinctive, the
knobs providing hemispherical surfaces which are ornamented in three dimen-
sions often with triskels terminating in buttons or studs. The same plastic con-
cepts were put to good use to create the human, animal, and grotesque heads
which brighten up the yokes and Jinch pins of chariots or stare Srom the rims or

22


===== PAGE 142 (index-145_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

handle attachments of vessels like the cauldron found in the Danish bog at Bri
with its fearsome guardian bird.

Free Plastic art, particularly that which incorporates animal forms, is very
different from that of the decorated sword scabbards. It uses the methods (of
casting) and also the ethos of the earlier styles of the fifth and fourth centuries;
even so it has moved a long way from its origins. These cast pieces and the
graphic decoration on sword scabbards and spears are far more than just orna-
ment to amuse. There can be little doubt that they were all deeply symbolic,
denoting status, lineage, and power, warning off adversaries and providing
protection, The sword, the chariot, the cauldron, and the human body were
redolent with visual messages which the Celts themselves would have well
understood.

The Impact of Scythians and Thracians?

During the sixth and fifth centuries Transdanubia developed a strong eastern,
horse-focused culture which may have been, in part at least, the result of new
peoples moving in from the region of the Pontic Steppe. To free it from pre-
conceptions which might be implied by ethnic names such as Scythians or
Sigynnae, it is usually referred to as the Vekerzug culture, after a type site pro-
ducing distinctive horse burials. The maintenance of strong cultural links with
the Pontic Steppe region produced, on the eastern borders of the Early La Téne
cultural province, a rich source of concepts and iconography, and from the
fourth century, when Celtic groups extended eastwards, there was much
mingling of populations. In such a situation one might expect eastern Celtic
culture to have absorbed some elements from the indigenous culture.

If one excludes the dragon-pairs on the swords, assuming them to have
developed from the Etruscan lyre motif, then there is remarkably little metal-
work that can be regarded as showing eastern characteristics, with the excep-
tion of a bronze drinking horn terminal from Jaszberény-Cserdhalom which
ends in an open-mouthed dragon wearing a torc. Hungarian pottery, on the
other hand, embodies many reflections of its complex cultural ancestry. Most
dramaticis a pottery vessel from Libatlan, inscribed on the neck with a scene in
which a cervid is being attacked and brought to the ground by two fierce
quadrupeds, presumably wolves. The composition is redolent of the struggling
animal theme so prevalent in steppe art.

Much of the Lower Danube Valley down to the Black Sea and the territories

95 Scene of stragghing
animals in a Scythian Style
inscribed on a pottery vessel
from Labatlan, Hungary,
Magyar Nemzeti Muzeum,

Budapest.


===== PAGE 143 (index-146_1.jpg) =====
96 Torc of iron covered in
silver from Trichtingen,
Baden-Wirttemberg,
Germany. The style of the
piece with the confronting
bovine beads and the use of
silver suggests an origin in
the Middle Danube region.
Sevond century ne. Wit
tembergisches Landes-
museum, Stuttgart,

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

on either side was occupied by a complex group of tribes who may collectivy
be called Thracians. From the fifth century onwards the Thracian tribes devel-

oped a characteristic art style of their own based on an amalgam of Greek,
Scythian, and eastern, ultimately Persian, ideas (Fig. 141). For the most part it
was an aristocratic art designed to provide prestige vessels for the feast and
armour for parade. The juxtaposition of Celtic and Thracian tribes in the
Middle Danube created conditions of contact between the two cultures, vary-
ing from trade and the exchange of gifts to the acquisition of booty by raiding.

Several items, found in western La Téne contexts, may be thought to show
Thracian influence. The ram-headed drinking horns from Schwarzenbach
have already been mentioned. Drinking horns and ram-headed terminals were
both prevalent in Thracian culture, and another drinking horn from
Weiskirchen, on the Saar, decorated in gold stamped with sphinxes, may con-
ceivably have been made in a Black Sea workshop. Their appearance in the
Rhine-Moselle area could have been the result of a diplomatic gift between the
nobility of the two regions. The Rodenbach arm ring, with its pairs of rams
looking over their shoulders, though presumably of local manufacture, would
have been familiar to a Thracian or Scythian.

From the early third century, when the Scordisci became firmly established
in the Middle Danube as direct neighbours of the Thracian Triballoi, regular
diplomatic relations must have become the norm. Surprisingly little has yet
been found to give substance to the exchange, but two items must be consid-
ered. The first is a silver-plated iron torc of massive proportions found at

y



===== PAGE 144 (index-147_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Trichtingen in south-western Germany. The high technical quality of the silver
plating might suggest an eastern craftsman, while the iconography, incorporat-
ing two facing bulls’ heads as terminals, is evidently Thracian. There can be lit-
tle doubt that the torc was made somewhere along the Lower Danube. By what
process it reached southern Germany it is impossible to say but its massive size
and the fact that both beasts wear torcs, a sign of sovereignty, suggest that it
could have been a diplomatic gift symbolizing a treaty of friendship between
two equal élites.

The second item is the justly famous Gunderstrup cauldron recovered from
abog in Jutland (P1. X1). While the cauldron form and certain pictorial details,
in particular the depiction of warrior infantry and cavalry, are decidedly Celtic,
much of the iconography and the use of silver and of gilding are Thracian. The
most reasonable explanation for this remarkable piece is that it was made by
Thracian craftsmen thoroughly conversant with the Celtic world. Whilst it
could have been a gift, of great value, from the king of the Triballoi to his equal
among the Scordisci, a more attractive hypothesis is that it was made and used
as a symbol of lasting friendship, and perhaps even joint rule, between the two
ethnically different polities.

The fact that the cauldron was eventually deposited in a Danish bog and the
Trichtingen torc ended up in Germany is an interesting comment on the
mobility of valuable items in the Celtic world. To this same list we may add an
animal-ornamented silver gilt disc from Helden in Holland which is stylistic-
ally and technically of Thracian manufacture, and the remarkable collection of
metalwork including phalarae and greaves recovered (but subsequently lost
again) in the cighteenth century, on the tiny island of Sark near the Channel
Island of Guernsey. Judging from contemporary illustrations, the collection is
likely to have come ultimately from the Lower Danube region. The Helden and
Sark finds were probably buried in the late first century e or early first century
AD, but this says little of their date of manufacture or the route through which
they passed to their final place of deposition.

What survives in the archacological record presently available is only a
minute tithe of the works of high artistic merit which must have been moving
about Europe displayed for all to admire, The visual stimulation for the inven-
tive craftsman must have been immense.

The Art of the Sculptor

The art of the sculptor is art in the service of the gods. Here we will consider the
range and style of the work rather than its religious context, which is the theme
for a later chapter. Although a number of notable stone sculptures have been
recovered, mainly from western Europe, in reviewing them we should bear in
mind that they probably represent only a pale reflection of the sculptor’s art,
much of which islikely to have been in wood and therefore tends not to survive,

The earliest piece so far to come to light is a unique, roughly life-size carving

125


===== PAGE 145 (index-148_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

in the round of a warrior, found lying at the edge of a barrow at Hirschlanden
(Fig. 52) near Hohenasperg. If, as seems highly likely, the statue once topped the
barrow and was contemporary with it, then it must date to the late sixth cen

tury. The figure is shown as naked except for a two-thonged belt holding a short
dagger of Late Hallstatt type, a neck ring, and a conical hat very similar to that
made in birch bark and worn by the Hochdorf chieftain in death. The figure is
carved from local sandstone but in style is highly reminiscent of contemporary
carvings from the Abruzzi region and from Nesazio Pola in
Istria, su ting that the inspiration, and perhaps even the
sculptor, came from the Etruscan south, whence, at this time,

the élite of the Middle Rhine were receiving many cultural
influences.

group of sculptures from southern Germany dating to the
fifth or fourth century is more obviously of native work,
embodying as it does a religious iconography that is also
reflected in broadly contemporary metalworkers' art. The
most obviously ‘La Tene’ of the pieces is a four-sided pillar
from Pfalzfeld. Each of the sides, framed by cabling, bears a
stylized human head carved in high relicf. The heads wear the
a common motif presumably of reli-
gious significance—and appear to be sprouting three-pointed

so-called ‘leaf crowns™

ds and the frames the space is filled
-shaped

beards. Between the hea

with running scrolls and lyre patterns composed of ¢

mot

The leaf crowns are a feature shared with two other items
from the region, a fragmentary stone head from Heidelberg
and a stone pillar figure from Holzgerlingen. The Heidelberg
head is a dramatic piece with piercing circular eyes and a fur-
rowed brow which enhances the ferocity of his stare. The
Holzgerlingen pillar statue, carved similarly on two opposite
faces, is altogether simpler, with the facial features, and right
arm folded across the stomach, heavily schematized. None the
less, standing originally some 2.5 metres, it would have pre-
sented a terrifying vision. Another pillar sculpture, from
Waldenbach, not far from Holzgerlingen, is rather different in
style. Only the bas
pattern with which it is decorated in low relief is characteristic
ofthe fourth or third century. Little remains of the figure which
sepillarfrom  comprised the upper part of the pillar except for a well-sculpted arm and hand.
<StGoar Germany.— Together the southern German group of sculptures suggests a long-lived and

ide bears a head with a

now survives, but the complex curvilinear

d triple varied tradition.

d. Fift

pointed b
fourth cen
Rheinisches |

museum, I

A second group of religious sculptures comes from Provence and helps to
8 R

characterize the Celto-Ligurian culture of the region—a long-established folk

des.

nn culture overlain and modified by influences from the nearby Greek colonies

126


===== PAGE 146 (index-149_1.jpg) =====
THI ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

and also from the Celtic world. A recurring theme is the cult of

the severed head. This is most dramatically represented by a
pillar carved with a series of heads, presumably from a sanctu
ary, which was found reused as a door sill in the oppidum of
Entremont, near Aix-en-Provence. A carving of four severed
heads in a pile is a further image of the cult. Not far away, at

Roquepertuse, an array of religious sculptures has been recov

ered, including columns with niches for severed human heads,
and a lintel carved with a fricze of horse heads (Fig. 164) upon

which probably once stood a dramatic stone carving of a bird of
prey. Another notable find was a pair of stylized Janus-heads

sharing a single leaf crown. Both Entremont and Roquepertuse

also produced elegant renderings of life-sized human figures

seated cross-legged. In the trabeated architecture of the

Roquepertuse sanctuary and the seated figures (Fig. 163) we are


===== PAGE 147 (index-150_1.jpg) =====
o1 B

pottery

% and red painted
ft

e Early La Tene

Champagne.

Le Champ la Guerre',
Prui 3 20 Quartier Saint
Basles’, Prunay;

‘Culvidame’, Bussy-Je
Chiteau: 4: "Le Mont de la
Forche', Lavannes

THL ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

4 clearly seeing the influence of the Greek world,
but the severed heads and Janus-like deities
provide a firm link with the Celtic symbolism

Ane

n more fearsome image was found at
Noves in the Lower Rhone Valley. The “Taras-
que’ of Noves, as itis called, is a squatting beast
clasping severed, bearded heads in its fore-
paws whilst devouring a body of which only
the arm protrudes from its jaws. A somewhat
similar rendering, from Linsdorf in Alsace, is
an indication that the imagery had a wide geo
graphic spread.

In addition to these two highly distinctive
regional groupings of sculpture, a number of
individual items have been found widely scat
tered. A small stone figure from Euffigneix

. 83) in the Marne evidently depicts a deity,

wearing a tor, and is identified by a vigorous
rendering of a boar against his body. Another
god figure, again wearing a torc, but this time
holdingalyre, was discovered at Paule in west

ern Brittany. It is probably also in this same
category of deities that we should place the
famous head from the religious site of Miecké
Zehrovice (P, Villa) in Bohemia. He, too,

wears a torg, but is considerably larger in scale than the two French figurines.

These few surviving isolated examples are a reminder of both the diversity and
the extent of Celtic sculpture. Similar icons and their wooden counterparts
must have pervaded all parts of the Celtic sphere.

Ceramic Art

One of the most striking characteristics of La Tene culture is the frequent, and
often highly elaborate, deco

ation of pottery using motifs common to those of
the metalworker. An example of this is the popularity and widespread distribu-

tion of pottery with stamped decoration (Map 24) which was produced in sev

eral centres from the fifth to the third centuries, concentrating in a broad zone
from the Moselle to Transdanubia but extending as scattered outliers even fur-
ther. The high technical quality of this ware and standardized range of motifs
and motifarrangements are strongly indicative of a shared set of cultural values
and a degree of centralization in production. Outliers of the generalized style in

western Brittany (Fig. 122) raise interesting questions about the nature of con-

tact at this time.
By the fourth century the Breton potters had begun to develop a highly dis

128


===== PAGE 148 (index-151_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

tinctive curvilinear style of decoration, at its most sophisticated on vessels from
Saint-Pol-de-Léon (Fig. 82), Pendreff en Commana, Kélouer Plouhinec and
Blauet (Fig. 123). The lyre patterns and running S-scrolls are highly accom-
plished reflections of the very best of the metalworker's repertoire developing
in the Marne and Moselle regions. The striking similarity raises the question of
the mechanism by which these visual concepts spread. The simplest explana-
tion is that the Breton masters were using imported metal vessels as the source,
and the discovery of inscribed bronze vessels of this quality from Cerrig-y-
Drudion (Fig. 124) in Wales shows that such pieces had a mobility. Even so the
transmission of metalworkers' designs to a subtly curving ceramic form
required exceptional skill.

The same range of abilities was demonstrated by the potters working in the
Marne region. Already in the fifth century pottery was being decorated,
wsually with geometric incisions, but more adventurous compositions were
making an appearance, such as the facing S-shaped beasts, or dragon-pairs, on
the beaker from La Cheppe. In the fourth century a far more claborate style had
developed in which the red-fired vessel was painted in black in such a way asto
leave intricate curvilinear patterns appearing in the red body colour. The close
similarity between the design on the pedestal vase from Prunay and that on the
helmet from Canosa di Puglia leaves little doubt of their common artistic
ancestry. A slightly later vessel from Bussy-le-Chateau, probably dating to the
carly third century, uses the same reversal technique, but the running scroll is
more developed. Clearly, in the Marne region painted pottery served as a pres-
tige item for several generations, during which the ceramic artists remained in
the forefront of artistic development.

The inscribed curvilinear decoration of Brittany and the painted version of
the Marne are two of the most impressive examples of potters’ art in the Early
and Middle La Téne period, but other regions could boast more modest output.
In the south-west of Britain, for example, a number of different production
centres created their own simplified versions of curvilinear decorated pottery,
perhaps influenced by their neighbours across the Channel in Brittany, while in
Northamptonshire a different curvilinear style of pottery decoration devel-
oped. In Hungary, on the other hand, potters favoured more plastic forms of
decoration in the form of human or animal heads usually at the attachment of
handles to the vessel. In this they will have had in mind the heads attached to
metal vessels,

Many of the fine creations of ceramic art are likely to have been prestige
goods produced by skilled craftsmen for an élite, perhaps specifically as grave
goods, but their more lowly value, when compared with metalwork, and their
general fragility will have mitigated against movement, by gift or exchange, far
from their territory of origin. Below this level of production were far more
humble pots, essentially the folk art of the ordinary people, produced to serve
everyday needs, to symbolize the ethnic unity of the community, and to demar-
cate aspects of their social relationships.

129


===== PAGE 149 (index-152_1.jpg) =====
Painted pottery
m the cemetery of
Fosse-Minore at Caurel,
Mame, France. The bold
curvilinear decoration

is painted in red. Se

Nationales, Saint-Germain
en-Laye, Paris.

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

w2 Right: Pottery vessel from La
Cheppe, Marne, France. Second
half of fifth century sc. Each of the
two zones of decoration shows.
pairs

fronting m
Similar dragon-pairs frequently
ormament the hilt ends of sword
sheaths. Musée des Antiquités
Nationales, Saint-Germain-<n
Laye, Paris.

nsters.

An indication that decorative motifs of orig)
part of everyday existence is provided by the wooden vessels preserved at the
lake village of Glastonbury in Somerset. At this level we might reasonably begin
to wonder whether decoration might here be being used for no reason other

ity and vigour were a regular

than to give pleasure.

The Art of the Die Engraver

The debt of Celtic art to inspiration gained from the Mediterranean extends to
the specialized sphere of die engraving as the essential creative preliminary to
the striking of coins. Coin manufacture began in the Celtic zone at the begin-
ning of the third century 8¢, the impetus coming, in part, from the flood of

130


===== PAGE 150 (index-153_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Hellenistic coinage brought back from the Mediterranean by Celts who had
served as mercenaries, and in part from the Greek colonies around the Golfe du
Lion. The gold or silver coin was a convenient method of payment for service or
reward for faithful clientage and as such it soon gained widespread popularity.

Silver was the favoured medium in the Middle and Lower Danube, the
Balkans, northern Italy, and southern France, while gold was preferred in the
north inazone stretching from Bohemia to southern Britain. Different regions
favoured different prototypes. The most popular in the Middle Danube was the
tetradrachms of Philip 11 of Macedon (359-36), which had a head of Zeuson the
obverse and rider on the reverse, but in the west the model was Philip's gold
stater, with the head of Apollo on the obverse and a charioteer and team on the
reverse. Between the two, in the Upper Danube and Bohemian region, the gold
stater of Alexander the Great with helmeted Athene and a winged Victory pro-
vided the prototype. Why these different preferences developed is impossible
1o say—it need mean little more than the accident of what models were to hand
when the decision was taken to begin a particular local series,

The coins minted in the Greek cities around the Golfe du Lion proved popu-
lar prototypes in the west. The didrachms of Rhoda were widely copied in
south-western Gaul in the basin of the Garonne, while the communities of the
Po Valley favoured the model provided by Massilliot drachms.

The processes involved in manufacturing coins were comparatively simple.
To begin with the appropriate amount of metal had to be exactly weighed out
and reduced to a blank by melting in a proformer. In the first-century rectan-
gular sheets of baked clay with rows of deep indentations were used, so that fifty
or more blanks could be produced at any one time. The blank (or flan) was then
placed between two engraved dies, one firmly fixed to a base the other held in
the hand, and the foot of the hand-held die was struck a heavy blow impressing
both designs onto the flan.

The huge array of Celtic coinage available for study leaves little doubt that
from the third century sc there existed a distinct class of craftsmen highly
skilled at the intricate art of die cutting, Not only were these craftsmen techni-
cally accomplished, with steady hand and fine eyesight, but they were creative
artists in their own right. The vitality and sense of movement they were able to
create, particularly when dealing with the horse and chariot, are remarkable.
The freedom (and constraint) of the die provided the stimulus for a creativity
which, in many instances, surpassed that achieved by craftsmen working on
larger scales. The art of the coin engraver deserves far more attention than it has
been afforded by numismatists intent on clas

The Broader Context

Celtic art, because of its energy and novelty, has justly achieved fame, but to
remove it, as has so often been done in the past, from its social context and to
treat it in the manner of modern art-historical analysis, is entirely inappropri-

131

104 Abowe: Gold stater of
DVMNOL THGHR SN0 of the
British tribe, the Corieltauvi
who occupied much of
Lincolnshire. The original
coin is t9 millimetres across.
To make a dic on this small
scale indicates the great skill
of the die-carver,

108 Below: Silver minim of
the Atrebates, a tribe which
controlled much of central
southern Britain (Hamp-
shire, West Sussex, and
Berkshire). The original
coin is only 9 millimetres
in diameter.

.~



===== PAGE 151 (index-154_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

ate, Celtic art was functional and served a variety of ever-changing needs. Its
practitioners carried with them not only skill but a deep knowledge of society's
beliefs and values expressed in symbols. That knowledge was potent and it must
surely have been revered and feared. For this reason it is quite likely that the
craftsman existed in a world outside the bounds of the closed community.,

To attempt to understand the nature of a society through an observer-
imposed interpretation of its art is a dangerous game. But is it too spurious to
see in the tightly sprung tension of the art of the fourth and third centuries
something that would have appealed to the reckless warrior hordes, or in the
enigmatic faces which peer from the stylized foliage an image that had meaning
for those who believed in the shape-shifting of the gods?

132


===== PAGE 152 (index-155_1.jpg) =====
s, Denmark
eals weari
ods, much of the detail derives from Thracian art, and

silver, of which the cauldron ph e made, is common in the Thra orkd and
the Celts. It is able that the cauldron was made in the Midk n in
y »¢ and trans,



===== PAGE 153 (index-156_1.jpg) =====
e P
a


===== PAGE 154 (index-157_1.jpg) =====
7
Iberia and the Celtiberians

Tue questions raised by the origins and nature of Celtic settlement in the
Iberian Peninsula bring into sharp focus many of the general issues considered
in Chapter 1, in particular the relationship between language, ethnicity, and
archacology. Classical writers describing Iberia frequently refer to the presence
of Celtiberians, the Celtic language was spoken in some areas, and social sys-
tems existed which bore similarities to those of the historical Celts in temperate
Europe; yet the material culture differed markedly from that of the La Tene
type. In considering the problem in the Peninsula, therefore, it is necessary to
dissociate La Tene material culture from the concept of ‘Celtic” and in doing so
the nature and significance of the Celtic language are inevitably raised.

The Landscape and Culture of Iberia

Before considering the matter of Celtic societies in the Peninsula, something
must be said about the landscape and the broader cultural context within which
the enquiry lies. The roughly square mass of the Iberian Peninsula can, at a
highly simplified level, be regarded as a flat plain tilted down to the west.
Because of this the east and south coasts present their somewhat austere moun-
tainous backs to the Mediterranean while the western, Atlantic, coast is lower
and more accessible. Iberia is also effectively isolated from the rest of Europe by
the Pyrences and their westward extension—the mountain ranges of Canta-
bria, This basic structure determines that most of the major rivers of Iberia—
the Duero, Tagus, Guadiana, and Guadalquivir—flow westwards to the
Atlantic; the Ebro and the Segura are the only significant east-flowing rivers.
The position of the Peninsula, between the Atlantic and the Mediterranean,
aswell as its varied relief, has a direct effect on climate, the north and west being
significantly wetter and cooler than the south and east. This, in turn, conditions
vegetation—the south-east has a Mediterranean climate, allowing the growth

133


===== PAGE 155 (index-158_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

and ripening of olives and vines, while the north and west are essentially tem-
perate with much deciduous woodland. The Peninsula is also a rich source of
metals, the most prolific zone being the ‘pyrite arc” extending from the copper-
and silver-rich Sierra Morena in the south to Galicia and the Cantabrian
Mountains in the north-west where tin and gold are concentrated. These geo-
morphological factors, in their various ways, have all had an effect on the eth-
nic and political development of the region.

The communities of the east Mediterranean first began to establish links with
Iberia, either directly or indirectly, in the Late Bronze Age, an interest reflected
in a few sherds of Mycenaean pottery found in Andalucia. It may have been in
the wake of these early exchanges that the first Phoenician contacts were estab-
lished with the south-west, but it was not until the eighth century nc that the
Phoenician port-of-trade at Gadir (Cddiz) developed as the base for regular
and intensive exchanges between the cast Mediterranean entrepreneurs and
the metal-rich kingdom of Tartessos occupying the region of the Lower
Guadalquivir and the valleys of the Rio Tinto and Odeil. In the seventh and
sixth centuries a string of Phoenician settlements were set up along the south-
ern coast as far east as Guardamar, and as a result the native culture of Anda-
lucia underwent an ‘orientalizing' phase.

Greek contact with the south is attested as carly as ¢.630, when Kolaios, a
native of Samos, explored the markets of Tartessos and came back a rich man.
It was also during the latter part of the seventh century that the Greeks from
Phocaea began to explore the north-western shores of the west Mediterranean
from the Rhone to the Segura, an exploration which culminated in the founda-
tion of Massalia c.600 and the creation of other colonies around the Golfe du
Lion with Emporion (Ampurias) founded not long after. Greek trading inter-
ests extended well down the coast of Levantine Iberia, at least to the Segura
mouth, where a fortified base was set up at La Picola in about 430 sc. Further to
the south and west Greek trading interests penetrated the zone first developed
by the Phoenicians, but the nature of the interaction is obscure,

From the eighth century until the middle of the third century the orientaliz-
ing and classicizing effects of intensive trade on the Mediterranean coastal zone
of Iberia, from the Straits of Gibraltar to the Ebro Valley, contributed to the
development of Iberian culture. Large nucleated settlements, many of them
already occupied in the Late Bronze Age, developed the characteristics of Medi-
terranean cities; a distinctive art style represented in vase painting, sculpture,
and metalworking emerged; and the social system developed a degree of com-
plexity which, by the fourth century, can reasonably be called a state system,
That a distinctive script emerged to express the Iberian language was no doubt
aconsequence of increasing socio-economic complexity. It wasat this time that
military forces, armed with round shields and falcatas (short swords with a sin-
gle curved cutting edge), took on the appearance of hoplite armies and were in
demand as mercenaries throughout the Mediterranean,

Inshort, the Iberians of southern and castern Iberia can best be regarded asa

134


===== PAGE 156 (index-159_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

Mediterranean people sharing in the broader development of the region
throughout the middle of the first millennium. After the mid-third century,
when the Barcid dynasty from Carthage began to build a power base in south-
ern Iberia, following Carthaginian failures in the First Punic War (264-241), the
Iberians became caught up directly in Mediterrancan power struggles—an
involvement which led to the gradual annexing of the entire Peninsula by the
Romans over a period of two centuries following their destruction of Cartha-
ginian power and the capture of Cidiz in 206 nc.

The Atlantic zone presented an altogether different picture. Already during
the second millennium the Atlantic communities had developed close contacts
one with another along the length of the Iberian seaboard and had established
wider links with the network which bound the communities of western France,
Brittany, western Britain, and Ireland together in a series of overlapping
spheres of interaction. It is unlikely that long-distance voyages were the norm
along the Atlantic front: exchanges at this time were probably down-the-line
between neighbours, but in this way commodities, especially metals, could be
moved over considerable distances.

The Atlantic bronze industry received a new impetus when the Phoenicians
established themselves on the Atlantic island of Cédiz. The consuming demand
for tin, which was to be had in quantity in Galicia, Brittany, and Cornwall, and
the ready accessibility of gold from these regions and from Wales and Ireland
would certainly have led the entrepreneurs of Cidiz to encourage their native
counterparts working the Atlantic sea-ways to bring supplies to the Phoenician
port. As the Phoenician presence became established, Mediterranean sailors
began to explore the Atlantic for themselves. In this way, it seems, enclaves were
established around the coast at least as far north as the estuary of the Tagus and
south along the African coast to Mogador. In all probability a few more enter-
prising ships’ masters ventured further. The sixth-century sailing manual
known as the Massilliot Periplus gives directions and advice for sailing into the
Atlantic at least as far north as Britain and Ireland. On one such journey, in the
late fourth century, Pytheas, a Greek from Massalia, reached Britain and prob-
ably beyond and managed to return safely to record his experiences.

In spite of the infiltration of the Atlantic sea-ways by Mediterranean influ-
ences, the indigenous culture, deeply rooted in the Bronze Age, remained
strong. In the north-west of the Peninsula continuous development through-
out the second half of the first millennium led to the emergence of a highly dis-
tinctive Castro culture characterized by defended hilltop settlements (castros),
decorated pottery types, and stone sculptures. This community was among the
last to submit to Rome in the first century se.

The north-east of Iberia, and in particular the Ebro Valley and the coastal
regions of Catalonia, developed a Late Bronze Age culture which exhibited
close parallels with Urnfield developments in temperate Europe. The cultures
on the two sides of the Pyrences were sufficiently similar to suggest that close
contacts were maintained, possibly involving limited movements of people. At

135


===== PAGE 157 (index-160_1.jpg) =====
106 The Iberian Peninsula,
showing the focus of Celt-
iberian culture with the
names of the principal Celtic
tribes.

IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

the very least the Iberian communities
readily absorbed the beliefs and material
cultural assemblages of their northern
neighbours interpreting them in a local
manner, The extension of Greek influ-
ence along the coast of northern Cata-
lonia, following the establishment of
Emporion in the sixth century, helped
to integrate this coastal zone into a
Ligurian sphere which spread around
the Golfe du Lion.

This brief overview of Iberia in the
first millennium e has left the centre of
the Peninsula unaccounted for. Here
lived indigenous groups who spoke
Celtic and were to develop the distinctive characteristics of Celtiberian culture.

Celts and Celtiberians through Contemporary Eyes

Direct evidence for the existence of Celts in Iberia is provided by the classical
historians. The carliest of these is Herodotus, who, writing in the mid-fifth cen-
tury 8¢, makes oblique and somewhat confusing references to the Celtic pres-
ence. In one passage he mentions that they were the most westerly people in
Europe next to the Cynetes, who appear to have been the inhabitants of the
extreme south-west of the Peninsula. Elsewhere he says that the Celts lived
beyond the ‘Pillars of Hercules'—the area known 1o us as the Straits of Gib-
raltar. Both comments provide a reasonable geographical precision and leave
no doubt that Herodotus' informants believed there were Celts in western
Iberia. When Herodotus notes that Celts lived around the source of the Danube
and that the Danube rose near Pyrene—a place name thought to be connected
to the Pyrenees—he was presumably conflating two different scraps of infor-
mation into a single incorrect perception.

The third-century writer Eratosthenes also comments on Celts in Iberia,
contrasting their prominence in his own time to the situation two centurics
earlier when they had been less numerous or at least less important. From the
beginning of the second century Celtiberes or Celtiberi began to be referred to
with increasing frequency in the various conflicts in which the Romans were
engaged in the Peninsula. According to Diodorus, no doubt quoting Posei-
donius, ‘Celtiberes are a fusion of two peoples and the combination of Celtsand
Iberes only took place after long and bloody wars’ (Hist. 5. 33). This may be
nothing more than a helpful rationalization but it was widely believed. Indeed
Martial, who was born in Bilbilis in Celtiberian territory in Ap 40, several times
refers in his writing to ‘we who are descended from Celts and Iberians’,
Diodorus characterizes the Celtiberes, saying that they were very warlike but

136


===== PAGE 158 (index-161_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

were noted for their hospitality, since they regarded strangers as being under
divine protection. He goes on to say that ‘some have shields of lightly-con-
structed Celtic type; others a round shield of the kind more familiar in the
Greek world. The iron of their two-edged swords, shorter than the Celtic great
sword, is capable of cutting anything’ (Hist. 5. 33).

Other authors contribute to the generalized Graeco-Roman view of the
Celtiberian, emphasizing the dual attribute of military ferocity and hospitality.
Support of the chiefin battle was demanded of every warrior and to survive him
was a criminal act: death in battle was glorious. One tantalizing account says
that they believed that the souls of those who died in battle and were eaten by
vultures went straight to heaven. Here, just possibly, is a reference to the rite of
excarnation. Among at least one tribe, the Vaccaei, land and the harvest were
the property of the community, and every year land was reapportioned to those
who worked it. Many other anecdotes are recorded, such as Celtiberians drink-
ing wine mixed with honey or cleaning their teeth with stale urine, but these
add little to our understanding other than local colour. Taken together, then,
the ancient sources are consistent in their belief in the Celtic ethnicity of the
societies they encountered beyond the northern and western borders of the
more civilized Mediterranean-facing Iberians of the south and east.

The Celtic Language

The origin and development of palacohispanic languages present highly com-
plex problems which have provided a fertile field for study and debate among
scholars, It is only fair to stress that that debate continues and many issues are
still unresolved. At the very simplest level, however, it is possible to divide much
of the Peninsula into two broad linguistic zones based on the common occur-
renceof distinctive typonyms. In the south and east there exists a concentration
of place names ending in -il()i, -il(t)u, which are thought to be non Indo-

107 The distribution of
Celtic place names in Iberia
gives some idea of the area
of the Peninsula aver which
the Celtic language wasin
use. Some of the Celtic name
elements appear for the first
time in Roman place names.

European and from their distribution

clearly correspond to the region that was [_
culturally and historically that of the
Iberians. Over much of the rest of the
country names ending in -briga are
comparatively widespread; these reflect
the area over which a Celtic language

was spoken. .
When examined in more detail, how- > S "
ever, something of the complexity of the r A R

situation becomes apparent. The zone
of non-Indo-European place names
extending from southern Portugal to
the Levantine-Catalan region can be
divided into several different groups.

——

TN A0 Wowes



===== PAGE 159 (index-162_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

Similarly within the broad -briga zone several linguistic sub-zones can be
defined, the most distinctive being the area of the Lusitani and Gallaecia on the
Atlantic coast, which is thought by some linguists to represent an archaic form
of Celtic, and the north of Galicia around Lugo and La Coruna. There are also
significant differences in language east and west of a divide which runs approx-
imately through Oviedo and Mérida. None the less, these groups all belong to
the broadly defined Celtic family of Indo-European.

The questions which immediately arise are when and how was the Celtic lan-
guage introduced into Iberia? Earlier linguistic studies have stressed that most
of the Celtic which survives for study in Iberia is of the more ancient Q-Celtic
form, suggesting an early penetration. There is, however, some evidence of P-
Celtic in place names with the -dunum ending, suggesting to some linguists the
possibility of a second penetration. Since the -dunum names were found over
only a limited territory, concentrating mainly in Catalonia, it has been sug-
gested that a later Celtic ‘influx” through the Pyrences was superimposed upon
an already established and far more extensive Celtic-speaking region.

Interpretations of this kind must be regarded as oversimplifications. At best
the linguistic evidence shows that Celtic, in various forms, was spoken over
large areas of Iberia. It does not take with it a convincing chronology nor can it
be used as a model for population movements.

It has been argued that the Celtic language had already evolved by the time
that food-producing communities first moved into northern and central Iberia
in the Neolithic period, but the view is not widely supported. An alternative is
to see the language spreading as the result of a series of successive migrations in
later prehistoric times, different ‘waves’ of Celtic speakers settling different
areas. Yetanother suggestion is that a limited influx of population took place in

108 One of the longest the north-east of Iberia, whence, as an élite language, Celtic spread to other
bcripian Ok o The simple reality is that we do not know, nor is it within the nature of
iéiteyey e s the evidence ever to provide firm answers to these problems. All that can safely
Saragossa in Spain, It was. be said is that by the fourth century sc a Celtiberian spoke a language which had
:;:l:‘l::d'l::‘u':::';::r‘l::" much in common with that spoken by many communities of western and cen-
preted ssa contracteelating  tral Europe, and by good fortune the Celtiberians sometimes had recourse to
insame waytoland awner record transactions in their native language on metal plaques like that found at

ship. Museo Arqueoldgico 5 g s g .
Nacional, Madrid, * Botorrita, which contribute to a growing corpus of invaluable texts,

inscriptions in the Celt- region

——— e s — -
L WONAMEEZQONM AW LR WM QL I MEQAMNTHQY MG T e § iyl Y
W MEOL T QAP B DI WMYINEQE XAME MR CAOPINEOERPIMNPIY Y SPANENT P W EMHS PR D
S PREa Rp ) RIVERR HMOESM @ MPREGSH MY WM 91 PUGIM PR WY BNM S MY @09 7 51 @
: o f'AW':’ WINEE [EMAQ PR P NP RNG (h M ARHIA Dk § )iy P8R 9T T
DI | WAL L PPN Fin BTN RSP TS H 570 mm Y o 914D W Goa Xl SE DS IS
: DIk ey MR N IMDN DB E QRAE VKA QNG AMNINY B I ol ¥ IR o
i
M
s
S

B NIV N 77 8% 1 N 1O R MARIVS M SHNG MK [ 9 5 e MV 1o B OMXIG
P93 ¥PrOp e il oM e QX A 10"“:&’.‘#-‘0%5‘«&w&*?gfém?w%p\:ms':mwwg
BN KUY LR @G W M DF MDA S P GERQMPArP S el g I mEr QR M

T 2 T N A (N A L Ay Tl SR S e LA Te

HOETNYNSTMXNIN ZTEMPIEN S MO NS L Fif 51 KRG
HOETNRNI0 XN T TEWPIEN QM (€M 5 pytire SR SPURTROW

138


===== PAGE 160 (index-163_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

The ‘Arrival’ of the Celts: Some Theories

The question of the ‘arrival’ of Celtic-speaking peoples in the Iberian Peninsula
has understandably been the subject of much debate. In the nineteenth century
it was usual to link 'Celts” with the construction of megalithic tombs, more
because the megaliths were at that time the best-known elements of the archae-
ological record than for any more positive reason. In the 1920s and 1930s, asan
awareness of the complexity of the archaeological record grew, it was suggested
that the Celtic advent was reflected in the material culture of the Urnfields of
north-eastern Iberia. This, it was argued, was directly related to the culture of
western and central Europe, which was the homeland of the Celts. Further
study refined the view, leading to the ‘two-Celtic-waves’ theory. This saw an
initial wave arriving from north of the Pyrenees about 1000 e, with a second,
more complex invasion bringing in new peoples in the sixth century. Another
version of the same general theory held that there was only one phase of incom-
ings, some time in the eighth century. However, the demonstration that the
Celtiberian zone and the distribution of the Iberian Urnfields were exclusive
and that the language spoken in the Urnfield area was not Indo-European did
much to undermine the traditional view. More recently some commentators
have attempted, somewhat unconvincingly, to demonstrate that the Celtic
incursion was the result of movements of the La Téne Celts,

Current Spanish work accepts that these monocausal explanations are over-
simple. Invasionist theories are rejected in favour of a model based on the
assimilation of selected cultural elements by the indigenous élites. The model
proposes the existence of a cultural ‘substratum’ embedded in the Atlantic
Bronze Age which had already absorbed some linguistic and ideological traits
common to the historical Celts. Among the distinguishable characteristics are
a language form in which place and personal names retain an initial P and are
closely related to the later Lusitanian language, circular houses, burial rites
involving the excarnation of the dead, and religious locations associated with
natural phenomena such as mountains, springs, rivers, and woods. This
‘proto-Celtic” culture gradually developed, in the highlands of the Iberian
Mountains and the Eastern Meseta, into the culture of the historical Celtiber-
ians, as a result of absorbing influences emanating from the Mediterranean
fringe. From the homeland of its genesis, Celtiberian culture spread to north-
ernand western Iberia, being readily assimilated by the ‘proto-Celtic” substrate,
butin the extreme north and west—the area of the Castro culture—the ‘proto-
Celtic’ culture remained largely untainted.

Thisinterpretation raises a number of interesting questions and possibilities.
In its reliance on an Atlantic Bronze Age ‘proto-Celtic’ culture, it opens the
possibility for developing a model which embraces the whole of Atlantic
Europe—a matter to which we will return in the next chapter. The view that
classic Celtiberian culture was an amalgam of the indigenous ‘proto Celtic’ with
an overlay of Mediterranean influences is precisely what has been suggested, in

139


===== PAGE 161 (index-164_1.jpg) =====
100 Above Antennac-hilted
sword from Alcacer do Sal,
Porgugal, is typical of swords
of the sixth to fourth cen
turics 8¢ in use in the
Celtiberian region. Museu
Nacional de Arqucologia ¢
Etnologia, Lisbon.

1o Right: The oppidunt of
Los Cogotas, Avila, Spain,
s one of the better-known
defended scttlements of the
Celtiberian region of Spain,
1t has been extensively exca.
vated as the result of which
the arrangement of the inte-
rior buildings has been
identified in outline allow
ing this artist's reconstruc
tion to be offered.

IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

Chapter 3, as the process behind the emergence of the La Tene Celtic culture of
temperate Europe.

The Archaeology of the Celtiberians

The homeland of the Celtiberians lay in the north-eastern part of Iberia stretch-
ing from the southern flank of the Ebro Valley to the Eastern Meseta. To the
north lay the territory of the Urnfield culture, to the west the loosely linked
communities of the Atlantic Bronze Age, while to the cast and south, along the
Mediterranean fringe, the distinctive Iberian culture was soon to emerge as
contacts with the east Mediterranean states intensified. The Celtiberian zone
therefore lay on three peripheries and inevitably benefited by absorbing cul-
tural elements from all three.

The harshness of parts of the territory, particularly the plains of the Meseta,
desiccated during the summer months, necessitated a degree of transhumance
in the pastoral economy. The flocks and herds were taken to upland mountain
pastures before the heat came and were brought down again in autumn. Such
conditions allowed a gradual increase in population and led to the emergence
of an élite reflected in a series of rich graves furnished with short swords, spears,
d round shields, redolent of the warrior-based nature of society.
The principal burial rite was urned cremation, adopted from the Urnfield
cultural zone to the north-east, but other elements came from the south and
east, including geometric painted pottery, fibulae with two-part springs, and
belt hooks, all characteristic of Tartessian culture. The short antennae-hilted

140


===== PAGE 162 (index-165_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

iron sword was, however, a development spec-
ific to the north, extending, with regiona i
tions, over the Celtiber

an area and the Ebro

Valley, and across the Pyrences into Languedoc
and Aquitania,

From the sixth century se the influence of
stimuli from the cultures of the Mediterranean

littoral and the developing Iberian hinterland
intensified. By the fourth century the Celt-
iberians were using rotary querns and the pot-
ter's wheel. Celtiberian script, derived from
Iberian, was in use by the third century, and
large oppida-like settlements—again probably
an Iberian inspiration—began to develop at
about the same time or a little later.

To what extent Celtiberian culture received
significant influences from the La Téne cultural
zone it is difficult to say. A scatter of La Téne
artefacts have been found in Iberia, most nota-
bly the collection of third-century weapons
from the burial at Quintana de Gormaz, which
included
pairs. This
existed with communities north of the Pyrenees,
but it need not imply anything more than
processes of gift exchange. Nor does the adop-

a scabbard decorated with dragon-

array of material shows that contacts

tion of the torc as an item of prestige display
mean more than a sharing of belief or value sys-

1 Above The defences of
Los Cogotas enclose in total
some 14.5 hectares but oaly
the upper enclosure was
intensively occupied.
Though large, it is by 0o
mcans the largest of the
appida in the Ambles Valley
as the lower plans will
demonstrate.

fi: Gold torc of the
fourth-second centuries e
from Vilas Boas, Portugal
Museu Nacional de
Arqueologia ¢ Etnologia
Lishon

4


===== PAGE 163 (index-166_1.jpg) =====
13 Distribution of horse-
man fibulag, typical of the
Celtiberian area of Spain.
The styleis local but the
basic structure of the brooch
s found throughout much
of western Europe.

IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

tems. The silver torcs of the Meseta and the gold torcs of the north-west are dis-
tinctively Celtiberian in style, as are the widely distributed horse-and-rider
fibulae.

The possibility that groups of La Téne Celts may have moved south into
Celtiberian lands, as raiders, settlers, or mercenaries, cannot, however, be ruled
out. Celtic war bands may have attached themselves 1o the incursion of the
Cimbriin 104 B¢ and Caesar specifically mentions thearrival in Lérida, in 49 sc,
of 6,000 Gauls, including Gallic cavalry, Ruthenian archers, and their families.
The contribution of these and other possible intruders to Celtiberian culture
seems to have been minimal.

The Expansion of Celtiberian Culture

From its homeland in the north-east of the Peninsula, Celtiberian culture
spread to many other areas of the country. This is best exemplified by the extent
to which the Celtic language was spoken, as is demonstrated by the distribution
of place names with the suffix - briga or the prefix Seg- (Fig. 107).
Archaeological evidence from grave finds suggests an extension of Celt-
iberian culture westwards to the territory of the Vettones in the fifth century ic,
and to Estremadura and the far west, where the surname Celtius was used to
indicate cthnic origin. According to Pliny, some Celtiberians from this region
moved south to settle in Baetica, whence they became known as the Celticr: one
of the towns, Penaflor, was called Celtiin the Iberian and Roman period. Pliny
as well as other writers record further movements to the north: the Celti praest-
marici settled in northern Portugal, the Gallaeci moved to the extreme north-

142


===== PAGE 164 (index-167_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

west (modern Galicia), while the Galli settled in the Ebro Valley, That
all these groups were known by ethnic rather than tribal designations
is an indication that the Celtiberian expansion is more likely to have
been the result of military élites taking over the power structure of the
peripheral tribes than of large movements of population. Beyond this
zone raids may have penetrated still further into the territories of the
more advanced Iberian communities, and it was in these regions that
, like those depicted on the stone relief from Osuna
or the pot from Liria, will have found employment. In rare sculptures,
like the stone head from Cordoba, we may be glimpsing an icon of a
Celtic deity.

Celtic mercenarie:

Celtiberians and the Classical World

The value of the Celtiberians as mercenary troops was well appreciated
by the Carthaginians, who employed substantial detachments in their
various campaigns. Celtiberians were also used in the Roman armies,
which entered Spain in 218 e at the beginning of the Second Punic
War, though they proved to be somewhat unreliable. By the end of the
second century, with Carthage defeated and Rome now developing its
hold over the Iberian lands, Romans and Celtiberians had become all
too familiar with each other’s strengths and weaknesses.

114 Lefe Stone relief of a warrioe from Osuna, Andalucia,
Spain. The warrior holds a typical Iberian faleata (single edge
sword) in his right hand. but his dongated shield i
type and quite unlike native therian round shiclds. Third or
second century se. Museo Arqueokogico Nacional, Madrid.

15 Above: Detail of the decoration of a painted pottery vessel
from Liria, Valencia, Spain, showing a warrior holding an
clongated shield of La Tene type. Third or second century ne
Musca Prehistorico de Valencia

116 Stone head carved in a style very
similar to Celtic stone heads found in
southern Gaul. From the region of
Cordoba. The very simplicity of the
depiction makes it difficult 10 argue that
the object was actually carved by &
craftsman with knowledge of ‘Celti
iconography, but the head stands out
marked contrast to Iherian and Roman
work in this region of Andalucia
Mauseo Municipal de Cordoba

143


===== PAGE 165 (index-168_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

For the next seventy years, in a long-drawn-out war of attrition, enlivened by
peace treaties and revolts, Rome was drawn deeper and deeper into the territo-
ries of the Celtiberians and Lusitanians. Some indication of the devastating
scale of the conflict is provided by Tiberius Gracchus, who could claim to have
destroyed 300 Celtiberian hill towns in his single expedition of 179-8 Bc. A brief
respite followed, but after the revolt of the Celtiberiansand Lusitaniin 154a fur-
ther series of bitter engagements ensued, the native opposition being rallied
and brilliantly led for a time by the Lusitanian war leader Viriathus. The final
stage began in 143 B¢, by which time the Lusitanian campaign had been sepa-
rated from that against the Celtiberians, and culminated in 133 with the destruc-
tion of the Celtiberian stronghold of Numantia after a long and bitter siege.
Although it was to take more than a century for the whole of Iberia to be
brought under Roman control, the destruction of Numantia and the selling of
its survivors into slavery effectively marked the end of organized Celtiberian
resistance,

During the second century Rome had come to understand and respect the
Celtic peoples of Iberia. They were characterized as fearles
who fought with a total disregard for their own safety: their cavalry was awe-
inspiring and they were capable of producing charismatic war leaders like
Viriathus. They were also bound by their overriding beliefin the sacred nature
of hospitality.

In stressing the valour and hospitality of the Celtiberians, the Roman writers
were providing a familiar caricature of the Noble Savage, but there can be little
doubt that these aspects were deeply embedded in the social system of the
Celtiberians. It was this, as well as their language, which allowed the classical
authors to believe them and the Celts of temperate Europe to be one people.

ferocious warriors

117 A wolf's head made
from baked clay found at the
native hill town of
Numantia, Spain. The head
is the mouth of a trumpet
similar to the carnyx.
Second to first century s
Museo Arqueologico
Nacional, Madrid.

144


===== PAGE 166 (index-169_1.jpg) =====
8
The Communities of the
Atlantic Facade

Tue Celtic language was spoken throughout much or most of western Europe
to the very fringes of the Atlantic and survives now in a vital spoken and written
form as Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Breton, and, until recently, Cornish. Over much
of this same region distinctive elements of the La Téne material culture are to be
found, and there is ample evidence that local craftsmen, working in metal or
clay, were thoroughly conversant with the grammar and spirit of Celtic art, For
these reasons, then, one may assume that western Europe was an integral part
of the wider Celtic world.

But behind this broad linguistic and cultural similarity lay a more complex
pattern. In the opening paragraph of the first book of his Commentaries on the
Gallic War, Caesar offers a sketch of the ethnic structure of Gaul:

Gaul as 2 whole consists of three separate parts; one is inhabited by the Belgae, another
by the Aquitani, and the third by the people we call Gauls, though in their own language
they are called Celts. In language, customs, and laws these three peoples are quite dis-
tinct. The Celts are separated from the Aquitani by the river Garonne and from the
Belgae by the Marne and the Seine.  (De Bello Gallicor. 1)

The reference is admirably clear and explicit, and, while it may well containa
degree of oversimplification either through ignorance or 1o aid the audience,
there is no reason not to accept it as a fair summing-up of the situation in the
mid-first century be. The archacological evidence provides some support for
this threefold division, but the broad swath of territory designated ‘Celtic’ by
Caesar can be further divided into Armorican Gaul, occupying the entire
Atlantic zone from the Seine to the Garonne, Narbonnaise Gaul, comprising
Provence and Languedoc from the Alps to the Pyrenees, and a central zone
which subdivides roughly along the Loire Valley into an Arvernian and central
castern region.

Further west, Britain and Ireland pose an altogether different problem. No

145


===== PAGE 167 (index-170_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

ancient author ever described the inhabitants of the islands as Celts, though
Caesar says of the occupants of Kent that their way of life was very like that of
the Gauls. The earliest surviving reference is to be found in the Massillior
Periplus, a source probably of the sixth century sc, preserved in the Ora Mari-
timaof Avienus, Here Britain is described as insula Albionumand there is men-
tion of gens Hiernorum—the race of the Irish. The underlying Celtic forms are
Albiones (roughly “people of the living surface world’) and lerne (‘people of the
fertile earth’). The account of the voyage of Pytheas, which took place about 320
1, makes no use of these ethnonyms, employing instead a transliteration of the
Gallo-Brettonic Pritani to describe the British—a name which has persisted
ever since. Taken together, this evidence is usually thought to imply that the
carlier form of Celtic (Goidelic) was replaced by the later (Brythonic), in Bri-
tain but not in Ireland, between the sixth and the beginning of the third cen-
turies. The reasoning has further been extended by suggesting that the
appearance of Brythonic Celtic is the result of social contacts between Britain
and Gaul reflected in the development of Insular Celtic art. As a simplified
model this may be broadly acceptable, but, as we will see, the situation is likely
to have been far more complex. A point of particular relevance, however, is that
in Ireland and Britain the Celtic language was already established by the sixth
century.

The situation in Brittany is less clear. Modern Breton is based on Brythonic
Celtic, very similar to that spoken in Wales and, until recently, Cornwall. Since
the Armorican peninsula is known to have received settlers rom south-west-
ern Britain in the fifth century an, it has generally been assumed that the Breton
language developed from that spoken by the incoming population. This is,
however, likely to be an oversimplification. Archacologically Armorica, south-
west Britain, and south Wales formed a broadly linked cultural zone in the first
millennium s and must have shared a similar Brythonic Celtic. Although the
Roman interlude in Armorica seems to have imposed itself rather more heavily
than that in the south-west of Britain or in Wales, there is no reason to suppose
that the indigenous Celtic language was totally replaced by Latin. In other
words, the British migrants in the fifth century ap are likely to have encoun-
tered a native population able to communicate with them in the language
shared by their ancestors five centuries before, even though it must have under-
gone a degree of transformation. In the rest of Gaul, where romanization was
far more intense, Latin had, by the fourth century, begun to oust Celtic, Even
50, that St Jerome could note the similarity between the native language of the
Treveriand that of the Galatians suggests that Celtic survived in spoken form in
parts of Gaul other than Armorica until the Migration Period.

The principal question to emerge from this briefintroduction is when and by
what processes did the communities of western Europe become Celtic? The tra-
ditional view, held until the 1960s, was that the answer lay in one or more major
migrations. More recently it has been suggested that the Celtic languages of the
west simply evolved in situ from an indigenous Indo-European base. On both

146


===== PAGE 168 (index-171_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

archacological and linguistic grounds, neither generalization is acceptable. By
reviewing a selection of the evidence, it may be possible to come closer to an
understanding of the issues involved.

The Nature of the Atlantic Fringe in the Bronze Age

To take the broadest view it may be said that the communities of the Atlantic
fringe of Europe formed a single cultural zone, linked by the sea. It differed sig-
nificantly from the central zone of temperate Europe and from the Mediter-
ranean zone, yet all three were bound by networks of contact channelled along
corridors determined, to a large extent, by the opportunities created by geogra-
phy. Most of these corridors were threaded by navigable rivers—the Rhine,
Seine, Loire, and Gironde-—but other nodes, such as the trading port of Gadir
(Cddiz), provided essential points of articulation.

That cultural links along the Atlantic sea-ways extend back far in time is evi-
dent from the archacological record. As early as the fourth millennium nc,
megalithic tombs, of the type known as passage graves, developed on a broad
front from Portugal to Ireland, and within this zone common symbols recur-
red, carved on the orthostats of the tombs, While no one any longer conjures up
visions of migrant ‘Megalithic Saints' proselytizing along the Atlantic fagade,
the similarities are such that the different com-
munities must have been developing their belief
systems in the general knowledge of what was
happening clsewhere. A flow of ideas implies
movements, however limited, of people, and it
may well be that the exchange of rare commodi-
ties, such as fine stone axes, between neighbour-
ing polities provided the mechanism.

Continued contact was maintained through-
out the second millennium and began to inten-
sify as copper and later bronze became generally
available. Along the maritime networks a dis-
tinctive burial practice spread, characterized by
single inhumations accompanied by grave sets
including decorated beakers. It was during this
time that centres displaying élite dominance
emerged in Brittany and Wessex. Cultural con-
tact was maintained through gift exchanges
which saw fine stone axes, gold, amber, and
faicnce beads pass between them across the
intervening channel.

Contacts intensified still further in the Late
Bronze Age, after about 1300 . From then,
until ¢.600 i, bronze in various forms—as its

97

18 Atlantic Europe, indi-
cating the main cultural
zones in the second half of
the first millennium sc.



===== PAGE 169 (index-172_1.jpg) =====
