===== PAGE 241 (index-244_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

remont was defended with sic

dels. The urban layout within was

second centuries ne

175 Be

by stone walls with bastions rem

+ The native oppivhums of Nages, Gard, France, was defended

o Greek defensive architec

ture. The regular layout of the parallel streets is a characteristic

Greek urh ining. which can only have been learned from the

Greek cities of the coastal zone. Third to first centuries w

the
Celto-Ligurian inhabitants absorbed many asp

zone to Roman commerce. In this w

ects of Roman culture. This is demonstrated by
the Mediterranean styles of architecture adop-
ted by the inhabitants of the hill forts of Ensér-

une, Entremont, and Nages.

In crossing southern Gaul the Roman entre-

preneurs will have become increasingly con-
ataxes of trade—the Rhone

route 10 the north and the Aude-Carcassonne

scious of the two gr

Gap-Garonne route to the west. The large native

settlements at Tolosa (Toulouse) on the Garo-
nne and Vienna (Vienne) on the Rhone were no
doubt thoroughly explored by the more adven
turous at an early stage in the contact period.

The mutual interdependence of the native
and Roman systems worked well, until increas
ingly serious raids mounted by the tribes of the
Maritime Alps and Lower Rhone Valley against
Roman convoys and Greek cities alike led, in
evitably, to annexation in 123 sc. After this the
Province of Transalpina was formally estab-
lished.

T'hus, while in Iberia Celtic-speaking peoples
were locked in a seemingly interminable conflict
with the Roman armies, in the west the early sec-
ond century B¢ saw the establishment of an
interface between the Roman and the Celtic
worlds stretching from the Adriatic to the Pyr-
ences. Along the 1,100 kilometres of this cultural
frontier social and economic interactions devel

oped, increasing in intensity as the Italian econ
omy became more and more dependent on the
periphery.

In the eastern Mediterranean and the east the
situation was different. The mountains of the
Balkans formed an effective barrier between the
Adriatic and the Middle Danube regions, shel

tering the Celtic communities from Roman

interference, apart from brief campaigns against
brigands in the Upper Sava Valley between 156
and 129 s, In the Lower Danube Valley the
Thracians acted as a buffer against the develop-

ing Roman interest in Greece and Macedonia



===== PAGE 242 (index-245_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

until the middle of the first century Ap, when Thrace finally became a Roman
province,

The situation in Galatia was different yet again. Here, as we have seen, the
Galatian state remained independent and, to a large extent, isolated, even after
its decisive defeat by the Romans in 189 sc. Following the massacre of the
Tetrarchs by Mithridates IV in 88 nc, the Galatians became increasingly pro-
Roman until their territory was annexed by Pompey in 67 sc. During the cen-
tury or more of contact between the two peoples there is little evidence of
significant acculturation, but the allegiance which developed between the later
Galatian leaders and the Roman authorities implies a close political relation-
ship at least by the first century nc.

The Roman Economy and the Celtic World

During the second century 8¢ the Roman economy was undergoing major
transformations. The reasons were various and complex. One of the principal
factors was the need to maintain substantial citizen armies to forward Roman
interests abroad. This meant that men who would otherwise be engaged in
rural activities were required to spend long periods away from home and were
therefore unable to work the land. For many of those who survived and
returned home, farm work retained little attraction. This encouraged a gradual
drift to the cities and in particular Rome, leaving farms abandoned and land
uncultivated. As the urban proletariat grew, so the smallholdings were bought
up and gradually amalgamated into estates of increasing size. By the end of the
second century large tracts of land were held by comparatively few owners, One
of the reasons for the growth of big estates, in addition to the availability of
cheap land, was that for the senatorial class land provided a convenient and
socially acceptable form of investment. To be involved directly in the trading of
commodities was not considered to be a proper pursuit for a man of status,
though in all probability many ignored or circumvented the convention. To
own land, on the other hand, was desirable. The physical extent of the estate or
estates was a ready indicator of a man’s prestige. More to the point, the yield
provided a cash return on the money invested in the original land purchase.

The estates required large bodies of agricultural workers. With extensive
rural depopulation, labour for hire was not readily available. A more certain
way to fuel productivity was with slave labour. Slaves were cost effective, not
least because they could breed in captivity and slaves could be sold. By the
beginning of the first century B¢ the reliance of the Roman economy on slave
labour was considerable. One estimate is that in the early first century ¢ there
were 300,000 Gaulish slaves in Italy alone, a total which required to be topped
up at the rate 0f 15,000 a year.

There is one further factor to be weighed. For the most part those estates, too
far from Rome to deliver fresh fruit and vegetables to the city, had to rely on
producing corn, oil, and wine. Of these, manufacture of wine soon became the

215


===== PAGE 243 (index-246_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

most popular, no doubt because of ease of production and profit margin, but
overproduction led to pressure to develop new overseas markets.

From this brief, and greatly oversimplified, sketch, two things stand out: the
need to maintain a steady flow of slaves; and the need to create new markets in
which to dispose of surpluses not required in Italy.

While the Roman economy became increasingly dependent on slaves to fuel
its productive capacity, its need for raw materials, and in particular gold and sil-
ver to serve as currency in the increasingly complex economic system, also
increased. Copper, tin, and high-quality iron were always in demand. Other
imports listed by contemporary writers such as Strabo include hides, furs,
amber, hunting dogs, and other exotic animals. These raw materials would
have been sought in the newly won territories and in the barbarian hinterlands
beyond. Thus from the beginning of the second century sc Rome became more
and more dependent upon sources of supply beyond its immediate control.

Romans and the Society of the Celtic Periphery

There can be little doubt that the imperative of Roman needs impinged
significantly upon the barbarian world, such was the energy of the Roman state.
But the Celtic north was also undergoing social change, in part sui generis.
Opportunity for raiding was now far more restricted, not only by the growing
power of Rome in the south but by the rise of the Dacian state in the east and
what may be interpreted as the population increase now underway among the
Germanic peoples of the north. New systems were evolving for the display of
power among the élite. The entourage remained important: the size of a
leader’s ‘following’ was seen as an indicator of his status. In earlier times, as we
have argued above (pp. 88-90), the raid provided the opportunity to lead and
the feast was the occasion for the display of status before the assembled com-
pany. But times had changed, and Poseidonius (through Strabo), in describing
the feast among Celts with whom he was familiar, could assign it to ‘former
times’.

What seems to have replaced this early system, at least in parts of Gaul, was a
form of potlatch—a process of conspicuous giving and consumption, enacted
publicly so that the company could gauge the wealth of the host and benefit
from his generosity. The account which Poseidonius gives of an event staged by
the Arvernian chief Louernius is informative. In a bid for status he built a large
square enclosure and there stockpiled food and set up wine presses to feast all
comers over a period of many days. He also drove about the countryside in his
chariot scattering ‘little pieces of gold and silver’ to the horde who followed
eagerly in his wake. To be able to mount such a display of largess Louernius was
evidently in command of considerable resources. Thus the control of goods
and raw materials, and the facility to manipulate them to produce luxury
exotics such as wine to dispense to clients, now became essential for the aspir-
ing leader. The development of oppida controlling route nodes, and thus the

216


===== PAGE 244 (index-247_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

movement of goods, might be seen as one of the more visible elements in the
complex package of social change now coming about in the Celtic world,
Whether or not the ‘little pieces of gold and silver’ which Louernius threw to
his followers were coins or bullion is unclear, but the development of coinage
played a significant part in the new system. Gold and silver coins were used for
gift exchange rather than commerce in the capitalist sense. Since they were
stamped with the symbols of the issuing authority, often in the first century Bc
actually mentioning the king by name, the coin, however acquired, would be
seen to emanate ultimately from this authority. It was part of the largess which
he distributed to his people, and the current holder was therefore beholden to
him for his initial generosity. The sporadic mintings of coins were, quite possi-
bly, occasioned by the desire of the issuer to legitimize his claim to leadership.
The proximity of the Roman world introduced another new factor into the
political and social dynamics of the periphery. A tribal leader could ally himself
and his following to the Roman state—that is, he could become a client of
Rome. In doing so he would acquire prestige and power by virtue of the pro-
tection which the Roman patron would offer. In the same context an aspiring
young warrior might place himself and his fighting entourage in the hands of
Rome to serve as auxiliaries in the Roman army, much as his ancestors might
have been engaged in a less formal way as mercenaries by Mediterranean pow-
ers. Knowledge of Roman fighting methods and acceptance of Roman ways
would have provided another opportunity to demonstrate social superiority.
The kingdom of Noricum provides an informative example of the relation-
ship which could develop between Celtic and Roman society. The kingdom lay
in the eastern Alps in an area roughly coterminous with present-day Austria. [t
began as a group of loosely allied Celtic tribes but achieved a degree of unity

176 The kingdom of
Noricum in the second and
first centuries nc.


===== PAGE 245 (index-248_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

some time during the second century sc under the hegemony of the Nori of
central eastern Carinthia. Noricum lay astride the east Alpine trading routes,
but it also commanded rich supplies of iron, which were worked locally into a
fine steel, well known in the Roman world as ferrum Noricum. Relations with
Rome began in 186 c and developed amicably, until the region was eventually
annexed in 15 8¢, Throughout this period trade intensified. In about 70 sc a
local coinage was developed in southern Noricum to serve as a medium of
exchange.

The capital of Noricum, Virunum, was located on the Magdalensberg, near
Klagenfurt, close to the major route leading northwards from Aquileia. The
native oppidum was sited on the highest point of the mountain. It was here that
the royal residence was located, and, inevitably, the oppidum served as the prin-
cipal administrative centre of the kingdom. Just below the native town there
developed a ghetto occupied by resident Roman traders. Excavation suggests
that it was established as early as the beginning of the first century Bc and con-
tinued to grow. By 30 e the lower settlement could boast a large forum and
masonry-built houses constructed and decorated in purely Roman style. These
were the residences of traders linked to enterprises based in Aquileia. When, in
15 8¢, Drususand Tiberius began to annex the Alpine territories, Noricum, now
thoroughly romanized, was absorbed with ease.

Roman relations with the Celtic tribes of Gaul were no less intense. The con-
stant Roman presence in the south of the country after ¢.200 nc will have pro-
vided ample opportunity for Roman entreprencurs to develop lucrative
trading links with native communities living around the fringes of the Roman
sphere of influence. At the hill fort of Nages, in the Vaunage not far from
Nimes, itis possible to trace the impact of the Mediterranean world through the
increasing quantities of imported pottery, both fine wares and transport ves-
sels, found in successive stratified layers throughout the duration of the settle-
ment’s habitation beginning about 300 B¢ and ending about ap 10.

One of the most desirable of the Roman imports was wine. The Celts’ love of
wine was legendary in the Roman world. Diodorus Siculus (quoting Poseid-
onius) sums up the stereotype in a famous account:

They are extremely partial to wine and glut themselves with the unmixed wine brought
in by merchants, Their desire makes them guzzle it and when they get drunk they either
fall into a stupor or become manic. For this reason many lalian merchants, with their
usual love of money, regard the Celtic passion for wine as a source of treasure. They
transport the wine by boat on the navigable rivers and by cart through the open coun-
try and they get an incredibly good price for it: for one amphora of wine they get a
slave—a servant in return for adrink!  (Hist. 5. 26)

Whilst it is always necessary to treat texts of this kind with caution, archaco-
logical evidence amply bears out the huge volume of Roman wine which was
transported to Gaul in distinctive amphorae of Dressel 1 type. Two trading
ports have been identified, one near Toulouse in the Garonne Valley, the other

n8


===== PAGE 246 (index-249_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

on the Sadne at Cabillonum (Chalon). At Chalon, it is estimated that 24,000
amphorae were discarded in the river, while the farm land at Vieille T
still so thick with amphora sherds that even today ploughing is difficult. Both
locations must have functioned as trading ports where the wine, transported by
the merchants in amphorae, was decanted into other containers, either barrels
At other sites deeper into Celtic territory the
show that sometimes it was moved
veral of thes

pulouse is

or skins, for movement inland.

discovery of large numbers of amphor.
further without decanting.
Essalois, and Montmerlhe, were native fort

sites, such as Bibracte, Jeeuvres,
fications. To such places the Italian
wine may well have been carried by Roman merchants and there exchanged for
slaves and other commodities with the local élite, who could then dispense the
wine to their followers.

The exchange rate noted by Diodorus—an amphora of wine for a slave—
need not be taken too literally: it may have been little more than a neat literary
flourish, But if it is an accurate record of relative values, then comparative data
suggest that the Celts were getting a poor deal: in Rome the trader might expect
to get the equivalent of half a dozen amphorae of wine for a healthy Gaul.

The development of the wine trade can be charted from the relativ
quency of amphorae in dated archacological contexts. In southern Gaul Italic
amphorae make their appearance in small number about 200 nc and increase
steadily throughout the second century e, but it may well have been the
annexation of southern Gaul by Rome 120 Bc that gave the impetus for the
adventurous to seek more lucrative markets deeper inland (Map 28). The first
of the distinctive Italic amphorae to be found widely in Gaul are the Dres
type 1A, the earliest known examples of which were recovered from the
destruction levels at Carthage and can therefore be dated to 146 B, It is quite
hing the Gauls of the interior as
carly as the middle of the second century sc. Thereafter the quantities increased
dramatically, reaching a peak by the middle of the first century, when ¢
ted new and extended marketing opportunities,
he distribution of Dressel 1A and the later Dressel 1B amphorae provides a
vivid illustration of the Roman penetration of Celtic socicty in the west. The
navigable rivers of Gaul, as Diodorus says, provided arteries along which the
wine could flow. The long-established trading route along the Aude, Garonne,
and Gironde to the Atlantic sea-ways—the route by which tin had been
brought to the Mediterranean—was evidently busy in the late second and first
centuries Bc. Dressel 1A amphorae have been found on wreck sites off the
Breton coast and at a number of settlements in Brittany. The further extension
of the route can be traced, by amphora sherds, via the Channel Island of
Guernsey toa major port-of-trade at Hengistbury Head on the coast of Dorset.
Contemporary archaeological levels at Hengistbury have shown that other
, and unknown commodities
transported in Armorican-made pottery, were reaching Britain at this time.
idence for the production and refinement of metals—iron, gold, silver, and

el

possible, therefore, that wine was already r

aesar’s
conquest cr

goods, including figs, raw glass, metal vessel

219

177 Amphorac used to
transport wine provide a
clear indication of trade
routes. Two amphora types.
Dressel 1A and Dressel 11,
both made in fraly., are par
ticularly useful in identify
ing the changing patterns of
commerce in the second and
first centuries ne. The 1A
type was in commaon use
from the mid-second 10
mid-first centuries ne. The
1B type became
the second hal
century ne, Musée de Saint
Raymond

oulouse.


===== PAGE 247 (index-250_1.jpg) =====
78 Distribution of Dressel
1A amphorac in noeth-west-
e Gaul and southern
Britain, indicating the trade
axis operating in the early
first century se.

THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

bronze—and for the manufacture of shale bracelets, provides some tangible
indication of British exports. Others, mentioned by Strabo a little later as the
desirable products of Britain—hides, corn, hunting dogs, and slaves—can
hardly be expected to leave much archaeological trace.

The evidence from Hengistbury is interesting in showing the impact which
the Roman economy could have on distant communities. There is, however, no
need to suppose that Roman entrepreneurs
were actually sailing the Atlantic sea-ways. In
all probability commodities moved back and
forth within an indigenous network of
exchange, but Roman demands may have
influenced the intensity and focus of the
exchanges. That the major port-of-trade on
the south coast of Britain developed at
Hengistbury rather than a port in the south-
west peninsula might suggest that the
emphasis was more on corn and slaves than
on metals. The hill fort-dominated society of
central southern Britain might have been a
convenient source of slaves, It was probably
for some such reason that Hengistbury be-
came the port-of-call in the late second and
carly first centuries. It was short-lived, for
after the Caesarian conquest of Gaul new sys-
tems of trade emerged (see pp. 247-50).

The head of the Adriatic provided another convenient route between the
Roman world and the north. A Roman colony, established at Aquileia as early
s 169 B¢, led to the further development of an already important trading post
on the route northwards along the eastern Alpine fringes to the Danube, in the
vicinity of Sopron in north-west Hungary, thence to the Morava Valley and the
far north. This was broadly the route along which Baltic amber was carried to
the Mediterranean throughout the later prehistoric period, in Roman times,
and into the early Middle Ages. The importance of Sopron as a route node is
amply demonstrated by the large settlement and cemetery which developed
there and flourished between the fifth and first centuries B, its function even-
tually being continued by the Roman town of Scarbantia.

Between the head of the Adriatic and Transdanubia lay the hilly, even moun-
tainous, country of the Julian Alps from which flowed the upper streams of the
Drava and Sava rivers, In terms of modern political geography the region is
roughly equivalent to Slovenia and north-western Croatia. It was through this
territory, controlled by many Celtic tribes, among them the Taurisci, Carni,
Istri, and lapodi, that items of trade had to pass.

The Carni caused some disruption in 186 B¢, when, intent on establishing
new settlements, they moved west, forcing the evacuation of Aquileia, but they

220


===== PAGE 248 (index-251_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

were eventually driven back in 183. Thereafter Roman relations with the area
were not always harmonious. In 171, returning from an abortive attempt to
reach Macedonia, a Roman army commanded by Cassius Longinus rampaged
through the region taking large numbers of captives to sell as slaves. A formal
complaint was presented to the Roman Senate by ambassadors from the Carni,
Istri, and lapodi, and the brother of the king of Noreia went to Rome as a rep-
resentative of other Alpine tribes. The incident is interesting in that it demon-
strates the nature of diplomatic relations between Celts and Romans at this
time. A few decades later, in the 140s and 130, Polybius records the discovery of
gold in the territory of the Taurisci. Italian entrepreneurs joined the gold rush
but were expelled as soon as the price of gold began to fall. Partly as a result of
this a Roman force was sent into the area in 129 B¢, gaining victories over the
Taurisci, lapodi, and Istri, and probably also the Liburni and Carni. Further
expeditions followed in 115 Bc,

Thus, although the relations between Rome and the eastern Alpine region
were uneasy during the second century, a degree of equilibrium was eventually
established allowing an active trade to develop. At the end of the first century 8¢
Strabo could list the materials flowing through Aquileia as ‘slaves, cattle, and
hides'.

The situation further cast is confused by the many different ethnic groups
inhabiting the area and the mobility of many of them. As we have seen, the
Celtic enclave in Thrace had been destroyed by the end of the third century and
the Celtic communities which had penetrated Transylvania and the southern
parts of Moldova and Ukraine had in all probability been absorbed or ousted,
the former group into the emerging Dacian state, the latter by the Sarmatians
and the Bastarnae. After the end of the second century itis unlikely thatany rec-
ognizable Celtic community existed east of the Middle Danube Valley, except
for the Galatians in their remote homeland in central Asia Minor.

The Dacians and the Germans

Totheeast of the Celts of the Middle Danube lay the Thracians and the Dacians,
while to the north were many tribes regarded by classical writers as being ethni-
cally German. While the Thracians mostly maintained friendly relations with
their Celtic neighbours during the second and first centuries sc, the Dacians
and certain of the so-called Germanic peoples made territorial inroads on the
Celtic homelands.

The earliest recorded movement came from the north and involved two
different tribes, the Cimbri and the Teutones, who migrated, sometimes singly
sometimes together, through western Europe in the late second century 8¢,
causing widespread disruption among the Celtic tribes and sending a chill of
fear down every Roman spine (Map 29).

The origins of these tribes is obscure, though there is sufficient evidence to
suggest that they came from north-west Europe bordering or close to the North

221


===== PAGE 249 (index-252_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

Sea. The long debate about their ethnicity—whether Celtic or Germanic—is,
and is likely to remain, inconclusive. In 120 B¢ the Cimbri had moved against
the kingdom of Noricum, where they were unsuccessfully opposed by a Roman
force. In 114 they were ousted by the Boii in northern Hungary and moved
south, where they became involved in various clashes with the Taurisci and
Scordisci. Thereafter they thrust westwards into Gaul, inflicting further defeats
on Roman armies at Bordeaux in 107 and Orange in 105. A brief expedition
through the Pyrences brought them into conflict with the Celtiberians. By the
time they returned once more to southern Gaul, Gaius Marius, with a reformed
Roman army, was ready to meet them. In two decisive battles, in 102 at Aix-en-
Provenceand 101 at Vercellae in northern Italy, the marauding barbarian forces
were destroyed.

The significance of the invasion is difficult to judge. While it may not have
caused extensive disruption among the tribes of western Europe, it served asa
destabilizing element in that it demonstrated to local tribes that Rome was not
always invincible.

A more serious threat to the eastern Celtic tribes was posed by the growing
power of the Dacians. The origins of the Dacians are obscure. The earliest liter-
ary accounts of them refer to the first half of the second century e, at which
time they were successfully preventing the Bastarnae from moving into the
Carpathians. Under King Rubobostes, in the 170s 1¢, their territorial control
was said to be increasing, and it is generally assumed that this implies an expan-
sion from their original homeland, in the plain of Wallachia north of the Lower
Danube, into Transylvania, where they will have come into contact with long-
established Celtic communities, absorbing them into the expanding Dacian
state.

By the 8os of the first century sc the focus of Dacian power lay in Tran-
sylvania, with its centre in the Origtic mountains to the south of the fertile val-
ley of the Mures. Here, under the leadership of King Burebista working in
partnership with a religious leader named Deceneus, a number of disparate
tribes, among them the Daci, the Getae, and the Buri, were welded together to
form a single powerful state covering roughly the present area of Romania.
After some twenty years of consolidation, Burebista was in a strong position,
able to command, according to Strabo, 200,000 warriors.

In 60 or 59 B he began a policy of expansion westwards, moving first against
the Scordisci and then against the Boii and Taurisci (Map 30). His intention,
Strabo tells us, was to win back ancient Dacian territory. The defeat of the Celtic
tribes was so devastating that Strabo was able to write of the ‘desert of the
Boii'—a phrase open to several interpretations. The archacological evidence,
mainly in the form of distinctive Dacian pottery, suggests that the conquered
territories extended across the northern Tisza region into Slovakia and possibly
as far as Moravia. By expanding westwards Burebista was evidently seeking to
take control of an important route node where the cast-west Danube corridor
was crossed by the north-south amber route, He then turned his attention east-

222


===== PAGE 250 (index-253_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

wards to the Dobrudja, attracted both by the Greek cities of the Pontic coastal
region and by the prospect of halting Roman advance north of the Danube.

Having established a massive power block from central Europe to the Black
Sea, Burebista felt strong enough to intervene in international politicsand in 48
e he sent a message to Pompey, then at Heraclea Lyncestis in Macedonia,
offering him the support of Dacia against Caesar. In the event Pompey was
defeated at Pharsalus, and, before Caesar could take up the Dacian challenge, he
was assassinated in 44 B¢, at about the same time that Burebista met a like fate.
The king's death signalled the end of Dacian expansion: the annexed territories
were quickly lost and the Dacian homeland was split into a number of smaller
polities ruled by reguli, leaving only a resistant core in the Ordstic mountains to
provide continuous trouble for Rome until its final conquest early in the sec-
ond century AD.

The Dacian expansion into the eastern Celtic territories in 60 s¢ caused con-
siderable reverberations among the Celtic tribes of the Alpine region. The Boii
who had been displaced from northern Hungary/Slovakia moved to the south-
west into Noricum and besieged Noreia. They were repelled but entered
Helvetian territory and subsequently were to join the Helvetii in their abortive
migration westwards through Gaul. The alliance of the Boii and Helvetii posed
apotential threat to the kingdom of Noricum and it may have been for this rea-
son that Noricum forged a diplomatic bond with a Germanic tribe, the Suebi,
by marrying the sister of Voccio, the king of Noricum, to the German leader
Ariovistus. In such a circumstance it is possible to understand why, at this stage,
Ariovistus was classed as ‘king and friend’ to Rome and why the Helvetii felt
under threat from all sides. Ariovistus was also involved in Gaulish politics as
anally of the Arverni and Sequani against the Aedui and had, by 61 s, settled a
large group of his people in the territory of the Sequani (modern Alsace), fur-
ther fuelling the tension and instability of the region. The complex situation in
the Alps and its western fringes provided Caesar with ample excuse to begin his
wars of conquest in Gaul.

Itisdifficult to judge how unusual the situation in the 60s of the first century
e was. The classical sources are sufficiently detailed to provide a picture of
social disruption and migration. It is quite possible that this was a new devel-
opment caused by the Dacian expansion and exacerbated by population pres-
sures among the Germanic peoples of the north. But it may have been little
more than the inherent instability of the Celtic tribal system brought into sharp
focus by the sudden interest of the Roman world in the affairs of its northern
periphery.

Intensification, Production, and the Emergence of Oppida

The century and a half after 200 e saw a series of far-reaching changes in the
Celtic world which are represented in the archacological record as a dramatic
increase in production and the rise of large nucleated settlements usually

223


===== PAGE 251 (index-254_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

referred to as oppida (Map 26). The definition and significance of oppida have
occasioned a considerable literature and there is little doubt that the debate will
provide a fruitful area for continued investigation for years to come. The rea-
son why there is so much uncertainty about these sites is that archacologists
haveattempted to reconcile a categorization used, but not defined, by Caesar—
the word oppidum—with a broad group of large settlements, usually defended,
about which there is surprisingly little tangible archacological evidence. Few
‘oppida’ have received more than a cursory archacological examination and
very few have been examined on a scale appropriate to the questions being
asked of them. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that there is confusion and dis-
agreement not only about the social and economic processes which led to the
development of these sites but even about the functions they performed.

Caesar’s use of the word oppidum relates specifically to the Celtic sites he
encountered during his Gaulish campaigns in the middle of the first century se.
Itis, therefore, specific to time and place. He uses it to distinguish the larger set-
tlement locations from villages (vici) and farmsteads (aedificia). Among these
larger settlements he further distinguishes the towns within the Provincia,
which he calls eivitates, and a few other important locations, such as Gergovia,
Alesia, and Avaricum, for which he uses the word urbs, from the general mass
of oppida. Even in the light of our present imperfect archacological knowledge
itis clear that the word oppidais used to cover a number of sites of different size
and different functions spread among tribes of very different social organiza-
tion. There is no suggestion that oppida were necessarily tribal capitals: among
the Helvetii there were twelve and the Bituriges had twenty. Even the small cliff-
castles of the Armorican tribes ‘on the far ends of spits and headlands’ were
described as oppida. Caesar, therefore, uses oppida as a convenient portman-
teau word and as such it may be used by archacologists.

Within this very broad category it is possible, archacologically, to distinguish
aclass of large developed oppida. These may be defined as areas of land (usually
in excess of 10 hectares) defined by a continuous boundary, man-made or nat-
ural, within which a variety of social, religious, and economic functions were
performed of the kind needed to enable the systems, binding large communi-
ties, to articulate. A definition of this kind takes with it the implication that the
oppidumwasa focal centre in a larger territory (not necessarily that of the whole
tribe): it had a political legitimacy and may have been a centre of regional
authority.

The oppidum of Bibracte, in the territory of the Aedui, exemplifies this
definition. It was prominently sited on a hilltop commanding an important
route nexus., The defended area covered some 135 hectares and required over 5
kilometres of ramparts to be built and maintained. It was, Caesar said, ‘by far
the largest and richest oppidum of the Aedui’. Here envoys from other tribes
were received by the chief magistrate and most of the tribal councils met during
Caesar’s Gallic campaigns, and here, in 52 ¢, Vercingetorix was confirmed as
supreme war leader by Gauls who had gathered from all over the country. Its

229


===== PAGE 252 (index-255_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

significance was such that the next year Caesar decided to spend the winter
there. Excavation has shown that occupation began in the second century B
and continued until about 20 Bc, by which time the focus of activity had moved

to the newly founded Roman town of Augustodunum (Autun) 20 kilometres

away.

The oppidum of Manching, in the Lower Danube Valley in Bavaria, exemp-
lifies other aspects of this type of settlement. It too was large, occupying some
380 hectares enclosed by a massive timber-laced rampart some 7 kilometres in
length. Something of the communal effort involved can be appreciated when it
is said that to make the nails which clenched the timbers is estimated to have
required 60 tons of iron. This, together with the massive mobilization of
resources needed to fell and carry the timber, hew the stone, and assemble the
rampart and gates, gives some idea of the vitality of the community and the
coercive power of the authorities. Within the enclosed are

the central part was
densely occupied with houses and other buildings laid out in an ordered man-
ner bounded by paths and streets. Between this area and the ramparts was an
open space which could have been used for pasturing livestock.

When it is remembered that only about 4.5 hectares of the site have been
of arte-

excavated (less than 3 per cent

, the size and quality of the assemblag
facts recovered are remarkable. The tools reflect all the major craft and agricul
tural processes and there is clear evidence of manufacture on a large scale: iron

extraction and forging; bronze-working to make a range of personal jewellery;

the large-scale production of high-quality pottery; the manufacture of poly-

9 The opp
Mo
Sadne-ct-Lare, France, was

Bibrac

the capital of the Aclui at
the time of Cacsar's


===== PAGE 253 (index-256_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

Abowr: The
of Manching, I
Germany, is onc of the best
known of the appida of
temperate Europe, as a result
of an extended campaign of

excavation which exam
alarge sample of the densely
setthed arca of

erior.

181 Above, right: Ap excava
tion conducted within the
ppidum of Manching 1965
in advance of construct
work The p
and ditchy
marks cut into

s post-holes,
howing as dark
hoedrock,
clearly demonstrate the
regular rectilinear layout of
the boundaries of the first
century ne settlement

2 Right: The nucleated
setthement which dev
on the banks of the Rhine
(beneath the site of Rasle.
Switzerland) in the first
century G was first an open
setthement. Laser, after about
50 1, the occupation moved

o a new defended location
on Cathedral Hill

"
b
S



===== PAGE 254 (index-257_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

chrome bracelets and beads from imported raw glass; and the casting of pellets
of gold and silver from which coins were struck. There can be little doubt from
the items produced, and from the distribution of the more distinctive types,
that the craftsmen working in Manching reached an impressively large market
area. In this sense Manching functioned as
a service centre for its hinterland.

The excavations at Manching have been
on a sufficiently large scale to provide some
evidence for the development of the site.
Occupation began in the third century with
an agglomeration of small farms with their
fields and pastures. Throughout the second
century the population increased, and at
the same time craft specialization and coin
production speak of greater complexity.
Some time in the 13081208 BC, a time of
insecurity exacerbated by the wanderings
of the Cimbri and Teutones, there is evi-
dence of destruction and a total rebuilding,
this time within the protection of the mas-
sive defensive perimeter, Thereafter, for
seventy or eighty years, the oppidum con-
tinued to develop, the defences being re-
built or repaired on two occasions. After
the middle of the first century s decline set
in, occasioned presumably by the rapidly
changing political scene and the economic
reordering consequent upon it.

The development of Manching provides
a convenient yardstick for comparing the
archacology of oppida and for showing the way in which such sites might
develop from simple rural village beginnings, but it should not be taken as the
only model for the evolution and functioning of oppida: different economic
pressures and different political histories will have produced a variety of pat-
terns.

Zavist, in the valley of the Vitava, south of Prague, offers a slightly different
scenario. Here a hill fort flourishing in the fifth and fourth centuries sc pro-
vided a focus for the development of a much larger oppidum, in the second cen-
tury covering an area of 150 hectares with a perimeter of 9 kilometres. The
history of the site appears to have been troubled, and several phases of destruc-
tion have been noted, requiring one of the main gates to be rebuilt on five occa-
sions. The population seems to have grown rapidly during the first century s¢,
when new enclosures were successively added to the original nucleus. Internal
organization, like that at Manching, was controlled and regular streets were

227

183 The oppidum of Zavist,
Bobemia, Czech Republic,
has been the focus of a long
campaign of excavations
which has allowed the
complex development of the
defences to be disentanghed.


===== PAGE 255 (index-258_1.jpg) =====
XIX Facing The city of
Pergamum, in Acgean
Turkey, was the capital from
which the Atalid dynasty
led the struggle against
Celtic war bands in the third
century ne. To monumen-
talize their victories they
created many great build-
ings ornamented with
sculptural compositions
often depicting their
enemics, particularly the
Celts. One of the most
impressive of these was the
great Altar of Zeus
cxcavated in the nineteenth
century. All that now
remains is the sad ruin of its
stepped foundation: the
superstructure is on display
in Berlin.

184 Befow: The oppidum of
Kelheim, Bavaria, Germany,
occupies a large area, but
this is achieved by making
good use of the River
Danube and its tributaries
in liew of ramparts.

THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

maintained. Structures identified as farms occurred alongside other houses and
there was ample evidence of craft production particularly of ironwork and the
minting of gold and silver coins. Occupation ended in a disastrous fire in 25 or
20 BC, which may be associated with the Germanic penetration of Bohemia.

The sequence observed at Levroux (Indre) provides another example, like
Manching, of an oppidum which begins as an open undefended village and was
succeeded, some time about 80-70 Bc, by a strongly defended settlement of
some 20 hectares in extent. The difference is that at Levroux the two settlements
are about 1.5 kilometres apart. The situation at Basle is much the same. Herean
undefended settlement on the plain, on the banks of the Rhine, began in the
third century Bc. It seems to have been abandoned some time about 60 Bc in
favour of a fortified oppidum of about s hectares in area, 1.5 kilometres away, on
the site now occupied by the cathedral. One possible historical context for this
shift may have been the social turmoil which would have accompanied the
migration of the local tribe, the Rauraci, in the company of the Helvetii, in 58
e, and their subsequent defeat by the Romans. This same movement from
open settlement to fortified hill site is reflected in the settlement pattern at
Aulnat near Clermont Ferrand.

Whilst the evidence for the origins and development of oppidais still far from
adequate, the picture which emerges suggests a gradual growth over time,
beginning, in the third or second century e, with open village settlements,
which gradually acquired a range of spe-
cialized manufacturing skills until such
time, in the first century ¢, that the com-
munity decided, for reasons of status or
sheer need, to defend itself. Thereafter,
where local conditions permitted or dem-
anded, the defences were refurbished or
extended. The size and development of
these oppida depended on a variety of fac-
tors, among which their position com-
manding raw materials or major route
ways must have been particularly import-
ant. It is no coincidence that successful
oppida like Manching and Kelheim were
located close to rich supplies of iron, while
Trisov in Bohemia had a prolific source of
graphite in the immediate vicinity: graph-
ite was extensively used in pottery manu-
facture. Other oppida commanded major
routes: Staré Hradisko in Moravia was
astride the amber route, as the quantities
of amber found in the excavation bear
witness, while Zavist, Bratislava, and

228


===== PAGE 256 (index-259_1.jpg) =====
— . T
o AT
P T o
ot :,;1_‘;,\ ¥ P i’;ﬁé G !
S e U L
A L (f
W s g Lol : SRR


===== PAGE 257 (index-260_1.jpg) =====
y |y 1
i e I
B L ! =S


===== PAGE 258 (index-261_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

Berne could have controlled traffic along the Vitava, Danube, and Rhine, which
they respectively overlooked.

Differences in size may to some extent have reflected the different status and
prosperity of the community. Manching, at 380 hectares, is large by any stan-
dards, and the 9 kilometres of ramparts at Zavist, even though not all of the
same date, reflect the colossal surplus effort available to the community. But
enclosed area alone is not a direct measure of status, The remarkable 630
hectares of Kelheim and 1,500 hectares of Heidengraben were achieved by judi-
cious use of comparatively short lengths of man-made defences cutting off
promontories between the meandering courses of the Rhine and the Danube,
while the coastal port of Hengistbury, before recent erosion, would have
extended to some 120 hectares behind a single rampart only 600 metres in
length, which cut off the promontory.

Although a variety of defensive techniques were used, most of the large op-
pida which have been excavated fall into one of two categories: a western
European type called the murus gallicus style and a central European type
known as the pfostenschlizmaner style. Murus gallicus is the phrase used by
Julius Caesar to describe the type of fortification he commonly encountered
during his Gallic campaigns.

Wooden beams are laid on the ground at regular intervals of two feet along the whole
length of the wall and at right angles to it. They are fastened together on the inside and
covered with a thick layer of rubble; at the front large stones are used to form a facing
which fills the spaces between the timbers. When this first course has been laid and
made firm, another is added. This is set on top in such a way that, although there is a
two-foot space between its timbers as well, they do not touch those of the first course but
are separated from them by a vertical interval of two feet.  (De Bello Gallico 7. 23)

He goes on to commend the regular appearance of the wall seen from the out-
side with its alternating timbers and stones running in straight rows at standard
intervals from each other, noting that such a structure made a good defence, the
stone protecting the wall against fire while the timbers provided resilience

XXa Facing, above The

Roman triamphal arch at
. Vaucluse, in
€ was proba-
the carly first

depicted in chains bencath a
victory monumsent.

XXb Fucing, befow: The
<Hiff-castle of Lostmac’h,
Finistere, France, The multi-
ple banks and ditches
defend a promontory jut-
ting into the Atlantic.

185 Sestion through the
miures galticues defence of Le
Camp d'Artus at Huelgoat,
Finistere, France, drawn by
Sir Mortimer Wheeler. The
position of the bicing tim-
bees and the nails joining
them was clearly observed,

229


===== PAGE 259 (index-262_1.jpg) =====
186 Diagrammatic sections
through ramparts of
Fécamp type in Normandy
and Picardy. Those tested by
excavation were dump-
constructed without timber
or stone-wall strengthening.
The wide flat-bottomed
ditch is a distinctive charac-

teristic.

THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

against the battering ram. About thirty structures of this type have been found
and excavated. They are concentrated mainly in Gaul, but the style extends as
far as the Upper Rhine and the Upper Danube. Most of those excavated exhib-
ited the additional refinement of having the timbers fastened at the crossing
point by large iron nails.

The second type of defensive structure—the pfostenschlizmauer or Kelheim
type—involved creating a vertical front wall with large upright timbers set in
post-holes 1-2 metres apart with the intervening spaces filled with drystone-
work. The verticals were tied back into the ramp of soil and rubble behind with
horizontal timbers. This type of defence is characteristic of the eastern Celtic
area stretching from just west of the Moselle to Moravia. The distributions of
the two styles overlap in the Upper Rhine-Upper Danube area, and at Man-
ching the Kelheim type of wall was adopted when the carlier murus gallicus was.
rebuilt.

A third distinctive type of defence has been identified in northern Gaul, dis-
tributed mainly, but not exclusively, north of the Seine and named after the
fortification at Fécamp. Here the rampart was composed of tips of earth and
rubble without timber structuring, its front face being steeply sloped. Added
strength was provided by a wide flat-bottomed ditch. This type of rampart con-
struction (but seldom the ditch type) was adopted in contemporary forti-
fications in Britain.

The gates of the oppida were usually elaborate
structures set back at the end of a corridor or
courtyard created by inturning the ends of the
ramparts.

Itis worth focusing on the salient characteristics
of oppida. They are large nucleated settlements
exhibiting a high degree of social organization
reflecting the power of the hierarchy to mobilize
surplus labour in the interests of the community.
Many of them evolved from carlier undefended
villages and in all a high percentage of the popula-
tion was involved in productive activities generat-
ing manufactured goods for extensive hinterlands.
The documentary evidence provided by Caesar
makes clear that in some, like Cenabum (Orléans),
Roman traders had taken up residence. The major
oppida were also places where tribal assemblies
could meet and where embassies from other tribes
could be received. This list of generalizations sug-
gests that by the middle of the first century sc
many of the oppida had acquired the functions
appropriate to urban centres and we might rea-
sonably refer to them as towns.


===== PAGE 260 (index-263_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

The emphasis on command of trade routes and raw materials and on the
production of consumer durables implies that the economic imperative was a
significant factor in the emergence of oppida. It is reasonable, therefore, to sug-
gest that one of the prime causes, perhaps even the initial catalyst, for the
growth of these sites was increasing contact with Rome and the intensifying
demands of the Roman economic system for manpower and raw materials
after ¢.200 se. In other words the oppida and the economic systems which they
represented were a feature of the barbarian periphery adjacent to the Roman
world. Trade preceded the flag: within another century Rome had absorbed
most of the oppida zone.

Social Organization: Power and Prestige

For the Roman system to have been instrumental in causing change in the
Celtic world implies that what it had to offer was acceptable in Celtic society.
We have suggested above that this was indeed the case. With the raid becoming
obsolete as a mode of élite expression, new forms of aggrandizement and dis-
play were developing which involved the manipulation of commaodities, gener-
ated by systems of intensified production, either for direct use or for exchanges
yielding Mediterranean luxuries.

Some reflection of this change in the style of power and prestige is reflected
in Caesar's Commentaries on the Gallic War, which depict Gaulish society in a
state of evolution. The situation among the Helvetii is informative. Orgetorix,
we are told, was the richest and most distinguished man in the tribe, but he
“aspired to kingship' and, according to Caesar, attempted to persuade Casticus,
a noble of the Sequani, and Dumnorix of the Aedui to do the same. “The three
exchanged an oath of loyalty, hoping that when each had seized royal power
they would be able to control the whole of Gaul." However, the conspiracy was
discovered and Orgetorix was arrested to stand trial. If he were found guilty, the
punishment would be death by burning, To evade the procedure Orgetorix
called together his kin and clients (some 10,000 according to Caesar), but the
magistrates amassed a force to oppose him, and in the chaos which followed he
died, possibly by suicide. The incident is informative in that it shows that
among certain tribes government by elected magistrates had replaced kingship,
but such was the social instability that to aspire to kingship was regarded as a
very serious offence. The point is again made when Caesar mentions in passing
that Celtillus, an Arvernian and the father of Vercingetorix, had once been the
most powerful man in the whole of Gaul and had been killed by his fellow
tribesmen because he wished to become king.

The leadership of these more socially evolved tribes was in the hands of an
annually elected magistrate, called the Vergobret by the Aedui, who had the
power of life and death over his people. During his term of office the magistrate
was forbidden to leave his country, and a further rule laid down that two mem-
bers of the same family could not be appointed magistrates while both were

3


===== PAGE 261 (index-264_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

alive or indeed might not be members of the council together. These strict con-
trols were evidently designed to preventan elected representative from leading
a raiding force into another territory and to make sure that power did not con-
centrate in the hands of any one family. Regulations of this kind hint that the
change from the old system to the new had only just got underway and that the
elected magistracy was still a delicate growth.

These social changes seem to have been underway among the Gaulish tribes
closest to the Roman Provincia and are likely therefore to have been condi-
tioned to some extent by the Roman example. Elsewhere in Gaul kings were still
much in evidence, though the system allowed for war leaders to be appointed to
command the troops of more than one tribe when the need arose. Vercing-
ctorix, who led the opposition to Caesar in 52 B¢, is the prime example.

Caesar’s sweeping generalization—that in Gaul only the knights and Druids
were of any social significance—is useful in that it makes clear that the power
lay with a social élite among which the mounted warrior was still a symbol of
prestige. [t designated the class from which the tribal leader and the war leader
would be drawn. The size of the entourage which a man could call upon,
because of lineage or clientage, was the demonstration of social prowess, if not
any more of military power. His ability to maintain or enhance that following
was now largely dependent on his ability to manipulate production and the
wealth generated through trade.

The archacological identification of the élite is not easy, nor is it clear
whether or not they lived within the oppida. Rich burials which can reasonably
be regarded as kingly have been found within the bounds of the oppidum of
Camulodunum (Colchester), suggesting that in south-eastern Britain, in the
carly first century Ap, the top echelons of the élite were closely associated with
the growing urban nucleus. But not all of the aristocracy were oppida-centred,
if the burial evidence can be taken as indicative. In south-cast Britain there
appears to be no close correlation between oppida and rich burials. Much the
same can be said of burials found across northern Gaul. In the territory of the
Treveri, for example, the élite burials of Goeblingen-Nospelt (Luxembourg)
(Pl. XXIla) were 17 kilometres from the oppidum of Titelberg.

Rich burials of the types just referred to were not evenly spread throughout
the oppida zone but are restricted to a peripheral zone in west and north-west
Europe (Map 25). Within this region, from the late second century s, warriors’
tombs, some of them provided witha rich array of grave goods, begin toappear.
Most contain fittings appropriate to the feast, such as amphorae of wine, jugs,
basins, and paterae, frequently imported from the Roman world, as well as fire-
dogs and other hearth furniture. A few were provided with parts of chariots or
chariot fittings.

In Britain it is possible to recognize a hierarchy of burials, The simplest are
cremations in pots, sometimes accompanied by other pottery vessels. Next
come those provided with bronze-bound wooden buckets and occasionally
other luxury items such as imported Roman bronze vessels. These are named

32


===== PAGE 262 (index-265_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

after the type site at Aylesford in Kent. Rich female burials, of the same social
level, were provided with decorated mirrors and sometimes bronze bowls.
More elaborate are the Welwyn-type burials arranged in pits with amphorae
and imported tabletvare. Finally there are the kingly burials such as Lexden,
Colchester, and Folly Lane, St Albans, where the exceptionally rich grave goods
were ritually destroyed, presumably at the point when the lying in state of the
dead king was over and the body was ready for cremation.

In Gaul, especially in the central and western part of the territory, the richer
burials were often accompanied by short swords with anthropoid hilts. Such
swords are widely distributed from Hungary to Britain and may have been an
emblem of a particular social class.

The appearance of this broad zone of élite burials from south-eastern Britain
and western France across to Luxembourg suggests that the social system which
they represent may have differed from that which had developed in the core of
Europe, where the large oppidaflourished. If so, then the totality of the evidence
available to us might be taken to indicate three broad social zones: a core zone
of tribes or early states which were adopting governments of clected magis-
trates; an intermediate zone of polities ruled by kings where large oppida, like
those of the first zone, had developed; and a periphery where élite status was still
being expressed in the ancient manner with sumptuous burial rites. Beyond, up
to the Rhine, in central, western, and northern Britain and in Ireland, old social
systems continued much as they had done for centuries. The army of Queen
Boudica in Ap 60 and that led by Calgacus in northern Scotland in Ap 84 appear

233

187 Elite buriaks of the Late
La Téne period chuster ina
broad zone from Kent to
Germany. They arc charac-
terized by their use of
impoarted wine-drinking
‘equipment and wine
ampharac coming from
northern laly and reflecta
type of prestige goods econ-
omy developing in the sec-
ond half of the first century
nc. In Britain burials of this
kind continue into the mid-
dle of the first century Av.


===== PAGE 263 (index-266_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

1o have been organized in much the
same way as the Celtic forces which
met the Romans in Italy three cen-
turies earlier,

Clearly, any such model is a gen-
eralization. The situation in the sec-
ond and first centuries nc was by no
means static. Society was changing.
The tribes living in areas more dis-
tant from the influence of the
Roman world inevitably evolved at a
different rate from those in direct
daily contact.

After 60 sc the pace of change,
which hitherto had been regular

188 Map indicating the with its own momentum and trajectory, was dramatically dislocated as Rome
different social zonesinthe  began its accelerated expansion northwards.

carly first century ne.

34


===== PAGE 264 (index-267_1.jpg) =====
12
The Celtsin Retreat

During the third century the Celtic world reached its greatest extent. In
northern central Spain the Celtiberians had developed asa strong military force
whose influence extended westwards to the Atlantic. To the north the Celtic
language had long been spoken as far west as the Atlantic shores of Ireland, and
elements of La Téne culture were well established among many of the Insular
communities. South and east the Celts who had settled in the Po Valley and in
central Asia Minor were harrying the Graeco-Roman world and earning their
reputation as ferocious fighters. Smaller communities had spread around the
northern shores of the Black Sea and others had penetrated northwards
through the Carpathians into southern Poland. Isolated war bands had reached
Delphi, mercenaries were operating in Egypt, and ambassadors had followed
Alexander to Babylon.

The Second Punic War completely altered the balance of power in the Medi-
terranean. Rome moved into an expansive mode. From the end of the war in
202 se until the capitulation of Numantia in 133 the Celtiberians and Lusitani
were gradually brought under control. The first two decades of the second cen-
tury saw the Roman armies win a series of major campaigns north of the Apen-
nines paving the way for romanization, largely completed within a century. In
Asia Minor the Celts of Galatia were brought to heel by the Roman army in 189
e, after which, though still nominally free, their powers were progressively cir-
cumscribed.

In 133, the fall of Numantia in the west and the ‘gift’ of the Pergamene king-
dom to Rome in the cast, following the death of Attalus II1, established Rome as
aworld power. Within a decade southern Gaul had been annexed, marking the
first step in the systematic encirclement of the Mediterranean. At about the
same time campaigns in the eastern Alps had extended Roman influence deep
into central Europe. Along this immensely long interface, from the Pyrenees to
the mountains of Hlyria, the Roman world confronted Celtic tribes.

235


===== PAGE 265 (index-268_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

The Unstable Equilibrium: 130-60 BC

For seventy years or so the Roman frontier with the Celtic world retained a
degree of stability, while complex systems of interaction developed. Trade, as
we have seen, expanded quickly, while a host of treaty relations negotiated with
individual tribes established a delicate network of obligations and expectations
which could be manipulated to the advantage of any party with the wit to do so.
It was a time of bonding and learning.

Inevitably there were tensions, and these erupted into bouts of outright
aggression. In Transalpine Gaul, the initial campaigns against the Ligurians,
the Salluvii, and the Vocontii in 124 and 123 B¢, which led to the annexation of
the coastal region, had quickened, to be followed up in 122 and 121, when Cn.
Domitius Ahenobarbus routed the Allobroges and Arverni bringing under
Roman control the Rhone Valley as far north as Geneva. The creation of a port
on the lakeside with timbers felled between 123 and 120 se is almost certainly to
be seen as a native response to the new commercial opportunities which the
Roman presence offered. Some years later a firm control was taken of the west-
ern trade corridor—the Carcassonne Gap and Garonne—when in 106 Caepio
was sent with an army to put down a revolt among the Volcae and Tectosages.
Asaresult Tolosa (Toulouse) was sacked, and thereafter the town and its terri-
tory were absorbed into the Province.

Old Greek cities of the coastal zone, new Roman creations like the colony of
Narbo Martius (Narbonne) founded neara native town in about 118 8¢, and the
commercial annexation of important native centres like Tolosa, Vienna
(Vienne), and Geneva provided the infrastructure necessary for the aggressive
trading ventures of the Roman entrepreneurs who flooded into the Gaulish
province. An interesting insight into these times is provided by the court case in
which Cicero defended Fonteius, practor of Transalpina, in 75-3 nc, against
charges of extortion made by members of the local community. The details are
slightly obscure, but in essence Fonteius stood accused of levying an unofficial
tax, in hisown interests, on the movement of Italian wine destined for the Celtic
market. In his defence of Fonteius, Cicero is at pains to denigrate the accusers,
playing on all the prejudices of a Roman Celtophobe—they are noisy and arro-
gant, their manners and language are uncouth, and they wear trousers! More to
the point, their ancestors attacked Rome and Delphi. Thus they are barbarians
and cannot be considered on the same level as a Roman citizen. If a civilized
man like Cicero could present the Gauls in this way, evenallowing fora lawyer's
distortion, what must have been the attitude of petty officials and merchants?

A little later, in 63 B, the Allobroges sent commissioners to Rome to com-
plin of maladministration. The discontent among Celtic tribes was well
known in Rome and an attempt was made to involve them in the conspiracy of
Catiline, but in the event the Allobrogian emissaries decided against rebellion.
The incident is interesting in that it shows how Roman factions might choose
to manipulate Celtic discontent in their own interests, but it also demonstrates

236


===== PAGE 266 (index-269_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

the reluctance of tribes who had experienced only two generations of roman-
ization to disrupt the equilibrium which had emerged, even though they had
serious grievances.

The situation in the fringes of the eastern Alps is less clear. The close rela-
tionship which had been established with the kingdom of Noricum created a
degree of stability in the western flank of the region, but the main axis of com-
munication which led northwards from Aquileia to the Sava Valley and beyond
remained in the hands of native tribes, principally the Taurisci and lapodes.
When, from time to time, the flow of trade was threatened, Roman troops were
sent in to restore order. In 129 ne a force reached Siscia (Sisak), but without
attempting to take control of the land. Policing of this kind continued until the
middle of the first century gc. In 88 the Roman commander Scipio Asiagenus
moved further cast against the Scordisci, who were decisively defeated but with
no territorial advantage to the Romans.

For the last two decades of the second century many tribes in central and
western Europe suffered disruption from the migratory movements of the
Cimbriand Teutones, the names which classical authors give to a mobile horde
which originated somewhere in the territory north of the Lower Rhine. While
the composition and exact ethnic origins of these peoples remain unclear, that
they emerged from the land broadly known to the Romans as Germania gave
rise to the belief that they were Germans and thus were distinct from the Celts.
The divide was a convenient one for commentators like Caesar and Tacitus to
use, and for them the Rhine marked the boundary between the two peoples.
The actual situation was far more complex and it is doubtful if any significant
ethnic divide existed at least before the middle of the first century ne. Celtic
tribes had long occupied the Middle Rhine, Bohemia, and Moravia, and Celtic
enclaves had established themselves in southern Poland. Caesar also acknow-
ledged that Germanic tribes occupied lands west of the Rhine and that there was
some admixture with the northern groups of Belgae who lived between the
Seine and the Rhine. While in terms of material culture, socio-economic struc-
ture, and language the inhabitants of the North European Plain differed from
the Celtic communities further south, there was a wide zone between where
one graded into the other.

One way to view Europe in the second century ac, as we have argued in
Chapter 1, is to see it as a series of peripheries of decreasing social and eco-
nomic complexity as one moved away from the Mediterranean, Close to the
Roman frontier the groups were oligarchies practising an advanced market
economy. Further out they were kingdoms focused on oppida. These graded
outwards into a zone where status was still expressed by prestige goods burials
and where many defended settlements suggest a more fragmented organiza-
tion. Beyond this in the northern parts of Belgica and the North European Plain
organization seems to have been simpler and the people more warlike. This last
zone, broadly speaking, is that which the classical writers designated as ‘Ger-
man’. What can be deduced of Germanic society from Julius Caesar, and from

37


===== PAGE 267 (index-270_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

189 Map toillustrate the
changing boundary between
“Celts” and “Germans”.

the more specific accounts of Tacitus written 140 years later, gives the impres-
sion of communities differing little from the Celts of the fourth and third cen-
turies. In other words, degree of social complexity cannot be taken as a
distinguishing factor between Celt and German. If a single characteristic is
required, it can only be language. But apart from recourse to chronologically
ill-focused maps of Celtic and Germanic place names, there is no sure way of
distinguishing which tribes were German-speaking. All we can do is to accept
the ethnic identifications made by the Roman commentators.

The movement southwards of the Cimbri and Teutones is the first recorded
movement of Germanic peoples into the territory of the Celts. It reflects an
carly stage in a series of southward expansions which culminated in the massive
migrations between the third and the fifth centuries Ap. Caesar’s often-quoted
rationalization, that Gaul would have to be taken over by the Romans if it were
not to become Germanic, may have been an unbiased interpretation of the evi-
dence he had before him.

In Gaul the situation reached a critical point when a German tribe, the Suebi,
led by Ariovistus, crossed the Upper Rhine to support the Sequani in their
struggle against the Aedui. The event helped to precipitate Cacsar’s interven-
tion in Gaul. It was at precisely this time that Burebista led a huge force of
Dacians westwards across the Great Hungarian Plain into Transdanubia, dev-
astating the Boii and Taurisci, and establishing control of the crucial route
westwards of the Danube Bend.,

These two events, coming together in 60-59 Bc, caused turmoil among the
Celtic tribes of the Alps and Gaul.

The Conquest of Gaul: 60-50 BC

In 59 BC Julius Caesar was given command of the province of Cisalpine Gaul
and Ilyricum for an exceptional period of five years (which he later had
extended for a further five years in 55 8c). To this province the Senate added
Transalpine Gaul at the urging of Pompey. Thus in one stroke Caesar was pro-
vided with a brief that gave him control not only of the full sweep of the land

238


===== PAGE 268 (index-271_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

approaches to Italy but also of virtually the entire frontier between Roman
territory and the surrounding Celtic tribes. He was, therefore, able to choose
whether to focus first on the Germanic threat in the western Alps or the Dacian
threat in the cast. His choice of Gaul may have been conditioned to a large
extent by his perception of the immediacy of the problem, but it is difficult to
believe that he was not influenced by his knowledge of geography, which would
have told him of the circumscribed nature of Gaul and the ease, therefore, with
which the entire territory could be annexed for Rome.

Another factor was surely economic. Gaul, as we have seen, provided Rome
with an immensely valuable market where slaves and other commodities could
be had in plenty in exchange for Italian agrarian surpluses especially wine,
Some indication of the volume of this trade is given by the tens of thousands of
Italian wine amphorae which found their way into free Gaul before the con-
quest. When Cicero wrote, ‘all Gaul is filled with
traders, is full of Roman citizens', it was probably a
fair reflection of the state of things. The threatened
instability caused by Ariovistus’ interference, to-

gether with the imminent migration of the Helvetii

and their followers, which would also have left a

dangerous vacuum on the doorstep of Cisalpine
Gaul, provided ample reason for Caesar to inter-
vene. By driving the remnants of the Helvetii back to

their Alpine homeland and winning a decisive battle

over the massed Germanic tribes commanded by
Ariovistus, he was protecting Roman commercial
interests as well as establishing a raisont d'étre for
campaigning in Gaul.

The subsequent course of the Gallic War was con-
ditioned by many factors, The prime motivation was
Caesar’s need to establish military prestige and thus
to build his power base, while at the same time
amassing booty in order to pay his debts. The way he
chose to pursue the war suggests a carefully devised

strategy designed to leave the principal markets of
central Gaul intact for the Roman entrepreneurs
while taking control of the entire northern coastal
region from the Loire to the Rhine. By doing this he
would open up new markets with the British Isles,
which were rumoured to be a prolific source of
desirable raw materials. Thus, in his second cam

paigning year, 57 a¢, he moved directly into Belgic territory, where, using the

friendly Remi as a stable base, he moved first against a massed force com-
manded by the Bellovaci, and then against the Nervii and the Aduatuci, suc-
cessfully destroying all opposition and acquiring among the booty some 53,000

239

190

it of Gar



===== PAGE 269 (index-272_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

191 & 192 The progress of
Caesar’s conquest of Gaul
during his cight-year cam-
paign.



===== PAGE 270 (index-273_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

prisoners, who were sold as slaves. Whilst the Belgic campaign was being
fought, Publius Crassus had been sent with a legion to the Atlantic seaboard,
where he received the submission of all the major tribes of Armoricaand Lower
Normandy. The stage had been set for what may have been assumed to be the
season of careful consolidation and planning needed for the invasion of Britain
in 55 BC.

In the event rebellion among the Armorican tribes upset the plan. Their sub-
mission to Crassus had been nominal, and it may well have been news of the
intended Roman invasion of Britain that sparked off the revolt. For centuries
the Armorican tribes had had a close trading relationship with Britain: its
imminent disruption by Roman intervention could have been sufficient cause
10 try to thwart Roman efforts through active opposition. In this context we
may also understand why the Aquitani chose to rebel. They too were an integral
part of the Atlantic trading system, since they commanded the crucial route
node between the ocean, via the Gironde, to Tolosa and the Mediterranean.
Any threat to siphon off the lucrative Atlantic trade was a threat to their liveli-
hood. Although Caesar does not suggest a causative link of this kind, some such
fear may well have spread the flame of revolt.

In the event Caesar had it well contained: Crassus was sent in spring to sub-
due the Aquitani, while Caesar moved against the tribes of Brittany with a spe-
cially constructed fleet, focusing his energies on the Veneti, who appear to have
been the main instigators of the uprising. Sabinus, meanwhile, was given the
task of bringing the tribes of Lower Normandy to heel. Caesar’s treatment of
the Veneti was particularly savage. All the elders were put to death and the rest
of the fighting force who surrendered were sold as slaves. ‘I decided that they
must be punished with particular severity,’ wrote Caesar, ‘so that in future the
Gauls would have greater respect for the rights of envoys.” No doubt the confis-
cated property and the proceeds of the sale of slaves were an added incentive to
his wise decision to teach a salutary lesson.

There was just time at the end of the summer for a force to be sent to the mar-
itime Belgic tribes, the Morini and Menapii, who had not previously come to
terms. The control of this territory was crucial to the successful invasion of
Britain, but it was too late in the season to complete the operation before the
winter rains set in. Had the Veneti not rebelled, the whole of the coastal zone
would probably have been firmly under Roman command and the preparation
for the invasion of Britain well advanced. As it was, ‘after ravaging all the
enemy’s fields and burning their villages and farm buildings’, Caesar put his
army in winter quarters spread out among the tribes of Lower Normandy.

At this stage in his command it was crucial for Caesar to be able to present
some spectacular successes to the Roman people and to remind them of the
potential dangers of the northern barbarians to the safety of Italy. In this way he
would beable to gain agreement to the renewal of his command for another five
years. Against this background it is possible to understand why, in 55 5¢, he
needed 1o take his force across the sea to Britain—an act which would have

241


===== PAGE 271 (index-274_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

been regarded as verging on the superhuman—and across the Rhine into Ger-
many to demonstrate not only his military skills but the ferocity of these north-
ern peoples whose ancestors had, only fifty years before, reached the Po Valley.

In the fourth book of his Commentaries Caesar begins with a sketch of the
warlike Germans, reminding his readers of the instability of the region. His
description of the expansive power of the Suebi, driving other tribes like the
Usipetes and the Tencteri from their lands to seck a new home south of the
Rhine, is probably an accurate account of the volatile situation and provides
sufficient justification for his concern on behalf of the stability of Rome. After
building up a fearful picture of the might of the Germans in battle, and throw-
ing in the incredible figure of 430,000 for the size of the enemy force, Caesar
presents the justification for crossing the Rhine—the Ubii, on the German side
of the river, had asked for Roman protection, saying thata show of strength and
support would strike fear into the rest of the German peoples and, by implica-
tion, discourage them from further southward movements. In the event,
Caesar spent only eighteen days across the Rhine, considering that he had done
all that *honour or interest required’,

The German expedition had deflected him from his planned invasion of Bri-
tain, but even though it was late in the season he decided on, what he presented
in retrospect to be, a military mission of reconnaissance. ‘I thought it would be
very useful merely to have visited the island to have seen what sort of people
lived there and to get some idea of the terrain and harbours and landing places.”
He goes on to offer the interesting observation that very few people apart from
traders crossed to the islands and they knew only the maritime regions. To pre-
pare the way, while the flect was being assembled, he sent a warship to recon-
noitre and began to establish diplomatic relations with certain of the British
tribes, using Commius, a chief of the Belgic Atrebates, as a mediator.

The campaign was not a particular success, in spite of Caesar’s attempt to
present it in a favourable light. He had clearly underestimated the strength of
the British resistance and in particular the mobility of the British cavalry and
chariots in battle. He had also seriously misjudged the effect of weather and
tides in the Channel. To add to his difficulties, the Morini, in whose territory lay
his European base port, attacked the returning troops, reflecting Caesar’s lack
of preparation. To make sure that the failures of 55 Bc were not to be repeated,
he set the army to work throughout the winter, preparing a fleet for the next
year's campaign.

The planned invasion of Britain in 54 Bc was again deflected by trouble close
to the German frontier: this time the powerful Treveri had refused to acknowl-
edge Caesar'’s authority, largely because of an internal power struggle which
was going on for leadership of the tribe. The situation was serious enough to
require Caesar’s personal intervention. Further troubles with the Gaulish nobi-
lity in his train caused additional delays, but eventually, during the summer, a
huge invasion force set off in a flotilla of 800 vessels. The size of the expedition
and the enormous input of labour that the preparations had required are

42


===== PAGE 272 (index-275_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

sufficient to demonstrate the importance which Caesar attached to the venture.
Indeed it could well be argued that his main aim from the outset of the Gallic
War had been to subdue Britain.

The picture which he provides of that part of the island through which he
campaigned was of tribes involved in continuous bouts of warfare but
sufficiently cohesive to be able to elect one of their number, Cassivellaunus, as
supreme war leader against the Roman threat. Opposition was fierce and at one
point, whilst campaigning north of the Thames, the Roman force was in danger
of being cut off from base by the concerted attack of four Kentish tribes. Asses-
sing the dangerous situation in the light of the damage which his fleet had sus-
tained in a storm and the fact that the campaigning season was drawing to a
close, Caesar decided to withdraw, having negotiated terms with Cassivel-
launus. The nature of the arrangements are not reported in detail, except that
hostages were given and Cassivellaunus agreed not to harass the Trinovantes.
The archaeological evidence for what was to follow suggests that the Trinovan-
tes of Essex were probably given some kind of special treatment by the Roman
authorities, which may even have amounted to a trading monopoly, since it is
in their territory that the greatest quantity of Roman luxury goods, hereafter,
concentrates.

On his return in the early autumn of 54 8¢ Caesar found northern Gaul ina
dangerous state, General unrest, exacerbated by a poor harvest, had flared into
a rebellion led by Ambiorix, one of the élite of the northern Belgic tribe, the
Eburones. [t was a confused period of marching and countermarching, during
which time a substantial Roman force under Sabinus and Cotta was cut off and
destroyed and only by rapid action was Caesar able to retrieve what had prom-
ised to be a rout. So serious was the situation that Caesar decided to spend the
winter with his troops near Samarobriva (Amiens).

It was a winter of discontent in Gaul. The annihilation of a Roman force had
shown that Rome was not invincible: it provided hope for dissident elements
throughout Gaul. ‘There was scarcely a time', wrote Caesar, ‘when I was not
anxious, and not receiving some report or other about plans for a rising among.
the Gauls,” What is significant is that the discontent had spread far beyond the
Belgic tribes. A force from Armorica threatened one legion based, presumably,
in Lower Normandy, while the Senones and Carnutes, strong and influential
tribes who occupied the territory between the Seine and Loire, ignored Roman
instructions and were regarded as being in open revolt. Apart from the Aedui
and Remi there was no one Caesar could trust. All the while the Treveri were
actively stirring up trouble among their neighbours and the Germans across the
Rhine, but their leader Indutiomarus was killed in a skirmish, whilst attacking
the winter camp of Labienus. After this, wrote Caesar, ‘my province of Gaul was
somewhat more peaceful’.

With the winter not yet over Caesar moved decisively against the main
centres of resistance. The northern Belgic tribes were the first to receive his
attention with a rapid thrust against the Nervii. Following this success he sum-

243


===== PAGE 273 (index-276_1.jpg) =====
XXI Facing Wooden
carvings found in the ritual
shaft and well at Fellbach-
Schmiden, Baden.
Wirttemberg, Germany,
The figures presumably
decorated o structure built
around the top of the shafi.
The paired beasts, clasped
about the waists by a central
figure now missing. are a
motif reflected in Celtic
metalwork. Late second or
early first century nc.
Wiirttembergisches Landes-
museum, Stuttgart.

THE CELTS IN RETREAT

moned the Gallic Council. The Senones, the Carnutes, and the Treveri failed to
attend—a failure which Caesar interpreted as an act of hostility. His first
response was 1o bring the Senones and Carnutes to heel by a show of military
strength, thus preventing the immediate threat of being encircled. Then he
turned his energies against the Treveri and Ambiorix. First he moved into the
territory of the Menapii at the Rhine mouth to establish control and thence to
the Treveri, from where he crossed the Rhine again to harry the Suebi and to
consolidate the subservience of the Ubii. After a brief stay he was back in the
land of the Eburones engaging in systematic destruction and plunder, in which
the Roman forces were joined by pillaging Gauls and by Germans who, seeing
an opportunity, came from across the Rhine. It was an effective way to destroy
the resistance of a people who would not come to battle.

The terror over, Caesar returned to the safety of the Remi, where he held an
enquiry into the conspiracy of the Senones and Carnutes, bringing the pro-
ceedings to an end with the public execution of the instigator of the plot. The
act was ill-judged, or at least ineffective. The unrest which had been simmering
now boiled up, the Carnutes taking upon themselves the leadership of a revolt
more serious than any that Rome had previously experienced. Caesar gives no
reason why the tribe should have been such a focus of unrest, but we learn in
another context that the annual assembly of the Druids was held there at what
was considered to be the centre of Gaul. The place clearly had power in legit-
imizing pan-Gaulish decisions. Some such meeting, possibly under Druidic
instigation, may have provided the context for concerted action. The rebellion
began with the murder of the Roman traders who had settled in the principal
oppidum of Cenabum.

News rapidly spread to the Arverni, where a member of the élite, Vercing-
etorix, set himself up as war leader. The event throws interesting light on the
changing nature of Celtic society at the time. The Arverni were ruled by a
democratically elected magistracy and, like many such tribes, were evidently
aware of the ease with which the old social system, in which power was wielded
by those who could command large entourages, could re-establish itself. The
father of Vercingetorix, Celtillus, had actually been killed by his fellow tribes-
men for wanting to become king. When Vercingetorix “called his dependants
together and had no difficulty in rousing their passions’, he was taking the first
step in clevating himself as his father had tried to do. It is understandable,
therefore, that his uncle and other leading men in the tribe should try to restrain
him. He was, in fact, expelled from the oppidum of Gergovia. But he persisted
and gradually won over other Arvernians, soon gaining sufficient power to oust
his opponents and set himself up as king. What we are witnessing, therefore, is
the resurgence of the old social order made possible by the call for Gallic free-
dom. Once established, his support among other tribes grew rapidly, and he
was acknowledged as supreme war leader.

Virtually the whole of central Gaul was up in arms against the Romans, plac-
ing Caesar in a very difficult position. His first action on reaching the Province,

244


===== PAGE 274 (index-277_1.jpg) =====
j 4 ‘* Vi N
L1119 \ . i
% b / ot
L. 3
/. LR
g\ ko


===== PAGE 275 (index-278_1.jpg) =====
| B
] . —
> 7 . R
3 T L R
% = i‘\'};"ﬂ:"\m“%"‘
LA \\fL s


===== PAGE 276 (index-279_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

at the beginning of the campaigning season of 52 B¢, was to establish the secu-
rity of the western part of Transalpina, which was most at risk. Next, by leading
his troops through the Cevennes against the Arverni, he added a further safe-
guard to the Province while causing a considerable distraction to the rebels.

Then followed a long period of marching and countermarching through
those parts of central Gaul which hitherto had been totally free of Roman mi
tary interference. One by one the major tribal oppida were besieged and fell.
Vellaunodunum, capital of the Senones, capitulated, Cenabum of the Carnutes
was taken and destroyed, and the Biturigan oppidum of Noviodunum surren-
dered. Next it was the turn of Avaricum, the largest of the oppida of the Bitur-
iges, to suffer Roman encirclement. The resistance of the townspeople was paid
for with savagery when the Roman troops entered. Of the population of 40,000
only 800 escaped. In dealing with the more urbanized tribes of central Gaul,
Caesar's tactic was simply to pick off the population centres one by one. Such
an approach would have been impossible among the tribes of Armorica and
Belgica, where this degree of centralization had not developed.

In the weeks to follow, news of the close-run battle at Gergovia and the defec-
tion of the Aedui to the rebellion caused the uprising to escalate. Robbed of
Gallic support and unable to bring in new troops from Italy, Caesar resorted to
inviting German cavalry groups to join his force. They were soon to play a
significant part in routing Vercingetorix's cavalry and forcing him to withdraw
to the oppidun of Alesia in the territory of the Mandubii.

At Alesia the Gaulish rebel force was besieged (Figs. 12 and 13). In making his
decision to defend himself on the hill, Vercingetorix was no doubt banking on
the rapid arrival of a large relieving force which was now being amassed.
According to Caesar, a Council of Gauls had been summoned but had rejected
Vercingetorix's proposal for a universal call-up, instead deciding to proscribe
the size of the force which each tribe was required to provide. Some forty-four
different tribes are named, and the company, when finally assembled, amoun-
ted to 8,000 cavalry and 240,000 infantry. The supreme command of the force
was divided between four war leaders, one from the Atrebates, two from the
Aedui, and one from the Arverni. The coercive power of the Gallic Council in
causing such a force to be created is impressive. Although it was, no doubt, due
to the uniqueness of the occasion, the facts that individual tribes respected the
will of the assembled chiefs and that so many men could so readily be called to
arms are indications that the character of Celtic society, evident in the migra-
tion period of the fourth and third centuries, had not been significantly weak-
ened by the socio-political changes which were already well underway in some
parts of the country.

The rest of the story may be briefly told. The arrival of the relieving force and
its defeat by the Roman troops were quickly followed by the surrender of the
Gaulish force in Alesia. All the captives, other than Arvernian and Aeduian,
were distributed as booty to the Roman troops and thus passed into the Roman
slave markets. The 20,000 Arvernian and Aeduian prisoners were restored to

245

193 Vercingetorix, a noble
of the Arverni, became war
leader in 52 e, spearbead
ing the revolt of the Gaulish
tribes against Caesar, He
and his followers were cven-
tually besieged at Alesia and
forced to surrender to the
Romans. After years in a jail
in Rome he was strangled as
part of Caesar’s triumph,

The coin is a gold stater of
the Arverni struck in central
Gaul €51 0.

XXlla Facirg, above: The
contents of a princely grave
(1omb B) at Goeblingen-
Nospelt, Luxembourg.
Wine was provided in large
amphorac and mixed and
drunk from imparted
bronze vessels. The bronze-
bound wooden buckets,
samilar to those found in
southern Britain, are of
local manufacture, Late
first century ne. Musée
Nationale d"Histoire et
J'Art, Luxembourg.

XXHb Facing. below: One
of the deposits of gold and
silver torcs buried in a pit
at Sacttisham, Norfolk,
England. The surprisingly
large number of deposits of
this kind concentrated in a
small area suggests that this
may have been a Jocation
sacred to the gods, First
century nc. British
Muscum, London.



===== PAGE 277 (index-280_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

194 The plateau of Alesia
was chosen by Vercingetorix
asa secure place from which
st Rome, As a result of
u,

A massive campaign
fickdwork and excavat
was mounted between 1860
and 1865, bringing to light
details of Caesar’s sicge
works. After the capitulation
of Vercingetorix to the
Romans in 52 s¢, the hill
developed as a small tawn,

their tribes as a gesture of goodwill. Caesar himself decided to spend the winter
in the Aeduian capital of Bibracte, to rebuild relations with the tribe and set
Gaul in order. Vercingetorix was shipped to Rome, where, after spending six
years in prison, he was strangled to add drama to Caesar’s delayed triumph.
The war in Gaul was not yet over. During the winter Caesar had to deal with
residual unrest among the Bituriges and the Carnutes. More serious trouble
with the Bellovaci required firmer military action, after which Caesar turned
his attention once more on the Eburones, where the rebel leader Ambiorix was
still at larg
in the area. ‘Detachments of legionary and auxiliary troops were
over Ambiorix's territory, killing, burning, and pillaging; every
troyed and great numbers of the people were either killed or taken prisoner,’
The final acts were focused in the west, where certain of the tribes of Aqui-
tania had mobilized forces. The campaign culminated in the siege of the native

ame as those used on his previous campaign
ent out all

His tactics were the

hing was des-

oppidum of Uxellodunum. When eventually the defenders surrendered, all
those who had carried weapons had their right hands cut off but their lives
spared, ‘so that everyone might see how evildoers were punished”.

Thereafter mopping-up operations in various parts of the country extin-
guished any spark of resistance which had survived. Hirtius, who wrote the
cighth book of the Commentarie.
pleted his acti
ulish leaders. ‘He did not wish to impose any fresh burdens on them. €
able to keep it peaceful by mak-
ble." The reality must have been far more

concludes by telling us that Caesar com-

ities in Gaul by handing out valuable presents to the surviving

al

was exhausted by so many defeats. Caesar wa

ing the terms of subjection more tolera



===== PAGE 278 (index-281_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

stark. Of an estimated population of 6-7 million, about one million had been
killed and another million sold into slavery. Among the remainder hardly a
family would have been left unscarred. The resentment must have been deep
and bitter.

With Gaul now brought to heel, it is likely that Caesar's attention would have
turned to the problems posed by the expansion of Burebista, whose military
ambitions had led him to annex great swaths of territory across what is now
northern Hungary and to establish control of the narrow reaches of the Upper
Danube. The Celtic oppidum of Bratislava seems to have been destroyed at
about this time and a Dacian stronghold established nearby at Devin. The main
westward thrust of this expansion came in 60-59 8¢, at just the time that Ario-
vistus was causing trouble to the west of the Alps. The fact that lllyricum was
added to Caesar's command is, in part at least, an acknowledgement that the
castern Alpine region was likely to require firm military action. After his Belgic
campaigns in 57 8¢ Caesar had hurried back to Illyricum, quite possibly to give
some initial consideration to the problems developing on the northern border
of this part of his sphere of responsibility, The fact that he had seriously under-
estimated the resistance of the Gauls meant that he could not pursue any plan
that might have been forming and at the end of the Gaulish War he was drawn
immediately into the Civil War so that the Dacian problem had to be left in
abeyance.

That Burebista remained a serious threat is, however, shown by his overtures
of support to Pompey in 48 sc. Thus, once Pompey had been overcome and
some semblance of stability restored to Rome with Caesar firmly in control,
plans fora Dacian campaign, and for the wildly ambitious conquest of Parthia,
could be pursued. Caesar’s assassination in March 44 e brought these
grandiose schemes to an end.

Consolidation and Expansion: 50 Bc-AD 10

For more than two decades Gaul was left to nurse its wounds with relatively lit-
tle interference from Rome, while the continuing Civil War claimed everyone’s
attention. During this time native systems continued. At Bibracte, capital of the
Aedui, buildings were replaced by more elaborate structures modelled on the
Roman house, the artisan quarters continued to develop, and the oppidum
began to take on the appearance of a Roman town. In the less advanced regions
of the north the Mediterranean overlay was less evident. In the Aisne Valley, for
example, the old oppidum of the Suessones at Pommiers seems to have been
abandoned for a new settlement built in the bend of the river at Villeneuve-
Saint-Germain, defended in native style by a rampart thrown across the land-
ward approach.

While systems of government and the native economies were left more or
less unhindered, except for the draining of the gold from the system by taxa-
tion, the economic demands of the Mediterrancan were having a noticeable

247


===== PAGE 279 (index-282_1.jpg) =====
195 Oppidain the Aisne
Valley showing the three
successive fo<i of popula-
tion, Pommiers was accu-
piedin the period upto
Cacsar's conquest;
Villeneuve-Saint-Germain
was a post-Caesarian devel-
opment but was abandoned
when the Roman town was.
established at Solssons by
Augustus,

196 Below: The defended
settleent of Villeneuve-
Saint-Germain, Picardy,
France, was protected on
three sides by the River
Aisne and on the fourth by a
rampart and ditch. Intern -
ally the buildings were care-
fully laid out, Occupation in
the seconsd half of the first
century Be was short-lived.

THE CELTS IN RETREAT

effect. Lyons was the hub of Gaul. It was already tied firmly to the Mediter-
rancan by roads and the River Rhone: from here new roads were set out to aug-
ment the old river routes. One road to the west linked the centre direct to the
Atlantic ports. Two other road systems thrust northwards, one to the Channel
coast at Boulogne, the other through the territory of the Treveri to the Rhine.

Both routes were of considerable economic
importance in opening up direct access to new
markets and also providing a means of rapid
contact with troop concentrations in frontier
regions. No doubt those tribes, like the Treveri
and Suessones, who were able to command the
routes, could gain benefit from the volume of
traffic and trade passing through. The distribu-
tion of the later Dressel 1B amphorae, which
concentrate in these territories, provides a
convenient demonstration of the benefits
which this northern zone were now reaping.
Many of the amphorae, together with the
Italian bronze vessels necessary for wine-
drinking, were finding their way into the graves
of the native aristocracy. Once again the buri-
als of the élite were being used to demonstrate
the conspicuous consumption of a prestige
goods economy. This system was to last in the
region until the end of the first century e,
Apart from a brief revolt in Aquitania in


===== PAGE 280 (index-283_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

+ Taerbcry occupied by Rome by S0BC  ~———== Limit of ROMan 00cupaton ¥ 50BC  ——— Major 1000% bust Gurng Augusian penod

£ Teriory added 1o Roman -
zZz o2ded o o kgl Uit of Roman sccupeion 0 ADI =t Mafor movies GG EMe tuteh

39-38 BC, Gaul appears to have remained quiet. But widespread discontent
arose in 27, when Augustus, who had successfully destroyed all opposition to
his leadership of the Roman state, began to organize a census of Gaul as a pre-
liminary to imposing a new system of taxation. The presence of the emperor
himself prevented serious trouble from erupting and thereafter romanization
moved on apace,

The regions of the Pyrenees and the Alps, still unconquered, were brought
rapidly under Roman control. The Augustan campaigns in north-western
Iberia and in particular the Cantabrian mountains from 25 to 19 s¢ tidied up
one corner, and in doing so freed larger numbers of troops from frontier dutics.

Augustus, as Octavian before becoming emperor in 27 Bc, had already
attended to problems in the eastern Alps. In 35 n¢ he had moved against the
lapodes and had pushed on into Pannonia, in the next year taking the key loca-
tion of Siscia (Sisak in Croatia), which henceforth became the springboard for
Roman campaigning in the region. In this way he was beginning to put into
play plans which must have been in Caesar’s mind. The campaign against the
Dacians was finally launched in 29-28 B¢ by Marcus Lucius Crassus. With the
Dobrudja under Roman control, much of the Balkans began to be taken in hand.

In 15 B¢ Tiberius and Drusus led a major offensive into the eastern Alps.
Noricum was formally annexed and the Rhaetians and Vindelici brought into

249

197 Map to illustrate aspects
of the political geography of
western Europe at the end of
the first century sc,


===== PAGE 281 (index-284_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

the Roman sphere. The tribes of southern Pannonia, between the rivers Driva
and Sava, were the focus of Tiberius’ campaigns between 13 and 9 ¢, during
which time the province of [llyricum was formally instituted. In this way the
Celtic peoples of Transdanubia began to be absorbed into the expanding
Roman world. In 7 sc Augustus inaugurated a victory monument at La Turbie
on the coastal road around the Alpes Maritimes. On it he recorded his victory
over forty-four Alpine tribes. The erection of the monument symbolized the
end of free Celts south of the Rhine. The incorporation of a few surviving
enclaves, such as the remaining Boii in northern Transdanubia, in the carly first
century A, brought Celtic freedom to an end in continental Europe.

The expansion of the Romans towards the Rhine-Danube frontier in the sec-
ond half of the first century Bc took place in parallel with the more gradual
expansion of Germanic peoples in the north and Sarmatians in the east. The
continued southern pressure of the populations of the North European Plain,
which Caesar was 10 stay temporarily in the s0s 5¢, continued with the Germ-
anic settlement of the Celtic regions of Bohemia and Moravia between 16 and 8
8C. The germanization of these territories effectively brought to an end the
large oppida and with it Celtic culture. Thus, while the strong Roman presence
south of the Rhine-Danube axis prevented a further southward move at this
stage, the territories on the north side of the rivers were open to settlement and
filled rapidly with new tribes of Germanic origin. The absence of a firm ethnic
frontier at the beginning of the first century sc had allowed a fluidity of move-
ment. Once the Romans had established a firm control along the two rivers, the
ethnic divide was rapidly intensified by the tide of incoming Germans building
up against the barrier of the frontier. This pressure was to continue until, three
centuries later, the power of the Romans to resist it began to give way.

In the cast the constant outflow of horse-riding peoples from the steppes,
north-cast of the Black Sea, continued with the western migration of Sarm-
atians along the Lower Danube Valley into the region of the Great Hungarian
Plain. The region was settled by a Sarmatian tribe, the lazyges, in the carly years
of the first century ap. This movement was simply echoing the western migra-
tion of the Cimmerians and Scythians before them. The new settlers will have
found themselves in an area where Celtic groups had long combined with
indigenous populations. After the new wave of immigrants from the Pontic
Steppe had established themselves little of Celtic culture remained. Henceforth
the Middle Danube, flowing between Transdanubia and the Great Hungarian
Plain, formed the boundary between the Roman world and the eastern barbar-
ians. Under the Romans some vestiges of the Celtic tribal and social systems
survived; beyond they disappeared totally.

Romanization and Rebellion: Ap 10-40

The romanization of Celtic societies in Gaul, the Alpine regions, and Pannonia
developed apace in the early first century ap. There had always been a tendency

250


===== PAGE 282 (index-285_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

toape selected behaviour emanating from the Mediterranean, and now Roman
style and manners provided the Celtic élite with a mode of expression in their
very midst. The adoption of Roman building styles by the Aeduian aristocracy
at Bibracte is a clear example, and it was not long before the population had
migrated from their hilltop fortification to the new Roman foundation of
Augustodunum (Autun) in the valley 20 kilometres away, where all the princi-
pal comforts of Roman city life were to be had and where their sons could be
educated in the Roman manner. Even in the rather more primitive north, the
oppidumbuilt by the Suessones after the conquest at Villeneuve was abandoned
for the Augustan town nearby at Augusta Suessionum (Soissons), founded in
the early years of the Principate (Fig. 195).

In the far west at Mediolanum Santonum (Saints) a triumphal arch was ded-
icated to the Emperor Tiberius and his heirsin Ab 18 or 19 by Caius Julius Rufus,
who records his ancestry back to his great grandfather—a Celt with the name of
Epotsoviridos. His grandfather Otuaneunos had been given citizenship by
Caesar and had taken the names Caius Julius. Family histories of this kind were
by no means rare among the urban aristocracy of Roman Gaul. Whereas 100
years previously a Celtic chief, like Louernius, would have demonstrated his
status by feasts and gift-giving, now the same end could be achieved by paying
for public monuments and proclaiming the fact through the Latin inscriptions
which adorned them.

There was little to prevent natives of Gaul from rising to positions of power
within the Roman state. The Narbonnese province had long provided distin-
guished men. From the town of Forum Julii came L. Julius Grecinus, who
gained the rank of senator under Tiberius. He may well have come from Celtic
stock. His son Julius Agricola, born about ap 40, spent much of his life in the
Celtic west, serving first in the army in Britain, then as governor of Aquitania.
Later, as governor of Britain, he led the army into Wales and Scotland, with dis-
tinction in the period Ap 78-84. Beyond the region of the old Province, in the
Gaul conquered by Caesar, the social advancement of the native élite was
significantly slower. It was not until a century after the conquest, in Ap 48, that
Claudius made his famous speech recommending that leading men of the
Aedui should be admitted to the Roman Senate. Even then he met with ridicule
from his peers,

For all the desire to emulate Roman ways and become part of the Roman sys-
tem, there remained a deep-seated resentment which, given the scale and feroc-
ity of Cacsar’s conquest, is hardly surprising. Natural sentiments of this kind
were exacerbated by bureaucratic abuse—an ever-present feature of Roman
civil administration. The provinces were an important source of wealth to
provincial administrators whose terms of office were short and whose rapacity
was, in consequence, intensified.

Unrest was recorded from time to time, but the most serious outbreak of vio-
lence came in Ap 20, when two members of the Gallic aristocracy, Julius Florus
of the Treveri and Julius Sacrovir of the Aedui, orchestrated an outright rebel-

251


===== PAGE 283 (index-286_1.jpg) =====
THE CELYS IN RETREAT

lion to Roman rule under the banner of Gallic liberty. The actual reasons were
more prosaic: Roman officials were behaving in an arrogant and oppressive
manner and many individuals had become bound by debt to Roman money-
lenders. The rebellion was serious but came to little. In the event Florus was
defeated during flight and committed suicide, while Sacrovir and his followers,
who had seized Augustodunum, finally killed themselves having set fire to the
town when defeat looked inevitable.

Itisdifficult to judge from the rather summary account of Tacitus how wide-
spread the revolt was, but his observation that “The seeds of rebellion were sown
in almost every Gallic community” suggests that the situation may have been
serious. These Gauls were, after all, the grandchildren of tribesmen decimated
by Caesar, and there must have been much latent anger in the stories told of
family exploits seventy years before. In the call for Gallic freedom and the sui-
cides of the leaders in the face of defeat we are witnessing the last significant
expression of the Celtic heroic ideal. The later revolt of Vindex and Civilisin Ap
6970 was an altogether more sophisticated act of political intrigue.

Into Britain: Ap 40-100

Julius Caesar's brief campaign in Britain in 55 and 54 Bc may not have achieved
a great deal from a military point of view, but the treaty relations he established
with the tribes of the cast coast, north of the Thames, had a lasting effect on the
social and economic development of the south-cast. The tribes on either side of
the Thames Estuary already had close relationships with their Belgic neigh-
bours: indeed Caesar records that before the war Diviciacus of the Suessones
had exercised authority in Britain, a fact which may suggest that Diviciacus was
recognized as some kind of high king to whom tribute was due. During the war
Britons fought with the Gauls, and the considerable number of distinctive
Gallo-Belgic E coins minted as a war currency which found their way to Britain
suggests that payment for services may have been made on an impressive scale.

With the war over these long-established links continued to be maintained,
and parts of south-castern Britain, in particular the territories of the Trinovan-
tes and Catuvellauni, developed close economic ties with their Belgic neigh-
bours, sharing the same range of imported wine and wine-drinking equipment
and the same customs of display in elaborate burial rituals. Largely as a result of
this contact, which involved the export of those goods for which Strabo tells us
Britain was famous—metals, corn, hides, slaves, and hunting dogs—that part
of the country south and east of a line roughly between the Humber Estuary on
the cast coast and Lyme Bay on the south developed systems of coinage mod-
clled on continental types, while the heart of that region, south-east of a
Solent-Wash axis, became politically and economically sophisticated with
large nucleated settlements having many of the characteristics of the continen-
tal oppida. Although this advanced core was composed of a number of tribes, by
about Ap 40 two main power blocks had emerged: north of the Thames the

252


===== PAGE 284 (index-287_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

Catuvellauni ruled by Cunobelin were dominant, while to the south the Atre-
bates held sway. Conflict between these two polities had been going on for some
while, and disputed territories seem to have changed allegiance more than
once, but the Catuvellauni were in the ascendancy and Tacitus could describe
Cunobelin as ‘great king of Britain”,

The treaties set up by Caesar, and no doubt later developments about which
we know little, established bonds of clientage between the native tribes and
Rome, and these were used to political effect. A number of British kings are
recorded as being among the admirers of Augustus, and during the first decades
of the first century ap several British rulers fled to Rome to ask for the help of
the emperor in establishing their claims to power. The last recorded refugee was
Verica, king of the Atrebates, whose flight, about Ap 42, was caused by internal
rivalries, possibly exacerbated by the increasing dominance of the Catuvel-
launi. The arrival of Verica provided the Emperor Claudius with the excuse he

198 Britain in the first cen-
tury Ap.


===== PAGE 285 (index-288_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

needed to mount a British expedition—a flamboyant gesture which had been
in the minds of the emperors since Caesar’s time. The motives behind the plan,
like those of Caesar before, were mixed. Roman economic interests would have
been to the fore, but the challenge of the island and the desire to impress were
not far behind. Whether there was any real need to interfere in British politics
to support pro-Roman factions is doubtful.

The first aim of the invasion force was to capture the Catuvellaunian capital
at Camulodunum and then to fan out across the core of the south-east to take
control of the territories which had come cither directly or indirectly under the
authority of the Catuvellauni and Atrebates. This semi-urbanized zone with its
large oppida would be easy to integrate into the Roman system. The less cen-
trally organized tribes beyond, the Durotriges, Dobunni, and Corieltolavi, were
also rapidly overcome, though not without considerable resistance from the
Durotriges, and a military frontier zone was laid through all three territories,
skewering them together with a military road—the Fosse Way—which ran
from one military base at Exeter on the Channel coast to another at Lincoln on
the east side of the island.

The organization of the province was put rapidly in hand. Most of the area
seems to have been taken under direct state control, but two client kingdoms
were created within: the Iceni of Norfolk were left under the authority of
Prasutagus, a member of the royal family, while part of the Atrebates was put
under the control of Cogidubnus, who, by virtue of his acquired names,
Tiberius Claudius, presumably received his grant of citizenship from Claudius.
Nothing is known of his ancestry but he may have been chosen from the Atre-
batic aristocracy at the time of the invasion.

The opposition to the landing was orchestrated by Togodubnus and Cara-
tacus, the two sons of Cunobelin (who had died a year or two before). Togo-
dubnus was killed and Caratacus fled beyond the frontier area, into the Welsh
mountains, where he stirred up an active resistance to Rome for a further eight
years, thus providing an example of the way in which charismatic war leaders
could assume the leadership of tribes other than their own,

To contain the military problems which the occupation of the south-east of
the island posed, the provincial authorities negotiated a settlement with a con-
glomeration of tribes, known collectively by the name of the Brigantes, who
occupied the whole of northern England from coast to coast and recognized the
authority of a single ruler Queen Cartimandua. The coalition seems to have
been unstable, and in Ap 51 Cartimandua took a decidedly pro-Roman stance
by handing over the war leader Caratacus to the Romans, The anti-Roman fac-
tion, led by her estranged husband Venutius, were no doubt incensed by the
act. In the ensuing disarray a legion had to intervene to prop up the queen’s
authority. The unstable equilibrium was maintained for a further decade until
AD 69, when Venutius gained control by fermenting a revolt among the queen’s
tribe and enlisting the help of other tribes in the anti-Roman cause.

While these events were going on, the English Midlands, Wales, and the

254


===== PAGE 286 (index-289_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

south-western peninsula were taken under military control, the only signi-
ficant opposition coming from the two major mountain tribes of Wales, the
Silures in the south and the Ordovices in the north, Fighting was tough but the
result inevitable. Far more serious was a revolt deep within the province led by
Queen Boudica of the Iceni, wife of the client king Prasutagus. There had been
aminor uprising in Ap 48 when the tribe was disarmed but it does notappear to
have been too serious. The events of Ap 60-1 were on an altogether different
scale. The immediate cause was the heavy-handed bureaucratic incompetence
which followed the death of Prasutagus, when the authorities seem to have
decided to terminate the client kingship, but the speed with which the revolt
spread to most of the rest of the province implies a far more deep-rooted
resentment caused by administrative abuses and the appropriation of tribal
lands for the colonial settlement implanted in the oppidum of Camulodunum,
A further factor, the impact of which is difficult to estimate, is that the revolt
broke out at the precise moment that the Roman armies were in north-west
Wales attacking the Druid sanctuary on Anglescy.

The revolt spread rapidly and was pursued with ferocity by the Britons, many
of whom would have experienced the trauma of the conquest only seventeen
years previously and the humiliation and abuse which had followed. The
colony of Camulodunum, the town of Verulamium, and the port of London
weredestroyed and their inhabitants slaughtered. Boudica’s plea to the goddess
Andrasta for assistance, and the subsequent impaling of female victims, suggest
that the old Celtic gods still had a firm hold on the people. The final battle, in
which the British force was soundly beaten, with its chariots, noise, clamour,
and boasting and its baggage trains from which the women and children could
geta good view, would not have been out of place as a description of Celtic war-
fare four centuries earlier. The scale of the engagement can be judged from
Tacitus’ estimate that 80,000 British died. The reprisals to follow put back the
development of the province for decades.

Meanwhile the situation in the north of Britain had deteriorated and Carti-
mandua had finally to be rescued. Thereafter Roman campaigns beginning in
Ap 71 brought much of northern Britain, up to the line later chosen for
Hadrian’s Wall, under Roman military control, and the scene was set for Julius
Agricola, as governor of Britain (oD 78-84), to complete the subjugation of
Scotland, fighting the last pitched battle against the army of Calgacus at Mons
Graupius in the far north on the south side of the Moray Firth. It was the last
occasion when a Celtic army used chariots against a Roman force. The circum-
navigation of Scotland and the acceptance of the submission of the Orkney
Islands brought Agricola’s triumphant campaign to an end. Although the
Roman hold on the north and west of Scotland was tenuous in the extreme and
a withdrawal to the Tyne-Solway line was soon considered advisable, Mons
Graupius marks the culmination of Roman military achievement against Celtic

peoples.
The old socio-economic division of Britain at the time of the conquest

55


===== PAGE 287 (index-290_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

remained a significant fact of political geography throughout the Roman inter-
lude. In the south-cast the urban pattern continued and developed, even
though the Boudican revolt caused a major disruption. Tacitus could write of
this region:

Agricola gave private encouragement and official assistance to the building of temples,
public squares and private mansions. . . . he trained the sons of the chiefs in the liberal
arts and expressed a preference for British natural ability over the trained skill of the
Gauls. The result was that in place of distaste for the Latin language came a passion to
command it... and so the Britons were gradually led on to the amenities that make vice
agrecable—arcades, baths, and sumptuous banquets. They spoke of such novelties as
‘civilization', when really they were only a feature of enslavement.  (Agricola21)

Yet beyond, in the south-west, Wales, and the north, in spite of a network of
forts and roads, the life of much of the population changed little. City life failed
to gain a hold, traditional patterns of agrarian production and settlement con-
tinued, and the Celtic language with its rich oral tradition remained strong.
Whether it was Roman lack of enthusiasm for instigating what they perceived
to be unnecessary economic changes in the far-flung fringes or native resistance
to change and a dogged adherence to traditional ways, it is impossible to say.
The fact remains that in the western and northern fringes of the islands much
of Celtic life continued.

The Free Celts: Ireland in the First Century Ap

Tacitus records the story of Agricola standing on the coast of western Scotland
and looking across to Ireland and saying that he thought it could be conquered
and held with a single legion. ‘In soil, in climate and in character and civiliza-
tion of its inhabitants [Ireland] is much like Britain.” He goes on to say that its
‘approaches and harbours are tolerably well known from merchants who trade
there’. This much is evident from the quite detailed and accurate knowledge
which the geographer Ptolemy was able to gather for his Geography in the
middle of the second century, at least of the south, east, and north coasts. That
trade with Roman Britain did take place is evident from the array of Roman
objects, mainly trinkets of various Kinds, found on Irish sites, and there is
evidence to suggest that a major port-of-trade was established on the sea-girt
promontory of Drumanagh, north of Dublin. There is, however, nothing to
imply a Roman military presence on the island and little to suggest any signifi-
cant exchange of population.

Something of the vitality of Celtic society in Ireland in the last centuries sc
and first centuries Ap can be gauged from the importance of the great ritual
centres of Tara, Emain Macha, and Din Ailinne, and, by implication, Crua-
chain. These were the social foci for huge territories and the places where king-
ship was legitimized, but outside these centres remarkably little is known of
Iron Age society and economy. Indeed recent pollen analytical work has sug-

256


===== PAGE 288 (index-291_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

gested widespread forest regeneration in the second halfof the first millennium
u¢, which may indicate a significant decline in population during this time.

There remains, however, the wonderfully rich vernacular literature commit-
ted to writing for the first time in a final, if somewhat emasculated, form in the
medieval period. While accepting all the problems of interpretation which this
literature carries with it—whether the sagas are specifically Irish or pan-Celtic
and how to distinguish the various overlays of later material—there can be lit-
tle doubt that in the Tiin, the carliest written version of which dates to the
eleventh century ap, we have a reflection, albeit perhaps a dim and distorted
reflection, of a Celtic epic which may, in innumerable different versions, have
been told from one end of Europe to the other. The survival of so much of this
oral tradition is one of the miracles of Celtic studies.

57


===== PAGE 289 (index-292_1.jpg) =====
13
Celtic Survival

By the end of the first century Ap most of the lands occupied by the Celtic peo-
ples south of the Rhine-Danube line were under Roman occupation. To the
north of the Danube the Celtic territories of Bohemia and Moravia had become
Germanic, while further east in the Great Hungarian Plain and Transylvania
the Celtic enclaves had been absorbed either within the Dacian state or by the
incoming Sarmatian tribes. It was only along the extreme north-western
periphery, in north and west Scotland and in Ireland, that Celtic-speaking
communities continued to exist without the benefit of romanization.

Celts under the Romans: First Century s¢ to Fourth Century Ap

The treatment of native Celtic societies by Roman administrators varied from
region to region, but for the most part the newly imposed structures made good
use of indigenous systems. Thus in Gaul the Augustan reorganization which
divided the country beyond the Province (now Gallia Narbonensis) into Aqui-
tania, Gallia Lugdunensis, and Gallia Belgica was reflecting directly the ethnic
divides noted by Caesar when he distinguished between the Aquitanians, the
Celts, and the Belgae. Below this tier of administration lay the individual civi-
tates, which, almost invariably, were directly, or closely, related to existing
tribal divisions, allowing much of the economic, social, and legislative structure
of the indigenous systems to remain in place. Those native towns which were
well sited to become nodes on the newly imposed road system simply contin-
ued, while others in less favourable locations withered away to be replaced by
new towns: Bibracte gave way to Autun and Villeneuve to Soissons in the
Augustan period.

In the south-east of Britain the situation was much the same, though in the
early stages of the occupation two large tribal units were left under the direct
control of client kings. In East Anglia the Iceni were ruled by Prasutagus until

258


===== PAGE 290 (index-293_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

his death in Ap 60, and in the centre south a substantial part of Atrebatic terri-
tory was put under the control of Cogidubnus, who was styled ‘rex’ though he
had been made a Roman citizen by Claudius. Cogidubnus survived as ruler
faithful to Rome until the time of his death, probably early in the 70s. How the
client kings were chosen is unknown, but they were probably members of the
ruling native élite. In the fragmented tribal system north of northern Britain it
was left to Queen Cartimandua to attempt to maintain control under the pro-
tective eye of the Roman governor, These somewhat tenuous arrangements
were probably intended as temporary measures, and, with the deaths or (in the
case of Cartimandua) overthrow of the clients, the territories were formally
absorbed into the administrative structure.

The Roman system provided many opportunities for the native élites. The
willingness with which the Gauls took to Roman education is noted by a num-
ber of contemporary observers. In Britain, Tacitus describes the deliberate
process of romanization in a somewhat scathing passage already quoted (p.
256). The reality of all this can be seen in Britain in an impressive building pro-
gramme in the late 60s and 70s Ap, which saw the erection of the forum and
basilicaat Verulamium, public baths at Chichester, and the palatial residence at
Fishbourne, while the native temple at Hayling was rebuilt to a similar plan in
masonry and the sacred spring at Bath aggrandized on a monumental scale.

Much of the building work undertaken in Gaul in the Augustan and Tiberian
period and in southern Britain in Neronian and Flavian times would have been
under the direction of the Roman provincial authorities and may well have
used military engineers and craftsmen, but building programmes provided the
native élites with a way to demonstrate their patronage: their natural inclina-
tion for competitive display could now be channelled into public works.

The integration of native communities into the Roman system seems to have
been thoroughly achieved throughout Gaul by the first century ap. Even in the
remote west, in the Armorican peninsula, each of the main tribal territories was
provided with an urban centre laid out on a regular grid system: Condate
(Rennes) for the Riedonies; Fanum Martis (Corseul) for the Coriosolitae; Vor-
gium (Carhaix) for the Osismi; Darioritum (Vannes) for the Veneti; and Con-
devicnum (Nantes) for the Namnetes. That none of these sites is known to have
been a native centre before the Roman period, taken together with their formal
planned layouts, suggests that the urban system may have been deliberately
imposed. Some native centres, like Camp d’Artus, were abandoned altogether,
while others, like Le Yaudet and Alet, remained in occupation though at an
undeveloped level. The romanization of Armorica is evident not only in the
imposition of towns but in the development of a network of quite opulent
villas,

In Britain the situation was different. In the economically advanced south-
cast—that is, roughly south and east of the Fosse Way—the indigenous system
was easily adapted to Roman administrative needs, with flourishing civitascap-
itals developing from native centres accompanied by a rash of villa building in

259


===== PAGE 291 (index-294_1.jpg) =====
XXIHI Facing: The small
settlemsent, remarkably
preserved at Chysauster in
Cornwall, comprises a
group of celiular courtyard
houses representing a local
style of architecture which
deveoped in the first and
second centurics Ap from
native traditions and owed
nothing to Roman ideas or
techniques.

CELTIC SURVIVAL

rural areas around about. In many cases these villas evolved from settlements
dating back to the first century nc. The continuity is impressive. Yet beyond this
favoured south-eastern core, in the periphery, life was very different. Much of
Wales and the north remained in military occupation, Some easing of tension
allowed legionary bases such as Gloucester, Lincoln, Chester, and York to be
developed as coloniaeto provide civilian urban foci, while others such as Exeter
and Wroxeter developed as urban and administrative centres without the
benefit of colonial status. But over much of northern Britain and Wales the
romanized style of civilian development characteristic of the south-east failed
to take hold. The only exception was the southern coastal strip of Wales
fronting the Severn Estuary, where small towns were established at Cacrwent
and Carmarthen and a few villas developed from native settlements. In the
south-west peninsula of Devon and Cornwall
the lack of romanization, after a brief military
occupation in the first century, is particularly
striking. West of Exeter the native socio-eco-
nomic system simply continued unhindered.

In Britain and Ireland, therefore, we can
recognize three distinct zones: the romanized
core, with its focus on the commercial and
administrative centre of London, where an
urban system was firmly in place; a peripheral
zone, including the south-west peninsula,
Wales, and northern Britain up to the Clyde-
Forth line, which was under Roman author-
ity but was substantially unromanized; and a
free zone beyond, including the extreme
north of Britain and all of Ireland, where
native systems continued unhindered. The
survival of Celtic culture was directly related
to the intensity of romanization reflected in
these three zones.

In Gaul and south-east Britain it is evident
that Celtic society became heavily romanized,
both by the adoption of Roman culture and
by a mobility of population caused by trade
and military and civil service, None the less,

AD s

199 Above: The Iron Age and Roman farmstead at Whitton,
South Glamorgan, Wales, showing its development from
the carly first century Ap.

200 Below: Native scttlements of the Roman period in
Cornwall. Two examples of stone-bullt courtyard houses
constructed within enclosures (‘rounds’) which were prob-
ably of pre-Roman date.



===== PAGE 292 (index-295_1.jpg) =====
"»g{(* R ';Wﬁ 7
el 77 7 ¥ e e M{gﬁ%
s S F il
\ﬂ;.»,. ¥ Ty 9‘" mﬁ?‘%’ b,
K. ey «#f; v{%%;:s‘» ‘ﬁ:&. &‘n«‘
. s ir %ﬁ‘g&f s
5;@&%,3;, Sl 7 Mo A :
hﬁ{g\‘m“' o L i’:ﬁ '“«&',;%&L LM
kh‘%*’?ﬁg - i G Y
it L -,‘x,‘,\a‘f.vciﬁ* r;—x.;::m:r }f&':a:‘u-?«v.% B B
§r ol gx*?@hf‘”“‘gm 1*?5’
: } L ~‘ ] *”f”(w‘kwﬁmﬁwéwx


===== PAGE 293 (index-296_1.jpg) =====
" ¢ § F 7
.


===== PAGE 294 (index-297_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

elements of the Celtic belief systems remained—a reality vividly shown by the
maintenance of many Celtic religious sites of great antiquity, temples such as.
Gournay and Hayling Island and sacred springs like those of Sulis and
Coventina in Britain and Sequana in Gaul. A chance remark by Ausonius, writ-
ing in the fourth century ap, that Attius Patera, a professor in Burdigala
(Bordeaux), came from a Druidic family, might reflect the continuation of a
tradition of learning going back into pre-Conquest times. Certainly a sense of
ethnic unity would have been maintained by the Consilium Gallarium and was
put to good political use during the brieflife of the virtually independent Gallic
Empire which emerged in the turmoil of the late third century. In Armorica it
is tempting to wonder if the refortification of the old Iron Age oppida of Alet
and Le Yaudet might not have been, in part at least, a symbolic gesture recalling
a Celtic past.

A question of some interest is the extent to which Celtic was spoken in Gaul
and south-castern Britain during the Roman period. The discovery of a num-
ber of inscribed lead “curses’ at the spring of Sulis Minerva at Bath shows that
Celtic personal names remained much in evidence into the third and fourth
centuries Ap, and one example of an entire curse written in Celtic was recov-
ered. A few other examples are known from Gaul, including curses thrown into
the hot springs at Amélie-les-Bains and the spring of Chamaliéres. These few
Celtic texts are interesting but they give no sure indication of the strength, or
otherwise, of spoken Celtic in relation to the vulgar Latin which must surely
have been widespread.

Away from the areas of intense romanization, in the south-west peninsula,
Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, Celtic remained the dominant language through-
out.

Ethnic Readjustments in the Fourth to Sixth Centuries

The Germanic raids into lands south of the Rhine and deep into Gaul in the late
third century ap should be seen essentially as the continuation of south-thrust-
ing pressures created by a growing and mobile north European population
which first emerged into history with the Cimbri and Teutones of the late sec-
ond century sc. Caesar’s campaigns against Ariovistus and the subsequent cre-
ation of the Rhine frontier brought these incursions to a temporary halt but did
nothing to stop the root cause. Pressures continued to build until the spectacu-
lar break-out in the mid-third century.

After a temporary respite the germanization of the Roman west continued,
first with the deliberate settlement of Germanic peoples in frontier regions to
provide buffer zones and later, in the carly fifth century, with large-scale popu-
lation movements into Gaul and south-castern Britain. While the actual num-
ber ofimmigrants involved is difficult to estimate and the size of the indigenous
populations who survived may have been greater than was previously sup-
posed, the political, and to some extent the linguistic, map was totally changed.

261

XXIV Facing Many of the
Tron Age stelae of Brittany
continued to be revered as
sacred places well into
Christian times, Some were
moved into the precincts of
churches, while others were
carved with Christian sym
bols. This stela from Croas-
Men at Lampaul-
Ploudalmeézcan, Finistere,
had had its top removed
and replaced by a Christian

cross.


===== PAGE 295 (index-298_1.jpg) =====
as built
similar way with a ser
all chambers ope
central ¢
ugh a distinctive
nish d
dating
busic g
tothe tra
round

CELTIC SURVIVAL

By the end of the fifth century Clovis had brought much of northern and west
ern Gaul under Frankish domination, leaving the more Germanic enclaves of

Burgundia and Alamania and the Ostrogothic kingdoms to control the centre

and east. With the exception of Brittany, Latin was strongly entrenched, and in
considerable part survived as the basis of French. In Britain German settlement
had advanced rapidly across most of the romanized south-cast. Here the emer-
gence of Anglo-Saxon as the dominant language shows that the impact of ger-
manization must have been considerable

During this period of turmoil there was some movement among the surviv-
ing Celtic communities of the west. The process began with Irish raids across
the Celtic Sea against the coastal communities of Roman Britain. The Attocotti
from the Western Isles off Scotland and the Picts from north of the frontier



===== PAGE 296 (index-299_1.jpg) =====
12 The ‘Petrie Crown’, named after the

poece o
nd. The elegant decoration is fine

f Irish insular La Tenc art

second

g to the first
al Museu

prury AD. N.
Dublin

joined in, and there is a suggestion, in the contemporary historical record, that

these northern and western raiders worked together with Germans from across
the North Sea in what was called the Barbarian Conspiracy of ap 367. Whether
the raids were concerted or fortuitous in their timing, they had a devastating
effect on the Roman province. The Irish, Attocotti, and Picts were probably
Celtic peoples, although some linguists claim to be able to detect a pre-Indo
European element in the Pictish language. The reason for the raids are
unrecorded, but it is likely that simple opportunism and the prevailing atmos-
phere of ‘folk wandering' that characterized the period played an important
part.

The continuous pressure of the Irish on the western coasts of Britain, which
began as raids in the late third century Ap, led, a century later, to the establish-
ment of permanent colonial settlements. In south-west Wales, in Pembroke-

shire and the Gower, the Déisi carved out enclaves; in the Lleyn Peninsula of

north-west Wales, more Irish settlers established themselves; while in the west-

crn coastal region of what is now Scotland the Scotti, from northern Ireland,

took control of a territory which eventually became part of the kingdom of Dil

Riata extending to both sides of the Celtic Sea. These Irish settlers brought with

them their own distinct dialects of the Celtic language.

263


===== PAGE 297 (index-300_1.jpg) =====
203 The distribution of
Ogham and carly Christian
inscribed stones in Britain
reflects the penetration of
Irish settlers in the fourth
and fifth centuries ap,

CELTIC SURVIVAL

Another folk movement took place
from south Wales and south-western
Britain southwards across the Channel to
Armorica (which thereafter can be called
by its more familiar name—Brittany).
The movement may have begun in the
fourth century with the use of British
troops in the defence of Roman Gaul
against barbarian attack, but by the mid-
fifth century it had taken on the character
of a folk movement. Although the bulk of
the migrant population probably came
from Cornwall and Devon, the commu-
nities of south Wales played a significant
part in providing the leadership. There
may also have been an Irish element join-
ing the restless movements.

The leaders came from the local élites.
Some were evidently peregrini, or spiri-
tual leaders, many of whom took solace
in the remote islands off the Breton coast
or deep in the Breton forests. Others were
probably younger sons secking new lands
for themselves and their followers. Their personalities and adventures con-
tributed to the rich store of saints’ lives composed four or five centuries after the
event from surviving scraps of oral tradition. The reason behind the migration
of the western Britons was presented by Gildas in simplistic terms. For him the
prime cause was pressure from the Saxon advance from the east. While this may
have contributed to the exodus, the Irish expansion into Wales and the south-
west, internal population increases, and the new sense of freedom and adven-
ture born as the constraints of Roman government crumbled are all likely to
have played a part.

The complexities inherent in the study of the early British settlement in
Armorica are considerable, and many issues remain the source of energetic
debate. The peninsula was divided into three territories, Dumnonia (Dom-
nonée), Cornovia (Cornouaille), and Broérec. The first two may have taken
their names from the tribes of south-western Britain who settled the coastal
regions: the third was carved out by the Breton chieftain Waroc, who advanced
into the Vannetais, where Gallo-Roman culture still remained strong,

In attempting to trace the early settlement much has been made of place-
name evidence. The concentration of names containing Plou, Lan, and Tré in
northern and western Armorica has long been argued to reflect the settlements
of the Britons. A very high percentage of the Plou names are compounded with
male personal names, cither saints or laymen, and of those which can be

264


===== PAGE 298 (index-301_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

identified most have a British origin. Recent work has, however, suggested that
some of the Plou-plus-common-name places may date to the pre-migration
period. The second set of significant names are those ending in the suffix -ac.
These concentrate in the south-east of Armorica, particularly in the Morbihan,
They were believed to represent the survival of Gallo-Roman place names end-
ing in -acum, but since it has been shown that this is a modification of the
Gaulish -acos and that these names are only rarely compounded with Latin
prefixes, it is now argued that the -ac names may well reflect the survival of the
Gaulish language.

The whole question of the Breton language is equally subject to lively debate.
It is widely accepted that there are four main dialects. Three, covering
Cornouaille, Léon, and Trégor, are similar and are referred to as the Kerneu of
Léon and Trégor (KLT). The fourth, in the Vannetais, is significantly different.
This pattern has interesting similarities to the place-name distributions men-
tioned above. Two diverging hypotheses are offered. The traditional view,
championed by Joseph Loth and Kenneth Jackson, argues that Old Breton
developed from the same Primitive Brittonic roots as Cornish and Welsh,
which persisted in south-western Britain at the time of the migrations and that
the Breton dialects developed only after the eleventh century. If so, then the
Breton language was a form of Celtic reintroduced from Britain. The alterna-
tive view, that developed by Chanoine Falc’hun, argues that Breton derives
substantially from indigenous pre-Roman Celtic. He suggests that the two
principal dialect groups reflect a pre-Caesarian division, the Vannetais thus
deriving from the language spoken by the Veneti while KLT was the dialect of

265

204 Map of carly place
names in Brittany, showing
the extent of the Celtic an-
guagein the fourth-sisth
centuries AD.


===== PAGE 299 (index-302_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

the Osismi and Coriosolites. Falc'hun accepts, however, the contribution of
British Celtic in strengthening the Celtic spoken in the north and west.

These issues will remain at the centre of scholarly debate for some time to
come. There is nothing, however, inherently unlikely in the survival of Celticin
Armorica from pre-Roman times, but the close relationship between Armorica
and south-western Britain throughout the Late Iron Age and Roman period
may well have been sufficient to have maintained a degree of parallel develop-
ment in the languages of the two peninsulas during the millennium before the
British migration.

A population movement still further south into Galicia in north-western
Iberia is implied by the fifth-century writer Orosius, who refers to the Galician
city of Brigantia, which had, he claimed, a direct relationship with Ireland. The
Irish contact is further reflected in the presence of the Celtic monastery of Santa
Maria de Bretona near Mondonedo, which was included in the episcopate of
Britona. To what extent these links along the Atlantic sea-ways reflect a sub-
stantial movement of population or simply the influx of a small religious élite it
is difficult to say.

The Celtic Communities of the Middle Ages and After

The Celtic communities of the Atlantic zone survived in different degrees of
isolation throughout the carly Middle Ages. The Viking attacks which began in
the eighth century ravaged coastal areas of Scotland, Ireland, Cornwall, and
Brittany, and in Scotland and the eastern parts of Ireland settlement followed,
introducing a strong Scandinavian element into local culture. A little later the
westward advance of the Norman élite established a firm hold on Wales and
large tracts of Ireland. In Brittany following the Viking onslaught many of the
characteristics of the Carolingian system survived, and the duchy, which even-
tually came into existence, became increasingly part of the greater continuum
of Francia.

The complex politics of the Middle Ages brought the Celtic populations of
the west into direct contact with the rising power of the mongrel élites of
England and France, while the spread of Christianity in its many guises intro-
duced new value systems with new role models, mythologies, and symbolisms.
Inevitably the Celtic cultures of the west suffered some dilution, but the isola-
tion of their lands at the far extremities of the civilized world allowed much of
the indigenous pattern of life to continue behind the thin Anglo-Norman
fagade. The vibrant epics and folk tales of Ireland and, to a lesser extent, Wales
survived, albeit modified by Christianized redactors, while in Scotland,
Cornwall, and Brittany, though little of literary merit has come down to us, the
scrapsof folk talesand legends that do survive are a reminder of what there once
was. In the Law Tracts of Ireland and Wales we glimpse Celtic society in all its
intricacies.

The growing imperialism of France and England during the eighteenth cen-

266


===== PAGE 300 (index-303_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

tury, with its deliberate attempts to impose metropolitan values and rule on all
the distant peripheries, began to erase the already-weakened Celtic cultures,
but in doing so created a new spirit of resistance. The Celtic past, in all its man-
ifestations, took on a new importance as a symbol of unity. It was in this mood
of ethnic struggle that the Celtic revival, which we briefly reviewed in Chapter 1,
had its genesis. To what extent the Celticism of the Atlantic fagade is a survival
or a revival is a matter for anthropologists to debate. What is not in doubt, as
anyone familiar with Galicia, Brittany, Ireland, or Wales will well know, is the
very strong emotional appeal which the idea of sharing a common Celtic her-
itage has. Perhaps the only real definition of a Celt, now as in the past, is that a
Celtisa person who believes him or herself to be Celtic.



===== PAGE 301 (index-304_1.jpg) =====
14
Retrospect

Since the early eighteenth century the quest for the Celts has become a con-
suming passion for an increasing number of historians, linguists, folklorists, art
historians, and archacologists. Inevitably, this intensity of effort and enthusi-
asm has spilled over into the public’s understanding of the past, in part inform-
ing it but at the same time introducing imperfectly understood concepts which
are sometimes used to underpin vague notions of ethnicity and, occasionally,
to excuse extremes of political behaviour, This woolly, fey, and sometimes dan-
gerous ‘Celtic fringe” has brought the word ‘Celt” into disrepute in some acade-
mic circles, and understandably so, but it would be as well to remind ourselves
that the concept of "Celticness” exists and has existed only through the inter-
pretations which observers have chosen to put upon it, whether they be Poly-
bius or Yeats—for both of whom the Celts were real.

In this book we have chosen to take a broad view. For us the Celts comprise a
large number of ethnic groups who occupied much of central and western
Europe in the first millennium e and spoke a series of related dialects which
linguists define as ‘Celtic’. Some of these groups moved into east Europe to set-
tle. They were rapidly assimilated. Over much of the rest of the Continent
‘Celticness’ eventually disappeared in the turmoil and reformation of the first
half of the first millennium Ap and only in the extreme western fringes did the
language, and with it the memory of the Celtic heritage, survive.

Over such a vast tract of land and period of time there was, inevitably, much
variation. Tribes trekked far and wide and polities came and went. To what
extent the different entities regarded themselves as having a common heritage
we can only speculate. The huge hordes that moved eastwards in the third cen-
tury must have felt themselves to be part of a single people and so too did the
disparate tribes called upon by Vercingetorix to send troops to Alesia to oppose
the Romans. That contacts were maintained over considerable distances is sug-
gested by historical anecdotes referring to political links between the Galatians

268


===== PAGE 302 (index-305_1.jpg) =====
RETROSPECT

in Asia Minor and the inhabitants of the area around Massalia, but whether any
of this meant that individual lincages felt that they belonged to a shared inter-
national ‘Celticness’ will always remain in doubt.

The two most commonly used methods of defining Celts—language and La
Tene material culture and art—both present problems in that they represent
very different cultural attributes. Celtic languages appear to have been spoken
over wide, if discontinuous, areas of western Europe by the sixth century e,
while the material manifestations of La Tene culture reflect the emergence,
expansion, and subsequent evolution of one cultural complex for a brief period
of three or four centuries, Whilst these two aspects of Celticness overlap in time
and space, they are by no means coterminous.

To characterize the social and economic dynamics of western Europe in the
first millennium nc it is necessary to understand something of the basic struc-
tures which provide a constant framework throughout. At its simplest we may
distinguish three broad geographical zones: an Atlantic zone, a Rhine-Danube
zone, and a west Mediterranean zone, each with its own internal systems of
interaction and each interacting with the others. The Atlantic zone, stretching
from Andalucia to the west coast of Scotland, was bound by the sea, which pro-
vided comparative ease of communication between adjacent territories and
over longer distances. Besides this its greatest attribute was its metal-rich geo-

205 Furope in the Late
Bronze Age, showing the
major socio-cultural zones
into which the Late Bronze
Age communities can be

artanged


===== PAGE 303 (index-306_1.jpg) =====
RETROSPECT

logy. Galicia, Armorica, south-west Britain, south Wales, and southern Ireland
between them offered, and no doubt provided, huge quantities of copper, tin,
silver, and gold to the polities of central and Mediterranean Europe. The
Rhine-Danube zone was particularly favoured as the principal route nexus of
Peninsular Europe, where the river systems of the Rhine, Danube, Seine, and
Rhone came together. The zone sat astride the east-west routes from the Atlan-
tic zone to eastern Europe and beyond as well as the north-south routes bet-
ween the Mediterrancan and the northern Europe-Baltic (or Nordic) zone.
The west Mediterranean constituted the third system. The sea provided the
means of communication along the entire littoral zone from Italy to Andalucia
and between the many islands from Sicily to the Balearics.

The different pace of social and economic interaction between these three
zones provided the dynamics which underlay the emergence and expansion of
Celtic societies. But before exploring this in a little more detail we should
remind ourselves that Peninsular Europe, which is our prime concern, was in
contact with other major socio-cultural complexes: the Nordic zone, the east
European zone, and the east Mediterranean zone. During the first millennium
the Celtic-speaking peoples of the west interacted with these distant zones in
different ways, at different times, and in differing degrees of intensity. It was
during the Late Bronze Age, roughly 1300-750 8, that the Celtic language
developed its recognizable characteristics in western Europe. By 600 e Celtic
was spoken in Iberia, Ireland, and around the Italian Lakes, and it is reasonable
to suppose that it was also in use over much, but notall, of the intervening area.
Where and when Celtic emerged as a language distinct from other Indo-
European tongues is still a matter of much debate, but the general consensus of
linguists—that the origin lay within the Rhine-Danube zone late in the second
or early in the first millennium—is perfectly consistent with the archacological
evidence. Indeed it could be argued that the re-formations underway in the dif-
ferent zones of Europe in the Late Bronze Age, the intensification of production
and exchange, the apparent population growth, and the greater stability in the
settlement pattern provided optimum conditions for the crystallizing-out of
the major European language groups.

If the origins of the Celtic language lay within the Rhine~Danube zone, then
when and by what mechanism did it spread to the Atlantic zone? There is little
in the archacological record to suggest migration or even the spread of a domi-
nant military élite, but what is apparent is a rapid increase in the production
and movement of bronze and a change in the socio-religious systems with a
new emphasis on propitiating the chthonic deities. It is quite possible that
increasing demands for metals led to a much greater mobility among those
with pyrotechnical skills and that with this élite came new systems of religious
beliefs. In such a context it is easy to see how the Celtic language could have
spread both as a lingua franca and as the language of a technico-religious caste.
While such a hypothesis is difficult to prove, it has the benefit of being, at least,
plausible.

270


===== PAGE 304 (index-307_1.jpg) =====
RETROSPECT

e~

- =y
W s i S i g R
Conc wngueges

In the period which followed, ¢.750-450 8¢, the Celtic-speaking communi-
ties of the west developed increasingly close contacts with the Mediterranean
zone. In two core areas, the West Hallstatt region of the Rhine-Danube zone
and the Meseta of Iberia, distinctive élites emerged. The West Hallstatt chief-
tains adopted selected behaviour patterns, and the luxury goods which sup-
ported them, from the Etruscan and Greek communities of the northern
littoral of the Mediterranean, while the Celtiberian élite of north central Spain
embraced a range of traits learned from the complex Iberian culture develop-
ing at this time in south-castern Spain under the influence of Greek, Etruscan,
and Phoenician contacts.

These two innovating core zones benefited, by virtue of their position, from
contact with the Mediterranean world, and, while it is inappropriate to argue
that their development was caused by Mediterranean influence, it was certainly
facilitated by ease of access to Mediterrancan markets. Beyond both ‘cores’
there existed broad peripheries extending westwards to the Atlantic, through
which, no doubt, commodities such as metals flowed eastwards, while luxury
goods like horses and weapon sets will have been used for reciprocal exchanges.
One way of viewing these two innovating cores is to see them as benefiting from
their favoured locations between the metal-rich Atlantic zone and the metal-
demanding Mediterranean. This level of generalization is a helpful simplifica-
tion, but it should not be allowed to obscure the complexity of the dynamics

27

206 Europe in the Hallstatt
period. By this stage the
Celtic languages were
spoken over much of west
e Europe and two majoe
20nes of innovation

were developing in Iheria
and west central Furope.
Both were in active contact
with the west Mediterrancan
zone and with the metal-
rich Atlantic zone.


===== PAGE 305 (index-308_1.jpg) =====
207 Europe in the Early and
Middle La Tene period, It
was during this time that
populations from the élite
zones began to expand into
peripheral arcas away from
the territories in which
Celtic languages had been

spoken for some centuries.

RETROSPECT

involved or to suggest too close a similarity between the Celtiberian or West
Hallstatt communities, since both existed largely in isolation from each other.

It may well have been during this period that divergence in language became
apparent. Celtiberian retained much of its earlier structure, while in the West
Hallstatt zone it seems likely that developments began which were to lead to
Brythonic or ‘P-Celtic'.

The next major phase began in c.450 and lasted until about 200 b, In west
central Europe this saw the emergence of a new élite, around the northern and
western fringes of the West Hallstatt chiefdom zone—an élite which can be
characterized by the distinctive La Téne material culture. After a brief period of
development the traditional social system which had been slowly evolving for
more than 500 years collapsed. The suddenness of this and the massive social
upheaval which ensued make the events of the late fifth century sc a classic
example of systems-collapse. The causes are difficult to untangle but may in
part have been the social instability inherent in the élite system exacerbated by
population increase and reorientations within the Mediterranean economy.

What followed was an outpouring of populations into the Mediterranean
zone and the cast European zone. The expansion was temporarily halted in the
Balkans by the power of Macedonia, but, following the death of Alexander in
323 &, and the political instability which followed, Celtic-speaking peoples
thrust castwards, establishing themselves in the Middle Danube (the Scor-

FRD Torws of e mearce e gt roverants
Fary Coms somamers ——

72


===== PAGE 306 (index-309_1.jpg) =====
RETROSPECT

disci), on the eastern shores of the Black Sea (the kingdom of Tylis), in Asia
Minor (the Galatians), and probably in Moldova, Elsewhere within this broad
zone Celts settled among existing populations or served as mercenaries wher-
ever they could find employment. The numbers involved are difficult to esti-
mate but must have run into hundreds of thousands.

To what extent there was an equivalent expansion westwards is unclear.
There is nothing in the archacological record to suggest any significant disrup-
tion. Indeed it could be argued that communities of the western periphery up
to the Atlantic coast and beyond were saved from predatory attack because they
had long been bound in networks of reciprocal exchange with the élite-domi-
nated zone. Whether or not this was so, it is abundantly clear that the main
thrust of the migratory moves was to the south and cast.

The situation in Iberia is less clear but that there was some expansion to the
south and west is borne out both by the classical sources and by the distribution
of tribal names.

The migrations were largely at an end by 200 sc. This was the moment at
which Rome, freed from the threat of Carthage by her hard-won victories dur-
ing the Second Punic War, entered into a more expansive mode. Military
involvement in Iberia led to the gradual subjugation of the Celtiberians, while
increasing intensity in trade with the Transalpine Celts introduced a new range
of opportunities and the catalyst for change. Here the energies, which previ-
ously had been dissipated in aggression, were turned to more productive pur-
suits, and the social display of luxuries acquired through trade, in cycles of
conspicuous consumption, replaced the desire for prowess gained in the suc-
cessful accomplishment of a raid. In this way the Celtic tribes began to be trans-
formed into urban-based states where gifts, dues, and other exchanges were
articulated through the exchange of coins.

The transformation of the Celtic world was gradual and uneven. In the cen-
tury and a half from 200 to 50 1, the communities closest to the Roman fron-
tiers had changed dramatically, but at this point local developments were
overtaken by Germanic pressures from the Nordic zone, Dacian and Sarmatian
pressures from the east European zone, and a rapid escalation in the Roman
desire for empire. In a brief sixty years the Celtic communities of continental
Europe were completely overrun and within the century much of the south of
Britain had been absorbed as well,

Only the insular Celtic-speaking communities of the far west remained free.
Those of Cornwall, Wales, and northern Britain were loosely controlled within
the frontiers of the empire: beyond in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland
and in Ireland they lay beyond the reach of Rome and when, in the late third to
fifth century, Roman control weakened, there was a limited resurgence with
small populations moving east and south along the Atlantic sea-ways. The sur-
vival of the language, laws, and traditions of these Atlantic fringe Celtic com-
munities and the revival that began in the eighteenth century are part of a
different but no less fascinating story.

73


===== PAGE 307 (index-310_1.jpg) =====
208 Europein the Late La
Tene period. This period
saw the Celtic commumitics
under increasing pressures
particularly from the
Romans but also to a lesser
extent from Dacians and
Germans. By ap 400 Celtic
langusges survived only in
the Atlantic zone.

RETROSPECT

Survscal of Cotic anguagen ster AGK) s Exbors o Noman Emges By $40C
Z

The history of Celtic-speaking communities in Europe covers nearly two
millennia. The process began in the formative period c.1300-750 1c, when most
of Europe underwent a dramatic transformation. Then followed the emer-
gence of early chiefdoms, 750-450, as the increasing rhythms of the Mediter-
ranean economy began to impinge. The systems-collapse and diaspora of 450
200 created a warrior society which was to provide the classical world with its
stereotype of the “northern barbarian® and the archacologist with a material
culture and art which could be called 'Celtic”. Thereafter, in the final phase, the
Mediterranean-based culture of the Romans spread its influence northwards,
first through traders, then through the army, and finally, and more devastat-
ingly, through provincial administrators, until only a few insular communities,
long isolated from the developments in continental Europe, were left clinging
toa precarious freedom along the Atlantic fringes.

Sufficient has been said in this brief retrospect to remind us that Celtic-
speaking peoples have had a long and complex history: their diversity in social
and cultural terms is beyond dispute. Yet the stereotype which, for a variety of
reasons, their literate contemporaries created of them echoes across the ages.
These visions have provided, and no doubt will continue to provide, metaphors
for later generations. The ‘Celt’ is a powerful and emotive image which per-
vades our culture, and it is entirely proper that we should spend time attempt-
ing to understand it

274


===== PAGE 308 (index-311_1.jpg) =====
A Guide to Further Reading

The quantity of literature on the subject of the Celts is enormous and to guide those
wishing to go decper into the subject is not casy. In the section to follow we offer, first, a
series of books written for the general reader, which, in many cases, are attractively illus-
trated. Then follows a list of more specialist works published since about 1970.
Together, in some 200 individual papers, they provide a fair coverage of the detailed
research currently being undertaken. These volumes should be approached only by
those of resilient disposition,

Thereafter some guidance is given as to the most significant general reading on a
chapter-by-chapter basis. Wherever possible English works have been chosen, but,
where nothing suitable exists, French, German, and Spanish sources have been sug-
gested, Most of the works cited have extensive bibliographies which will help the enthu-
siast to begin detailed research on virtually any Celtic topic. It is a pursuit which can fill
many lifetimes.

General Books

Among books offering overviews of the ancient Celts, the two classic texts are T, G. E.
Powell, The Celts (London, 1958, and subsequent editions), and Jan Filip, Celtic
Civilization and its Heritage (first published in Czech in 1960 with the first English edi-
tion appearing in Prague in 1962 ). Though elderly, both texts are well worth reading for
the mastery and style of their authors. Three books, focusing more on the historical
Celts but still offering a broad sweeping approach, can be recommended: Nora
Chadwick, The Celts (Harmondsworth, 1971); Myles Dillon and Nora Chadwick, The
Celtic Realms (London, 1967); and Alwyn and Brinley Rees, Celtic Heritage: Ancient
Traditions in Ireland and Wales (London, 1961).

More recent general works include a massive tome The Celts, edited by Sabatino
Moscati and others, and published in 1991 in Milan to accompany a comprehensive
exhibition entitled “The Celts, the Origins of Europe” which was held in Venice, The vol-
ume includes a large number of papers on sites or themes, written by scholars with a
first-hand research knowledge of the subject area, and illustrated with photographs of
incomparable quality, mostly in colour. Though physically unwicldy and unindexed,
The Celts presents a brilliant kaleidoscope of Celtic achievement, A second large com-
posite volume, The Celtic World, edited by Miranda Aldhouse Green (London, 1995),
presents a valuable collection of thematic papers reflecting research. More general sin-
gle-authored books which can be recommended because of their carefully integrated
texts and illustrations are: Paul-Marie Duval, Les Celtes (Paris, 1977); The Celts of the
West, text by Venceslas Kruta with brilliant photographs by Werner Forman (London,
1985); Barry Cunliffe, The Ceitic World (London, 1979); Simon James, Exploring the
World of the Celts (London, 1993): Christiane Eluere, The Celts: First Masters of Europe
(first English edition: London, 1993); and Celts: Europe’s People of Iron, a Time-Life

275


===== PAGE 309 (index-312_1.jpg) =====
FURTMER READING

Book (Alexandria, Va., 1994). Of these the most useful as an up-to-date and compre-
hensive introduction is Simon James’s book.

More Specialist Works

An increasing number of edited compilations of specialist papers, often emanating
from conferences or colloquia and designed mainly for the specialist reader, are being
published. These contain work of varying degrees of usefulness usually concerned with
research in progress. Among those which offer a selection of interesting papersare T.C.
Champion and J. V. S, Megaw (eds.), Settlentent and Society: Aspects of West European
Prehistory in the First Millennium BC (Leicester, 1985); K. Kristiansen and |, Jensen
(eds.), Europe in the First Millennium BC (Shefficld, 1994); ). D. Hilland C, G. Cumber-
patch (eds.), Different Iron Ages: Studies on the Iron Age in Temperate Europe (Oxford,
1995); and B. Arnold and D. B. Gibson (eds.), Celtic Chiefdom, Celtic State (Cambridge,
1995).

Inaddition to these volumes, which could reasonably claim to have a European-wide
scope, there are 2 number of more regionally based compilations which may be cited as
important reference works for the specialist. These include: Catalogue: Steyr 1980, Die
Hallstattkultur; Frithform europdischer Einheit (Steyr, 1980); Symposium: Steyr 1980,
Die Hallstattkultur (Steyr, 1980); E. Jerem (ed.), Hallstatt Kolloquium Veszprem 1984
(Budapest, 1986); L. Pauli (ed.), Die Kelten in Mitteleuropa: Salzburger Landesauss-
tellung im Keltenmuseum Hallein Osterreich (Salzburg, 1980); K. Bittel, W. Kimmig, and
S. Schiek, Die Kelten in Baden-Weirttemberg (Stuttgart, 1981); Catalogue: Ljubljana,
KEATOI: Kelti in njihovi sobobniki na ozemlin Jugoslavije (Ljubljana, 1983); 1.-W,
Neugebauer, Die Kelten im Osten Osterreichs (St Polten/Vienna, 1992). J. Fitz, The Celts
in Central Europe (Székesfehérvir, 1975); Paul-Marie Duval and Venceslas Kruta (eds.),
Les Mouvements celtiques du V* au I* siécle avant notre ére (Paris, 1979); P. Drda and A.
Rybovi, Les Celtes de Bohéme (Paris, 1995); M. Szabo, Les Celtes de l'est (Paris, 1992);
Paul-Marie Duval and Venceslas Kruta, L'Habitat et la nécropole & I'dge du fer en Europe
occidentale et centrale (Paris, 1975); Memoires de la Société archéologique champenoise,
L'Age du fer en France septentrionale (Reims, 1981); 1, Collis, A, Duval, and R, Perichon,
Le Deuxiéme Age du fer en Auvergne et en Forez (Sheffield/St Etienne, 1983); A. Cahen-
Delhaye, A. Duval, G. Leman-Delerive, and P. Leman, Les Celtes en Belgique et dans le
nord de la France (Villeneuve d'Ascq, 1984); Revue Archéologie de I'Ouest, Les Ganlois
d"Armorique (Rennes, 1990); Revue Archéologie de 'Ouest, Les Celtes en Normandie
(Rennes, 1993): M. Almagro-Gorbea and G. Ruiz Zapatero, Los Celtas: Hispania y
Europa (Madrid, 1993); and Aquitania, vol. 12, L'Age du fer en Europe sud-occidentale
(Toulouse, 1994).

Chapter 1. Visions of the Celts
The most challenging work on the whole question of validity of the concept of ‘Celtic
is M. Chapman, The Celts: The Construction of a Myth (New York, 1992). It deserves
careful reading as an essential preliminary. Other writers have been quick to espouse a
politically correct disdain for the use of ‘Celt” though usually without Chapman’s depth
of scholarship.

The Graeco-Roman vision of the Celts is admirably summed up in Celts and the
Classical World by H. D. Rankin (London, 1987). The principal classical texts are use-
fully gathered in translation in John T. Koch with John Carey (eds.), The Celtic Heroic

276


===== PAGE 310 (index-313_1.jpg) =====
FURTHER READING

Age: Literary Sources for Ancient Celtic Europe and Early Ireland and Wales (Malden,
Mass., 1995). The seminal scholarly discussion of the works of the classical historian
Poseidonius with the full classical texts in translation is J. |. Tierney, ‘“The Celtic
Ethnography of Poscidonius’, Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, 60 (1960), 1892
~46. A source worthy of study, and fascinating to read, is Julius Caesar's Commentarics
on the Gallic War, of which there are many good modern translations (e.g. that of A. and
P. Wiseman: London, 1980), As the war reminiscences of an old soldier and poll
they must be treated with critical attention, but they contain much relevant detail. A
helpful discussion of Caesar as a source for the Celts is a paper by Daphne Nash,
“Reconstructing Poscidonios's Celtic Ethnography: Some Considerations', Britannia, 7
(1976), 1126,

The reawakening of the post-medicval world to the Celts and the emergence of
Celtomania is part of the history of archacology which is treated with great panache by
Stuart Piggott, William Stukeley (1st edn., Oxford, 1950), The Druids (London, 1968) and
Ancient Britons and the Antiquarian Imagination (London, 1989).

The contribution of archacology to the early years of Celtic studies is a theme too
massive to document here, but two period pieces well worthy of attention are Napoleon
11, Histoire de Jules César (Paris, 1865), and Mortimer Wheeler, Maiden Castle, Dorsct
(London, 1943). In both cases the authors show how carefully planned excavations and
fieldwork can be used to enliven, and sometimes to create, historical narrative.

Chapter 2, The Reality of the Celts

“The questions posed by the origins and development of Celtic language are extremely
complex and much of the literature is impenctrable to all but the most skilled scholar.
Two recent books, Colin Renfrew, Archacology and Language (London, 1987), and ). P,
Mallory, In Search of the Indo-Europeans (London, 1989), present the problems (from
very different viewpoints) in clear uncluttered prose and offer valuable starting-points.
A helpful overview is offered by D. Greene, “The Celtic Languages’, in |. Raftery (ed.),
The Ceits (Cork, 1967). Thereafter things become difficult! Among the more scholarly
works are |. Whatmough, A Study of the Dialects of Ancient Gaul (Ann Arbor, 1970); D,
E. Evans, Gaulish Personal Names (Oxford, 1967); and A. Tovar, Sprachen und
Inschriften: Studien zum Mykenischen Lateinischen und Hispanokeltischen (Amsterdam,
1973). The complexities of the problems are also well exposed in three review papers: K.
H. Schmidt, 'On the Celtic Languages of Continental Europe’, Bulletin of the Board of
Celtic Studies, 28 (1979), 189-205; D, E. Evans, ‘Celts and Germans', ibid., 29 (1981),
230-55; and D. E. Evans, “The Labyrinth of Continental Celtic', Proceedings of the British
Academy, 65 (1978), 497-538.

The insular tradition of vernacular literature is an immense and specialist subject.
The two central original sources are the Irish epic, the Tdin Bé Cuailnge, available as The
Tdinin elegant translation by Thomas Kinsella (Oxford, 1969) and the Welsh epic, The
Mabinogion, trans. Jeffrey Gantz (Harmondsworth, 1976), which includes a helpful
introduction. The most accessible introduction to the complexities of the Irish litera-
ture is Myles Dillon, Early Irish Literature (Chicago, 1948), which is usefully augmented
by Gerald Murphy, The Ossianic Lore and Romantic Tales of Medieval Ireland (Dublin,
1955). The classic attempt to use the Irish literature to present a picture of Iron Age soci-
cty is Kenneth Jackson, The Oldest Irish Tradition (Cambridge, 1964). Jackson’s stimu-
lating, but oversimple, interpretation has been challenged in two important papers by J.

77


