===== PAGE 13 (index-16_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

beginning in ¢.390, soon reached the Greek world, which gained first-hand
experience of Celtic warriors, who, along with Iberians, were employed as mer-
cenary troops in the war between the Spartans and Thebes in 367 sc. Thus,
when Plato (429-347) in his Lawsdescribes the Celts as warlike and hard-drink-
ing, he may have been doing so on a basis of fact rather than repeating a stereo-
type of ‘barbarians’.

Aristotle (384-322) clearly had access to a number of sources on which to base
his generalized comments about Celtic peoples and he was certainly aware of
the attack on Rome. For him the Celts were a hardy northern people: they
exposed their children to their harsh climate with little clothing to toughen
them, and excessive obesity among men was punished. They were warlike and
ferocious and fearless to the point of irrationality, they took little notice of their
women and rather preferred male company, and they had strict rules of hospi-
tality especially to strangers. A lost text, Magicus, sometimes ascribed to
Aristotle, is said to mention the existence of Druids and holy men among the
Celts and Galatae. The Aristotelian stereotype is a compound of anecdotal
scraps presented within a vision of how barbarians ought to be. The balance of
fact and prejudice is difficult to assess, but the range of information available
from first-hand observation had greatly increased during the fourth century
and it would be surprising if Aristotle had not used it with some judgementand
discretion.

While the intrusion of Celtic peoples into the Mediterranean world in-
creased familiarity of them, expeditions, like that undertaken by Pytheas of
Massalia, c.320-10, will have broadened the knowledge base still further.
Pytheas sailed extensively along the Atlantic sea-ways in a voyage of discovery,
no doubt underpinned by sound economic motives, exploring the tin-
producing peninsulas of the west, and the south and east coasts of Britain, and
even venturing still further north. For him the British Isles lay north of the land
of the Celts and were known as the Pretanic islands. There is no suggestion in
the surviving quotations about his voyage that he regarded the Pretanias Celtic.

In parallel with the scientific discoveries of men like Pytheas and the philo-
sophical considerations of Aristotle, Greek mythology expanded to take
account of the Celts. According to Timaceus, they were descended cither from
the union of Polyphemus and Galatea or from the giant Keltos. Another version
sees the Galatians as the descendants of Galatos, the son of Cyclops and Galatea.
A different tradition assigns the fatherhood of Galatos or Keltos to Heracles,
who, during his wanderings in the west, was seduced by Keltine, the beautiful
daughter of King Bretannos. Unable to resist her charms, and her refusal to
retrieve the cattle of Geryon, he felt impelled to sleep with her,

The Celts were brought into much sharper focus for the Romans and the
Greeks during the fourth and third centuries B¢, as hordes of warriors, some-
times accompanied by migrating communities, thrust into Italy, Greece, and
Asia Minor, For Rome the dangerous conflict lasted from the initial advance
southwards towards Rome soon after 400 Bc to the decisive battle of Telamon in

4


===== PAGE 14 (index-17_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

225. The Greek confrontation was shorter lived, focusing around the invasion of
28078, which culminated in an attack on Delphi. In Asia Minor the Hellenistic
and Roman armies were to confront Galatians throughout the century or so
after the initial migration from Europe in the aftermath of their Greek expedi-
tion.

It was during these two centuries that the Celtic stereotype was to acquire its
familiar form. They were wild fearless warriors, irrationally brave in the first
onslaught but prone to wild despair when the battle turned against them.

5

+ The acropolis of
Pergamum in western
Turkey was the focus of
Pergamene power in the
third and second centurices
ne. The twa religious
precinets, the temple of
Athena and the altar of Zeus,
were focal points for the dis-
play of sculptural compasi-
tions celebrating Pergamene
victories over the Celtic
raiders, Through these
monuments the kings of
Pergamum were baying
claims to be the saviouss of
Hellenism,


===== PAGE 15 (index-18_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

Unpredictableand unreliable as allies, who could be too drunk or too paralysed

by superstitious fear to fight, they were a people otherwise easily aroused to bat

tle fury. And above all they were barbarians—people of alien behaviour, cruel,

and prone to such savagery as human sacrifice and even cannibalism. It is casy

to see in this broad sketch—a sketch which any Greek or Roman schoolboy

might have been expected to turn out—a standard, almost timeless, description

ation lie

of ‘the enemy from without) and yet beneath its simplistic exa
some elements of the truth learned by the bitter experience of two centuries of

confrontation and conflict

The historians of Greece and Rome, writers like Polybius (c204-c.

ate second century An), were all atten

Livy (59 sc-Ap17), and Pausanias

ing

tions of the

to project particular images of history. Their individual presents

Celt were necessarily conditioned by this, but the common thread which &

¢s from

wished to communicate was of their own systems triumphing over

without—the rational, civilized order of state control contrasted with the wild

savage, chaos of the primitive barbarians. It is, therefore, the antitheses to the

ideals of Gracco-Roman civilization that were emphasized in the classical

accounts of the Celts. To point up the classical ach

ievement, hy

rless in battle and with

enemy had also to be presented as a worthy opponent
a savage nobility that made his defeat the more remarkable.

These attitudes come together in the dramatic visual reality of contemporary

antly

sculpture. The savagery and chaos of the Gauls looting a temple are bril

portrayed in a sculptured frieze of the second century sc from Civitalba

6


===== PAGE 16 (index-19_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

Ancona (PL Ib), but the power and nobility of the Celt is
nowhere better captured than on the victory monuments
erected by the Attalid kings at Pergamum and at Athens in
the third and second centuries se. The acropolis monu-
ment at Pergamum, commissioned by Attalus 1 in the
2205, is known to us only from later Roman marble copies,
including the famous Dying Gaul, the Gaulish warrior
with his dead wife committing suicide (PL 11), and the
head of abearded Gaul. Together they convey the vision of
an enemy one would have been proud to have defeated.
The theme of the Pergamene kingdom as the saviour of
Hellenism was displayed in an even more dramatic form
ina victory monument erected on the acropolis of Athens
after the final defeat of the Gauls between 168 and 166 Bc.
, the Pergamene defeat of the

Here, according to Pausan
Gauls in Asia Minor was presented in parallel with the
Greek victory over the Persians at Marathon and both
were balanced with mythological battles, the Greeks
mplication, the ancestors of

against the Amazons and, by

the Pergamenes against the Giants. The claim of the
Attalids is, thus, blatant: they, like the Greeks, have
throughout time been the saviours of civilization against
the external forces of chaos and destruction. The allusion
dy there in the Hymn to Delos, written by Callimachus, who lived at the
cltic attack on Delphi, in which the Celts are likened to*Latter-day

was alre:
time of the €
Titans’

A similar message was conveyed in a great frieze around the altar at Perga-
mum in which Zeus and Athena defeat the Giants while the Attalids defeat the
Gauls. Of the many Gauls who would have been depicted, five survive in Roman
marble copies (one in the Louvre in Paris, one in Naples, and three in Venice),
all caught at their moment of defeat cowed by the might of their conquerors.

In these remarkable survivals the classical vision of the Celts, as it was per-

ceived by those with the power to purvey their own version of history and its
messages, stands out in sharp focus. Once created it has remained in the con-
sciousness of all subsequent observers.

As the threat of the Celts asa force for destruction receded in the second cen-
somewhat different metaphor of them began to develop. The most infor-
mative source, from the modern viewpoint, is the work of Poseidonius, a Syr
k from Apamaca (c.135-c50 8¢). Poseidonius wrote a s of Histories

n
fifty-two books beginning in the mid-second century to follow on from the
Histories of Polybius. Book 23 contained an ethnographical introduction about
the Celts as a background to the Roman conquest of Transalpina completed in
121 8¢, For this he had access 1o a variety of earlier sources augmented by travels
of his own in Gaul. The information at his disposal, then, comprised much

~

3 Marble relie f
sanctuary of Athena

the

mum,

gamon
museum, Berlin. The relief
gives an accurate impression
of Celtic armour of the late
third century e showing a
tunic of chain mail, shickds,
aspear, and an animal
headed carnyx (war
trumpet



===== PAGE 17 (index-20_1.jpg) =====
4 The'round monument’,
only the base of which
remains in the sanctuary of
Athena at Pergamum, is
thought by some scholars to
have been the focus for the
display of statues of the
defeated Celts. Marble
copies of these works were
taken to Maly, where several
have survived. This
insaginative reconstruction
by A. Schober was published
in 1952,

VISIONS OF THE CELTS

[ \
anecdotal material reflecting earlier times, which he was able to present against
his own more systematic observations. The Histories are no longer extant but
were extensively used, sometimes with direct acknowledgement, by three later
writers, Strabo (¢.64 Bc-ap 21), Diodorus Siculus (who wrote ¢.60-30 s¢),and
Athenacus (. Ap 200), and may also have been used by Julius Caesar as a source
for the ethnographic descriptions in his Commentariesin Book V1 of the Gallic
War. Poseidonius was a Stoic philosopher, and, as Athenaeus tells us, in describ-
ing the many customs of many peoples he composed his work ‘in accordance
with his philosophical convictions, In essence Poscidonius believed that con-
temporary barbarian peoples reflected a condition closer to the Golden Age
than civilized societies, and that in that Golden Age society was ruled by the
wise. To this extent his account of the Celts has something of a rosy glow about
it. Thus he approves of their bravery and of their honouring of the brave, and
comments favourably upon their hospitality to strangers. He excuses their
fondness for war and their impetuous nature by saying that they were a
straightforward people and not of evil character: he even came to terms with
the idea of Celtic headhunting. They were, in fact, only like boisterous school-
children. "To the frankness and high-spiritedness of their temperament must be
added the traits of childish boastfulness and love of decoration.’ But they were
ruled by wisdom because among those specially honoured and given authority
were the Druids, who were the natural and moral philosophers and men of sci-
ence. ‘They are believed to be the most just of men.’ In his Celtic ethnography
Poseidonius can fairly be accused, as modern commentators have suggested, of
being a‘soft primitivist’ who shielded himself and his readers from the realities

8


===== PAGE 18 (index-21_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF TME CELTS

of Celtic societies. This same attitude is evident in the works of the Alexandrian
school from the first century Ap onwards which, using written sources rather
than field observation, present Celtic religion and Druidism as on a par with
Pythagorean systems.

A new sense of reality was instilled, from the middle of the first century Bc, by
writers such as Caesar, Lucan, and Tacitus, who reported on the conquest of the
Gauls and the Britons. Although there was some recourse to the old stereotypes
for the standard ethnographic introductions, much of the sense of the political
turmoil among the Celtic peoples comes over. Thus Caesar: ‘In Gaul there are
factions not only in every state and village and party but practically even inindi-
vidual households’; and Tacitus: ‘Once they owed obedience to kings: now they
are distracted between the warring factions of rival chiefs.” Implicit in com-
ments of this kind is the justification for conquest, for not only could Rome not
tolerate such instability on her borders but conquest and romanization brought
peace to the barbarians. The point is explicitly made in a set-piece speech which
Tacitus attributes to Petilius Cerialis in Ap 69, though in all probability it is the
historian speaking:

Throughout the whole of Gaul there were always despots and wars until you passed
under our control. We ourselves, despite many provocations, imposed upon you by
right of conquest only such additional burdens as were necessary for preserving peace.
Stability between nations cannot be maintained without armies, nor armies without
pay, nor pay without taxation. Everything else is shared equally between us. (Hist. 4.73)

Tacitus takes a rather more realistic view when he puts into the mouth of the
British war leader Calgacus, facing the Roman army in northern Scotland in ap
84,a damning indictment of Rome: ‘Pillagers of the world, they have exhausted
the land by their indiscriminate plunder . . . to robbery, butchery, and rapine,
they give the lying name of “government”; they create a desolation and call it
peace’ (Agricola 30).

While Caesar has a specific political agenda to achieve through his presenta-
tion of the Gauls, Tacitus uses the Britons and Germans as part of a general
tirade against his perception of the shortcomings of the Roman leadership.
Modern decadence and indiscipline and the loss of individual liberty are his
themes, and the Britons and Germans provide convenient characters through
which to purvey these views. The Celts are no longer a serious threat to Rome;
it is the danger from within that is more insidious. For Tacitus, then, the Celts
provide the allegory.

From the end of the first century Ap barbarians other than the Celts provid-
ed the raw material for invective and polemic, and attitudes began to mellow as
second- and third-generation Gauls and Britons became creative and influ-
ential citizens of the empire. Martial, born at Bilbilis in Ap 40, several times pro-
claimed his pride in his Celtiberian origins—'we who are descended from Celts
and Iberians’—and both Iberia and Gaul produced men of real literary talent.
Only in occasional disparaging references to the northern Britons—such as

9


===== PAGE 19 (index-22_1.jpg) =====
5 A seventeenth-century
vision of an Ancient Briton
awoodcut from Joha
Speed's Historic, published
in 1611, The ultimate source
seems 10 be a watercolour
drawing by John White dat
ing to about 1588,
Nakedness, body-painting,
long hair, neck tores, and
head-hunting are all charac
teristics of the generalized
Celt' derived from classical
sources, which were becom-
ing available in printed form
atabout this time.

VISIONS OF THE CELTS

Ausonius’ epigram, that 'matus’ (drunk) rather than ‘bonus’ (good) is a more
appropriate description for a Briton—can we see the old Celtic stereotype
recurring.

Oblivion and Awakening: c.1500-1700

From the fourth century until the sixteenth century Ap the world cared little for
Celts. The classical texts were largely forgotten and lost, and the universal
appeal of Christianity, with its own texts, mythologies, and stercotypes, provid-
ed all the models that were required to order behaviour and to invent ¢
myths and protohistories, Yet it was Ch ty that kept alive a knowledge of
the Celts in the manuscript copies of the classical sources preserved in monas-
tic libraries.

In the sixteenth century many of these texts began to become more widely
available in printed form. The manuscript of Tacitus’ Agricola reached Rome
about 1470 and was published in Milan five to ten years later, while Caesar's
Gallic War was published in Venice in 1511, By
the beginning of the seventeenth century most
of the major texts were available in their origi-
nal languagesand in translation. This coincided
with a general awakening in western Europe of
the need to create national prehistories based
on fact rather than myth. In Britain scholars like
John Leland (1503-52) began avidly to collect
data, while at the end of the century William
Camden (1551-1623) produced the first serious
attempt at explaining the early origins of
Britain in his Britannia, first published in 1586.
In France the Celts were beginning to come to
the fore in such works as Jean Le Fevre's Les
Fleurs etantiquites des Gaules, published in 1532,
and particular attention was beginning to be
paid to the practices and philosophy of the
Druids throughout the sixteenth and seven-
teenth centuries.

The discovery of the New World with its star-
tling range of ‘primitive peoples’ each living in
their own distinctive ethnographic present,and
the beginning of the exploration of Africa and
the Fast, provi
for those writing about the prehistory of Euro-
pean society. Samuel Daniel could liken the
tribal warfare of pre-Roman Britain to that of
the American Indians, while John White could

ed ample comparative material


===== PAGE 20 (index-23_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

6 Raphael Holinshed's
vision of Queen Boudica
(Boadiccea as she was then

tribe, the Ieni, who in ap 60
Jod a rebellion against the
Romans. IHustrated in his
Chronicles (1578). The
similarity to Queen
Elizabeth | reviewing her
troops is unmistakable.

use his field drawings of Virginian Indians as models for Picts and Britons.
What was beginning to emerge throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies was the concept of the Celts, Gauls, and Britons as Noble Savages, not
donius, though frequently they
were displayed in contemporary dress. It was a trend which was to develop still
further in the
South Seas enlivened the European consciousness.

unlike the soft-primitivist approach of Pos

shteenth century after an awareness of the islanders of the

Celtomania and Nationalism: c.1i700-1870

By the beginning of the eighteenth century the antiquarians concerned with
early Europe had access to the principal classical texts, a varied array of ethno-
logical analogi
artefacts of their countrie

and a growing knowledge of the prehistoric monuments and

he three elements were combined, particularly in
France and Britain, to create a vision of the past peopled by sand Druids. In
Britain the movement was led by William Stukeley (1687-1765), who began, in
1723, to write a History of the Ancient Celts in four parts. The work was never
completed, but his two volumes on Stonehenge and Avebury, published in 1740
and 1743, ascribed both monuments to the 'British Druids’ In the wake of
Stukeley's energetic proselytizing, virtually all the megalithic monuments of
Britain—tombs, circles, and alignments—uwere considered to be the preserve of

Druids, while the hill forts were seen as ‘Ancient British’ strongholds or as the
camps of Caesar built during his expeditions in 55 and 54 8C.

In France the same enthusiasms prevailed. In 1703 Paul-Yves Pezron pub-
lished his L'Antiquité de la nation et la langue des Celtes, autrement appelez
Gaulois. By the end of the century the belief that the megaliths were Celtic was


===== PAGE 21 (index-24_1.jpg) =====
7 ADruid seen through the
vivid imagination of
William Stukeley. From his
volume Stonehenge,
published in 1740. The axe
in the belt is of Bronze Age
type. but such details were
unappreciated in Stukeley's
ti

9 Queen Boudica
35 she appears resphendent

in her chariot on the
Thames Embankment
facing the Houses of

Parliament. The statue,
erected in 1902, shows the
British queen as in the
model of late Victorian regal
nobility

VISIONS OF THE CELTS

firmly entrenched in such works as Malo Corret de la
Tour-d'Auvergne’s Origines gauloises (1796) and Jacques
Cambry's Monuments celtiques (1805), which assigned
all the Breton megaliths to the Celts.

Another pursuit of those caught up in the romance of
Celtomania was to ‘discover’ Celtic literary traditions
still extant in the folk memory of peasants living in
remote areas, The most blatant case of invention came
from Scotland, where James Macpherson created single-
handed the poems of Ossian, which he published
between 1760 and 1763. They were to have a profound
effect throughout Europe in the fight for national iden-
tity: Ossian features large in the freedom poetry of the
Hungarian Sandor Petofi (1823-49). In Brittany similar
‘discoveries’ were being made by Vicomte Hersart de la
Villemarqué, whose Barzaz-Breiz (Songs of Brittany)
was first published in 1838, at the time when the French
pe out Breton culture
and language. Nor were the Welsh free from romantic

government was attempting to wi

invention. In 1792 the ceremony of Maen Gorsedd was

created. It was held on the autumn equinox and involved
Welsh bards in an extended performance of pompous
ritual heavy with symbolism, requiring for its props an
altar and a circle of stones. The entire pastiche of an
‘ancient tradition’ was the invention of Welsh stonema-
son Edward Williams, who preferred to be known by his
bardic name lolo Morganwy. By managing to have the
Gorsedd attached to the more ancient and respectable
ceremony of the Welsh Eisteddfod in 1819, Williams
ensured the survival of his nonsensical Celtic creation.

with its
in the history of scholarship. It wasa

The C
mixture of facts and fantasies, has its place

eltomania of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centurie:

stage through which west European antiquarianism, almost inevitably, had to
pass, since it provided the first faltering attempts in bringing together classical

sources, the study of antiquitie: te a

oral traditions, and language to cre.
European past. What is more surprising is that much of the romantic nonsense
of this phase still persists.

The French archaeologist Salomon Reinach, looking back over the outpour
ings of Les Celtomanes, could characterize their beliefs somewhat wryly

The Celtsare the oldest people in the world; their language is preserved practically intact
in Bas-Breton; they were profound philosophers whose inspired doctrines have been
handed down by the Welsh Bardic Schools; dolmens are their altars, where their priests
the Druids offered human sacrifice; stone alignments were their astronomical observa

tories,


===== PAGE 22 (index-25_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

He could afford to be scathingly dismissive, for after 1870 the results of archs
ological activity throughout western Europe were casting an entirely new light
on the culture of the Iron Age (see Chapter 2),

Beneath the romantic Celtism of the eighteenth century lay an undercurrent
of nationalism which intensified and became more explicit in the nineteenth
al sources provided a galaxy of national heroes—Boudica in

Britain, Vercingetorix in France, Ambiorix in Belgium, Viriathus in Iberia—all
of whom could be used as symbols of national identity and freedom when

set up on the Thames Embankment in London in 1902, and Ambiorix depicted
in heroic guise at Tongres in Belgium were there to provide much-needed inspi-
ration of nationhood in the tumultuous century between the end of the
Napoleonic War and the outbreak of the First World War.

In much of this, France took the lead. The famous statue of the Dying Gaul,
bought at great expense by the French monarchy in 1737, was eventually trans-
ferred to France by Napoleon Bonaparte, on whom the potency of the image
will not have been lost. Bonaparte established the Académie Celtique in Paris in
1805, but it was left to Napoleon's nephew, Louis Napoleon, to initiate what
be the carliest planned research programme in Iron Age archae-
ology. Returning to France aftera period in exile, he was elected President of the
Second Republic in 1848, seizing further power four years later to become
Emperor, thereafter styling himself Napoleon [11. France had been through a
ng Prussian mili-
as being a politician and skilfully com-

long period of upheaval and was facing the threat of increa

tarism. Napoleon was a scholar as wel
bined his personal academic inclination with the need to boost French morale
by sponsoring a spectacular campaign of fieldwork and excavation to provide

archacological data for his projected work, the Histoire de Jules César. The
fieldwork was undertaken between 1860 and

1865 by Colonel E. Stoffel with the aid of up to ‘

300 assistants and labourers. The colonel’s task
was to research the topography of Caesar's
campaigns and to identify the battlefields, an
assignment completed with varying degrees of
success, the highlight being the excavation of

the siege works and a battleground of Alesia,
where the war leader Vercingetorix made his last
heroic stand against Rome. To provide further

Celtic background to these events, Napoleon
initiated the large-scale excavation of the prin-
cipal oppidum of the Aedui at Bibracte (Mont
Beuvray)—a task which he entrusted to J. G.
Bulliot. Of the three projected volumes of the
Histoire, two were published, in 1865 and 1866.
The foundation of La Musée des Antiq

8 Statue of Vercingetorix.
the Gaulish resistance leader
who confronted Cacsar at
Alesia in 52 ne. The statue,
which dominates the plateau
of Alesia, was erected at the
instigation of the Emperor
Napokeon 111 in 1865,
Napokon organized a
detailed field study of
Cassar's campaigns. There
is a certain stylized resem
Blance between the emperor
and the statue.



===== PAGE 23 (index-26_1.jpg) =====
10 Napoleon I}, emperor of
France from 1852 until s870,
ated and
mans at

when he was de
captused by the G
Sedan, During the Second
Emypire, largely as a result of
Napaleon's scholarly inter
ests, the archacology of fron
Age Gaul flourished

VISIONS OF THE CELTS

11 Colonel Stoffed, in his quest to discover details of Cacsar’s military
installations, cut trial trenches to test the existence and form of buricd
ditches and pits. This careful work enabled him to produce plans
Cacsar’s forts and associated defensive works. The illustratic
from Napoleon 111's Histoire de Jules César (1865
the outer circumvall,

Cacsar's camps « designed 1o restrain the

army of Vercingetorix at Alesia.

Nationales in Paris in 1863 er
uities, complete with models and reconstructions, would become readily acces-
sible to the general public.

There can be little doubt that in intensifying, and possibly even creating,
public awareness of the Gauls and of their heroic resistance to the outside
lapoleon 111 was deliberately

ured that his growing collection of Celtic antig-

aggressor, Rome, setting out to inculcate a nat-
ional spirit. His attitude to Caesar was ambivalent. Caesar confronted Gaulish
opposition, but he did so, he claimed, because otherwise the country would
have been overrun by Germans—the parallels would not have needed stressing
to the French public in the 1860s, The conquest also had the advantage of unify-
ing Gaul in along period of peace in a way never before or after achieved. When
in1870 Napoleon rode out at Sedan to lead the French army in disastrous defeat
at the hands of the Germans, one wonders whether it was Vercingetorix or

Caesar that provided his role model.

he Romantic movement which had gripped Europe in the eighteenth and
carly nineteenth centuries provided a major stimulus to Celtomania in those
regions which could claim to be Celtic. The ‘discovery’ of poetic traditions like
the Ossian epic invented by Macpherson and La Villemarqué's Barzaz-Breiz
(recently shown to be based on genuine folk traditions) and the nonsenses
which sprang from the fertile imagination of lolo Morganwy should not detract
from more serious work, such as Evan Evans's Some Specimens from the Poetry
of the Ancient Welsh Bards published in 1764, or, for that matter, the literary

14


===== PAGE 24 (index-27_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

based on fic]

excavat

genius of Sir Walter Scott, whose novels and poems gave a new nobility to the
Highlander at the moment when all things Celtic were being proscribed in
Scotland. Out of this ferment of literary and folkloric outpourings more solid

structures began to crystallize: the foundation of the Society of Cymmrodorion
15 A model of Cacsar's
circumvallation of Al

in 1751 and the Cambrian Archacological Association in 1848 provided a sound

academic framework for Wales, while in Scotland the Socicty of Antiquaries of
Scotland was instituted in 1780.

‘he Royal Institution of Cornwall emerged in
s 3 tions undertaken by Ce
1818 and in Ireland the Royal Irish Academy came into being in 1785, Stoffel in the 1860s.



===== PAGE 25 (index-28_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

For the most part these organizations provided structured fora where the
like-minded could research and celebrate their past, but inevitably such soci-
eties provided, often unwittingly, an underpinning for nationalist sentiments,
and the perceived shared ‘Celtic’ ancestry offered a degree of unity. This was
particularly developed in Brittany, where, in 1867, La Villemarqué set up the first
of a series of Interceltic Congresses to which were invited ‘kith and kin' from
Wales, ‘brothers' from Cornwall, and ‘cousins’ from Ireland and Scotland. It was
from these roots that the Breton separatist movement Breiz Atao (‘Brittany for
Ever') was to grow in the interwar years. Pan-Celticism provided strength, it
also offered an identity of otherness: wethe Celts as opposed to them the French
and English. It is a powerful metaphor which is still very much alive.

The Contribution of Archaeology: 1870-1970

The growing awareness of the material culture of the pre-Roman Iron Age in
the middle of the nineteenth century began to instil a new sense of realism into
the study of late prehistoric Europe, but it was not until 1871, with the recogni-
tion that the cultural assemblages found in the graves of the Champagne and
the lake-side site of La Tene in Switzerland were closely matched by those asso-
ciated with a series of burials inserted into the ruins of the Etruscan town of
Marzabotto, that the historic Celts could confidently be identified (see Chapter
2). Thereafter the belief that the movements of people could be traced in the
archacological record gained wide acceptance, and the invasionist model
became central to much archaeological writing.

Material of La Téne type found throughout central and eastern Europe was
directly related to the historic expansion of the Celts, though the extreme pauci-
ty of La Téne material in Greece and Asia Minor, where the Celts were known to
have been active, wasa salutary warning of the adage that absence of evidence is
not evidence of absence.

In the west the situation was more complex. The study of ancient European
languages had shown that forms of Celtic were spoken over much of the Iberian
Peninsula, the British Isles, and Ireland, and yet there was no historical record of
Celtic migrations into these areas. It was, therefore, left to archacologists and
linguists to construct models of invasion from their two disparate viewpoints.
Since each relied heavily on the other, a considerable degree of circularity devel-
oped in the arguments. In Iberia the classical sources indicated a Celtic presence
by the sixth century ¢, and this was supported by linguistic arguments that
suggested that the Celtic spoken in the Peninsula was more ancient than that
recorded in Gaul. Thus it was incumbent on archacologists to ‘discover’ evi-
dence for the Celtic migration from west central Europe through the Pyrenees
in the material culture of the Late Bronze Age. This approach was most influ-
entially propounded by P. Bosch-Gimpera in his famous paper “Two Celtic
Waves in Spain’ published in 1939 in the Proceedings of the British Academy. In
Britain and Ireland invasionist theories were summed up in the elegant formu-

16


===== PAGE 26 (index-29_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

lation of Christopher Hawkes, presented in a paper entitled ‘Hillforts’ pub-
lished in the journal Antiquityin 193y, in which a series of migratory

aves were
envisaged.

Simple invasionist theories of this kind were in common use until the 1960s
and are still found from time to time in the more popular literature. Their mod-
elling was based partly on the classical accounts of Celtic movements, but also
derived inspiration from an awareness of the migrations of the late Roman and
carly medieval periods. Behind itall lay the knowledge, gleaned from recent his-
tory, of the dramatic cultural changes, linguistic and material, that had been
brought about by west European imperial expansion. This strengthened the
implicit belief that cultural change was most simply to be explained as the result
of folk movement.

The ‘Celts’ that emerged during this period still retained the image of the
warrior intent upon feasting and raiding—in other words the classical vision
but, in a century dominated by recurring war, much of it resulting from

German militarism, a new image began to develop in which the ‘Celt’ was given

a more homely, creative appearance in contrast to other barbarians, in particu-

lar the‘warlike Germans': in other words the ‘Celt’ was becoming domesticated. 14 Celtic domesticity as
imagined by A. |

estier in

This was subtly, and perhaps unconsciously, done by putting increased empk

f 1911, based
sis on artistic and technical achievements and on the ‘hearth-and-home’ asp-  on the excavated evidence

derived from the examina.
t
developed in Britain, where the creative originality of Celtic art had long been ¢

ects of the archacological record. Such an approach was particularly well

the lake village of

tonbury, Somerset.



===== PAGE 27 (index-30_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

recognized, largely because the extreme paucity of cemeteries producing war-
rior equipment forced archaeological activity to focus on settlement sites and
on the productive systems which maintained them,

The first recognizable ordering of the British agrarian landscape became
known as ‘Celtic field systems), and the term was readily, if inappropriately,
adopted in the Low Countries and Denmark, where isolated Celtic elements of
material culture have tended to be given particular emphasis in contrast to the
Germanic.

The Celt of the period 1870-1970 is, therefore, a complex creation. In the
image of the nineteenth-century imperialists, he was prepared to fight his way
into new territories, taking his women and children with him, but there to set-
tledown tottill the soil while the womenfolk spun, weaved, and ground the corn.
His love of art was well developed and he was served by craftsmen of great orig-
inality and skill. Even his wife could add to the artistic ambience of the home by
making pleasantly decorated pots. He was not unduly aggressive but would
fiercely protect his family and home if danger threatened. The discovery of a
‘war cemetery”at the gate of the hill fort of Maiden Castle, in Dorset, attributed
to the gallant Celts defending their settlement against Roman invaders, provid-
ed a potent image which caught the grim public mood in the late 19305, and, by
the time that the excavation report was finally published in the depths of the
Second World War, the ‘war-mad’ Celt of the Poseidonian tradition had become
celticus domesticus!

In France, too, opportunity for allegory was not lost, In the aftermath of the
war, in 1949, a monument was erected on the plain of Les Laumes below Alesia.
It records that

On this plain 2,000 years ago Gaul saved her honour pitting, at Vercingetorix” call, her
peoples against Caesar's legions. After her reversal upon the battlefield, reconciled with
the victor, united, defended against the invasions of the Germans, open to the enlight-
enment of Greece and Rome, she knew three centuries of peace.

Celts at the End of the Millennium

Since 1970 there has been a subtle change in the vision of the Celt, with an
increasing emphasis on the economic systems which underpinned society and
the use of “world-systems” models. The development of coinage and the emer-
gence of oppida, which are widely believed to be of urban character, are areas
upon which much research has recently focused. These developments are, in
part, the result of a more widespread interest in economic structures among
archacologists, which can be related 1o a much broader awareness of economics
among the public at large. This, in some considerable measure, is a reflection of
modern European politics, with its concern for the development of the more
unified European Community. The pan-European image of the Celts is highly
appropriate to this political imperative.

The mounting of the spectacular exhibition “The Celts, the Origins of Eur-

8


===== PAGE 28 (index-31_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

ope'in Venice in 1991, under the auspices of Palazzo Grassi and sponsored by the
multinational Fiat company, is an example of the current use to which the Celts
are being put. The point was explicitly made by the President of Palazzo Grassi
in his introduction to the exhibition catalogue The Celts:

This exhibition is a tribute both to the new Europe which cannot come into fruition
without a comprehensive awareness of its unity, and to the fact that, in addition to its
Roman and Christian sources, today’s Europe traces its roots from the Celtic heritage,
which is there for all to see.

Itis in the light of this vision that one can best understand the initiative of
President Mitterrand in providing lavish funds from the French state to sup-
port a new programme of multinational excavations at the Aeduian capital of
Bibracte. In doing so he was echoing the gesture of Napoleon 111, though for
rather different political motives,

Jacquetta Hawkes summed it all up in the memorable thought that cach gen-
cration gets the archacology it deserves. Put another way, it is difficult, indeed
impossible, to study the past without our understanding being encumbered
and perverted by the impediment of the social mores in which we live and the
transient values of the moment. At best, by attempting to understand the dis-
tortions of the past, we can be more on guard against introducing distortions of
our own and accepting those forced on us by our political leaders.

There are currently two extreme perceptions of the Celts: the New Celto-
mania, which provides a vision of a European past to comfort us at a time when
cthnic divisions are becoming a painful and disturbing reality, and a politically
correct view, which argues that the term is so abused as to be useless except to
those who wish to increase the sales of their books, Both views contain some
threads of value but in their extremity they are sterile. There were, in Europe
and beyond, peoples who were known as Celts, whose movements and behav-
iour are reflected in contemporary sources. They spoke a language which
spread over a huge area, versions of which are still spoken and taught today in
the western fringes of the former territory. Some of these ancient Celtic com-
munities developed a unique art and a distinctive material culture, which
spread throughout Europe, and in the remote west, in Ireland, echoes of their
society come down to us through the written versions of a long-extinct oral tra-
dition. These threads are real and are worthy of our attention.

19


===== PAGE 29 (index-32_1.jpg) =====
¥
The Reality of the Celts

Tue concept of the Celts has many realities born of different disciplines. The
carliest awareness to break upon the academic world was the vision provided by
the Greek and Roman authors, a vision which, as we have seen, was moulded
through closely circumscribed historical traditions to produce a range of famil-
iar metaphors. These were translated into visual form through Hellenistic stat-
uary, which in turn became widely known through Roman copies. Together
these sources produced a ‘classical reality’, the great and lasting advantage of
which is that it gives the Celts a place in history endowing them with motives,
passions, names, and a fearsome alien character. Through the eyes of the classi-
cal world, the Celts, though familiar in some ways, were sufficiently foreign to
send a frisson of fear down the spine whenever their name arose.

This clearly sculpted model began to take on a more complex character in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries through a growing understanding of the
intricacies of the Celtic language, further to be enlivened by the great vernacu-
lar literature of the Insular Celts of Ireland and Wales, which offered a quite
different insight into the “Celtic character”. The crisply defined Celts of Roman
sculptors and Greek and Roman historians became worryingly distorted by the
unreality of magic and shape-shifting.

Archacological advances in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries provided
a new reality through the discovery first of the weapons and artefacts used by
Celtic peoples and later of the settlements in which they had lived and the detri-
tus of the economies which had sustained them, Finally, in the 1930s and 1940s,
the art of the Celts came to be recognized as a subject worthy of study, making
it possible to bridge the gap between the classical vision, the vernacular mys-
tery, and the harsh, if somewhat mundane, archacological reality. The excite-
ment of the subject is that it can be approached from these very different
directions, all of which have a validity within their own academic parameters,
and yet what emerges presents an altogether different set of images.

20


===== PAGE 30 (index-33_1.jpg) =====
B N N
N A\ T’in:
i e Vel


===== PAGE 31 (index-34_1.jpg) =====
Ho, ety

AT -~ S AR

g@"‘»’f* . E' b 5 9?'
2 \ s


===== PAGE 32 (index-35_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE

Inthe previous chapter we considered the classical model and its evolution in
broad outline, Here it is necessary to explore in more detail the main classes of
evidence which help to expand and modify that model.

The Celtic Language

Celtic belongs to the family of Indo-European languages. It is closest to the
Italic languages, to such an extent that some linguists have postulated a com-
mon Italo-Celtic origin for both. This hypothetical group is believed to be
broadly equivalent to two other European families, one from which the Baltic,
Slav, and Germanic languages were to evolve and the other ancestral to Greek.
The point at which Celtic began to be distinguished is much debated. On one
extreme it has been suggested that the main Celtic-speaking groups were in
place using their distinctive tongue as early as 3000 8¢, but the more conven-
tional view accepts that Italic and Celtic separated and developed in the regions
in which they were to flourish during the period 1300-800 8¢, before outward
migration of the Celts and the Latins.

Celtic languages are spoken now only in the extreme Atlantic periphery of
Europe, but originally they extended in a broad swath from south-western
Iberia, through Gaul and the Alpine region, into the Middle Danube, and one
group of settlers, the Galatians, introduced Celtic into central Asia Minor,
where, according to St Jerome, it was still recognizable in the fourth century ap.

The different types of recorded Celtic may be divided into two broad groups:
Continental and Insular. Continental Celtic is known from the evidence of
place names and personal names recorded by classical historians, on coins, and
from a comparatively small number of inscriptions, Using this evidence it is
possible to distinguish three, possibly four, Continental Celtic languages. In
Iberia, Celtiberian was spoken over much of the centre, west, and north of the
Peninsula. The carliest inscriptions date to the third century s, but, as we have
seen, the Greek writers show that Celts were to be identified in the region at least
two centuries earlier. In Gaul, the Gaulish language was spoken extensively in
the first century sc and is well represented in a hun-
dred or so inscriptions. South of the Alps in the north-
western part of the Po Valley a distinctive form of
Celtic known as Lepontic has been identified in about
seventy inscriptions. That the earliest of these date
back to the sixth century nc raises a number of impor-
tant questions which will be introduced later (see
p. 70). Finally, in the Middle Danube Valley place
names and personal names indicate that the Celtic
spoken here differed from the western Celtic lan-
guages, but little is known of its structure or date
except that many of the names are no later than the
first century sc.

n

Il Facing: A Celtic warrior
committing suicide in defeat
by the body of his dead wife.
The group, now in the
Museo Nazionale defle
Terme, Rome, is probably a
marble copy of an original
which once adorned the
Temple of Athena
Nikephoros at Pergamum
commissioned by Attalus |
a1 the end of the third centu-
rync.

15 Stone slab from Vaison
Ia-Romaine, Vauchuse,
France, inscribed in Gracco-
Gaulish, It probably dates to
the middle of the first
century sC and records the
ift of land to the goddess
Belesma by Segomaros, son
of Villonas, citizen of
Nemauso (Nimes). Musée
Calvet, Avignon.



===== PAGE 33 (index-36_1.jpg) =====
16 Abilingual inscription in
Latin and Ceitic from Todi,
Italy, dating to the second
century B¢, Musco
Gregoriano Vaticano,
Rome.

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

uﬁw& '

The Insular Celtic languages were spoken in Great Britain, Ireland, and Brit-
tany. It is conventional to divide them into two groups: Q-Celtic, or Goidelic,
spoken in Ireland, the Isle of Man, and western Scotland, and P-Celtic, or
Brythonic, which forms the basis of modern Welsh, Cornish, and Breton. The
long-established belief has been that Q-Celtic was the older form and was
adopted by the Atlantic communities at an carly date but was overtaken in
Great Britain by the more recently evolved P-Celtic, which was the basis of
Gaulish. It was further believed that Q-Celtic was reintroduced in Scotland and
the Isle of Man by invaders from Ireland in the third and fourth centuries Ap
and that P-Celtic was reintroduced to Brittany by settlers from south-west
Britain arriving in the fifth century Ap. Recent work has, however, suggested
that this model is probably a considerable oversimplification. It has been noted
that P-Celtic place names are recorded in Ireland, though they may be translit-
erations of Q-Celtic names by P-Celtic speakers reporting them to the geogra-
phers of the classical world. The introduction of the Breton language poses
more problems and it is probably more in keeping with reality to interpret it as
native Armorican P-Celtic, surviving beneath an overlay of Latin, reinvigorat-
ed by the similar language of the British settlers. A further factor to bear in mind
is that the division between the two types of Celtic may be less significant than
was originally believed.

Awareness of the character of the Insular Celtic languages emerged in the late
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, inspired by the researches of the
Oxford scholar Edward Lhuyd, Assistant Keeper at the Ashmolean Museum
from 1687 and its Keeper from 1691 until his death in 1709. As a true polymath,
Lhuyd had many interests and skills, but it was in the field of comparative Celtic



===== PAGE 34 (index-37_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

linguistics that he made his most lasting contribution. In 1695 he presented a
prospectus for an ambitious publication to be entitled Archacologia Britannica,
which was to contain a comparison of Welsh with other European languages,
especially Greek, Latin, Irish, Cornish, and Armorican. After extensive travel in
the Celtic West, he retired to Oxford in 1701 to begin writing. The first volume
of Archaeologia contains grammars and vocabularies of Irish, Breton, and
Cornish, with supporting discussions and etymologies. He noted the close rela-
tionship between Gaulish, Irish, and British, and the similarities between
Welsh, Cornish, and Breton, but he did not systematize it as a Q/P distinction.

In the Welsh preface to Archacologia, as well as in correspondence, he used
his linguistic studies to put forward a scheme to explain the “colonization’ of
Britain, suggesting that the Irish Britons were a colonial movement from Gaul
settling first in the British Isles. They were pushed out into the north of Britain
and to Ireland by a second wave of Gaulish settlers. In attempting to relate lan-
guage, through the careful study of etymology, to people and migrations,
Lhuyd was opening up a huge area of study which has occupied many scholars
ever since.

Lhuyd was working in one corner of the web of European languages.
Already, a century before, Joseph Scaliger (1540-1609) had divided the Euro-
pean languages into four groups (characterized by their word for God).
Subsequently various attempts were made to trace the European and related
languages back to a common ancestor. In 1796 Sir William Jones, Chief Justice
of India, suggested, in a lecture, that language groups as disparate as Celtic,
Gotbhic, Sanskrit, and Old Persian might belong to the same family, and it was
from this stream of scholarship that the concept of a common Indo-European
language began to develop, to be systematized, in the middle of the nineteenth
century, by Augustus Schicicher (1821-68). Schleicher developed the notion of
the tree-like growth of languages. Beginning with a primeval Indo-European
language, groups diverged until seven ‘fundamentals’ emerged, one of which
was Celtic; this in turn split still further, giving rise to the individual branches of
Celtic such as Cornish, Welsh, and so on. The model was a convenient way of
ordering the data then available and formed a significant stage in the develop-
ment of Indo-European studies.

BC AD 1900
|
i

Brithonic

Gadic

17 Diagram toillustrate the
possible development of the
Celtic language group.


===== PAGE 35 (index-38_1.jpg) =====
18 Part of a stone relief from
Bormio, Sondrio, ltaly.

he fifth century
nc. The warriors appear to
be equipped with Celtic
style arms. Recent work on
the Lepontic language of
this area suggests that Celtic
was spoken here as carly as
the sixth-fifth centuries e
before the historic
migrations began. Museo
Civico Arqueslogico Giov
Como,

dating

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

As the broad study of the Indo-European languages advanced, so too did the
analysis of the Celtic languages. Theories about Insular Celtic centred around
the questions of folk movement. The most influential work in this field was
published by Sir John Rhys, holder of the Chair of Celtic at Oxford University,
in a wide-ranging book Early Britain: Celtic Britain published in 1882. In it he
developed Lhuyd'’s ideas by putting forward the view that the Goidelic Celts
from the Continent first overcame southern Britain and thence spread to
Ireland. Thereafter there was an invasion of Brythonic Celtic spe:
from the European mainland, who forced the Goidelic settlers into western
areas of Britain, some taking ship to join their distant relations in Ireland. This
simple hypothesis provided a convenient basis around which linguists and
archaeologists have built and argued ever since.

Continental Celtic poses a rather different array of questions, since the lan-
guages nowhere survive in spoken form (with the possible exception of Breton)

kers, also

and are known only from comparatively few texts, augmented by a scattering of
place names and proper names.
In Iberia, Celtic language studies were given a major boost by the decipher

bed on a bronze tablet found at Botorri

ment of a long text ins

, near
Saragossa, announced in 1971. This, together with the work of Antonio Tovar
and others, has greatly advanced our understanding of the languages of the
Peninsula. Indigenous non-Indo-European languages survived into classical
times in the south-cast, as Iberian, and possibly in Tartessus, while in the north
Basque is also the remnant of a separate and once more-extensive non-Indo-
European group. On this basis it is argued that Celtiberian was intrusive, arriv-
th century.
The primary focus of Celtic lay in the north-castern central zone, whence the
language spread to the north, west, and south-
west. The mechanisms by which €
duced into Iberia and the processes by which it

ing some time before the earliest mention of Celts in [beria in the

Itic was intro

expanded are subjects of much current debate.

It has long been recognized that Lepontic,
focused around the lakes of Lombardy, was a
Celtic language and that a distinctive Lepontic
alphabet was used in the second and first cen-
turies B¢, but the demonstration that the Lepon-
tic language dates back to the sixth century scand
possibly a century carlier raises a most interesting
range of questions, since these early examples
significantly pre-date the migration of Celts from
north of the Alps in the early fourth century Bc.

Gaulish Celtic has benefited from a long and
distinguished tradition of scholarly study based
on the hundred or so inscriptions and the wealth

of place and proper name evidence. Major sur-



===== PAGE 36 (index-39_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

veys by David Ellis Evans (1967) and Joshua Whatmough (1970) have provided
full catalogues and discussions, the overriding view being that beneath a variety
of dialects Gaulish is broadly Brythonic, though some doubt has been placed on
the classificatory value of the term.

Standing back from the complex and highly incomplete picture created from
these linguistic scraps, one may distinguish a central Celtic linguistic zone com-
prising Gaul, the British Isles, and possibly the eastern Celtic province, beyond
which, in Ireland, Iberia, and the Lepontic region, was a periphery where some-
what different versions of the Celtic language were spoken. Two of these
‘peripheral’ areas were Celtic-speaking by the sixth century Bc, and there isa
strong possibility that the third, Ireland, was as well. The importance of lin-
guistic studies for an understanding of Celtic culture is considerable, especially
if it is accepted that a Celt was one who spoke Celtic. At its very simplest, it
enables the uncoupling of ‘Celt’ from the archaeologically defined La Téne cul-
ture, by demonstrating that the Celtic language was spoken considerably earli-
er than the development of La Téne culture and over a more extensive area.

The Insular Tradition of Vernacular Literature

It is reasonable 1o assume that the warrior aristocracy of the Celts, like other
warrior aristocracies throughout the pre-modern world, created and transmit-
ted in ever-changing form a rich oral history in cycles of epic narrative, In suit-
able gatherings these epics would be recounted by storytellers to an audience
keen to hear the deeds of their ancestors unfold and the nature of their gods
familiarized through stories of them interfering in the lives of ordinary mortals.
Such traditions were important in giving the community its roots and provid-
ing models of behaviour: above all they created a sense of identity.

The survival of such epics, if they survive at all, is a matter of chance. From
continental Europe and Britain little remains of what must have been a richand
vivid corpus of tradition, except for obscure and partial allusions in Celtic art,
difficult now for us to interpret. But in Ireland, where Celtic culture survived
untouched by the heavy hand of romanization, a selection of this narrative tra-
dition was committed to writing and in this form has been transmitted to us
across the ages.

The most extensive of the vernacular sources is the Ulster Cycle, comprising
about eighty individual stories of which the most complete and by far the
longest is the Cattle Raid of Cooley ( Tdin Bo Cuailnge). The rest of the corpus is
made up of stories which set the scene for the central drama or expand upon the
lives of the main characters.

The entire corpus is contained in ten separate manuscripts, overlapping in
content. The oldest extant version of the Tiin, known as Recension I, survives
in two separate manuscripts each providing part of the story, The Book of the
Dun Cow, dating to the eleventh century, and The Yellow Book of Lecan, com-
piled in the fourteenth century. A fuller and more coherent version, Recension

5


===== PAGE 37 (index-40_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

11, occurs in the late-twelfth-century Book of Leinster. Recension [ is probably
based on two lost ninth-century manuscripts, and it is possible that even earli-
er versions, going back to the seventh century, once existed.

The Tdin must be read to be appreciated, but the essential action focuses
around a cattle raid mounted by the people of Connacht against the people of
Ulster at the urging of Queen Medb—a strong-willed, promiscuous woman
who is part mortal and part a goddess of the land and therefore prone to test the
virility of male heroes. The army of Connacht is opposed by a company of aris-
tocratic warriors, the young and vital Cii Chulainn, the more mature and expe-
rienced Ferghus mai Roich and Conall Cernach, the wise Sencha mai Ailella,
and the two-faced scheming Bricriu the ‘Poison-tongue’, who sets men against
cach other to advance his own interests, As the story unfolds, we are introduced
to many scenes and actions reflecting behaviour familiar through the ethno-
graphic works of Poseidonius and Caesar: feasting and the hero's portion, char-
iot warfare, single combat, severed heads, joint dowries of husbands and wives,
fosterage, and above all the ethics and motivations of a warrior aristocracy for
whom raiding was a commonplace.

The similarities have long been recognized and commented upon. The most
influential work has been Kenneth Jackson's The Oldest Irish Tradition: A
Window on the Iron Age, published in 1964, in which he argued that the Ulster
tales reflected an Irish ethnographic present of the fourth century Ap, which in
turn gave direct access to an earlier Celtic society. The situation is, however,
more complex. The Ulster Cycle undoubtedly contains elements of an ancient
folk tradition, but it was composed in its final form by Christian monks with a
considerable knowledge of Greek and Roman literature as well as the Scriptures
and other Christian writings. Thus, while it might be tempting to argue that
similarities to the Homeric epics reflect a common European origin, it may be
more reasonable to suppose that the Homeric allusions were inserted by the
highly educated medieval redactors. There are, therefore, real dangers of being
led astray by false archaisms.

A detailed study of the ‘material culture’ represented in the Ulster Cycle has
led James Mallory to the indisputable conclusions that the constant reference
tosilveramong the prestigious items depicted must bea reflection of the broad-
er world experience of Ireland in the sixth to ninth centuries Ap and has no
bearing at all on the culture of the La Téne period. In his words, “The material
culture of the Ulster Cycle is essentially a “Window on the Dark Ages”."

Given, then, that the medieval Christian redactors were responsible for cre-
ating the text which comes down to us, by presenting an epic tradition in the
light of their own scholarly erudition and a desire to preserve a memory of the
splendours of their more recent past, how much of the pre-Christian tradition
survives? Itis tempting to take the easy way out and to argue that the basic mate-
rial that was moulded, redecorated, and to some extent repackaged by the suc-
cession of saga tellers and saga writers throughout the first millennium ap does
belong to the European Celtic tradition of the first millennium pc—the same

26


===== PAGE 38 (index-41_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

tradition that is visible in dismembered scraps in the surviving writings of the
classical historians and geographers.

There is, however, a slightly unnerving disparity between the archacological
record in Ireland and aspects of warfare which must be regarded as central to
the action of the epic. Two items in particular stand out: the sword and the
chariot. In the Ulster Cycle the heroes use massive slashing swords and are dri-
ven to battle on light war chariots; cavalry is not mentioned at all. All of this
would be quite acceptable in parts of continental Europe in the fourth or third
century Bc, but the archacological record of Ireland has produced no large
slashing sword of this type, and no chariot fittings, such as terret rings, strap fas-
teners, linch pins, hub rings, and iron tires, of the types which commonly recur
in Britain and the Continent. The word constantly employed for the vehicle
used in the hero tales is carpat, which elsewhere is used to describe transport or
travelling vehicles with two wooden seats, one for the driver, the other for the
passenger. From brief textual references it would seem that this was an indige-
nous vehicle totally different from the war chariot of Britain and Gaul. It
remains, therefore, a strong possibility that the core of the epics, deeply embed-
ded within the Ulster Cycle, lies in a Continental European tradition which was
transmitted at some stage to Ireland, there to be woven into a network of
indigenous folk tales in a local geographical and technological setting to which
was added a sprinkling of real history, Thereafter, the tales were constantly
modified, in each retelling taking on some new aspect, material or oral, gleaned
from the contemporary world, until their final editing for Christian consump-
tion in the medieval period.

This said, the Ulster Cycle is a remarkable survival providing a tantalizing
glimpse of the rich epic tradition of Celtic Europe which would otherwise be
totally inaccessible,

Another source of considerable interestare the Old Irish law texts, the major-
ity of which originate in the seventh and eighth centuries ap and come down to
us in varying states of corruption or incompleteness in documents of late
medieval date. From these it is possible to gain an intimate insight into the
working of society—rank, kin groupings, personal relationships, property,
offences and punishment, contracts and pledges, and the teaching and mainte-
nance of the law itself. No doubt, embedded within all this, are rules of behav-
iour which date back to the time of the earlier Celtic populations of Ireland, but
to tease out these early threads is an uncertain, perhaps impossible, task. At best
the law tracts may be enjoyed as a distant and distorted echo of a past era.

Archacology

The contribution ofarchacology to the study of the Celts has been considerable.
From the sixteenth century large numbers of antiquities have been published
and variously ascribed as *British’, ‘Gaulish’, or ‘Celtic’. Many were indeed of
Iron Age date, but at first correct designations were achieved more by luck than

27


===== PAGE 39 (index-42_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

through knowledge. Systematization began early in the nineteenth century
with the work of the Danish archacologist C. J. Thomsen (1788-1865), who is
credited with the creation of the Three Age model through his arrangement of
the collections of the Danish National Museum into items of Stone, Bronze,
and Iron, which he presented as three developmental stages applicable to the
prehistory of the whole of Europe. Thomsen's work was further elaborated by
his assistant J. J. A, Worsaae (1821-85), who, by stratigraphical excavations, was
able to demonstrate its general validity. By the 1840s it was possible to make a
broad correlation between the material culture of the Iron Age and that of the
Celts in those areas of Europe where the classical sources indicated the Celts to
have lived. Thus, when Johann Georg Ramsauer began to excavate an extensive
cemetery at Hallstatt in Austria in 1846 (PL 111a), he was simply following con-
cavations at Hallstatt contin-

vention by calling the graves he found ‘Celtic”. E
ued until 1863, by which time about 1,000 graves had been opened and
meticulously recorded in a series of fine watercolour sketches drawn by the
excavator. For the most part the graves, both cremations and inhumations,
were well furnished with artefacts, including an array of weapons, bronze and
ceramic vessels, and personal equipment and jewellery.
tion, together with well-preserved organic material, such as clothing and
wooden tools, recovered from the neighbouring salt mines, provided the
archaeological world with a detailed insight into the material culture of the cen-
tral European Iron Age. Most of the Hallstatt graves belonged to the period

his enormous collec-

19 Abowe: Georg Ramsatser, a government
director of mining. who, in 1846, discovered
the lron Age cemetery at Hallstatt in Austria
and continued excavating it until 1863,

10 Right: The location of the settbement and
salt mines of Hallstatt, Austria.



===== PAGE 40 (index-43_1.jpg) =====
21 Left: Georg Ramsauer conducted the exca
vations at the ¢
skill, record
plete
watercolours, of which th
Library of the Saciety of

netery at Hallstatt with some
du.

burial com.

sly detailed

23 Abowe A rucksack made from leather «
a wooden frame preserved in the salt
Hallstatt, Austria, dati
The sack was probably u

carry rock salt, Naturhistorisches Museum,
Vienna


===== PAGE 41 (index-44_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

2 9 N

AT
SN

23 The location of the site of
La Téne on Lake Neuchitel, |

Switzer This is Paul [
Vouga's plan published in

Prefargier

1923

NE U

cnireEus

1, Switzerland, in
ieth century,

30


===== PAGE 42 (index-45_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE

1s

spanning the seventh and sixth centuries sc with a few continuing into the early
fifth. Thereafter the importance of Hallstatt declined rapidly, as the salt depo-
sits at Diirrnberg began to be developed.

In 1857, at the north-western corner of Lake Neuchitel in Switzerland, a local
collector Hansli Kopp discovered a series of wooden piles and in groping in the
mud between them located about forty iron weapons. Thus began the explo-
ration of the famous site of La Tene, which continued sporadically until 1917
(PL [11D). La Tene is a puzzling site which has variously been interpreted asa
pile dwelling, a fortified oppidum, a bridge overwhelmed in a catastrophe, and
a platform from which ritual depositions were made. Its fame lies in the
extremely large collection of artefacts which have accumulated asa result of the
various excavations. The assemblage is particularly rich in weapons—swords,
spears, and shiclds—butalso includes a number of smaller personal items, such
as fibulac, belt clasps, and razors, as well as bronze vessels, iron ingots, and parts
of vehicles. The finds became widely known in the 1860s, largely as a result of

n

2 Plan of the timber strusc
ture and votive deposits
uncarthed at La Tene. Based
part of Paul Vouga's
original excavation plan,
published in 1923.



===== PAGE 43 (index-46_1.jpg) =====
16 Aselection of the
decorated sword scabbards
discovered at La Tene and
lustrated in the excavation
report, La Tene, by Paul
Vouga, published in 1921

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

Ferdinand Keller’s publication, in which he presented La Téne as a lake village
of the Celtic period. It was soon realized that they differed markedly in form
and therefore age from the material which had been recovered on the other side
of the Alps at Hallstatt, but were similar to other finds coming to light in ceme-
tery excavations in northern France.

In 1871 the International Congress of Prehistoric Anthropology and Archae-
ology was held at Bologna. Among the delegates were Gabriel de Mortillet from
France and Emile Desor from Switzerland; both had a detailed knowledge of
Iron Age material, de Mortillet having worked with finds from cemeteries in
Champagne and Desor at Neuchitel. During the congress they were able to
view material recovered from a cemetery recently excavated towards the edge of
the Etruscan city of Marzabotto. The finds were closely similar to those with
which they were familiar and left the two men in no doubt that the Marzabotto
burials were of Celts who had crossed the Alps to settle in the Po Valley, just as
Livy and Polybius had described. The recognition meant that, from then on,
archacological finds of La Téne type came to be regarded as the material culture
of the Celts. Moreover, the correlation provided a convenient dating horizon,
assuming the chronology of the classical sources to be correct.

In1872, the year following the Bologna conference, the Swedish archacologist
Hans Hildebrant proposed systematizing the Iron Age by dividing it into two
parts, the earlier characterized by the finds from the Hallstatt cemetery, and the
later by those from La Tene. Henceforth the concepts of a Hallstatt culture and
a La Tene culture came widely into use, with the La Téne culture being regard-
ed as the archacological expression of the Celts.

Subsequently the scheme was modified by subdivision. In 1881 Otto Tischler
divided the Hallstatt period into two phases, Early and Late, and then turned
his attention to the La Téne material, in 1885 proposing a threefold division into
Early, Middle, and Late, or I, 11, and 111, following the discovery of the votive
deposit at Duchcov in 1882. The Early phase was characterized by fibulae whose
recurved feet simply touched the bow; the contemporary swords were short
with the scabbard chapes perforated. In the Middle phase the fibulae had devel-
oped so that the foot wrapped around the bow, while the sword sheaths now
had unperforated chapes. The Late phase was characterized by fibulae with
solid catch plates often perforated. The contemporary swords were much
longer with rounded ends.

Tischler's system was widely used, and by the turn of the century firm dates
were being proposed. Thus, for France, Oscar Montelius suggested the La Tene
1 should be dated 400250, 11, 250-150, and 111, 1501 BC. Joseph Déchelette
argued that a period IV should be added to contain the later British material. In
Switzerland the careful excavation of the cemetery at Minsingen and elsewhere
allowed further subdivisions to be made by David Viollier in 1916; La Téne I was
thereafter divided into a, b, and cand La Téne [l intoaand b.

While the Tischler scheme worked well for the Champagne, Switzerland, and
Bohemia, the material from Bavaria posed problems, because here an early

32


===== PAGE 44 (index-47_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CEL

phase of burials, usually under tumuli, was identified. To contain these, in 1902
Paul Reinecke proposed that this assemblage, dating to the fifth century s,
should be recognized as a distinct phase known as La Tene A. Thereafter his La
Tene B, C, and D approximately equated with Tischler's Early, Middle, and
Late. This was a significant amendment in that it gave recognition to the form-
ative phase of the La Tene culture, pre-dating the period of the migration.
Reinecke also su ided the Hallstatt culture, giving specific recognition to its
Bronze Age origins (his Hallstatt A and B), allowing C and D to represent the
two stages of the Early Iron Age. In Britain, throughout the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, Iron Age material was simply designated ‘Late Keltic'
or ‘Early British’ without subdivision, following the suggestion of Augustus
Franks in 1863, though in the first decade of this century some attempts were
made to link the Insular finds to the Continental scheme. Itis the Reinecke sys-
tem of 1902, with many subdivisions, regional variants, and chronological
adjustments, that has underpinned Iron Age studies this century.

The systematizing of the European Iron Age in the late nineteenth century

3

37 Early La Tene metabwork
from the hoard found at
Duchcov in Bohemia in 1882
from the original publica
tion.


===== PAGE 45 (index-48_1.jpg) =====
28 Man of the chiefrain's
burial found at Somme
Marne, France, and
dating to the late fifth cen
The chicftain was
atwo-wheeled vehi
was accomparsied by

his weapons, feast
and horse trapping
excavated in 187

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

was, 1o a large extent, driven by the flood of new material deriving from the
excavation of cemeteries, which provided a favourite focus of activity for col-
lectors and archacologists. In France a lead was provided by Louis Napoleon
(1808-73), who became President of the Second Republic in 1852, assuming the
title of Napoleon 111 after a coup d'érar established the Second Empire a year
later.
him to take an active interest in the casual di
the Champagne when, each summer, he spent time at the military base at
Chalons. From material given to him and bought from the local peasants, and
obtained from excavations which he ordered, he built up a large collection
which was to form the basis of the Musée des Antiquités Nationales,

Among the other collectors inspired by the emperor’s example were Frédéric
Moreau (1798-1898) and Léon Morel (1828-1909). Moreau carried out exten-
si cavations in the Aisne and Marne region from 1873 10 1893, and the
collection of La Tene material which he accumulated, and in part published,
was given to the National Museum in 1899,
Morel's interest in archacology began in
1863, when he became involved in a La
ne cemetery at Somsois, near Vitry-le-
Frangois. Thereafter he continued to exca-
vate in Champagne until his death, ¢
for a brief period (1879-88) when his work
took him to Provence. The collection which
Morel amassed, and published in La Cham-
pagne souterraine in 1898, was second in
quality only to that of The National Mus-
eum at Saint-Germain-en-Laye. When
eventually it was put up for sale in 1901, it
was considered to be 100 expensive by the
French government and was eventually pur-
chased by the British Museum. Among the
mostimportantassemblages is that from the
fifth-century chieftain’s burial at Somme-
Bionne.

The frenetic activity in the Marne, Aisne,
and Ardenne regions between 1865 and 1914,
most of it carried out by peasants on behalf
of local collectors, brought to light many
thousands of graves from hundreds of
cemeteries. This corpus of material inevit-
ably contributed significantly to the under-
standing of the Celts, particularly of their
burial practices. Comparable, though less
intensive, work was underway at this time in

apoleon’s scholarly concern with the campaigns of Julius Caesar led

coveries that were being made in

large

cept

4


===== PAGE 46 (index-49_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

scting excava

ns on [ron Age cen
at Hallstatt and Stitn,
Magdalenska gora, Vinica

and elsewbere,

massing a
collect

artefacts,

other parts of Europe. In Slovenia, for example, in the decade before the First
World War, the Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg was instrumental in encour-
aging the excavation of cemeteries at Magdalenska gora, Sti¢na, and Vinics
ring more than graves, and also at Hallstatt itself in 1907. The
Mecklenburg collection, which was eventually acquired by the Peabody Mus-
cum in Harvard, is among one of the most important for understanding the
in the castern Alps.

uncov:

development of Iron Age societie

Much of the archaeological activity of the last half of the nineteenth century
was directed towards the examination of cemeteries, These were, after all, the
sites that produced collectable artefacts with a market value, but some attention
also being given to settlement sites, in particular to the large oppida. Of
these, Stradonice, in Bohemia, provides one of the most notorious examples.
During the last quarter of the nineteenth century it was dug over at the instiga-
tion of antique dealers, the artefacts being dispersed throughout Europe while
the local peasants found a ready market for the animal bone refuse recovered,

Wi

selling it for the production of bonemeal. The discovery of a hoard of gold coins
in 1877 increased interest still further. In all it is estimated that between 80,000
and 100,000 items were recovered, mostly belonging to the late second and first

centuries Bc. Some fla

cour of the importance of the collection began to dawn

on theacademic world following the publication of some of the material by
Pi¢in1903.

Interest in oppida in France was initiated by Napoleon 111, whose study in the
campaigns of Julius Caesar naturally led him to select for attention Bibracte, the



===== PAGE 47 (index-50_1.jpg) =====
1l Facing, above: Acrial

view of the site of Hallstatt,

Austria. The cemetery and
salt mines lay in the valley

behind the lake-side settle-

ment.

1L Facing. befow: Recent
view of the site of La Tene
on lake Neuchatel,
Switzerdand,

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

capital of the Aedui, situated on Mont Beuvray near Autun. In 1867 he appoint-
ed Gabriel Bulliot to direct the work, which was eventually published as Fouilles
de Mont Beuvray 1867 a 1895 in 1899. Bulliot was succeeded by his nephew
Joseph Déchelette, who was to become one of Europe’s most influential schol-
ars of the Iron Age before his death in the First World War at the age of 53. By
that time Déchelette had published the two Iron Age volumes of his Manuel, a
work of synthesis which summed up the advances of the great period of discov-
ery 1860-1910 and presented the culture of the oppida, visible through the work
at Stradonice and Mont Beuvray, in its proper context as the culmination of the
Celtic achievement.

The publication of Le Second Age du fer—the third part of the second volume
of Déchelette’s Manuel d'archéologie—in 1914 marks the end of the pioneering
phase of Celtic archacology. Twenty years before, S. Reinach and M. Bertrand
had presented an array of material in their Les Celtes et les Gaulois dans la vallée
du Po et du Danube (1894), but the Manuel provided the first European-wide
synthesis of La Téne material culture, demonstrating the remarkable similari-
ties which could be detected from one side of Europe to the other. It was now
possible for scholars to begin to integrate the textual and archacological data,
providing pan-European syntheses of which the two volumes of Henri Hubert,
Les Celtes et l'expansion celtique jusqu'a l'époque de La Teneand Les Celtes depuis
I'époque de La Téne et la civilization celtique (both 1932), were among the most
ambitious.

Celtic Art

In some ways it is surprising that the awareness of the importance of Celtic art
did not develop further during this formative period, but this may, at least in
part, have been due to the dismissive attitudes of art historians, whose sense of
values was narrowly constrained by the products of the Graeco-Roman world.
The first real appreciation of the distinctive identity of Celtic art appeared in
1863, when Augustus Woolaston Franks (1826-97), who became Keeper of the
Department of British and Medieval Antiquities at the British Museum
(1866-96) after joining the staff in 1851, published a collection of British
masterpieces in John Kemble’s Horae Ferales. These he described as ‘Late
Keltic', offering a consideration of them in their European context. In doing
this he was far in advance of the thinking of his continental contemporaries,
most of whom would have subscribed to the belief that barbarians were inca-
pable of producing significant works of art.

There was, however, a developing awareness of the part played by the classi-
cal world in introducing artistic concepts to the Celtic barbarians north of the
Alps. The importance of the Rhone route, via Massalia, was generally accepted,
and in 1875 Hermann Genthe published a work stressing the significance of the
Alpine passes for the transport of Etruscan goods and ideas to the north. Five
years earlier Ernst Werth had identified Etruscan inspiration in the ‘Gaulish’

36


===== PAGE 48 (index-51_1.jpg) =====
N e s N
B A agi et


===== PAGE 49 (index-52_1.jpg) =====
o e Ry
7 & PN
g ‘ﬁ Giiinmmmn o ‘\vwl\I(\\Ijjm'r;'
5
o |


===== PAGE 50 (index-53_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

metalwork found in the aristocratic burial at Waldalgesheim and in 1889 the
classical archacologist Adolf Furtwingler offered an analysis of the Celtic art
represented in rich grave finds from Schwarzenbach, preferring to see the exot-
icitemsas Massilliot products designed for the barbarian market. This view was
still adhered to by Paul Reinecke in his publication of 1902. It followed the rea-
soning of art historians working on material around the Black Sea interface,
who believed that many of the Scythian masterpieces had been produced in
Greek workshops located in the coastal colonial settlements, specifically for the
Scythian aristocracy.

Meanwhile, in Britain an alternative view was developing which saw Celtic
art not as a pale, ill-mannered, reflection of classical art but as an original cre-
ation. These ideas were elegantly summarized by Sir Arthur Evans in The
Origins of Celtic Art based on a series of lectures given in 1895, Evans's view was
that Celtic art emerged from the interaction of a number of cultural influences.
Heacknowledged the contribution of Etruscan and Grecek ideas but argued that
Hallstatt elements from the eastern Alpine area as well as Scythian motifs from
further east were also integral to what eventually emerged.

Evans’s thesis formed the starting-point of the monumental survey under-
taken by Paul Jacobsthal, Professor of Classical Archacology at Marburg
University (1912-35) and thereafter a scholar at Oxford University. Jacobsthal
began his study of Celtic art in 1921 and published his seminal Early Celtic Art,
the first volume of what he planned to be a three-volume work, in 1944. In it he
recognized three principal continental styles. His ‘Early Style” was an aristo-
cratic art confined to the high status burials of the fifth and early fourth cen-
turies nc. Here he detected native Hallstatt elements as well as the influence of
an eastern nomadic or ‘orientalizing’ trend adding to the more obvious classi-
cal input. His second style, named after the Waldalgesheim burial, used classi-
cal floral patterns as the basis, from which was developed an original treatment
of plant motifs. In the early third century the third style emerged, divided into
two sub-styles, a *Plastic Style’, in which motifs were used in an essentially
three-dimensional mode, and a *Sword Style’, involving inscribing and some
embossing to create two-dimensional patterns,

The importance of Jacobsthal’s work was that it established Celtic art as one
of the great artistic achievements of Europe, with an originality and vitality
which owed little to the formulaic inspiration which the Celtic masters
undoubtedly received from the classical world,

We are told that the Gauls were valiant, quarrelsome, cruel, superstitious, and had the
gift of pointed speech: their art also is full of contrasts, It is attractive and repellent; it is
far from primitiveness and simplicity, is refined in thought and technique; elaborate
and clever; full of paradoxes, restless, puzzlingly ambiguous; rational and irrational;
dark and uncanny——far from the lovable humanity and transparency of Greek art. Yet,
it is a real style, the first great contribution by the barbarians to European arts, the first
great chapter in the everlasting mutual stock-taking of Southern, Northern and Eastern
forces in the life of Europe.

37

Wa Facng Helmet made in
iron partially cased in
repoussé decorated bronze
nlaid with coral: from
Canosa di Puglia, Bari, Italy.
The decoration is typical of
Celtic art of the Vegetal
Style. Second half of fourth
century v, Staatliche
Museen Antikenssmmlung
Preussischer Kulturbesitz,
Berlin,

IVh fuset, left: A gold stater
of Verica who ruled the
Atrebates in central south-
orn Britain in the years lead-
ing up to the Roman
invasion in Ap 43. The
reverse of the coin shows a
mounted warrior armed
with a large shickl and a
spear and wearlng a helmet

Ve Inger, right A gold
stater of Tasciovanus, ruler
of the Catuvellauni in east-
ern Britain about 10 ac. The
horse rider holds aloft a
carnyx, of war trumpet.


===== PAGE 51 (index-54_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

Although his ‘Styles’ still provide a convenient general model, they are classi-
ficatory rather than explanatory. With a greatly enlarged corpus from which to
work and a deepening understanding of the nature of artistic expression in pre-
modern society, the study of Celtic art promises to become one of the more
lively areas of debate,

Celtic Culture

The publication of Early Celtic Artin 1944 can be regarded as the point at which
the broad range of Celtic studies at last came of age—when the uniqueness of
the Celts was firmly and finally established. The second half of the twentieth
century has seen major advances in all fields but none more than in archae-
ology. It would be impossible to fully review the achievements of this remark-
able period of activity. The sheer quantity of material recovered has increased
the database many hundredfold, but what is more important is the far greater
attention which has been placed on context—the nature of the site itself
whether it be a cemetery or a settlement. There has also been, at least in some
parts of Europe, a concern to see the site as an element in a landscape and to use
this larger geographical concept as the unit of study. Human communities are
only one of the elements of the biome, and to understand these the entire sys-
tem must be studied.

In parallel with all this there is a growing willingness, as the discipline moves
away from its traditional nineteenth-century artefact-based focus, to see the
values and approaches of anthropology as being of relevance to archacology.
The archacologist’s concern now lies with attempting to model and to under-
stand the different systems which make up a society, and by examining the
interactions of these systems to approach the fascinating dynamic of social
change. Increasingly the archaeologist, like the anthropologist, is being drawn
into considerations of communication through symbols, art, language, and
oral traditions. In this way the disparate threads which make up our under-
standing of the Celtic peoples—defined through the disciplines of archacology,
art history, linguistics, and history—are now, at last, being drawn togetherina
single study. It remains to see what will emerge.


===== PAGE 52 (index-55_1.jpg) =====
3
Barbarian Europe and
the Mediterranean
1300-400 BC

To take the broad perspective of European development, it can be said that the
period 1300-1100 BC was a time of major reformation. It marked the end of an
carly cycle of food-producing economies (traditionally the Neolithic to the end
of the Middle Bronze Age), which had culminated in the emergence of the
Aegean-centred Mycenaean-Minoan ‘civilization', and the beginning of a new
cycle which was to see the rise and fall of the broader, Mediterranean-centred,
civilization of the Gracco-Roman world. At its maximum extent, in the third
century Ap, the culminating Roman Empire was to stretch from the desert
fringes of Africa in the south to the forests of the North European Plain and
from the castern deserts to the Atlantic. The collapse of that system in the
fourth and fifth centuries ap created a turmoil from which western European
civilization was to emerge to become, for a briefinterlude from the late fifteenth
to early twentieth centuries, the centre of a world system.

It is within this ‘middle cycle'—1300 sc-ap 4oo—that the communities
speaking a Celtic language and known to contemporary writers as an ethnically
distinctive people called “Celts” or ‘Gauls” emerged and made their dramatic
and lasting impact on the consciousness of their literate neighbours. To under-
stand the origins of the Celts we must begin by considering the world they were
to inhabit.

The Aegean World: 1300-1000 8C

Europe’s first civilization, focused on the island of Crete, began its spectacular
development about 3000 B¢, reaching its peak of energy and influence by the
middle of the second millennium sc, by which time the island had become a
centre for a widely flung exchange network linking the Acgean coasts of Asia
Minor with the mainland of Greece. It was here, centred largely on the Pelo-
ponnese, that a peripheral zone developed whose archacological manifestation

39


===== PAGE 53 (index-56_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

is known as Mycenacan and whose society is dimly reflected in the epic tradi-
tion codified by Homer. By the middle of the second millennium sc Mycen-
aean power had developed to such an extent that over the next two centuries its
influence was to spread not only to the Minoan homeland of Crete but to the
Asia Minor coast and the island of Rhodes in the cast and to southern Italy and
Sicily in the west, some of its distinctive pottery reaching as far west as Anda-
lucia.

The Mycenaean-Minoan civilization created a centralizing focus in the Acg-
ean, which lay at the core of a complex network of exchange contacts drawing
commodities from Egypt in the south, most notably ivory, and from central,
western, and northern Europe, whence came such desirable raw materials as
tin, copper, gold, amber, and probably furs. The relative stability of the system
over the period 1600-1200 B¢ gave time for the networks of exchange to become
consolidated, and those barbarian communities commanding rare resources
or trade routes began to benefit in a variety of ways from these long-distance
exchanges.

During this time, in the heart of Anatolia, the Hittites were reaching a peak of
their development. One of their particular achievements was a knowledge of
iron production, a skill at this stage unknown in the Mediterranean and Eur-
ope. Iron was at first a rare and highly valued commodity which appears to have
been used principally for aristocratic gift exchanges. The iron-bladed dagger in
the tomb of Tutankhamun (1352 B¢) was precisely such a gift. One of the Hittite
texts dating to the thirteenth century gives a fascinating insight into exchanges
at this time. Itisa letter from the Hittite king Hattusilis 111 to the king of Assyria,
responding to a request for iron. He says that no good iron is being made at the
moment, but as soon as some is produced he will send it, meanwhile “Today |
am dispatching an iron dagger blade to you."

The stability of the late-second-millennium world was shaken and eventual-
ly fell apart in a series of convulsions in the twelfth and eleventh centuries Bc—
the period known as the Greek Dark Ages. Many reasons have been suggested
for this complex and ill-understood event—folk movement from the barbarian
north, overpopulation, and plague. Whether there were indeed significant
prime causes or simply a systems-collapse brought about by a number of inter-
acting or self-intensifying factors is difficult to say from the ill-focused archae-
ological evidence. What is clear is that it was a period of folk mobility during
which much of the old order disappeared. Surviving texts refer to the raids of
the ‘Sea People’ who impinged upon coastal Egypt. There were major popula-
tion replacements in Cyprus and the Levant and the Hittite empire collapsed.
In the Peloponnese—the focus of Mycenaean culture—the aristocratic power
centres all but disappeared and a major decline in population is evident.

Itis possible that the ripples of these momentous events were felt in the west-
ern Mediterranean, The settlement of the Shardana in Sardinia is thought to be
one such event. If so, the new settlers were simply following long-established
maritime trading routes to the west.

40


===== PAGE 54 (index-57_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

The impact of the Aegean systems-collapse on the European hinterland was
considerable. Existing exchange systems broke down or were transformed.
Some communities, once part of European-wide networks, found themselves
isolated and new configurations emerged.

The Re-Formation: 1000-800 B¢

The first two centuries of the first millennium sc was a crucial period in the for-
mation of Europe. During this time the principal social and economic group-
ings that were to dominate the scene for over a millennium began to crystallize
out.

In the Aegean, complex movements of Greek-speaking communities led toa
repopulation of some areas of Greece and a reinvigoration of others, whilst
from here some groups moved eastwards across the Aegean, settling the islands
and eventually carving out for themselves a foothold on the peninsulas and
sheltered havens of the Aegean coast of Asia Minor, where three broad
configurations were to emerge—Acolians in the north, lonians in the centre,
and Dorians in the south. No doubt many of these early immigrant communi-
ties mixed with the local populations—the Lycians, the Legians, and the
Carians—to absorb new genes and new cultures. For many, particularly the
lonians, it was a time of experiment and energy from which emerged the carli-
est and most vital manifestations of Greek culture. Significantly, according to
tradition, it was in one of the lonian cities, either Smyrna or Chios, that the
epics with which we associate the name of Homer were first written down.

The Greek enclaves on the coast of Asia Minor provided an interface between
the Acgean and the rising power of the Persians in the east, buffered for a while
by powerful inland states such as the Lydians. They were thus able to benefit
from the culture of their eastern land-locked neighbours, while at the same
time becoming part of the maritime world of the Mediterranean.

The Levantine coast (now Syria, Lebanon, and Israel) also developed a cul-
turally distinctive maritime interface—peopled by communities collectively
knoyvn as Phoenicians whose cities, Byblos, Tyre, and Sidon, became famous in
trading ventures reaching to the Atlantic. To the east of them lay the demand-
ing empires of the Assyrians and Babylonians, who provided the motivation
behind much of the Phoenician commercial enterprise.

Both the castern Greeks and the Phoenicians were to have a significant
impact on barbarian Europe, and the subjugation, in the sixth century sc, of
both coastal interfaces, Greek Asia Minor by the Persians and Phoenicia by the
Babylonians, was further to influence the course of barbarian development.

It was during this period that new cultural configurations were developing
on the Pontic Steppe along the northern shores of the Black Sea. The area
had long been settled by communities who depended upon the horse and
horse-drawn vehicles to enable them to maintain a degree of nomadic mobili-
ty over the huge tracts of steppe which they inhabited. Archacologically these

il


