THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

raw metal components, as scrap, or as finished weapons and implements—
moved in increasing quantity, and over greater distances, than before. The evi-
dence derives almost entirely from the distribution of artefacts, but includes
rare examples of shipwrecks, such as the vessels carrying French-made imple-
ments to Britain which foundered off the cliffs of Dover and in Saltcomb Bay in
Devon in about the tenth century se. Artefact distributions are at best a surro-
gate for understanding the movement of people and can offer only a crude indi-
cation of direction and intensity of contact. Thus the Sicilian-made shaft-hole
axe found in the sea near the southern British port of Hengistbury is not neces-
sarily evidence of a Mediterrancan adventurer visiting Britain in the eighth cen-
tury BC. At best it indicates the geographical extent of contact and hints at the
complexity of the social processes involved.

The copious evidence for the movement of bronze in the Late Bronze Age
also raises the question of the movement of skilled people able to judge the
quality of metal and, in some remote areas, to introduce the technology of
extraction or manufacture. The individuals who cast a range of bronze items at
Dun Aengus on the Aran Island of Inishmore off the Galway coast and at Jarl-
shof on Shetland 170 kilometres north of Scotland must have travelled in small
boats with their metal, beeswax, refractory clay, and skills.

It would be possible to call upon an array of varied evidence to demonstrate
local interactions, but sufficient will have been said to show that, for at least
three millennia, the communities of the Atlantic had maintained a degree of
contact such that many aspects of culture, especially belief systems and techno-
logical skills, were held in common. The contact would mostly have been
between adjacent communities, with few venturing further afield, but in this
way, from one neighbour to another, ideas would quickly have spread.

The principal change which can be discerned within this longue durée is an
intensification in the volume of bronze moving through the system after the
beginning of the Late Bronze Age. It is difficult to discern an internal cause for
this, and the simplest explanation would be to suppose that the metal-rich
Atlantic zone was being increasingly drawn into the bronze-consuming world
of the Urnfield and Nordic cultures. Here, in central and northern Europe,
bronze was used up in great quantities as furnishings for the burials of the dead
and as gifts to the chthonic deities whose worship demanded the deposition of
valuable items buried in pits in the ground or thrown into bogs, springs, and
rivers. As the Atlantic communities began to respond to the demand, develop-
ing new networks of communication along which the metals could pass,
aspects of Urnfield material culture, learned from the contact, began to be
absorbed into the Atlantic system-——so too did the belief systems which re-
quired the deposition of wealth on a considerable scale. The Late Bronze Age
was, therefore, the time when the technology and ideologies of the central
European Urnfield world were introduced to the communities of the Atlantic
fringe.

The Mediterranean states will have been made aware of the potential of the

148


===== PAGE 170 (index-173_1.jpg) =====
Xilla Above: A cup f

f iron
is, Charante, France. Fourt

Style of Celtic art

de la Charante,



===== PAGE 171 (index-174_1.jpg) =====
P
-
o
Ve
;
i 3 N
g7 e
S KSR T IR RER T
f o = —
—— \


===== PAGE 172 (index-175_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC

AGADE

Atlantic zone by the Phoenician enclave at Gadir (Cadiz), and it was probably
as the result of Phoenician activity that Atlantic bronzes were carried into the
western Mediterrancan. Their appearance, scattered though they are, reflects
an increasing awareness of the potential of the Atlantic zone among the com-
munities of the Mediterranean.

Within this sweep of territory, extending over 30,000 kilometres from the
Straits of Gibraltar to the Shetlands there developed a number of distinctive
cultural zones (Fig. 18) which, because of their geographical proximity, main-
tained close links and shared socio-cultural attributes.

Oceupying a central place in this Atlantic continuum were
the sea-girt peninsulas of southern Ireland, south Wales, south-
west Britain, and Armorica. It was a region composed, for the
most part, of old hard rocks heavily mineralized, its Atlantic
face washed by the Gulf Stream, which ensured a mild but
damp climate. What encouraged continued contact between
these four promontories was the attraction of their metal re-
sources, principally copper, tin, and gold.

A second system included the coastal region of Gaul,
between the Seine and the Rhine, and the adjacent shores of
Britain from Hampshire to East Anglia. Here the most evident
medium of exchange was bronze, either in the form of finished
items or as scrap, but behind this archacologically visible mate-
rial no doubt lay exchanges in many other commoditics.
Further to the north cultural similarities suggest that the com-
munities of north and west Scotland, the Northern and Wes-
tern Isles, and the north-eastern part of Ireland formed another
closely related zone.

South of Armoricait is possible to distinguish two distinctive
cultural zones: the north-west corner of Iberia, including Gali-
cia, Asturia, and Cantabria, with its highly localized settlement
types and copious supplies of gold and tin; and a south-western
zone, stretching from the Tagus to the Lower Guadalquivir,
characterized in the Late Bronze Age by engraved stelae and
burnished pottery. This region rich in copper and silver.

: 800-200 BC

The Development of the Atlantic Communiti

The attraction of Atlantic metal resources is apparent from the Massilliot
Periplus. In it is a rel ands in the Atlantic called the Oestrymnides,
‘rich in the mining of tin and lead. A vigorous tribe lives here, proud-spirited,
energetic and skilful. On all the ridges trade is carried on.” The account des-
cribes the native boats made of leather hides sewn together, and goes on to loc-
ate the Oestrymnides at two days' sailing distance from Ircland, which would
ther Cornwall or Brittany. Avienus says that the Tartessians

rence to

place them in

149

XIV Fu
from a vehicle grave at
Berru, Marne, France. Early
fourth century s, Musée
des Antiquités Nationales,
Saint-Germain-en-Laye,
Paris.

119 Carved stela, possibly of
Late Bronze Age date, from
Ategus, Andalucts, Spa

The central part of the scene
illastrates a two-wheelod
vehicle pulled by paired
quadrupeds with another
standing by. At the battom
are human figares, one
group of whom scems to be
dancing. The scene is proba
bly part of a funcrary ritual
Musco Municipal de
Cérdoba.


===== PAGE 173 (index-176_1.jpg) =====
THE €

MUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

traded with this region, as later did Carthaginian merchants after the sea-way:
had been explored by the Carthaginian Himilco about 400 kC in a journe:
which, he claimed,

ook four months.

Alater explorer, the Massilliot ship’s master Pytheas, braved the Atlantic sea-
ways in about 320 &, venturing even further. His reference to Belerion—the
Land’s End peninsula—suggests that he may have been following the estab-
lished tin route, but he gives no further details. However, the Sicilian historian
Timaceus, who was roughly contemporary with Pytheas and may indeed have
used Pytheas as a source, recorded some additional facts which survive now
only in a confused and muddled account in Pliny's Narural History. An island
called Mictis is mentioned where tin is produced and the Britons sail to it in ves-
erwork covered with hide. Much the same story is taken up by
Poseidonius (quoted by Diodorus Siculus), though the island is called Ictis and
oined to the mainland at low tide. *Here the merchants buy the tin from the
natives and carry it over to Gaul and after travelling overland for about thirty
days they finally bring their loads on horses to the mouth of the Rhone' ( Hist. 5.
22). It is not immediately clear which route was being used, but the general
assumption is that the tin was shipped either to the mouth of the Loire, where
the port of Corbilo was said to be located, or to the Garonne. Both estuaries,

sels of wi

Strabo tells us, were ports of embarkation for Britain.

The tin trade described by the ancient sources is best seen as a specific devel-
opment of the long-established Atlantic exchange network, manipulated now,
either directly or indirectly, by Mediterrancan entrepreneurs, It need have

changed little except for the introduction into the native systems of concepts
and possibly artefacts from the Mediterranean region. On this matter the
archaeological record is not particularly informative but two small bronze fig
urines, one from Sligo in Ireland, the other from Aust in the Severn Estuary,
may be imports from southern Spain. There is also a close similarity between
fibulae from Mount Batten in Devon and Harlyn Bay in Cornwall and types
manufactured in Aquitania and the Garonne estuary region. In addition to th
some at least of the comparativ e number of Greek and Cartha,
coins discovered in Armorica and southern Britain are likely to have been con
temporary imports.

The Mediterrancan penetration of the Atlantic systems seems to have
focused particularly on the tin-rich areas of Armorica and Cornwall with a pro
bable extension to southern Ireland where gold was to be had. But that there
was also direct interest in the tin and gold production of Galicia is indirectly
indicated by the extension of Phoenician activity along the Portuguese coast
and the discovery of Mediterranean trade goods, including Greek pottery, ata
number of coastal locations in the north-west.

Whilst the Mediterrancan world was learning how to exploit the Atlantic
trading system, the complex network of exchange which linked the western

lar nian

European communities to the innovating core of the Urnfield ¢lite in western

rope continued to develop in the subsequent Hallstatt C period

central

150


===== PAGE 174 (index-177_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

(€750~600). The distribution of the typical Hallstatt C slashing sword, known
after the type site of Gundlingen, together with the winged chapes which
adorned the ends of the scabbards, give a vivid impression of the direction and
intensity of these contacts (Maps 3 and 4). The more common bronze version
is found in the Low Countries and northern France between the Rhine and the
Seine, in the Loire Valley, and in the basin of the Garonne. It also occurs quite
widely in Britain, where the form is copied and modified by local craftsmen,
and is scattered across the face of Ireland. In Britain and Ireland the majority of
the swords from known findspots occur in rivers, lakes, or bogs in just those
locations where weapons were customarily deposited throughout the latter
part of the Bronze Age.

A range of other élite equipment in bronze echoes this pattern: bronze caul-
drons and buckets (both with distinctive British/Irish varieties), bronze horse
gear, razors, pins, and other trinkets. In other words the full panoply of élite dis-
play, except for the ceremonial vehicle, finds its way, selectively, into the hands
of the western communities. What is particularly interesting is that the élite
items were incorporated in different ways into the cultural systems of the west.
In the Low Countries, for example, swords and horse gear were deposited with
cremation burials under barrows according to the indigenous rite. In the
Garonne-Tarn region, urned cremations accompanied by personal jewellery
or weapons were also normally buried beneath low barrows continuing indige-
nous practices. In Britain and Ireland, on the other hand, deposition was usu-
ally in watery contexts and less often in hoards. Evidence of this kind
demonstrates not only how the alien goods were adopted and adapted by the
western communities who received them, but also how extensive were the
mechanisms which bound the polities of the Atlantic zone to those of the Hall-
statt C chiefdoms of west central Europe. The network, which had developed
throughout the Late Bronze Age, was now being even more intensively
exploited. The view, frequently expressed up to the 1960s, that the distribution
of Hallstatt C material represented invasions or migrations of warriors from
the centre is not supported by any of the evidence and is best disregarded.

In the subsequent Hallstatt D period (c.600-450 8C) there was a significant
change in the pattern and intensity of interaction. One possible explanation is
that developing contact between the Late Hallstatt élite and the Mediterranean
states diminished the desire to maintain traditional links with the west, or,
more precisely, such links as there were were refocused.

The range and quantity of centrally produced (or inspired) Hallstatt D goods
in northern France, the Low Countries, Britain, and Ireland dropped dramati-
cally. In Britain, apart from a single antennae hilted sword and a bronze caul-
dron, the only distinctive items are a small number of bronze daggers which
were avidly copied by local craftsmen and were mainly deposited in the
Thames. Similar daggers from the Low Countries and northern France suggest
that these display pieces were items of exchange in the sixth and fifth centuries.
The same pattern can be seen in Aquitania, where native craftsmen copied the

151

120 Facing, above Small
bronze figure identified as
coming from Stigo’ in
Ireland, considered to be an
import from Iheria in the
fourth to first centuries be.
National Museum of
treland, Dublin

121 Facing, below: Small
bronze figure found at Aust,
Glowcestershire, England.
The style of the figure is
Therian, the chosest parallels
coming from Andalucia,
dating to the fourth or thisd
century ne. The Aust figure
may have arrived in Britain
via the Atlantic trading sys»
tems. British Muscum,
London,


===== PAGE 175 (index-178_1.jpg) =====
Stamped pottery from
Brittany dating to the fifth
century be.

No. 1 from Pludual, Cotes
&Armor: no. 2 from
Morbihan;
Roz-an-Tré-
10, 4 from

Mané Rouillard, Morbihan;

no. 5 from Saint-Martin
des-Champs, Finistére.

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

Hallstatt D dagger form, the local version in
this region accompanying the dead to the
grave. Once again the alien concept was ad-
opted and adapted technically and culturally
| to suit indigenous demands.
/ In Armorica the picture was altogether dif-
/ ferent. Items of Hallstatt C type are noticeably
absent and there is little evidence of signifi-
cant contact with west central Europe, but in
the late sixth and early fifth centuries the situ-
ation changed. Imported metalwork is rare
(not least because soil conditions are not con-
ducive to preservation), but two notable
items, a fragment of a bronze oinochoe from
a cemetery or shrine at Tronoén and a deco-
rated dagger scabbard from Kernavest-Qui-
beron, represent alien élite goods. Even more
dramatic is the development of a highly dis-
tinctive style of stamp-decorated pottery
which belongs, in general, to a broad category
of stamped pottery found throughout central
Europe in the fifth and fourth centuries (Map
24). The inspiration for the Breton vessels
probably came from Late Hallstatt metal-
work, like the Kernavest scabbard, but the
origin and chronology of the style is still
unclear.

If it is accepted that the Breton stamped
wares reflect intensified links with west central Europe (and the argument is by
nomeans decisive), then this could be seen asa reflection of the growing impor-
tance of the Armorican peninsula in providing access to the metal-producing
Atlantic system. It would be easy from here to transport metals along the Loire
to the western extension of the Late Hallstatt chiefdom zone in Burgundy. The
development of the Loire corridor would also explain the rise of Bourges as an
¢élite centre (see p. 65).

Having once established a direct route to Brittany, which occupied the cen-
tre of the Atlantic system, the peninsula appears to have remained a zone of
innovation into the Early La Téne period. The intensity, and indeed the nature,
of the contacts are difficult to characterize, but the remarkable ceramic art of
Armorica in the fourth century (Figs. 82 and 122) is witness of the willingness
and ability of local potters to accept the most up-to-date ideas developed by
metalworking craftsmen in the Marne and Moselle regions. The inspiration
which the potters received would almost certainly have been through the med-
ium of imported metalwork. Of this virtually nothing has survived in the

152


===== PAGE 176 (index-179_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

archacological record except a fragment of helmet found at the sanctuary of
Tronoén, but it is possible that the metal vessels, which were eventually depos-
ited in a cist burial in Wales at Cerrig-y-Drudion, could have passed through
Brittany. Tronoén has also produced the only Early La Téne swords, albeit
fragments, so far found in Brittany.

Northern France, the Low Countries, and Britain received a flow of goods
throughout the Early La Tene period. The rite of élite burial distinguished by
two-wheeled vehicles, which had developed in the Marne and Moselle regions
in the late fifth century, was adopted in four peripheral areas: in the Lower Seine
Valley, the Ardennes, the Haine, and Yorkshire. What initiated these trends is
difficult to say, A population movement is one possibility but is by no means
required of the evidence, which could equally well be explained by supposing
that local élites with access to the knowledge of vehicle burial (and possibly the
vehicles themselves as diplomatic gifts) simply adopted the fashion as a means
of self-aggrandizement. Once established it would have generated its own
momentum. Other gifts that passed through the exchange network included
daggers, swords, shields, and spears, as well as trinkets such as fibulae. All were
copied by native craftsmen and accepted into the local repertoire,

123 Abvwe: Curvilinear decorated pots from Brittany of
the fourth century ne. From Blavet, Hénon, Cotes
d'Armor.

124 Right: The bronze vessels from Cerrig-y-Drudion,
Cleyd, Wales reconstructed here (incorrectly) asa
hanging bowl. The decoration is highly reminiscent of
styles of pattery decoration in Brittany but the basket-
work cross- hatching within the designs may indicate
British manufacture. National Museum of Wales,
Cardiff.



===== PAGE 177 (index-180_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

Itis simplest to see the distribution of these Early La Tene items as reflecting
a continuation of the systems which had been established in the succeeding
Hallstatt D period. In other words, the pattern of contact in northern France,
the Low Countries, and Britain continued little changed over a period spanning
the sixth to fourth centuries. Thus the British craftsmen, who in the sixth cen-
tury began to modify imported Hallstatt D daggers, and were the heirs of the
makers of British Hallstatt C swords, were themselves succeeded by craftsmen
who responded to new styles of La Tene daggers when they arrived on the
island.

For Ireland during this time, the archaeological evidence suggests an alto-
gether different picture. In the Hallstatt C period it is apparent that the island
played a significant part in the exchange networks which bound the Atlantic
communities together and received an inflow of élite items from west central
Europe. The fact that Ireland is specifically named in the Ora Maritima is an
indication of its prominence. But from the beginning of the sixth century until
the end of the second century sc there is little trace of any contact with conti-
nental developments, and indeed the dendrochronological evidence shows
that over large areas forests were regenerating—an observation suggestive of a
dramatic decline in population. In other words, after the sixth century Ireland
seems to have become a backwater for almost halfa millennium,

The folk movements which were underway by the beginning of the fourth
century in west central Europe disrupted the long-established networks of
exchange which had developed throughout Europe. In Brittany, north-western
France, the Low Countries, and Britain there isa marked diminution in the vol -
ume of centrally produced goods and ideas absorbed into local repertoires.
Each of the regions developed its own distinctive culture in relative isolation
and itis not until the second century that extensive networks of exchange begin
to develop once more.

Archacology and Language

The archaeological evidence from Atlantic Europe for the period from 1300 to
200 BCallows three phases to be recognized. In the first, from ca300to ¢.600, the
Atlantic system of exchange was at its most dynamic. During this time the
entire system north of Galicia was actively bound in a complex network of rec-
iprocal exchange to the Urnfield and Early Hallstatt systems of west central
Europe. Meanwhile in the south of Iberia the Phoenicians and possibly the
Greeks were creating ties with the Mediterrancan system.

In the second period, from ¢.600 to ¢.400, the intensity of the east—west con-
tacts slackened noticeably, with Ireland now left outside the system, This dim-
inution may have been caused by a reorientation with new networks
developing through Brittany, linking the West Hallstatt chiefdoms more
directly with the metal-rich core of the Atlantic zone. It was at this time that
Mediterranean interest in Atlantic products increased.

154


===== PAGE 178 (index-181_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

In the third and final period, c.400-c.200, with much of Europe in the throes
of disruptive migratory movements, the Atlantic system was left to develop
without significant external contacts, except for a continued, and possibly
increasing, interest by Mediterranean entrepreneurs,

There can be little doubt that the intensity and duration of these reciprocal
exchanges between western central Europe and the communities of the Atlan-
tic fringe led to a convergence in many aspects of culture. Similar élite goods
were accepted over large areas, technologies and craft skills were shared, and
decorative symbols may well have been understood by communities separated
by considerable distances. There was also a common attitude to the gods, who
required valuable equipment to be deposited in their honour in rivers, bogs,
and lakes or raw materials to be buried in the carth. Taken at this level, the
degree of cultural similarity over huge territories is remarkable. It is a similarity
born of long and intimate contact. All parts of the Atlantic zone as far south as
south-western Iberia shared this common culture until the sixth century sc.

So much for archacology: we must now turn to language. That the Atlantic
communities spoke Celtic is well established. The generally accepted view is
that the Celtic spoken in Ireland was an early form of Celtic—Goidelic or Q-
Celtic—whereas in the British Isles and France the later Brythonic or P-Celtic
was dominant. If the difference between Q-Celtic and P-Celtic is significant
and if that difference has chronological implications, then one reasonable
interpretation would be that Ireland received its Celtic language roughly at the
same time as the rest of the Atlantic zone but did not share in the development
or spread of the later form of P-Celtic which replaced the earlier linguistic form
in France and the British [sles.

The possible correlation of archacological and linguistic data is self-evident.
‘The question which arises is whether the network of cultural interrelationships,
so clearly demonstrated for the entire region in the period c.1300-600, provides
a suitable context for the Celtic language in its more archaic form to spread
from its west central European homeland to the Atlantic zone without having
toinvoke the deus ex machina of ‘invasion’ or ‘folk movement'? The acceptance
of élite systems and their symbolism and the sharing of complex technologies,
as well as religious concepts and practice, imply ease of communication. It is
not at all unreasonable 1o suppose that it was within this context that the Celtic
languages became widely adopted in the west.

This view, of the progressive celticization of the Atlantic province, could also
help to account for the development of an early form of Celtic in the Iberian
Peninsula. If Celtic was the lingua franca of the Atlantic sea-ways, it may have
been from the western coasts of Iberia that the inland Celtiberians developed
their language and the Lusitanians theirs, Herodotus may not have been so mis-
informed when, in the fifth century, he wrote that the Celts were the most west-
erly people in Europe next to the Cynetes (who occupied southern Portugal).

After the re-formation of the sixth century, the cultural isolation of Ireland
will have ensured that the more developed form of Celtic did not penetrate toa

155


===== PAGE 179 (index-182_1.jpg) =====
125 The village at Goulvars
on the Quiberon peninsuba,
Morbihan, Brittany. The
rectangular style of house-
buiding is typical of the 13
Téne period in Armorica

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

degree sufficient to alter the established forms, whereas in Britain and Armor-
ica and the rest of western France, two more centuries of continuing contact
with the innovating areas of west central Europe brought in new forms enhanc-
ing and modifying the Celticness of an already thoroughly celticized zone.

Regional Variations among the Communities of the Atlantic Zone

In spite of the broad similarities which bound them, the communities of the
Atlantic fringe exhibited a considerable cultural variety. Some aspects of this
are worth considering to provide an indication of the diverse social systems
which could exist in peripheral areas away from the main centres of innovation
and movement.

The metal-rich core pro
sula, south-western Britain
peninsulas surrounded by the Atlantic—share many physical characteristics in
common, and aspects of their culture suggest that links between them were
maintained throughout much of the formative
period (1300-600 8c), though little is known of
southern Ireland after this.

Culturally the communities of the Armorican
peninsula provided the focus, especially after the
sixth century e, when close contacts developed
h west central Europe and, as we have argued
above, the symbols and grammar of Celtic art
were readily adopted by local craftsmen. It was
during this time that a distinctive Armorican
Iron Age culture developed among a population
concentrated more in the coastal zone than in the
centre of the peninsula. The principal settlement
form was the enclosed farmstead of family or
extended family type, comprising one or more
small subrectangular houses. Some larger and
more complex sites may represent a hierarchic
structure. A frequently occurring feature is the
souterrain—an elongated chamber or series of
chambers tunnelled out of the soft bedrock and
entered from the surface through one or more
shafts. The function of souterrains is much

des a good starting-point. The Armorican penin-
buth Wales, and southern Ireland—all essentially

debated, but the explanation most likely lies in a
storage use, possibly involving a belief in the
power of the chthonic deities to preserve and
protect stored commodities, The distribution of
souterrains, which have been found in consider-
able number in Brittany (largely because tractors

156


===== PAGE 180 (index-183_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

o e
127 Above Souterrain at Lavban en Kerfourn,
Marbiban, Brittany. These underground chambers

may have been used for storage, perhaps of seed grain.

136 Left: The defended sette-
ment of Saint- Symphoricn.
Cotes d'Armor, in Brittany,
was discovered during road-
building and has been the
scene of a major excavation.

introduced particularly in the post-war period caused the hollowed chambers ;5.5 complex multiperiod
to collapse) provides a striking impression of the extent of the classic Armor-  site of the La Tenc period.

ican Iron Age culture and its sharp boundary with the rest of France.
The second settlement type is the defended coastal promontory, generally

Amang the finds was a stone
<arving of a god playing a lyre.

128 Below: The distribution

called cliff-castles (PL. XVII). These occur in some numbers, particularly oo 0w Gy
around the northern and western coasts. Little is known of their internal fea-  reflects the disssibution of

tures or chronology, but it is clear from Caesar’s accounts of his Armorican

Knvowen sctilements of the
Middle La Téne period, since,

campaign in the mid-first century b that cliff-castles were widely used at that  where cxcavation has been
time. While it is possible that their substantial defences endowed them witha 972 sufficint scale, they are

usually found 10 be a compo-

higher social status than the more normal farmsteads, there is no direct evi-  nentof rural settlements.

dence that this was so and a ritual function is
not unlikely.

Another highly distinctive aspect of the
Armorican Iron Age is the prominence of
standing stones (stelae) scattered widely in
the landscape. Of the many hundreds which
are known, two types can be distinguished:
tall pillar-like stelae and shorter hemispheri-
cal stones, All were worked with some care to
create smooth surfaces, the tall types being
columnar, faceted, or ridged. A few, most
notably the low stela from Kermaria, near
Pont-L'Abbé, and the tall example from
Sainte-Anne-en-Trégastel, were carved with
curvilinear and rectilinear designs, a remin-
der that many of the others could also have



===== PAGE 181 (index-184_1.jpg) =====
ve:dak
Ker

existin Hrittany, but

agh carefully finished,

are usually plain.

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADF

been decorated with paint. The function of the stelae is unknown, but their
prominence in the landscape may suggest that they served as religious foci or
boundary markers, perhaps both. The distribution of these stones is closely

to define west

comparable to that of the souterrains, the two features serving
ern Armorica as a culturally distinct zone.

The culture of the south-western peninsula of Britain reflects that of Armor
ica but has its own defining characteristics. There is a preference here for pot
tery decorated with curvilinear motifs, though the British south-western
decorated wares are less exuberant and refined than contemporary Breton
wares.

The settlement pattern has close similarities to that of Armorica, with defen

»unds

ded enclosures for the family or extended family (in Cornwall called *

and cliff-castles around the coasts. In Devon the rather more elaborate multi

vallate enclosures, usually sited on hill slopes not far from a permanent water

supply, might suggest a different kind of social organization, perhaps based on

the importance of cattle. Underground stone-built storage chambers, called
lent to the Breton souterrains.

fogous, are the Cornish equiva
Much the same array of settlement types occurs across the Severn Estuary in
south Wales, extending across to the south-west of the country. Here the
enclosed homestead type is characterized by Walesland Rath (rath being the
generic name for this type of enclosure in Wales and Ireland ), where total exca
vation demonstrated a simple arrangement of circular houses in the centre with
storage buildings around the periphery, the individual structures being re
placed on a number of occasions. The material culture of the south Welsh Iron



===== PAGE 182 (index-185_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

Age communities is not prolific but includes
the sporadic use of decorated pottery import-
ed from across the Severn.

The one noticeable difference between
the British south-western
communities is the absence of stelae, though
the possibility must be allowed that in Britain
a similar socio-religious function may have
been served by wooden pillars no longer ex-
tant.

Ireland remains something of a myste:
this period, but certain characteristics link it
culturally to the communities of the south-
west. Cliff-castles, all undated, occur around
all the coas
and a small number of carved stone stelae
have been recovered, the best known and
most elaborate being the Turoe stone from
Co. Galway, One structural feature, which
has been much debated, is the chevaux de

Armorica and

, particularly the south and west,

frise—a zone of close-spaced angular stones
laid out in advance of the walls or ramparts of
fortified enclosures. One of the most dra-
matic example of this from Ireland is at Dun
Aengus on the Aran Island of Inishmore (Pl
XVIla and b). Other examples are known in
the west of Ireland, north-west Britain, and
south Wales, and are closely comparable to
sites in north-west and central northern Iber-
ia. It is tempting to suggest an Atlantic origin
and dissemination of this style of defens
definition, but the angular stones may be

nothing more than local manifestations of a
more widespread system employing sharp-
ened wooden stake

of which has been excavated at Castell Hen-
I

an impressive example

in south-west Wales,

T'he great stone-built fort of Dun Aengus is
one of a group of stone forts focused on the
Aran Islands and the nearby limestone up-
lands of the Burran. Although similarities in
style were conditioned by the use of limestone
for building, these western stone forts must
reflect a strong local cultural tradition as well

130 Aerial view of Clovelly Dykes, north Devon, England. The many
lines of roughly concentric arthworks are typical of the ‘multiple-
enclosure’ forts of south-western Britain, Some of the enclosures may
1 cattle.

have scrved as paddocks

131 The landscape of south-west Wales is scattered with small defended
enclosures called raths, Walesland Rath in Dyfed is one of the few exca
vated examples. The central area was occupied by a succession of circu
lar houscs, while around the perimeter were arranged four-past storage
structures. Occupation spanned the third and second centurics ne



===== PAGE 183 (index-186_1.jpg) =====
Granite

1

carved in a curvili

Co, Galw

which suggests a possible
date in the first century e

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

as the abilit

 of society to mobilize labour on a massive scale. Little dating evi
ept at Dun Aengus where it can be shown that

thessite began its lif
massive stone walls were erected,

ensiv

cttlement in the Late Bronze Age before the

The northern extension of the Atlantic zone leads to the west and north
coasts of Scotland and the Islands—the Inner and Outer Hebrides, the Ork-
neys, and the Shetlands, This zone
shares a cohesive culture which can be
called that of Atlantic Scotland. Its
most notable characteristic is the pro-
liferation of massive stone-built settle-
ments—brochs or duns—in which the
desire to monumentalize by grandiose

building has gone far beyond the need

for physical comfort or even protec

tion. These structures are clearly a
statement symbolic of the social status
claimed by the lineages who occupied
them. At what stage this monumental

ization began is not easy to define, but
there is sufficient evidence now avail-
able to show that the structural tradi-
tion can be traced back to the Late
Bronze Age. The material culture of
Atlantic Scotland is limited and indig-
enous in the extreme, suggesting a high
degree of cultural isolation throughout

most of the Iron Age, though there is

evider

ce of developing contact along
the Atlantic sea-ways in and after the
first century b,

This brief review of the north-west-
ern part of the communitics of the Atlantic zone has shown something of the
variety of cultural responses reflected in the archacological evidence. The clear
impression given is of a cultural focus in Armorica linked to mainstream
European development with increasing regionalism and increasing isolation
the further one ventured north

The one essential characteristic binding these
communities together was a similar social structure based on the family unit or
lineage group. There may, in some regions, have been variations in status or
communal works such as hilltop enclosures

pla

perhaps defining the meeting
s of the larger community at annual festivals when flocks and herds

needed to be gathered in, but evidence for large agglomerations of population
is noticeably absent.
The castern part of Britain, from the Yorkshire Moors to the Thames Valley,

160


===== PAGE 184 (index-187_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

presents a very varied landscape, Broch of Mousa, Shetland Broch of Dun Troddan, Inverr

divided by a number of large rivers
flowing castwards into the North
Sea. Within this zone a broad cul-
tural similarity can be recognized,
although regional variations per-
sist. In the ninth and eighth cen-
turies a glimpse of an élite society is
provided by large, circular, defen-
ded enclosures containing substan-
tial circular houses. A little later,
from the fifth to the third centuries,
the distribution of locally made
daggers and anthropoid hilted
swords, centred within this zone, is
a further indication of a privileged
class served by able and inventive
craftsmen.

In the late fifth, or early fourth century, the élite occupying the area of the
Yorkshire wolds, just north of the Humber, adopted the burial practice of their
peers in northern France and the Low Countries—the burial of a two-wheeled
vehicle and an array of personal gear with the dead man or woman and the def-
inition of individual burials by placing them within square ditched enclosures.
The practice, once introduced, persisted at least into the second century se.

Continued contact with the Continent brought to Britain items of metal-
work decorated in the Vegetal Style. These were copied and developed by local
craftsmen producing prestige goods for the élite of eastern Britain throughout
the third and second centuries. For the most part it was the equipment of the
warrior that was selected for embellishment, in particular sword scabbards like
those from Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, Standlake, Oxfordshire, the River With-
am near Lincoln, and the éite burial at Wetwang Slack in the Yorkshire wolds.
A few decorated shields are also known, including the bosses from the Thames
at Wandsworth and from the River Witham. It is also possible that the deco-
rated pony cap from Torrs in Scotland, together with the engraved drinking-
horn terminals, which had at some stage been incongruously attached to it,
were products of eastern British craftsmen. Most of these valuable products
were dedicated to the gods of rivers, but a few accompanied prominent people
to their graves. Among these we may include, in addition to the Wetwang Slack
sword, a decorated canister, also from a grave at Wetwang Slack, and anarmlet,
from what was probably a female burial, found at Newnham Croft in Cam-
bridgeshire. The corpus of the surviving material is impressive and leaves little
doubt that the socially varied communities of eastern Britain were dominated
by élites served by skilled craftsmen in much the same way as their continental
neighbours.

161

133 The brochs of Scotland
and the Scattish islands
reflect a local tradition of
house-building in which the
simple idea of the circular
house has been transformed
into a massive walled
structure sometimes of
tawer- like proportions far
outgrowing defensive nceds.
Brochs may have originated
as carly as the fifth century
»e and may have continued
1o develop at least 1o the first
century me.


===== PAGE 185 (index-188_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

The

status after the eighth centu

ettlement pattern, as it is at present known, throws little light on social
. Enclosed homesteads are known but a number
of much larger and more straggling settlements have been discovered, suggest-
ing sizeable communities, of village-like proportions and complexity. Settle-
ments in the Yorkshire wolds have been found to extend for considerable

distances ays.

along the principal track
The social systems in eastern Britain, with their élite gear and nucleated set-
tlements, contrast noticeably with those of the west, but are far more closely
paralleled by those of northern France and Belgium, where the distribution of
prestige warrior metalwork, the vehicle burials of the Lower Seine, the Haine,
and the Ardennes, and large open settlements like Haps in the Netherlands
reflect, though with re; rall structure.
A third area of Britain—the central southern zone—presents an altogether

onal differences, much the same ove

different picture to that of both the west and the east. Its most obvious charac-
teristic is the dominance of hill forts—hilltops of some 5-10 hectares enclosed
by substantial defences sometimes multivallate and with elaborate entrance
carthworks. The hill-fort-dominated central southern zone extends from the
south coast, between Devon and East Sussex, in a band of decreasing width to
north Wales, with outliers spreading into Northamptonshire. It is a region of
different landscapes and encompasses a number of communities demonstrat-
ing their separateness through different styles of pottery decoration: the com-
mon link between them is the hill fort,

it Bronze sword
nd at Wishech
shire, England. The
decoration isa rather faltering
British version of the Vegetal
Style and probably dates ta the
third century s<.. Wisbech and
Fenland Museum Cambridge
shire.

134 Tap.
scabbard
Cambrid,

135 Lt ind below lefe: Bronze
sword scabbard sheath from
the River Thames at S¢
lake, Onfordshire, Eng
showing the Vegetal Style of
decoration. The basketry
cross-hatching on the upper
mount is typically British. Late
fourth or carly third century

s Ashmolean Muser

Oxford.
136 Right: Bronzc shield
boss from the River Thames

tiddlesex,
ation

at Wandswonh,
England, The de
resobves itself into two birds
with wings stretched. It is
brilliantly executed ina
combination of repoussé and
incmion. Second century ne?

162


===== PAGE 186 (index-189_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

Although a number of excavations have shown
something of the variety within the general *hill-
fort’ category, some generalizations can be offer-
ed. The earliest of the forts at present known,
dating to the end of the Bronze Age, concentrate in
the Welsh borderland, but by the sixth century the
phenomenon has spread to the Wessex region,
extending into the south-cast (Surrey and Kent)
by the third century. In some areas, such as central
Wessex, it is possible to show that over time the
number of forts in active use decreased, but the
strength of those surviving, and the intensity of
their use, was enhanced.

Functionally, the forts seem to have served their
region in a variety of ways, providing central
places where the different needs of the community
could be articulated. Some, like Danebury and
Maiden Castle, were intensively used for settle-
ment, production, and storage on a large scale.
The extent to which the forts were designed to pro-
vide defence is debatable. The enclosing earth-
works and the structure of the developed gates
would certainly have offered efficient protection, but there may well have been
an element of display involved. However, that some were actually defended and
attacked is clear from the excavated evidence. At Danebury, for example, large
numbers of sling stones were hoarded on at least two separate occasions, in the
third century and again in the carly first century, and after both phases there is
evidence of burning at the gates, the last burning marking the abandonment of
the fort. Other forts offer similar evidence, and at Bredon Hill in Gloucester-
shire the mutilated remains of bodies were found at the entrance.

The hill forts are only one aspect of the settlement patterr
contemporary countryside was densely scattered with farmsteads, many of

Elsewhere the

which showed continuous occupation over centuries. Most of the farmsteads
seem to have been of family size and were therefore probably centres of single
estates practising a mixed farming with a heavy emphasis on cereal productior
afew larger agglomerations indicate a scatter of more substantial communit
Apart from the massive nature of the hill forts, there is very little evidence in
this central southern zone for a hierarchy or an élite, but the heavy emphasison
the intensive working of the land and the production of grain might indicate
that status was measured by land or livestock. In the second century the two-
wheeled chariot, represented by decorated bronze fittings for the vehicle and
the bronze harness attachments for the horses, becomes far more evident.
Whether the vehicle was simply an indication of status or a means of warfare is
impossible to say, but most likely it served as both. The virtual absence of elab-

163

137 Pany cap with drinking
horn terminals attached
from Torrs, Dumfries and
Gallaway, Scatland, as origi
nally found. The decorated
terminals of the two drink
ing horns had been attached
atsome date to a repoussé-
decorated pony cap. Though
the context of the curious
marriage of these disparate
items is uncertain, the style
of both clements is typical of
that of a skilled school of
craftsmen working in east
crn Britain in the third or
second century nc. National
Museum of Scotland,
Edinburgh



===== PAGE 187 (index-190_1.jpg) =====
The Iron Age hillfort of

hite He
ncarby. The hill

xquently ¢
its gates was

The hill f

orate weaponry is at first sight puzzling, but it could be that this was simply a
reflection of the fact that prestige weapons were not consigned to rivers or buri
als within this region and therefore stood less chance of survival.

The developments in central southern Britain are in marked contrast to
those in the west and east. One possible explanation is that the central southern
zone was a border region between the metal-producing west and the warrior
élites of the cast. The instability of such a region, perhaps under threat of con-
tinuous raids from the eastern zone, may well have led to the need to develop
and maintain fortifications,

Similar hill-fort-dominated zones dating to the fourth to second centuries
can be seen elsewhere in west central Europe, especially in the region between
T'rier and the Rhineland, where again it could be their border position, between
the fully developed La Tene warrior élites in the south and zones with totally
different socio-economic systems to the north, that created a 'marcher’ society.

The western coastal area of France from the Charante southwards to the
Pyrences has produced a varied range of archaeological evidence for the period

200 B, ILis, however, clear from the distribution of Late Bronze Age tools

and weapons that the region played a significant part in the networks of

exchange during this period, and the Garonne-Gironde axis provided an easy

164



===== PAGE 188 (index-191_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

route linking the Atlantic to the Mediterranean. It was certainly an important
corridor for the trans-shipment of tin after the sixth century.

In the sixth and fifth centuries a distinctive Aquitanian culture can be recog-
nized, largely from the evidence of cremation cemeteries. Grave goods inclu-
ded local versions of anthropoid hilted swords and fibulae with elongated
springsand ornamented feet. Although both types are local products, they were
evidently inspired by widely distributed west central European forms. What is
more significant perhaps are the gencral similarities which the Aquitanian
forms share with those south of the Pyrences in north-west and north central
Iberia. The two regions must have shared systems of exchange linking them
through the western Pyrenean passes.

The discovery of a remarkable series of gold torcs in Haute-Garonne, Tarn,
and Gironde, dating to the third and second centuries, decorated in an exuber-
ant form of plastic art, has been linked to the possible migration of Tectosages
intheaftermath of the Celtic expedition into Greece. Whatever the origin of the
inspiration for these pieces (and Middle Danube parallels can be quoted), they
are likely to have been of local manufacture, utilizing gold extracted from the
gold-rich sands of the Tarn Valley. The social context of these items is obscure,
but their discovery in hoards suggests a religious motivation for their deposi-
tion, although this does not exclude their production under élite patronage.

To what extent these western French communities had become celticized it
is debatable, but the fact that Caesar regarded them as ethnically separate from
the Celts of Gaul may suggest that they retained a strong indigenous identity
throughout.

Although the Iberian Peninsula has already been considered separately in
Chapter 7, it is necessary here to offer
a brief comment on the cultural
development of the north-west—the
area of present-day Galicia. The area
is rich in metals, in particular tin and
gold, for both of which it became
famous in the ancient world. Its
cultural links were, traditionally,
Atlantic, although during the first
millennium a series of closer contacts
developed with the Celtiberian peo-
ples of the interior. The socio-eco-
nomic system seems to have become
warrior-based, the most evident set-
tlements being the fortified hilltop
enclosures, known locally as castros
which gave the culture its archaco-
logical name—the ‘Castro culture’.
Stone-built round houses, which

139 In central southern
Britain, in a zone spreading
from the south coast of
England to the north of
Wales, strongly defended
hill forts dominated the tron
Age landscape in the period
from the sixth to first cen-
turies ne. Not all hill forts
were in use for the whole
time. After the carly third
century a few sites rose to
dominance while the rest
were abandaned. The hill-
fort-dominated zone may
have been a ‘marcher” area
between the Atlantic com-
munities of the west and the
mare socially complex com-
munitics of the castern zone.



===== PAGE 189 (index-192_1.jpg) =====
dominate the settlement pattern, and the use of chevaux de frise around some of
the castros, have been used to stress the cultural links between Galicia and the
northern areas of the Atlantic province, but how significant these structural
similarities are it is difficult to judge. Recent work on the Castro culture has
en

shown it to have been an indigenous development rooted in the second mill

nium. Many settlements originated in the period 1000-700 1 at a time when

Is were strong. From about

maritime links generated by the exchange of me
700 BC Phoenician influences show that the indigenous culture was being pro
gressively integrated into Mediterrancan systems. After the middle of the mil
lennium regional differentiation becomes apparent among the settlements,
ts an increase in popula

and at some the extension of their boundaries sugg
tion. Parallel with this it is possible to detect an increase in items of both male
and female prestige and the appearance of rather closer cultural links with the
communities of the Meseta which might be related to the folk movements of

the Turduli and Celti towards the north-west referred to by Strabo, Increasir

contact with the Roman world, particularly after the campaign of Decimus
Brutus in the region in 138-6 sc, provided the stimulus for further change. It

an to take on

was at this time that those settlements in favoured positions be;

166


===== PAGE 190 (index-193_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

distinctly urban characteristics, with well-defined street grids and public open
spaces.

Taken together, the array of disparate evidence for the communities of the
Atlantic zone, presented in summary here, emphasizes the highly individual
nature of each of the major regions within this broad Celtic-speaking zone.
Maritime links bound them in systems of reciprocal exchange which waxed and
waned as internal and external stimuli had their different effects. Superim-
posed upon this was a network of cast-west contacts, linking the Atlantic to the
developments of the La Téne cultural heartland of west central Europe. Each of
the Atlantic cultures responded in an individual way.

167


===== PAGE 191 (index-194_1.jpg) =====
9
The Communities of the
Eastern Fringes

Tue classical sources and the archacological evidence taken together leave lit-
tle doubt that by the end of the fourth century s Celtic communities were well
established in the lands of the Middle Danube and some groups seem to have
moved eastwards from the Tiza into Transylvania. As a generalization we can
regard the Carpathian mountain range, which swings in a broad arc south then
west to join the mountains of the Balkans, as the effective limit of expansion by
the mid-fourth century. The Iron Gates—the gorge through which the Danube
flows from its middle reaches to the lower part of its valley, where it now defines
much of the border between Serbia and Romania—were still, at this stage,
closed to Celtic expansion.

Eastern Europe before the Celts

The cultural development of eastern and south-castern Europe beyond this
mountain barrier was complex. The most potent force was, of course, that of
the Greek city states, which, standing together in the period 513-479 8¢, had
managed to halt the western advance of the Persian armies under first Darius
and later Xerxes. This episode, which saw a massive Persian presence in the
Lower Danube Valley for much of the forty years of threat, had a significant
effect on the development of Thracian society. The Persian Grand Army moved
with its treasure and its finery and an entourage of craftsmen who could serve
the needs of the élite. Inevitably the Thracians were to learn much from the
example: eastern values and the accompanying symbolism were adopted and
adapted by the local craftsmen to serve their own masters, and there emerged a
highly distinctive regional style of aristocratic metalwork in silver and silver-
gilt, blending ideas derived from the east, from the nomadic cultures of the
steppe, and from the Greek cities which fringed the western shores of the Black
Sea, Thracian art, in its fourth-second century manifestation, was the eastern

168


===== PAGE 192 (index-195_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

at indigenous artistic

counterpart of Celtic art and is its equal as one of the gr
developments of late prehistoric Europe.

The Greek cities of the western Black Sea coast provided an interface with the
Greek world through which a wide range of raw materials and products could
be exchanged. After the Persian incident, trade intensified: corn, slaves, furs,
and metals flowed out of the Thracian hinterland and wine and prestige goods
of Greek manufacture flowed in. As Thucydides noted: ‘you can accomplish
nothir

with the Thracians without giving gifts." It was a situation with many
a, and it was during this period
an to become archacologically recognizable through

parallels in the west Mediterrancan and in Iber
that the Thracian élite be
their elaborate burials richly furnished with the accoutrements of status and

wealth. No doubt the competition engendered would frequently have
expressed itself in raiding and more extended bouts of warfare. The impression
given by the designs on the prestige metalwork of the period is of an élite inti-
mately involved with feasting and hunting. These pursuits—statements of
nobility and prowess—were as much a part of the Thracian social fabric as the
raid was of the Celtic,

By the beginning of the fourth century sc it is possible to identify distinct

ac of cen-

‘kingdoms” and their kings. One of the most powerful were the Odry:
tral Thrace, whose close links with Athens, both political and economic, con
tributed to their strength and ascendancy. In the early fourth century one of

their kings, Kotys, scems to have been acknowledged by other lesser polities as

having extensive powers beyond the territorial limits of his own kingdom.

169

41 Bridal decoration in
silver-gilt from Letnitsa
Bulgaria, showing a
Thracian rider wearing scale

armour. The rider’s b
tied in a topkn
das Thr

in Th
warrior,

god,isa ,
Thracian art. Narod
Archeologteski Museg,



===== PAGE 193 (index-196_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITINS OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

The broadly defined Thracian culture, within which at this stage we can
include other specific groups named by the classical authors such as the Getae
and Dacians, extended northwards along the coast of the Black Sea into Mol-
dova. Beyond this, stretching around the northern shores of the Black Sea in the
vast expanse of the Pontic Steppe, a somewhat different cultural configuration
was developing which can, for convenience, be called Scythian or Scythio-
Sarmatian, We saw earlier (pp. 46-7) that this region had been occupied by
nomadic and semi-nomadic groups known to the classical writers as Cimme-
rians but that during the eighth century sc they were coming under increasing
pressure from groups living on the Volga who, historically, were called Scyth-
ians. The picture given by Herodotus of the replacement of the Cimmerians by
the Scythians is a considerable oversimplification and may have been little
more than the movement of a Scythian élite westwards into the northern Pontic
zone. What is clear, however, is that the cighth and early seventh centuries were
a period of upheaval and folk movement which resulted in hoards of dislocated
horse-riding warriors, distinguished as Cimmerians and Scythians by contem-
porary sources, pouring through the Caucasus southwards into Asia Minor,
where they became involved as mercenaries and freebooters in the struggle
between the Assyrians and the kingdom of Uratu.

By the sixth century the ‘Royal Scyths’ were firmly established in the Crimea
and in the steppe zone to the north and, through the Greek colony of Olbia at
the mouth of the Bug, had developed close contacts with the Greek world, with
which a lively trade developed. The highly skilled craftsmen working through-
out the length of this Greek interface produced a range of exquisite items, most
notably in gold, for the Scythian élite who were buried in the great royal tombs
such as Chertomlyk and Solocha. When Herodotus visited Olbia in about 450
he was able to observe Scythian culture at first hand and to provide a vivid
description of the complex processes involved in the burial of the Royal Scyths.

Scythian culture developed a distinctive and original character in the sixth
and fifth centuries, and many aspects of this northern Pontic culture spread
south, to be absorbed into the eclectic culture of the Thracian tribes, and west
into the Middle Danube region, especially into the Great Hungarian Plain and
Transylvania. These influences may have been the result of the migratory
movements of populations or élites or simply of intensifying systems of ex-
change. By the fifth century, however, many of the communities of the Great
Hungarian Plain, extending westwards along the Danube into Slovakia, had
adopted a style of horse-riding and a material culture which bore many simi-
larities to that of the people living around the Black Sea fringe.

The pattern of folk movement from the east, reflected in the carly movement
of Scythians from the Volga to the northern Pontic zone, was repeated again at
the end of the fifth century sc, when the Sauromatae (Sarmatians), who
emerged as an ethnically identifiable group in the region east of the Don,
moved westwards into Scythian territory. One classical text, Pseudo-Hippo-
crates, suggests that this expansion took place about 4oo sc. Certainly, by 338

170


===== PAGE 194 (index-197_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

another text, Pseudo-Scylax, could refer to the Syrmataias the tribe now occu-
pying the old Scythian lands west of the Don. That the transference of power
was not peaceful is suggested by the archacological evidence, which shows that
a number of Scythian settlements on the Lower Dnieper were destroyed in the
late fifth or early fourth century. Whilst there may well not have been a
significant replacement of population, it is clear that the Scythian élite—the
Royal Scyths—were ousted from much of the territory; some retained power in
the Crimea while others established themselves in the Dobruja at the Danube
mouth, whence it seems that forays were made deeper into Thracian lands.
What emerged in the Pontic Steppe was a complex culture deeply rooted in
indigenous systems, which can best be called Scytho-Sarmatian.

The political and social upheaval around 400 sc dislocated the economic
systems which sustained the port city of Olbia. Cut off from its traditional cus-
tomers on the mid-Dnieper and from the exchange networks which brought
raw materials from the Urals and beyond, the city suffered a decline, though it
maintained control of the coastal strip between the estuaries of the Dnieper and
the Dniester,

The growth of Macedon asa significant political and military force in the area
began in the mid-fourth century B¢, when, under Philip 11 (359-336), Mace-
donia began to expand northwards into Thrace. Expansion continued with
Alexander, who, in 335, crossed the Danube to lead his armies against the Getae,
and it was on this occasion that his famous meeting with the embassy of Celtic
chieftains took place. After Alexander’s departure to the east in 334 the Mace-
donian interest in the north continued, and in 331 (or 326) detachments of
Scytho-Sarmatians came to the aid of Olbia, when Zopyrion, one of Alexan-
der’s generals, then governor of Thrace, mounted an attack on the now weak-
ened city.

In the political and social chaos which followed Alexander's death in 323 the
Macedonian hold on Thrace collapsed. The power vacuum was to some extent
filled by the rise of the Odrysae, who, under their king Seuthes 111, made good
use of their central position in the Balkans to command the trade which was
intensifying with Greece, particularly along the Maritsa valley route. Even so
the sudden demise of the power of Macedon, which had to a large extent held
south-castern Europe in a state of stable equilibrium, created an entirely
changed situation which, as we saw in Chapter 4, provided new opportunities
for Celtic expansion.

Asia Minor before the Celts

In Asia Minor the ethnic and political situation was no less complex. In the
period of turmoil which followed the collapse of the Mycenaean system,
migrating communities moved from Europe into Asia Minor, trekking across
the Hellespont or sailing the Acgean. It was in this way that the early Greeks
established their colonies along the Aegean coast. One of the migrating groups

7


===== PAGE 195 (index-198_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

was the Phrygians, whose homeland is thought to have been Thrace. Itis possi-
ble that they were involved in the destruction of Troy Vla and the Hittite cap-
ital of Hattusa some time about 1180 ¢ at the time of their settlement in north
central Asia Minor. They became archaeologically recognizable by the middle
of the eighth century, and in the period ¢.725-675 the Phrygian empire had
developed into a regional power, under King Midas, with its capital at Gordion.
The stability of the area was undermined by the conflicts between Assyria and
Uratu and by the incursions of horse-riding hordes from the Pontic Steppe (the
Cimmerians and Scythians) at the beginning of the seventh century. At this
time Gordion was destroyed by Cimmerians and the power of the Phrygians
collapsed. Many factors—the rise of the Greek cities on the west and north
coasts, the land-locked nature of their territory, the comparatively poor quality
of the land, and the eventual dominance of Persia—contributed to the Phry-
gian decline. By the third century they were regarded as effete, good only at
embroidery and best used as slaves.

The degree of stability which had been maintained in Asia Minor by the
Persian domination after the mid-sixth century was finally shattered by
Alexander’s ‘liberation’ and by the chaos of rivalries left in the wake of
Alexander’s death. After ¢.330 BC Asia Minor, like the Balkans and the Pontic
zone, was destabilized to such an extent that migrant Celts would find little
resistance and even, in some regions, a misguided welcome. This opportunity,
together with continued population pressures in their homelands, were two of
the more significant factors that encouraged the eastern advance of the Celtic
tribes.

In Chapter 4 we outlined the main historical framework for the Celtic pres-
ence in the east. Populations and bands of fighting men moved comparatively
freely over large territories. They came from the mid-Danube region, and,
while identified as Celts, or more usually Gauls or Galatians, by the historical
sources, they are likely to have been of mixed ethnicity. Intermarriage and alle-
giances will undoubtedly have made the Celts who moved into the Balkans and
Asia Minor significantly different from those who a century earlier had pene-
trated the Po Valley. None the less, since they were recognized as *Celtic’ by
their contemporaries and, some at least, appear to have spoken a Celtic lan-
guage, we may legitimately consider them here.

Celtic Settlement in Thrace

The Celtic expansion from the Middle Danube was underway in the early third
century. In 281 8¢, in a major thrust to the south and cast, the capital of the
Odrysac at Seuthopolis was sacked and the way was clear for the historic attack
on Delphi. It wasin the aftermath of the expedition into Greece that a Celtic set-
tlement, the kingdom of Tylis, was established in Thrace. According to Poly-
bius, the kingdom was not far from Byzantium, but a later source, Stephen of
Byzantium, says that Tylis was further away near Mount Balkan. Itis difficult to

172


===== PAGE 196 (index-199_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

offer greater precision and the thin scatter of items of La Tene metalwork are no
sure guide. Indeed it is possible that throughout the third century the Celts
maintained a high degree of mobility within a much larger territory. Certainly
in 227 Bc one group had reached Chersonesos (Gallipoli) but was defeated by
Antigonos Il At any event, Celtic power in Thrace was finally destroyed in
213-12 BC.

Since the Celtic presence in Thrace lasted for only two generations, it is
unlikely to have left any substantial trace, nor is there any reason to suppose
that its material culture was closely comparable to that of the west central
European La Tene culture, The few La Tene objects recovered from Thrace
need be little more than gifts arriving by exchange from the west, and their dis-
tribution does not necessarily reflect that of the Celtic group.

One outstanding discovery does, however, deserve mention. At Mezek, in
the valley of the Maritsa River, which
runs south through the Rhodope
mountains, a settlement and cemetery
were discovered. The principal tomb
was a tholos type, with a circular cor-
belled chamber (the tholos proper)
reached by a long passage or dromos,
the entire structure being embedded

within a substantial tumulus, The style

142 Map to illustrate the
principal areas of Celtic set-
tlemnent in eastern Europe
and Asia Minor and the
neighbouring political or
tribal entitics.

143 The Thracian tholos
somb of Mal-tepe, Mczek,
Bulgaria, It was possibly
reused for a Celtic burial in
the third century ne.



===== PAGE 197 (index-200_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

of the burial is Thracian, its architectural refinement being the result of tech
niques coming ultimately from the Greek world. The original burial, dating to
the end of the fourth century sc, is likely to have been of a Thracian chieftain
but the tomb was later used for a second burial in the third century. The new
interment was accompanied by a group of decorated bronze fittings appropri-
ate to a chariot, which may well have been placed in the grave. Stylistically the
fittings are Celtic and may be paralleled by contemporary material found in
Bohemia and Moravia,

The Mezek “chariot burial' nicely points up the problem. Was it the burial of

a Celtic chieftain, his lineage laying claim to territorial legitimacy by choosing

%
3

Bulgaria. Narodniis Arches

Sol



===== PAGE 198 (index-201_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

an indigenous royal tomb for the interment, was the chariot a diplomatic gift
from a Celt to a Thracian, or was it a Celtic chariot captured by a Thracian?
There is, of course, no certain answer, but the questions highlight the complex
of relationships which could have occurred between Celt and Thracian in the
region during the third century. The absence of any systematic body of archae-
ological evidence and the lack of anything more than a few passing references in
contemporary sources make it impossible to assess the nature or extent of
Celtic settlement in Thrace or of its impact on Thracian culture.

Celts in the Pontic Region

That groups of Celts moved cast of the Carpathians into the Ukraine and
Moldova now seems tolerably certain, since their presence is specifically
mentioned on a marble inscription from Olbia put up in honour of
Protogenes. Itis dated to the late third or early second century e but may

well be referring to events carlier in the third century—a time of great
instability in the region. It records that “T'he Galatians and Scirians had
formed a union and had assembled large forcesand intended to arrive in the
winter’ and that “The Thisamatiae, Scythians and Saudaratae, who were like-
wise afraid of the Galatians’ savagery, sought shelter within the city walls.
Protogenes, one of the wealthy inhabitants of the city, received his honour for
paying for the building of a defensive wall along the river and port side of the
city, which had previously been unprotected.

Additional evidence of a Celtic presence is provided by a number of Celto-
Illyrian hydronyms and place names such as Gallitsyja and Galich found in
western Ukraine which are suggestive of settlement on a more permanent basis
than that of merely a roving war band.

The archaeological record is also informative, producing an array of La Tene
metalwork, mainly brooches and bracelets, of which a significant number came
from Scythian graves. Among the more diagnostic of the metalwork are items
belonging to the Duchcov-Minsingen phase dating from the mid-fourth cen-
tury to roughly the middle of the third century, spanning the period of the his-
torical migrations of the Celts into Greece and Asia Minor.

If we accept the presence of a Celtic population in the Moldova-Ukraine
region, the question arises from which direction did they come? One possibil-
ity is that it was a northwards move from Thrace, but it is equally possible that
the penetration came from the west from the area of Celtic settlement in Tran-
sylvania. At any event it was probably the state of disruption caused by the
Sarmatian destruction of Great Scythia that provided the opportunity. Another
group which took advantage of these troubled times was the Bastarnae, proba-
bly of Germanic origin, who are first mentioned in the region in the later third
century. It may have been they who constrained the opportunities for a further
and more intensive Celtic penetration.

The nature of the Celtic presence in the northern Black Sea littoral is unclear.

175

145 Bronze coin of the
Bosporan king. Leucon 11,
Although the symbols are
the subject of debate. the
shicld resembles the Celtic-
style bong shicld. The use of
these weapons as symbols
could reflect an unrecorded
vent when Celtic peoples
came into contact with the
Bosporan kingdom.
National Museum, Moscow.


===== PAGE 199 (index-202_1.jpg) =====
146 A plague of bronze inset
with enamel from Kerch,
Ukraine. First century
showing the influence of

pted from Celtic

s ad
art, Ashmolean Museum
Oxford.

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

names and the Protogenes inscription show that
|
could imply at least a degree of assimila-
tion in the confused Sarmato-Scythian culture of
the region. The Celtic swords in Scythian

The plac
remained a cohesive entity, but the archacologi

graves, like that at Verkhnjaja Tarasovka in
the Lower Dnieper Valley and the Celtic
fibulae and bracelets from other Scythian
cemeteries, may well represent the ex-

change of weapons and women between

reek town

te

The familiarity of the
dwellers with Celts is also suggested by a
number of terracotta figures depicting

Celtic w

Further to the east, east of the Sea of

aponry.

Azov including the basins of the rivers Don
and Kuban, a scatter of ‘Celtic” items has
been found, most notably Etrusco-Celtic hel-
mets of Montefortino type. Although these were

probably made in the fourth and third centuries,
most have been found in Sarmatian graves of the second
and first centurie:

the processes by which the helmets were transported, and the;
items need not imply a Celtic presence. [t may be relevant, hower
geographers considered Mcotide (the Sea of Azov) to be the frontier of the
Celtic world. In such a situation it would not be unreasonable t«
helmets and other prestige items such as bronze vessels were the result of gift
exchange between Celtic communities and their Sarmatian neighbours on the
other side of the s
Sufficient will have been said to show that there are grounds for accepting a
Celtic presence in the north Pontic region, but the nature of the community, its
size, and its longevity as a distinct ethnic entity remain uncertain. Only one set-
tlement, at Bovshev on the Dniester, and one grave, at Zalesye in the Pripyat
estuary near Chernobyl, may reasonably be regarded as 'Celtic’. The remaining

. Various explanations may be offered for
v and the other

er, that Greek

argue that the

thirty or forty items are all stray finds. In a minimalist view, the Celtic presence
need have been no more significant or long lasting than the Thracian kingdom
of T

lis.

The Galatians

The Galatians of Asia Minor provide an interesting example of a Celtic com

munity which retained an ethnic integrity after its initial settlement in the early

third century s¢ and yet appears to have adopted the material culture of its new
homeland wi

h little or no reference to that of its roots.

176


===== PAGE 200 (index-203_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

The history of the Galatians has been outlined above (Chapter 4), and need
not be repeated here. Suffice it to say that the historical view records the move-
ment of some 20,000 people, only half of whom were fighting men, into Asia
Minor in 278-7 B¢ under the leadership of Leonorios and Lutorius. They came,
weare told, at the invitation of King Nicomedes of Bithynia to serve the king in
his conflicts with his neighbours, After fifty years or so as mercenaries in the ser-
vice of different factions and as raiders in their own right, they were eventually
settled in Phrygia in the vicinity of Ankara.

Livy, no doubt following Polybius, gives an account of the migrants at the
time of their arrival. They were divided into three tribal groups, all speaking the
same language, the Tolistobogii, the Trocmi, and the Tectosages, each of which
laid claim to a territory over which to rampage and raid. It was in this mobile
phase of their occupation that they provided mercenary services for any Hel-
lenistic potentate prepared to employ them. After a major defeat in about 232
8¢, the Celtic peoples were compelled to concentrate in Phrygia. The Tecto-
sages were already in the Ancyra region and the other two tribes were settled
nearby. An agreement with the Pergamene king, Attalus, recognized the Celts”
right to the land they now occupied in return for an agreement to cease raiding
the Pergamene kingdom and other spheres of Pergamene interests. In reality
this left only the lands to the cast as legitimate for punitive exploitation and it
was probably at this time that some territorial expansion took place east of the
River Halys. The agreement with Attalus marks the point at which Galatia—the
land of the Galatac—became a recognized territory, and we can henceforth
speak of the inhabitants as Galatians.

The Galatians by this time must have become ethnically mixed. The élite lin-
cages may well have been descended from the original migrant families of two
generations past, but the indigenous population of Phrygia will now have been
absorbed, if only in a subservient position, into the Galatian state.

The social structure of the Galatians seems to have remained little changed
from its earlier form. According to Strabo, each of the three tribes was divided
into four parts, which were called tetrarchies, and each had its own overall
leader (tetrarch) to whom a judge, a war leader, and two subordinate comman-
ders were answerable. A council, representing the twelve tetrarchies and com-
posed of 300 men, met at Drunemetom. Among its duties was to pass judgment
on murder cases. The system has interesting similarities to the organization of
the Celtic Gauls described by Caesar. There is the same separation of leadership
between a civil and a military leader and the recognition of a distinct judicial
class. A supreme council was also a feature of Gaulish society. Originally it
seems to have met once a year under some form of Druidic authority in the ter-
ritory of the Carnutes, but Augustus refounded it as the Consilium Gallarium
and required it to meet at Lugudunum on 1 August at the Altar of Rome and
Augustus. The name of the meeting-place of the Galatians’ council—Dryne-
metum—also implies a religious focus, since nemeton is a Celtic word for a
sacred place and is suggestive of a controlling religious authority.

7


===== PAGE 201 (index-204_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

How long this essentially Celtic system of social organization lasted among
the Galatians is difficult to say. Strabo, writing about the turn of the millen-
nium, specifically mentions that in his time power had passed first to three
rulers, then to two, and finally to one, in contrast to ‘the organization of Galatia
long ago’. This may have been as a result of Roman encouragement or duress,
but there are clear signs of change carlier. In 189 s we learn that Ortagion, a
chief of the Tolistobogii, wanted to unite the Galatians under his leadership,
but his attempts met with little success and a few years later a number of social
units are mentioned each with its own chiefs.

A century later the old system of tetrarchs still appears to have been in force.
The glimpse is provided by a treacherous incident orchestrated by Mithridates
V. In 88 BC, in a bid to take control of Asia Minor, he effectively destroyed
Galatian opposition by inviting the Galatian chiefs to meet him at Pergamum,
Of the sixty who turned up all but one were massacred. Those who did not
attend were picked off in individual attacks, only three tetrarchs managing to
escape.

The massacre of the tetrarchs may well have been the deciding factor in
bringing about far-reaching changes in the old social order. Not only did it
greatly weaken the ruling élite, but it showed that divided leadership was
inefficient in dealing with the problems of the rapidly changing world. Perhaps
even more important was that the incident drove the Galatians to the Roman
side, and it was in the interests of the Roman state to encourage a more unified
leadership.

Very little is known of Galatian ritual or religion. The existence of Druneme-
tom is a hint that sacred locations existed, presided over, perhaps, by a Druidic
priesthood, but there is no direct evidence of this, What is clear is that the
indigenous cults were assimilated by the Celts. Such was the case of the worship
ofthe Mother Goddess at Pessinus. In the late second century sc the high priest,
known by the ritual name of Attis, was a Celt whose brother, Aiorix, bore a
characteristically Celtic name. It is evident from a later, Roman, inscription
that half the college of priests at the temple were of Celtic birth. The sanctuary
at Pessinus was, however, a thoroughly hellenized place. Strabo refers to it as
having been built up by the Pergamene kings ‘in a manner befitting a holy place
with a sanctuary and also with porticoes of white marble’. Yet, in spite of their
acceptance of native cults and practices, the Galatians could revert to a more
typically barbarous practice, as they did in 165 B¢ when, following the conclu-
sion ofa war with Eumenes, the most important of the prisoners were sacrificed
to the gods, while the less favoured were dispatched by spearing. In this incident
we may be witnessing a resurgence of the Celtic belief in the need to sacrifice the
best of the spoils of war to the deities.

The fighting practices of the Galatians were, as we have seen, vividly depicted
by Pergamene artists in an array of victory monuments. Their fierceness and
ferocity in battle were legendary. In 189 sc a Roman army, under the command
of Cn, Manlius Vulso, moved against the Tolistobogii and Trocmi and won a

178


===== PAGE 202 (index-205_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

decisive victory at Olympus near Pessinus. Livy gives a detailed account of the
engagement using the occasion 1o provide his reader with a series of familiar
stereotypes about the Celt as a fighting man (Hist. 38. 19~30). Thus from the
mouth of the commander, in his set-piece pre-battle oration, comes direct ref-
erence to incidents from the Celtic invasion of Italy in the fourth century. That
Livy should emphasize the comparison in this way shows, at the very least, that
he was acutely aware of the similarities of the two peoples, even though he may
have overstressed or oversimplified them. Yet even allowing for these potential
distortions, several interesting points emerge. The Galatians, it appears, were
still using the rather archaic type of Celtic shield, ‘long, but not wide enough for
the size of their bodies and. ... flat in surface’, and they still adopted the practice
of fighting naked, a point vividly described by Livy: “Their wounds were plain
to see because they fight naked and their bodies are plump and white since they
are never exposed except in battle,” There is no reason to suppose that these
observations were not specific to the event. Together they show that patterns of
behaviour in battle had changed little, in spite of nearly a century of experience
in Asia Minor. Even so, Livy could report the Roman commander as saying:
“The Gauls here are by now degenerate, a mixed race, truly described by their
name Gallogrecians,”

In his brief review of Galatian territory, Strabo ( Geog. 12. 5) makes no men-
tion of towns, The Trocmi, he says, have ‘three walled garrisons’, Tavium,
Mithridatium, and Danala; the Tectosages command the fortress of Ancyra;
while the fortresses of the Tolistobogii are Blucium and Peium, the former
being the royal residence of King Deiotarus, and the latter where he kept his
treasure, Strabo’s use of ‘fortress” is clearly intended to imply that these sites
were not towns in the classical sense. He does, however, say that Tavium was
‘the emporium of the people in that part of the country” and he uses the same
word in describing Pessinus in the border region to the west of Galatia. By
‘emporium’ he was presumably seeking to stress the market functions of the
two places. If we can accept Strabo's distinctions, the implication is of an essen-
tially non-urban society focused on a series of fortified enclosures and with an
economy articulated at a few trading centres, at least one of them sited at a
major shrine. The towns of the Phrygian indigenes were left to decay. By the
time of the Roman annexation in 25 8¢, Ancyra, Pessinus, and Tavium were
sufficiently important to become the capitals of the three tribes.

Several Galatian fortresses have been located. Blucium has been tentatively
identified with the fortifications partially excavated at Karalar 35 kilometres
north-west of Ankara. A nearby tomb with a funerary inscription showing it to
have belonged to King Deiotarus (son of the king of the same name who was an
ally of Rome) provided some assurance of the identification. Pefum, the second
of the Tolistobogii strongholds mentioned by Strabo, is thought to lie in the
meander of the river Girmir Bay at Tabanlioglu Kale. The deeply incised river
provides the site with more than adequate protection on three sides, while the
neck of the promontory is defended by a wall protected by multiangular bas-

179


===== PAGE 203 (index-206_1.jpg) =====
147 The treasury of the
Galatian king Defotarus is
situated at Pefum in
Anatolia on a ridge
protected on two sides by a
Soop in the valley of the
River Siberis. The masonry
of the fortifications is typical
high-quality late Hellenistic
work.

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

tions built in fine Hellenistic masonry. The strength of the defences would be
entirely appropriate toa fortress guarding the king’s treasure. The quality of the
architecture of Peium (if correctly identified) is a reminder that the Galatian
élite were well able to use Hellenistic building techniques, even if their fortified
sites were typical Celtic *hill forts” in size and location,

The material culture of the Galatians has not been extensively studied, but
sufficient is known to suggest that indigenous styles and technologies
adopted from the beginning. Distinctive items of La Tene metalwork are at pre-
sent limited to four bracelets and twenty brooches from the whole of Asia
Minor. While a few items appear, as would be expected, in Galatia and on the
Aegean coast, the densest concentration lies in the south-cast of the country in
Cappadocia, a pattern which might suggest that Celtic raiding parties ranged
over a wider territory than might be supposed from the classical sources,

The Galatians provide a fascinating example of a Celtic people who main-
tained a high degree of ethnic identity over several centuries, even though they
must have represented a minority in their territory. Their persistence as a rec-
ognizably * people must be the result of élite dominance. As a powerful
warlike group, thrown together by migration and periods of mercenary service
they were easily able to dominate the effete Phrygian inhabitants of the land in
which they eventually settled without feeling the need for recourse to material
symbols of their ethnici

were

The Celts in Egypt

The Ceits who burst onto the Hellenistic world in the 280s and 270s Bc were, as
we have seen, largely absorbed into the armies of the contending dynasts of Asia
Minor, but the renown of the Celt as a fighting man was already well known in
the castern Mediterranean. It is hardly surprising, therefore, to learn of Celts in
Egypt as early as 274 nc serving in the army of Ptolemy 11 Philadelphos, In all

180


===== PAGE 204 (index-207_1.jpg) =====
XV Aerial view of the hill fort of Las Cogotas on the edge of the
northern Meseta in the province of Avila, Spain. The site was first
nt received its first fortifications
s) in the fifth century
sure was added Later. Clo

were found in the 2 osure while the

contained evidence of pottery manufacture.



===== PAGE 205 (index-208_1.jpg) =====
XVI The Celtiberian hill fort of Numantia, in the Ebro valley in north-castern Spain, had
taken on the appearance of a Mediterranean town by the beginning of the second century
sc. with a regularly laid out street grid defining insulac of closely packed houses, The settle-
ment stood out against Roman advances and was eventually taken by Scipio in 13y B¢ after 2
long ssege during which time, it is said, the inhabitants were forced 10 resort to cannibalisr



===== PAGE 206 (index-209_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

probability they were recruited from the horde that broke into Asia Minor in
278, but that they may have arrived in Egypt some time before is notimpossible.
They soon proved to be unreliable allies. Believing that Ptolemy was caught in
an impossible position between his half-brother Magas in the west and
Antiochos 1 in the east, they rebelled, buoyed on by the prospects of the wealth
10 be gained by looting the cities and sanctuaries of Egypt. They had, however,
misjudged the situation: Ptolemy reacted swiftly, driving some 4,000 of the
mercenaries onto an island in the Sebennytic branch of the Nile, where,
Pausanius tells us, “They perished by hunger and each other’s swords’.

This was by no means the end of the Celtic presence in Egypt. It was normal
in third-century Egypt for troops, no longer needed for active service, to be
settled and given land to cultivate, usually in the Fayum. These cleruchs (*sleep-
ers’) were, in theory, expected to retain their military skills and to be immed

iately available when called upon. Among the cleruchs living in the Fayum was

adetachment of Celts whose presence is demonstrated by

1 wooden shield, pre-

served in the dry desert conditions. In 217 8¢, when Egypt was threatened by

(L

't Wooden shield
of Celtic rype, well preserved

148 Farlke

1 the desert atmosphere of
the Fayum oasis, Egypt.
where a group of Celtic
mercenaries were given land
in the third century i
Services des Anti

Cairo

149 Lefe: Small terracotta

figure of a Celtic warrior
from Egypt. Th
ue, British Muscum,

London,


===== PAGE 207 (index-210_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

the Seleucid king Antiochos I11, Ptolemy IV called the ‘sleepers” to his defence.
Among the 50,000 or 50 troops who were eventually amassed were 6,000 'Gauls
and Thracians’, of whom 2,000, of unspecified nationality, were newly re-
cruited, Some of the cleruchs who took part were, according to Polybius, the
sons of original settlers. In the event the Ptolemaic force won a resounding vic-
tory at Raphia in Gaza. It is tempting to think that the small terracotta of a
resplendent Gaul found in Egypt proclaims Gaulish successes at this time.

Gauls still retained their identity throughout the second century sc and their
presence is recorded from time to time: they helped besiege the rebel town of
Abydos in 186-5 and were among the garrison resident at Hermopolis Magna
towards the end of the century, Whether these detachments had families in the
Fayum and returned there when not on military duty is difficult to say, but that
other communities existed is implied by funerary stelae naming Gauls and
sometimes depicting Celtic shields, found in the necropoli of Alexandria. One
wonders whether the old fighters living in the desiccating atmosphere of the
Fayum oasis in the mid-third century told their incredulous children stories of
the fertile Danube plain or the pine-clad slopes of Mount Parnassos remem-
bered from the time when they had camped in its shadow waiting to pillage
Delphi.

182


===== PAGE 208 (index-211_1.jpg) =====
10
Religious Systems

In describing the Irish and Welsh vernacular sources for Celtic religious
beliefs, the Irish scholar Proinsias MacCana, in a memorable phrase, referred to
the ‘fertile chaos of the insular tradition”. ‘Fertile chaos’ perfectly characterizes
the enormously rich array of partial and confusing evidence available to us
from a wide variety of sources reflecting on the religious beliefs of Celtic peo-
ples. It may fairly be said that there is more, varied, evidence for Celtic religion
than for any other aspect of Celtic life. The only problem is to be able to assem-
ble it in a systematic form which does not too greatly oversimplify the intricate
texture of its detail.

The Greek and Roman texts provide a number of pertinent observations, but
these are at best anecdotal, offered largely as colourful background by writers
whose prime intention was to communicate other messages. The most com-
prehensive account is that given by Caesar in his description of Gaulish society.
Though useful, its summary nature could lead to confusion if it was not bal-
anced against other evidence. Similarly the immensely rich vernacular litera-
ture of the Insular Celts must be approached in the awareness that Celtic
religion was not necessarily consistent across Europe, nor was it unchanging.
The very ‘Insular’ nature of the sources and the fact that what comes down to us
has passed through the emasculating filter of a Christian monastic perspective
demand particular care when such material is used as a basis for generalization.

The archacological record produces an equally varied mix of data. Icon-
ography in the form of stone and wood sculptures is not particularly plentiful,
but, if Celticart in its broader sense is taken into account, as it must be, the vari-
ety of symbols and images is greatly multiplied. In addition to this we have evi-
dence for belief systems embedded in burial practice, in a great number of
votive deposits, and in religious structures such as shrines and shafts. From this
huge mass of disparate evidence, sometimes distorted and usually partial, some
semblance of the religious systems of the Celts can be reconstructed.

183


===== PAGE 209 (index-212_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Itis necessary to stress at the outset the complexity of the problem. Three fac-
tors, in particular, contribute to it: the substratum of religious beliefs coming
through from the earlier prehistoric period; the relative isolation of certain
regions for periods of time; and the impact of rapid social and economic change
on those communities in closest proximity to the Mediterrancan world.
Together these factors will have created a disparity of belief systems taking,
from the general gene-pool of concepts, different combinations of characteris-
tics and emphasizing them in different measure. Yet behind this variety, broad
structural similarities can be detected.

There can be little doubt that religious concepts, prevalent in the second mil-
lennium e, appear, albeit dimly, in some of the beliefs and practices of the
Celtic communities in the later first millennium, yet there does seem to have
been a significant transformation across much of Europe some time in the sec-
ond half of the second millennium. Simply characterized, the carlier systems,
with their strong solar symbolism, were evidently focused on the solar and
lunar cycles, the significance of which underlies the orientation of some at least
of the megalithic tombs, circles, and alignments of the third and early second
millennia. By the end of the millennium these early monuments, many of them
long-lived, had been largely abandoned, and instead an emphasis had devel-
oped on the deposition of items of value placed in pits in the ground or thrown
into rivers, springs, and bogs. This focus on deposition intensified throughout
the first millennium. Deposits of this kind imply 2 more earth-related belief
system which may be best understood as a corollary to the increased emphasis
which was now being placed on the organization of the land and its productive
capacity. A greater reliance on crops and herds would have meant a greater
interest in marking the seasons. Thus the seasonal calendar may have begun to
replace, at least in emphasis, the solar and lunar calendar.

Some memory of these earlier beliefs may have been caught up in the myth of
the Hyperboreans who were believed to have lived in the distant north. Heca-
tacus, who wrote in the sixth century sc (and is quoted by Diodorus), said that
they occupied a large island in the ocean facing the country of the Celts and
there, in a magnificent circular temple, worshipped the sun god. One may rea-
sonably wonder if this is a reference to Britain and more specifically to Stone-
henge, about which the ancient world must have had some knowledge even
though there is no evidence that it was in active use much after the middle of the
second millennium.

The Nature of the Celtic Gods

At first sight the Celtic world was pervaded by a multiplicity of gods and god-
desses, of whom the names of more than 200 have been recorded. But if we
accept that individual deities could have been known by several titles or epi-
thets, then, in theory at least, the plethora of divine personages might be
reducible to a more manageable system.

184


===== PAGE 210 (index-213_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Julius Caesar attempted to do so in a famous passage in Book 6 of his
Commentaries on the Gallic War. Having introduced the topic by telling us that
the Gauls as a whole were extremely superstitious, he goes on to correlate the
Celtic gods, whom he does not name, with their Roman counterparts. The most
popular was Mercury “and they have very many images of him’. He is regarded
to be the inventor of all arts, and also presides over travel and commerce. The
other deities include Apollo, who averts diseases, Minerva, who instructs in
industry and craft, Mars, who controls warfare, and Jupiter, who *has suprem-
acy among the gods’. Caesar’s rationalization is clearly an oversimplification
designed to explain the essentials of the Celtic gods to his Roman audience, but
as such it offers a useful guide.

A rather different approach was taken by Lucan, who, in Pharsalia, names
three Celtic deities—Teutates, Taranis, and Esus—who were propitiated by
human sacrifice. The victims of Teutates were to be drowned, those of Taranis
burnt, and those sacrificed to Esus hanged. The Celtic names are informative.
Teutates means ‘the god of the tribe’ from the Celtic fewutd “tribe’; Taranis is
probably a sky god whose name comes from the Celtic taran ‘thunder’; while
Esus means ‘good” in the sense of all-competent. It is reasonable, therefore, to
equate Taranis with Jupiter as a deity of the sky and Esus (the all-competent)
with Mercury (‘inventor of all arts’). In another guise Esus may have been
synonymous with Lugh, a widely revered deity in the Celtic world whose name
is preserved in a number of place names such as Lugudunum (Lyons) and
Luguvallum (Carlisle). In Ireland Lugh (whose associated description means
“skilled in many arts together') conquered the evil creatures of the other world
and was celebrated at the harvest feast of Lugnasad held on 1 August.

Less certainty attaches to the other correlations. Itis, however, likely that the
tribal deity, Teutates, who was the protector of the tribe in times of war, is to be
seen as roughly equivalent to Mars in Caesar’s list. His Apollo and Minerva find
no parallels in Lucan’s classification but may be recognized among the Celtic
gods. Minerva is most likely to be a generalization for a formidable troop of
female deities who appear under various names as the consorts of male gods of
the tribal kind, as protectors of springs and rivers, or simply as Matres or Mat-
ronae—the divine mothers. Caesar’s Apollo is probably the Celtic Maponos—
the divine son—whose cult is known in Gaul and Britain and may be associated
with healing springs,

If the Celtic deities are approached through the vernacular literature of Ire-
land, a rather different perspective is achieved. Here the essential structure was
a dualism between the male tribal god and the female deity of the land. The
male deity was the Dagda, which means the good (that is all-competent) god
who served as the protector of the tribe. He was all-embracing and included
among his functional attributes control of warfare and the provision of wis-
dom, The Dagda’s counterpartand consort was the Morrigan, a native goddess
frequently referred to as ‘the Queen of Demons' in the Irish texts but also
known under other names such as Macha and Maeve, and often associated with.

85


===== PAGE 211 (index-214_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

the symbolism of the horse. She is both fertile and destructive. The coming
together of the Dagda and the Morrigan on the night of the festival of Samain
ensured the continuing prosperity of the tribe and the fertility of the crops and
animals in the coming year.

This simple binary opposition, which is probably of ancient origin, was com-
plicated by further deities who may have been introduced at a later stage. Thus
Brigit was the daughter of the Dagda. She was a potent fertility force and seems
also to have had powers of healing and wisdom. Another latecomer, portrayed
as such in the mythological tracts, was Lugh, who, like the Dagda, was good at
all things. It is tempting to see in this pattern a simple early system, which may
date to pre-Celtic times, becoming overlaid by levels of complexity and appar-
ent conflicts as the celticization of Ireland proceeded. This would explain how
it was that the all-competent characteristics of the Dagda were to some extent
replicated by those of the newcomer, Lugh, and how the fertility/healing pow-
ers of Brigit could be understood to differ from those of the Morrigan. If one
allows that the early Irish binary system represented the continuation of an
ancient pan-European tradition, which in continental Europe developed more
rapidly to become the Graeco-Roman pantheon and the Celtic ensemble, then
the Mercury/Lugh/all-skilled god may be only a continental version of the early
Insular Dagda, while the Minerva/Brigit/fertility-curative deity could be the
continental manifestation of the Irish Morrigan. Reintroduced into Ireland at
a later date in their evolved form, they were accepted as different gods. Clearly
such suggestions must remain in the realms of speculation, but they have the
advantage of opening the mind to something of the complexity of the situation.

Various approaches have been made to attempt to systematize the Celtic
pantheon by scholars who, like Caesar and Lucan before them, have felt the
need to understand the structure which lay behind the apparent chaos. On the
one hand, it has been argued that Caesar was wrong to attempt to separate
divine functions. Leaving aside the female deities, the male tribal gods were
more or less polyvalent in that they were competent at all things and they were
also polymorphic, appearing in many guises and answering to a variety of
names. In this view the male tribal god was one. Other scholars have regarded
this as an oversimplification, a view which was neatly summed up by Proinsias
MacCana when he wrote:

one cannot but reflect that if the Celts were monotheists at heart, then they were
remarkably successful in disguising this, for not merely have they fractured their single
godhead into a multiplicity of aliases, but they have also invested some of these with a
convincing air of individuality.

For him, while Caesar’s account was wrong to imply that a pantheon of Celtic
gods with specific names occurred all over the Celtic world, it was none the less
a useful typological index to the principal classes of deity that a traveller in Gaul
in the first century sc might encounter. Thus, inaddition to the male tribal god,
one might expect to find Lugh (Mercury), Taranis (Jupiter), Maponos

186


===== PAGE 212 (index-215_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

rnuunos ( ‘the horned one'),
Epona (the horse goddess), and others cropping up almost anywhere.

Apollo), Brigit (Minerva), Ogmioc (Hercules), C

Caesar adds one tantalizing detail to hisaccount of Celtic religion. “The Gauls

claim that they are all descended from Dis Pater; they say this is the tradition

handed down to them from the Druids.’ Dis Pater, the Roman god of the dead,
provides an understandable eponymous ancestor. As the first man alive, he was
first to die and thus to acquire control of the underworld, and it is to him that
the spirits of the dead return after their earthly life. In Celtic mythology and in
the Irish Insular tradition, as Donn ‘the brown or dark one’, he stands aside
from the other gods.

One further aspect deserving of consideration is the prevalence of triplism in
Celtic religion. This is best understood to be an expression of extreme potency
rather than of any coming-together of three disparate elements. The ‘power of
three” was frequently expressed in iconography, as, for example, in the three-
faced stone head from Corleck, Cavan, in Ireland or the tricephalic deity
depicted on the pot from Bavay in northern France, but it is also found as a
the triskele—in Celtic art.

recurring motif he concept is made even more

llo-Roman religion in the form of the Deae
—who together form a
unity representing strength, power, and fertility. Another but less widespread

specific in Romano-British and

Matres or the Matronae—the three mother goddesses

female trinity are the Saluviae, who preside over springs. Male deities are less
pr
Lugoves in Switzerland and Spain may well

ne to triplism, but inscriptions to the

refer toatriple form of Lugh. In the Insular
literature of Ireland triplism is a recurring
theme. The great goddess, the Morrigan in
her plural form, the Morrigna, resolves
into three: Morrigan, Badb, and Nemain.
Brigit and Macha also occur as triads. It is
tempting to wonder if the threefold divi-

sion proposed by Lucan, of Esus, Teutates,

and Taranis, is a further expression of
Celtic triplism,

Sufficient will have been said in this brief
summary to have justified describing the
Celtic gods as a subject of ‘fertile chaos’,
Certainly by the first century 8¢, when the
first
sources, inscriptions, and iconography be-

coherent evidence from  classical
gins to appear, a bewildering variety of
deities present themselves, some strictly
local others with a wider geographical dis-
tribution. No doubt there would have been

an accompanying mythology explaining

150 Small plaque of schist
from Cleveland Walk, Bath,
England, crudely carved
with three female f
probuably represen
three mothers’, a triad of
deitics. The piece is undated
but is probably Roman
Triads of mother goddesses
wete comparatively
mon in the west of Britain in
the Roman period. probably
reflecting an carlier Iron Age
tradition. Roman Baths
Museurn, Bath



===== PAGE 213 (index-216_1.jpg) =====
151 The fray

calendar f

columns each of

four 29- or 30-day months,

containing a total of sixty
two months. Propitic

s times are

festivals
century Al

Civilisation Gallo- Roma

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

the supernatural community and this will have varied in emphasis and content
ion, The many-layered complexity of it all is well exemplified

from region to reg
by the mythologies which survive embedded in the Irish and Welsh vernacular
literature.

It would be unwise to try to structure Celtic religion more rigidly than we
reat geographical rang

have here, given the long period of development, the
and the variety of indigenous and external influences to which it was subjected.

Yet, among the multiplicity and mobility of titles and powers exhibited by the
Celtic gods, it is possible to detect an underlying structure of simple binary
oppositions:  male/tribe/sky/war female/place/earth/fertility.  The
coupling of the two produces balance, harmony, and productivity and has to be

painst

enacted on a regular annual cycle determined by the seasons,

Seasons and Festivals

The Insular literature and the remarkable calendar found at Coligny near
Bourg, dating to the late first century pc, enable an approach to be made to
Celtic concepts of time. The Coligny calendar, inscribed on sheets of copper
alloy, is divided into sixteen columns each subdivided into four months except
for the fifth and ninth columns each of which contain two lunar months and
one intercalary month. needed to adjust the system to the realities of actual
time, The months are divided alternately into 29 and 30 days, making a year of
354 days. Each month is also divided into a light half and a dark half, the divide



===== PAGE 214 (index-217_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

signified by the word Atenowx (‘returning night’), and the months are divided
between those that are auspicious and those that are not, with the abbreviations
MAT (‘good’) and ANM (‘not good'). The days are numbered and some are
also marked by abbreviations which must have been significant for those who
were informed: there are indicative signs for the festivals of Beltane (1 May) and
Lugnasad (1 August). Considerable similarities to the Greek calendar suggest a
possible source of inspiration.

That time was rigorously ordered need occasion no surprise in a society
whose economic basis was agrarian and pastoral. To beable to chart the passage
of time and to know when to initiate essential processes, such as sowing the
crop and moving animals to upland pastures, lay at the very basis of existence.

The Irish literature provides the most detailed insight into the divisions of
the year into seasons. The end of the old year and the beginning of the new was
marked by the greatest of the ceremonies, Samain, which took place on 1
November. It was a liminal time between the two yearsand as such was danger-
ous: the spirits of the dead could roam free. [t was on this occasion that the male
god Dagda and the female goddess, usually Morrigan, came together, and
through their intercourse the well-being of the tribe and fertility of all their
enterprises were assured. In some versions of the myth the goddess, now an old
hag, was revitalized by the union and became young and beautiful once more.
Samain was the time when all the important communal acts, meetings, and
sacrifices took place. The strength of tradition which lay behind the festival has
ensured its survival as Hallowe'en and its Christianized version, the festival of
All Souls.

The next festival, Imbolc, which took place on 1 February, is less well known.
Inall probability it was associated with the goddess Brigit, a goddess of fertility,
learning, and healing (cognate with Minerva). In Christian mythology the
Celtic Brigit became a saint: her festival falls on 1 February and is still celebrated
widely in Ireland. In terms of the agrarian year it probably signified the begin-
ning of the period of lactation of ewes, when the sheep could be moved to
upland pastures.

Next came Beltane, held on 1 May, a ceremony associated with the Celtic god
of fire, Belenus. The fires lit on this occasion may have been used to fumigate
cattle before they were turned out to graze on the summer pastures.

Finally on 1 August the festival of Lugnasad was held, presided over by the
god Lugh, The timing might suggest that it was when the propitiatory offerings
had to be made to the chthonic deities in anticipation of a fruitful harvest. In
Gaulin the first century s¢ this was the occasion when the Council of the Gauls
met, a fact neatly manipulated by the Emperor Augustus when, in 12 B¢, he
relocated the Gaulish consilium requiring it to meet annually at the Altar of
Rome and Augustus at Lyons. In doing so he was demonstrating the unity of
Gaul and Rome, by equating himself with Lugh.

The Irish sources enable us to recognize the overall structure of seasonal fes-
tivalsin its most complete form in relation to the main events of the agricultural

189


===== PAGE 215 (index-218_1.jpg) =====
152 Coin showing the Altar
of Rome and Aagustus at
Lyons, consecrated in 12 nc
as the focus of imperial
power in Gaul, Here the
annual meeting of the Gallic
Council was held

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

and pastoral year. The Coligny calendar, in indicating only the festivals of
Beltane and Lugnasad, might be thought to imply that here, in the most civi-
lized part of the Celtic world, some of the old beliefs and practices had already
fallen away. The suggestion would not be inconsistent with the other
$0€i0-pol

ical changes which were already underway in Gaul. The issue
is a reminder of variations possible across the Celtic world.

Time was crucial to the proper enactment of ritual. This is made
clear by Pliny’s famous description of the rituals attendant on the
cutting of mistletoe from the sacred oak. It had to be done by a white-
robed Druid using a golden sickle and afterwards a suitable sacrifice

had to be made, but more important to the present discussion is that
the act had to be carefully timed: ‘it is gathered with a great deal of cere-
mony, if possible on the sixth day of the moon. . .. They choose this day
because, although the moon has not yet reached half-size, it already has con-
siderable influence’ ( Nar. Hist.16.249). Int
the monthly cycle with its dark and light halves and its propitious and unpro-
pitious days had to be recorded and ac le to those whose task it was to
attend to supernatural matters,

is context one can understand why

Man and the Gods

In most societies interactions between the natural and supernatural world are
ordered by ritual and mediated by specialists and so it was in the Celtic world.
The principal mediators were called Druids ( druides, druidaein Latin; druad in
Old Irish; dryw (singular) in Welsh), which is thought to mean ‘knowledge of
the oak’ or, less likely, ‘deep knowledge’. Another group of religious practition-
ers were called by Strabo vates ( fathi in Old Irish), which probably originally
meant ‘seer’ or someone who was inspired by the gods to understand that

which was invisible.

Caesar gives the most comprehensive, and in many ways the most convin-
<ing, account of the function of the Druidic class (De Bello Gallico 6. 13-14).
Druids belonged to the social élite and had control over all sacrifices, both pub-
lic and private, It was they who gave rulings on all religious questions. They
were also called upon to act as judges in criminal cases and in disputes about
boundaries and inheritances. To enforce their judgements they were able to
ban any defaulter from taking part in sacrifices—an easy thing to accomplish,
since they were the sole intermediaries—and in doing so they cut off the indi-
vidual from the gods, thus making him unclean and excluded from normal
social intercourse: ‘no one will go near or speak to them for fear of being cont-
aminated.’

Among the Druidic class in Gaul one man was elected as supreme and held
the position for life. There was an annual meeting held in the territory of the
Carnutes, which was considered to be the centre of Gaul, where all the major

issues were settled.

190


===== PAGE 216 (index-219_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

The Druids enjoyed various benefits: they were exempt from tax and were
not required to offer military service, though Diviciacus, brother of the ruler of
the Aedui, who Cicero assures us was a Druid, was also a fighting man. The
privileges of the class attracted many pupils, who would be required to spend
twenty years studying the doctrine, committing everything to memory. Caesar
believed that emphasis on memorizing the teachings was designed to train the
mind. This may well be, but there must also have been the desire to keep the lore
exclusive to the initiated. In this way the Druids maintained their hold over the
population.

Caesar offers one final and intriguing observation: ‘It is thought that the doc-
trine of the Druids was invented in Britain and was brought from there into
Gaul: even today those who want to study the doctrine in greater detail usually
goto Britain to learn there." If one can accept the factual accuracy of the second
part of this statement, it might suggest that the power of the Druids in Gaul had
decreased by Caesar's time largely as a result of the social changes which were
taking place,and that in Britain, where a more undeveloped form of Celtic soci-
cty remained, Druidism was still strong. That this was so is suggested by
Tacitus’ account of the destruction of the Druids on the island of Anglesey by
the Roman army in Ap 59. None of this, however, need be seen to support
Caesar’s report that Druidism originated in Britain, though there is no inherent
reason why this should not have been the case.

One of the functions of the Druids was to officiate during sacrifices to the
gods, and there is ample evidence to suggest that among the commodities
sacrificed were human beings. For this reason, in the writings of the classical
authors, Druidism was associated with human sacrifice, which the Roman
world claimed, somewhat disingenuously, to find abhorrent. In describing
Druidic altars on Anglesey as ‘soaked with human blood’, Tacitus could hope
to offer justification for the destruction of the priestly class. What is more likely
to have been at issue is not so much the upset to Roman susceptibilities caused
by human sacrifice as the fear of the Druids as the unifying force able to galva-
nize Celtic opposition. It may have been no coincidence that the trouble which
broke out in the otherwise peaceful region of Gaul in 53 se started among the
Carnutes, where the Druids held their annual pan-Gaulish assembly. It may
also have been no coincidence that the rebellion of Boudica in eastern Britain
began in the immediate aftermath of the Roman attack on the Druidic centre
on Anglesey. In both cases the Druids may have provided the spur to rebellion.

Human sacrifice among the Gauls is mentioned by several classical writers,
Lucan’s commentaries distinguish the particular mode of death which the
different gods preferred: the victims of Taranis were burnt, those of Teutates
were drowned, while those of Esus were hanged. The same methods of dispatch
were enumerated by Poseidonius (and reported by others), though without
specifying the preferences of the different gods. Strabo, quoting Poscidonius,
says: “They used to shoot men down with arrows, impale them in the temples,
or, making a large statue of straw and wood, throw into it cattle and all sorts of

191


===== PAGE 217 (index-220_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

wild animals and human beings and thus make a burnt offering’ ( Geog. 4. 4.6).
Burning victims alive is mentioned by Caesar, probably quoting the same
source. Itis interesting that Strabo uses the past tense, which might suggest that
the practice had died out in Gaul by the first century sc. Britain, however, still
upheld traditional values. Not only were victims sacrificed on the altars of
Anglesey, but Boudica chose to impale captives taken during the rebellion of an
60, though whether out of sheer ferocity or as offerings to the gods of war is not
clear.

A distinction should be made between human sacrifice made to propitiate
the gods and that performed in the interests of divination. Diodorus Siculus,
probably quoting Poseidonius, is informative, When enquiring into important
matters, he tells us:

They devote to death a human being and stab him with a dagger in the region of the
diaphragm and when he has fallen they foretell the future from his fall and from the
convulsions of his limbs and. morcover, from the spurting of the blood, placing their
trust in some ancient and long continued observation of these practices.  (Hist. 5. 31)

A little earlier in the same passage Diodorus describes auguries, based on
sacrificed animals, which are made by “seers’, taking care to distinguish these
practitioners from the Druids. By implication, therefore, it is the ‘seers’ who
were likely to have been most closely involved in the human sacrifices, even
though the Druids must have been present.

Convincing evidence of human sacrifice is surprisingly rare in the archaco-
logical record. In the case of the body placed in a bog at Lindow in Cheshire in
the first or second century ap, there is tolerable certainty of ritual death. He had
been strangled, hit on the head, and his throat cut all in rapid succession. This
is surely an example of the threefold death referred to in the Irish vernacular lit-
erature. Less certainty attaches to the complete bodies thrown into disused
corn storage pitsat varioussites in southern Britain, most notably at the hill fort
of Danebury. Whilst the victims could have been dispatched on the spot before
deposition, some at least could have been stoned to death in situ. Bog burials
and pit burials may well represent offerings made to chthonic deities, the
different places of deposition reflecting perhaps different deiti

The concept of dedicating material to gods was well established in the Celtic
world. The belief system is neatly encapsulated by Caesar:

When they have decided to fight a battle, it is to Mars that they usually dedicate the
spoils they hope to win; if they are successful, they sacrifice the captured animals and
collectall the rest of the spoils in one place. Among many of the tribes itis possible to see
piles of these objects on consecrated ground. It is most unusual for anyone to dare to go
against the religious law and hide his booty at home, or remove any of the objects that
havebeen placed on such piles. The punishment laid down for that crime is death by the
most terrible torture,  (De Bello Gallico 6.18)

It may be that in this section Caesar was relying on Poseidonius. Strabo used the

192


===== PAGE 218 (index-221_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

153 The body of a man
buried in a peat bog at
Lindow, Cheshire, £
The man had suffered a
bangon the h

throat had been cut. The
three ways of death suggest
that he may have boen a

An. British Muse
London.

154 Human body buried in
adisused storage pit in the
hill fort of Dancbary
Hampshire, Engl
was 1o indication of how
and where the individual
died. but it is possible that
the large rocks which or
nally covered most of th
body were the cause of
ath. Hes
probably witnessi
tistory burial, Third or sec
ond century ¢

n we are

193


===== PAGE 219 (index-222_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

same source for his discussion of the great treasure at Toulouse believed to have
come from the sack of Delphi, which was eventually appropriated by the Rom-
ans. Part of it was stacked up in temple enclosures and part had been thrown
into sacred lakes. The temple at Toulouse was highly revered by the local inhab-
itants and for this reason the treasure stored there was considerable. Religious
taboos kept it entirely safe until the Roman Conquest, and even then the des-
poiler, Caepio, suffered a succession of misfortunes at the hands of the gods.

The beliefs lying behind these two accounts were widespread and are well
reflected in the rich archacological record. The most famous of the sites which
can reasonably be regarded asa religious location is La Téne on the edge of Lake
Neuchitel in Switzerland (Figs. 23-7). Although there has been much debate
about the nature of the site, there can be little doubt of its ritual connotations.
The principal structure was a timber pier running out into the lake, which
served as a platform from which votive offerings were thrown into the water
(Fig. 25). The range and quantity arc impressive, In addition to 269 spearheads,
166 swords, and 29 shields, there were hundreds of brooches and an array of
other items including wooden yokes, bronze cauldrons, iron ingots, knives,
razors, belts, and so on. La Tene is by no means unique. A similar pier built out
into the River Witham was found at Fiskerton in Lincolnshire, and from the
sediments around were recovered a number of metal artefacts, including a La
Tene Isword inan iron scabbard, though the radiocarbon dates suggest that the
structure may have begun earlier. Much the same arrangement was found at
Flag Fen in Norfolk, where a timber platform, reached by means of a bridge,
served as a place from which weapons, with a few tools and other items, were
thrown into the surrounding water over a long period from ¢.1600 10 200 Bc.

This same general concept is inherent in the famous ritual site of Liyn Cerrig
Bach in Anglesey, where a rock outcrop served as the place from which a wide
range of items, principally war gear, was thrown into a lake in the late first cen-
tury Bc or early first century ap.

In none of these cases is there any need to suppose that there was only one act
of deposition. Indeed, there is positive evidence to show that the dedications
took place over a period of time, perhaps on a seasonal basis or when a particu-
lar event, past or pending, demanded a propitiatory response. The examples
cited so far were all well-defined locations focused on a structure or natural fea-
ture. The possibility of less focused deposition also exists. Very large quantities
of artefacts, mainly weapons, have been found in European rivers with no evi-
dent concentration at any specific location. This pattern could be the result of
deposition from the river bank or from boats—the river itself, rather than a
specific location along it, being the sacred place. The Thames providesa partic-
ularly impressive example, with concentrations of weapons spanning the
period from the Late Bronze Age to the end of the Iron Age. Many of the
items—Ilike the Battersea and Wandsworth shields, the spearhead from Dat-
chet, and the Waterloo Bridge helmet—uwere prestige goods of considerable
value, and it remains a strong possibility that they were made specifically for

194


===== PAGE 220 (index-223_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Rver (1) @ (5)
Hoord &

Rier o (1) @ (5
Sway feds o

parade purposes or for ritual deposition. Given the apparently scattered nature
of these river deposits and the exceptional quality of some of the picces, the
belief system underlying their deposition must have differed from that govern-
ing the more normal array of warrior equipment dumped at one location.
What binds the two types of behaviour is the underlying belief that the gods
needed to be propitiated by dedicating war gear to them in watery locations. It
was a long-lived tradition which began in Europe in the sixteenth century sc
and continued unabated until the Roman Conquest in those areas reached by
the Roman armies. Rich finds as far north as Denmark, most notably the col-
lection of weapons deposited in a boat in a bog at Hjortspring on the island of
Als in the third or second century B¢, are a reminder that placating the gods in
this way was not the sole preserve of the Celtic regions.

Other types of propitiatory deposit are also known. The description of the
sacred treasure at Toulouse is an indication that items of considerable value
could be dedicated. Such deposits have occasionally been recovered. At Nieder-
zier in the northern Rhineland, for example, a hoard of gold consisting of two
torcs, an armlet, and forty-five coins were found together in a bowl buried next
to a post which was considered by the excavators to be of cult significance. The
total weight of the gold amounted to 321.84 grams, which was almost one
Roman pound (327.45 grams). This type of mixed deposit composed of various
combinations of torcs, arm rings, and coins occurs widely. At Tayac (Gironde)
almost 4 kilograms of gold were recovered made up of a massive tor, ingots,
coin blanks, and coins. At Fenouillet (Haute-Garonne) six torcs (Fig. 60) were
found, while at Lasgraisse (Tarn) two examples came to light.

195

155 The Thames may well
Iave been 4 sacred river in
the Late Bronze and lron
Age. From it have come a
remarkable number of items.
of prestige metalwork. The
maps show the distribution
of Iron Age swords ponting
10 sight change in the
focus of deposition between
the Hallstart and La Téne
periods.


===== PAGE 221 (index-224_1.jpg) =====
156 A hoard of sheet-gold
neck rings, an arm ring, and
gold coins from Niederzier,
Dibren, Germany. First
century we, This Fecurring
combination of abjects,
found in hoards in Belgium
and Britain, suggests adher
ence 103 particular propitia
tory ritual. Rheinisches
Landesmuseum, Bonn.

XVIla Fitcing The stone
fortifications of Dun Acagus
cling to the edge of the island
of Aran, Ireland, while the
Atlantic waves pound far
Ielow. The fortifications,
still undated, have been
shown to be multiperiod and
post-date an extensive Late
Bronze Age settlement.

XVIIb [nser: A barmier of
osely spaced angular rocks
placed to hinder the
approsch of men or horses
1 the fort of Dun Aengus.
Aran, Ireland. This kind of
defensive cordan is known
as chevaex de frise and is
widespread in the west from
Iberia to Scotland,

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

This same pattern of deposition extends to castern England. A hoard from
Ipswich (Suffolk) contained six torcs, but the most informative site is
Snettisham in Norfolk (Pl. XX11b) where chance finds and, later, systematic
excavation exposed twelve individual deposits
overan area of some 1.2 hectares, The deposits var-
ied in size. One of the original finds, producing the
famous Snettisham torc, in addition yielded
another torc, a bracelet, and a gold quarter stater.
Among the more recent, scientifically excavated,
deposits were five separately buried groups
together producing sixty-three torcs of gold, sil-
ver/gold, silver, and bronze. The sheer concentra-
tion of material in a small area and certain details
of deposition—for example, that some of the pits
contained two deposits separated from cach
other—leave little doubt that the motive for depo-
sition was ritual. Snettisham with its apparent lack
of boundary features and absence of structures,
other than the votive deposits, provides a fascinat-
ing insight into the kind of “natural’ sacred place
implied by certain of the classical texts. It is tempt-
ing to see Snettisham as little more than a clearing in a forest protected only by
its sanctity and the religious taboos restraining the people.

The great deposits of weapons and of treasure are likely to represent a ‘tribal’
response to the deities, either one related to a particular momentous event, ora
continuous process of reverence, but it is evident from the archacological
record that everyday life was pervaded by the need to propitiate the deities, and
there will have been very many acts of deposition carried out by the community
and the individual throughout the year. Evidence for this level of response has
come from the large-scale excavations of the hill fort of Danebury, in central
southern Britain. Here, in common with much of southern Britain and north-
ern Gaul, grain, presumably seed grain, was stored in pits. When the storage
phase was over and the pits ceased to have a functional use, propitiatory
offerings were placed in them. The range of material offered is impressive, In
addition to the complete human bodies mentioned above, which may have
been sacrificial victims, parts of human bodies have been recovered, including
severed heads. The most common deposit comprised domestic animals in
whole or in part. While the sheep, cattle, and pigs could have been animals
offered by virtue of their value to the community as food, other animals includ-
ing dogs, horses, and ravens are more likely to have had specific ritual
significance. Th most noticeable with horses, which were usually repre-
sented either by a single articulated leg or by a skull, sometimes in combination
with dogs. Other deposits include small collections of tools or horse gear, whole
pots, grain, and quernstones. Clearly, in these deposits we are glimpsing only

196


===== PAGE 222 (index-225_1.jpg) =====
& A

i - A ! . &
% ‘mwz» Lo "
ik g A


===== PAGE 223 (index-226_1.jpg) =====
gl e = 7N
v A
% M‘@i /4


===== PAGE 224 (index-227_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

the archaeologically recognizable clements of a highly complex pattern of
behaviour. Itis possible to imagine a whole range of offerings, including hides,
wool, cheese, and s0 on, which would have left no archacological trace.

The positions in which these deposits are found in the pits is informative,
The majority are from the bottommost layer, before any erosion had taken
place, but some pits had secondary deposits placed after a phase of erosion. The
implication is that there was a fixed pattern in the timing of the depositions. It
is tempting to see this as related in some way to seasonality and possibly to one
or more of the seasonal festiv

The most convincing explanation for this complex pattern of behaviour
would be to regard the storage of the seed corn in pits as representing a belief in
the power of the chthonic deities in preserving the corn during the liminal
period, when itis dormant, and ensuringits
fertility when sown, Once, therefore, the
seed had been taken from the pits for sow-
ing, it would have been necessary to make
an offering to the deity in anticipation of a
productive harvest. The second deposition
might represent an offering of thanks. For
spring-sown seed, the appropriate seasonal
festivals would have been Lugnasad and
Samain,

For societies for whom the productive
capacity of the land was of vital importance,
it is easy to understand how propitiatory
offerings specific to the community’s cen-
tral concern became dominant. In times of
stress, such as a succession of bad harvests,
theintensity of sacrifice will have increased.
It is probable that societies more reliant on
flocks and herds will have developed diff-
erent systems, In the case of upland areas, deposition in bogs seems to have
been a significant pattern of behaviour. In this context, the discovery of ‘bog
butter’ in the bogs of Ireland and Scotland is interesting. It is not unreasonable
to see in these kegs or cloths of butter the offering to the deities, by a pastoral
community, of part of its valued product in expectation of a satisfactory milk
yield, Other items found in bogs, including wooden containers and bronze ves-
sels, may again reflect the importance of the uplands for milk production.

Groves, Springs, and Shrines

Sufficient will have been said to show that offerings to the gods were made
throughout the landscape—both the natural and the domestic landscape.
There were also specifically designated sacred locations, known by the Gallo-

XV Facing The River
Thames has produced 2
spectacular array of
extremcly fine Iron Age
metatwork much of which
was probably thrown into
the water s offerings to the
gods. The shickd boss from
Wandsworth is 3 consider
able work of art. Itis deco-
rated in repoussé style with
two large birds whose
flowing wings develop inta
tendril motifs. Secand or
first century o, British
Museum.

17 The carcass of a dog and
the leg of a hoese buried
together in a disused storage
pit in the hill fort of
Danebury, Hampshire,
England. This combination
of dog and harse recurs on a
number of occasions and is
suggestive of a distinctive
ritual belief. A range of other
animal burials was also
recorded. The practice of
animal burial was wide-
spread in southern Britain
and northern France and
may represent thank
offerings 10 the chthonic
deities for protecting the
seed corn stored in the pits.


===== PAGE 225 (index-228_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Brittonic word nemeton, which, like the cognate Latin nemus, means a sacred
clearing in a wood or a sacred grove. The word recurs throughout the Celtic
world, from the Galatian Drunemeton to Nemetobriga in Spain and Aquae
Arnemetiae, the sacred spring at Buxton in Derbyshire. In Old Irish fidnemed
refers to a shrine in a forest.

Tacitus, in his description of the rout of the Druids on Anglesey in Ap 59,
writes of ‘groves sacred to savage rites’ which were cut down, ‘for their religion
encouraged them to drench their altars with the blood of prisoners and to find
out the will of the gods by consulting the entrails of human beings’. But the
most evocative description of a grove, in this case in southern Gaul, is provided
by Lucan in his poem Pharsalia and deserves to be quoted in full.

A grove there was untouched by men’s hands from ancient times, whose interlacing
boughs enclosed a space of darkness and cold shade, and banished the sunlight from
above . . . gods were worshipped there with savage rites, the altars were heaped with
hideous offerings and every tree was sprinkled with human gore. On those boughs . . .
birds feared to perch; in those coverts wild beasts would not lie down; no wind ever bore
down upon that wood, nor thunderbolt hurled from black clouds; the trees, even when
they spread their leaves to no breeze, rustled of themselves. Water, also, fell there in
abundance from dark springs. The images of the gods grim and rude were uncouth
blocks formed of felled tree-trunks. Their mere antiquity and the ghastly hue of the rot-
ten timber struck terror. . . . Legend also told that often the subterranean hollows
quaked and bellowed, that yew trees fell down and rose again, that the glare of
conflagrations came from trees that were not on fire, and that serpents twined and
glided round their stems. The people never resorted thither to worship at close quarters
but left the place to the gods. For, when the sun is in mid-heaven or dark night fills the
sky, the priest himself dreads their approach and fears to surprise the lord of the grove.
( Pharsalia 3. 400-25)

Forallits poetic licence, Lucan’s description, which so brilliantly conjures up
the sense of stark panic, may be regarded as a reasonable evocation of a sacred
place and the hold which it will have had over the local population. Lucan goes
on to mention that Caesar had it cleared ‘for it grew near his works’, though it
was more likely that he wished to destroy the power of the place. An interesting
parallel is provided by the sacred spring of Sulis at Bath, where hot mineral
water still gushes out of the ground at the rate of a quarter of a million gallons a
day. Very soon after the Roman invasion of Ap 43, a road, presumably of mili-
tary origin, was driven through the sanctuary within 30 metres of the spring
itself. Twenty years or so later, by which time the province had been firmly
grasped, the road was removed and the land returned to the deity, now
conflated with the Roman goddess Minerva: there is some suggestion in the
archacological record that a grove was replanted nearby at this time.

The archacological demonstration of sacred groves is likely, by the very
nature of the places, to be difficult, but, as we have suggested, there is a possi-
bility that deposits like that found at Snettisham may indeed represent just such
a place. The thermal springs of Bath and Buxton are other contenders.

198


===== PAGE 226 (index-229_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Reverence for springs was widespread. Among the best known are two
Gaulish examples, the shrine of Sequana at the source of the Seine in Burgundy
and Chamalieres near Clermont-Ferrand. Both have produced a remarkable
array of votive offerings in the form of small wooden carvings or, less common,
embossed plaques of metal. The symbolism of many of these items, emphasiz
ing as they do limbs, internal organs, and eyes, leaves little doubt of the under
lying belief in the curative power of the waters. Such a belief is also implied by
the way in which the thermal springs at Bath and Buxton developed. That the
figurines from the sanctuary of Sequana date to the first century Ap might sug-
gest that the sophistication evident in the depiction of that part of the body
which required the deity’s attention was something which developed late, per
hapsasa result of Mediterranean influence, but the sanctity of the springs must
go back to an carlier period. It is significant that
the majority of them for which the dedication is
known were presided over by female deities, but

this is entirely appropriate to the generalized
Celtic belief which related earth and place to

goddesses. The continuation of this belief pat-

tern is shown by the large number of wells and
springs in the west of Europe which continue to
be associated with female Christian saints, and
in this context it is not irrelevant to point out
that the majority of the French river names are
feminine,

The sacred nature of lakes and bogs should
also be remembered. The collections of war gear
at Llyn Cerrig Bach (Anglesey), Hjortspring in
Iene in Switzerland have
already been mentioned, and it is clear from

Denmark, and La

deposits comprising a range of metal items of

the eighth to the sixth centuries sc from the lake

of Llyn Fawr in south Wales and from numer
ous bogs in Ireland that the tradition was long

established and need not be exclusively associ-

ated with weapons. Geneva provides another

example of a lakeside sanctuary. Here an inlet
from the lake was found to contain a collection
of human remains especially skulls, and a mas-

sive statue carved from an oak tree and dated to

.80 sc may well have been one of the cult fig-
ures which dominated the sanctuary. Its some.
what gaunt appearance is a reminder of Lucan’s
haunting description.

Reverence for the chthonic deities, inherent

199

158 The sanctuary of

Seine, Cote d'Or, was used

during the Late Iron Age

n period as a he

simply carved wooden

d by emphiasin
the parts of the body requir
Musée



===== PAGE 227 (index-230_1.jpg) =====
159 Timber ido erected at
the port of Geneva, Swit
rerland, <80 e, The port
was constructed between 123
and 120 nc. based on den
drachronological dates, at
the time when the Romans
were establishing a firm
presence in Provence. The
devdlopment of the port
may have been encouraged
by rapidly increasing trade
with the Roman colonists.
Musée d'Art et d' Histoire.
Geneva.

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

in the worship of watery places, also finds an expression in the digging of shafts
or wells, which are found throughout Celtic Europe. The tradition is evidently
an ancient one and it is likely that the shaft found at Wilsford near Stonehenge,
dating to the Middle Bronze Age, represents the same belief system. A slightly
later example, of the Late Bronze Age, from Swanwick in Hampshire, is said to
have contained an organic deposit identified as blood.

The majority of the shafts from continental Europe date to the later stages of
the Iron Age and many of them lie within rectangular ditched enclosures
(viereckschanzen) (Map 27). That at Holzhausen in Bavaria was some 9o metres
across. In one corner was a timber structure, possibly a shrine, together with

three shafts 2.5 metres in diameter and 40 metres deep. One of the shafts con-
tained an upright wooden stake associated with material thought to have
derived from decayed flesh or blood. The viereckschanze of Fellbach-Schmiden
in Baden-Wirttemberg has proved to be particularly informative. Within the
enclosure, in addition to burials, there was a well, the lower part of which was
waterlogged, creating conditions for the preservation of the timber lining and
of organic remains within the filling. According to the dendrochronological
date, the timbers were cut in 123 Bc. Parts of a timber structure which sur-
rounded the top of the shaft had fallen in and were preserved. These included a
group of remarkable wooden carvings of animals (Pl, XX1), one a rampant stag,
another comprising two goats standing on their hind legs and clasped about the
waist by a central human(?) figure, now missing. On the bottom of the shaft
were two almost complete pottery ve The shaft probably served as a well,
presumably for ritual purposes, before it was abandoned and filled. Whether
the well was associated only with the activities attendant upon the burial or
a function after burial was complete remains

whether it continued to ha

unclear.

Viereckschanzen, with or without burials, have tended to produce little
archacological material other than that which might have been thrown into
shafts, if they occurred. This implies that, whatever activity went on within
them, the deposition of votive offerings was not normally part of the ritual. The
inds of sanctuaries which have been excavated is

contrast with the numerous
striking. Broadly speaking there are two basic sanctuary types: the
Ligurian sanctuaries of southern Gaul and the northern Celtic type which clus-
ter densely in a broad zone extending from Germany to Britain.

The southern Gaulish type is best known from the sites of Roquepertuse
(Bouches-du-Rhone) and Entremont near Aix-en-Provence. At Roquepertuse
two separate elements survive: large seated figures carved in stone, which are
now thought to be prominent members of the aristocracy, and the stone ele-
ments of a stone and timber architectural complex incorporating the famous
Janus-heads (Pl XI1), a stone bird of prey, a frieze carved with simply delin-
ecated horse heads, and stone pillars carved with niches 1o take severed human
heads. Most of the ensemble dates to the third century scand the sanctuary was
abandoned after it was destroyed by fire at the beginning of the second century.

Zelto-



===== PAGE 228 (index-231_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

of th
ny. Enclasur

at Neufahrn, Baden
are widespread in

160 Above Acrial vi

he rectangular ritual enclosure (v3
of this sort da ot

orthern France.

pe. In the case of those du

featur,

161 Ry

Late fron Age Eur

whether they were dug

s wells or for ritual pur
from Fellbach-Schmiden,
lar ritual enclosure
Stuttgart

nnotat
od with a

use asa well d
1-Wilrttemberg, Ger

s not preclude rite

was assoc

and produced well-preserved wooden sculptures. Wirttembergisches Landesmuscus

162 Below: The bottom part of the ritual shaft or well at Fellbach-Schmiden during excavation

201



===== PAGE 229 (index-232_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Many of these same elements recur at Entre
mont, where the architectural features include a
vertical pillar carved with severed heads and
another fragment with a carved severed head
flanked by niches for real severed heads, of
which some fifteen examples were found, some

still bearing nail holes for attachment. Other

sites in the region have produced fragments of

similar sculpture as well as human heads.

To what extent the religious sites of the
Celto-Ligurian area differ significantly from
those of the rest of Gaul is difficult to say. The

availability of easily carved limestone

and prox-

imity to the Greek cities of the Mediterranean
coastal zone will have had some influence, but
the principal elements of iconography—the
squatting figures and the Janus-heads—are
known in other parts of the Celtic world and the
collection of human heads among the Celts was
an often-repeated anecdote among Greek and
Roman writers. It is simpler, therefore, to re-

gard the Celto-Ligurian sanctuaries as a region
al manifestation of a more widespread pattern
of beliefs,

In the northern Gaulish zone the normal type
of sanctuary by the Late Iron Age was a rectan
gular or circular building of timber usually set

within a rectangular temenos defined by

difched or fenced boundary. Excavations at
Gournay-sur-Aronde (Oise) have provided a
detailed insight into the form and development
of a sanctuary of this kind and the rituals prac-

tised there. The sanctuary occupied a spur

overlooking a stream which flowed from a

small lake. The carliest building dates to the

fourth century s, and thereafter the site was

164 Friceesimply carved continuously used and modified until the end of the first century B¢, when the

with a row of

rses’ he

timber structures were burnt and the site levelled. The sacred nature of the loca

fre ctuary of
; pertuse, Bouches-du- 110N remained in folk memory until the fourth century ap, when a Gallo
Rhone, France. Traces ¢ Roman temple was built precisely over the original shrine.

TR Throughout, the pre-Conquest shrine was surrounded by a ditch of rectan-
& Archéologie Meditér gular plan later enhanced by an external palisade. From the fourth until the first

Shafewmc; Wil century e the focus was a large oval-shaped pit, in which the remains of

sacrificed cattle had been placed. It first lay in the open within a setting of



===== PAGE 230 (index-233_1.jpg) =====
(!l ) M_\
LS
\ - J
' w ‘
( % —
-
\ J
/ A
4 . o) iyl


===== PAGE 231 (index-234_1.jpg) =====
106 The temple site exca-
vated a1 Gournay, Picardy,
France, remained in use
over aconsiderable period,
for much of the time
focused around a ritual pit,
The ditch, created in period
1, formed the receptacle for
extensive ritual depositions
comprising weapons and
animals. The sanctity of the
site was still recognized in
the Roman period, when a
typical Romano-Celtic tem-
phe was built in masonry.

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

upright posts placed some distance away.
Later it was enclosed on three sides by three
sets of three pits containing a range of offer-
ings. In the next stage the pits were replaced
by a setting of timbers, which may have
served as uprights to take a roof over the cen-
tral pit. In the early first century ¢ the build-
ing was reconstructed in timber in a more
regular rectangular form and was rebuilt
again ¢.30 B, this time of daub on stone foot-
ings surrounded by an ambulatory of light
posts.

Throughout the life of the sanctuary the
temenos ditch was used as a repository for sac-
rificed offerings, including some 2,000 bro-
ken weapons and large quantities of animal
bones, which were found to have been placed
in successive layers, each representing a dis-
tinct act of sacrifice.

The continuity of the sanctuary over a long
period of time, from the pre-Roman Iron Age
wellinto the Roman period, isa phenomenon
T Maver widely recognized across the northern part of

the Celtic zone. Among the sites where struc-
tural evidence of the early sanctuaries has been found beneath later Roman
shrines may be listed Uley (Gloucestershire), Worth (Kent), Hayling Island
(Hampshire), Vendeuil-Caply (Oise), Saint-Germain-le-Rocheux (Chatillon-
sur-Seine), and Schleidweiler (Trier); many others have produced evidence
suggestive of a long continuity.

The evidence from Gournay-sur-Aronde and Vendeuil-Caply, only 30 kilo-
metres apart, show that in this region of Belgic Gaul, from the fourth century
until the beginning of the first, the religious structures—pits and upright
posts—were essentially open air; the concept of a regular roofed structure was
afirst-century 8¢ development. A similar open-air sanctuary dating to the third
century Bc was discovered at Libenice in Bohemia. Here the temenos was cre-
ated by a continuous ditch defining an elongated rectangular area at one end of
which a standing stone and two large post-holes provided the ritual focus. The
possibility that the posts were carved into god-like figures is suggested by the
discovery nearby of two bronze torcs which might have been worn by the
wooden images. A series of pits, dug one at a time and refilled, seem to have
been associated with successive libations, while deposits of animal bones and
the burial of a female indicate the variety of sacrifices offered.

The evidence from Britain differs only in that rectangular buildings appear
before the first century. The best known is the rectangular cella with its post-

204


===== PAGE 232 (index-235_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

built ambulatory found at Heathrow (Middlesex) within a rectangular enclo-
sure. Other examples of rectangular- or square-built structures have been
found in the hill forts of Dancbury (Hampshire) and South Cadbury (Somer-
set) and at Lancing Down (Sussex). All are thought to have served as shrines
during the British Middle Iron Age (¢.300-100 BC).

Another feature of the British evidence is the prevalence of circular temples.
This is most clearly demonstrated by the first-century se structure found on

. P g vt 167 Below, lefe: A rectangu-
Hayling Island, a large building 15 metres in diameter set within a rectangular  j,; givched enclosure N’:

ditched enclosure, The entire structure was rebuilt in stone, after the Roman "'l'n" Huiuh.hw/‘\"l\-"-
RONEES - 5 f e o Middlescx, England., in 1944,
invasion, in the late first century ap. A circular shrine, this time built with dry- sy anedule sl
stone wall footings, was found in the centre of the hill fort of Maiden Castle  angular timber building
(Dorset). This, too, was replaced in masonry in the Roman period, Although ~ *ith2 sishter ambulatory

L ’ : Yy X 8 9 around it. The plan is highly
circular shrines of the Iron Age are not yet known in continental Europe, circu-  reminiscent of later
lar Gallo-Roman temples suggest that earlier prototypes may once have existed,  Romano-Cetic temples

7 : 5 PR, 2 The date would appear to be
In Ireland, circularity was the prime characteristic of religious sites. Four  \iddie or Late Iron Age.

168 Left: The temple at Hayling Istand, Hamp.
shire, England, in use from the first century

e, was rebuilt in masonry by the Romans in

the late first century Ap, the Roman structure
reproducing the form of its predecessor.

169 Abowe: Aerial view of the sacred site of
Tara, Co. Meath, Irekand. The large ench
the Rath ma Riogh, contains a number of i
uments, the most prominent being two
smaller enclosures and a Bronze Age burial
mound—the Mound of the Hostages. Beyond
the enclosure, close to the church, is the Rath
of the Synods, which was in use during the first
century ap; the parallel banks beyond are
Known as the Banqucting Hall. Tara was
important in early Irish history as the place
where kingship was legitimized.

ure,

205


===== PAGE 233 (index-236_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

NAVAN

great ritual centres are known from the vernacu-
lar literature and all have been identified on the
ground as surviving complexes of earthworks:
Tara (Meath), Cruachain (Connacht), Din
Ailinne (Co. Kildare), and Emain Macha, or
Navan Fort (Co. Armagh). All were associated
with rites of kingship in the early historic period,
but Tara was pre-eminent.

The complex of Emain Macha is best known
archacologically. The focal point isan oval enclo-
sure of 5 hectares set within a ritual landscape
which included a natural lake, from which four
bronze horns and a number of human skulls
were recovered, and an artificial pool known as
‘the King's Stables’ which appears to have been
dug for ritual purposes ¢.800 nc. The enclosure
itself contained two prominent circular monu-
ments. One was a ploughed-out ring barrow, the
other survived as a mound 50 metres in diameter
tion showed it
he earliest occu-

and 6 metres high, but as exc
was altogether more comple:
pation comprised a series of circular buildings
associated with a range of prestige goods dating
from ¢.700-100 nc: the assemblage included the
skull and jaw of a Barbary ape which it is tempt-
ing to interpret as an exotic Mediterranean
import, though whether as a living beast or sim-
ply a severed head is unclear.

In 94 Bc (a precise date based on the dendro-
chronological evidence) an oak tree was felled
and set up as the centre post of a massive circular
structure nearly 40 metres in diameter composed

170 Toplefi: Aetial view of Navan Fort in Co. Armagh, Northers
Treland. Navan is the Emain Macha of the Irish epics. The crest of
the hill was occupied by a remarkable timber structure 40 metres
in diameter built around a single oak fefled in 94 me. The struc
ture was embedded in a cairn of stones and the exposed parts set
on fire.

171 Lefe: The map shows the ritual landscape dominated by the
enclosure known as Navan Foet (1), overlooking the lake of
Loughnashade (2), where four lange bronze horns and a number
of human skulls were found, Other sites are Haughey's Fort (3
and an a ial pond known as the King's Stables (4), which
produced finds of Late Bronze Age date, Other archacological
sites are shown as black spots. The detailed plan shows the mas.
sive timber structure dating to 94 s found under mound B
within the fort.



===== PAGE 234 (index-237_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

of six concentric settings of posts, some 275 timbers inall, arranged in radial sets
ina manner highly suggestive of a structure designed to be roofed. No evidence
of internal activity was found and the floor was kept absolutely clean. The
standing structure was then embedded in a stone cairn piled up inside toa max-
imum height of 2.5 metres, and that part of the building which projected above
the cairn was set on fire. After the conflagration the cairn was covered by a
mound of cut turves, raising the height by a further 2.5 metres. The motivation
for this remarkable programme, involving the mobilization of huge social
effort, defies explanation, except as a ritual act of momentous proportions.

The excavation of Din Ailinne provided a further insight into Irish ritual 172 Dun Alinne, Co.
sites, Here the hilltop was defined by an enclosure of 16 hectares. A succession :;:‘::::.::‘::"‘:;:':":l
of three substantial timber structures occupied a central position. The first was  in the Irish vernacular
a circular palisaded enclosure 22 metres in diameter. This was replaced by a !:f':l":""“'h'}':“;‘\:l:‘::“
more elaborate circular structure with concentric settings of timbers which the  rimber buikdings.
excavator suggests supported platforms of
different heights looking inwards. A smaller
enclosure formed an annex, while radiating
palisades and posts created a monumental
funnel approach. In the final stage concentric
palisades defined a circular area 37 metres in
internal diameter. Within the centre of this
was a circular building 5 metres in diameter
surrounded by a setting of massive free-
standing timbers probably 3-4 metres in
height. Aftera period, during which there was
intensive burning near some of the posts, the
entire structure was dismantled. Subsequent
use suggests that the site was given over to
periodic, perhaps seasonal, meetings involv-
ing feasting. The dating evidence shows that
the entire sequence belonged to the period
from the third century sc to the second or
third century Ap.

The size and form of the structures at Dan
Ailinne leave little doubt that they served a
centralizing ritual function. It is possible that
the creation of the mound at Emain Macha
and the demolition of the final structure at
Din Ailinne were broadly contemporary and
mark a significant change in the ritual use of
these sites.

The monumentality of the Irish religious
sites sets them apart from their British and
continental European counterparts. The



===== PAGE 235 (index-238_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

huge timber structures, and the enclosing earthworks which invariably have
the banks outside the ditches, are features which hark back to Neolithic and
Early Bronze Age times and provide a firm reminder of the strength of indige-
nous traditions in more remote areas of the Atlantic fringes.

In this context it is worth recalling the carved stelac—standing stones—of
Armorica, which occur in their columnar and hemispherical forms throughout
the Breton countryside (Fig. 129). That they were regarded as religiously pow-
erful is demonstrated by the Christianization which many of them suffered by
having Christian symbols, usually the cross, carved on them or by being moved
bodily into the precincts of a church. These Iron Age stelae clearly belong to a
belief system which can be traced back to the standing stones of the megalithic
period.

Some echo of the outlandish rites of the distant fringes is provided by
Poseidonius’ anecdotal tale (quoted by Strabo) of an island lying off the mouth
of the Loire occupied only by women ‘possessed by Dionysus’. Once a year they
removed the roof of their temple and replaced it with a new roof within the day.
During this ceremony one of the women was chosen for sacrifice. She was ‘torn
to pieces by the others, and they carry the pieces around the temple crying out
“euoi” and they do not cease until their madness has passed away' (Strabo, Hist.
4. 4. 6). Presumably this behaviour was judged to be sufficiently unusual for
Poseidonius to have mentioned it.

Sufficient will have been said to indicate that built temples existed through-
out the Celtic world. The archacological evidence adds firm support to the
references about religious structures given by the classical writers. When Dio-
dorus Siculus writes of ‘temples and sanctuaries’ and Plutarch tells us that
Caesar's sword was hung up in a temple of the Arverni, they were presumably
referring to the quite sophisticated timber structures of the type represented at
Gournay, the sanctity of which was to be remembered for many centuries to
come.

Attitudes to Death

The archacological evidence derived from the excavation of cemeteries is suffi-
cient to suggest that a belief in the afterlife may have persisted throughout
much of the Celtic world. Caesar makes the matter explicit by reporting that the
Druidsattach particular importance to the belief that after death the soul passes
from one body to another. In this he, like other commentators, is probably fol-
lowing Poseidonius, and rationalizes his observation by supposing that the
doctrine was favoured because it made the warrior fearless in battle.

The burial tradition most widely practised in continental Europe from the
seventh to the first centuries s was inhumation, the dead person being pro-
vided with the equipment appropriate to his or her status as perceived by the
lineage responsible for burial. This qualification is necessary to remind us that
the burial rite, at least of the élite, was an occasion for the lineage publicly o dis-

208


===== PAGE 236 (index-239_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

play its prestige to the assembled company. Rich burials, like those of the West
Hallstatt chicfdoms and their successors in the fifth century, and those of the
northern Celtic zone in the first century sc and early first century ap, reflect
societies in which command of prestige goods was considered to be an attribute
of status. For most of the period from the beginning of the fourth century to the
end of the second status was expressed in terms of warrior equipment reflecting
arather different set of values,

The change to cremation, which becomes evident in much of Celtic Europe
late in the second or early in the first century sc, implies a significant shift in
belief, though it is not apparent what caused it. It may be little more than the
resurgence of a long-established view of the spirit being released into the sky.
An alternative possibility is that the custom was an emulation of Roman prac-
tice. The move to cremation, together with the formalization of temple build-
ings and the development of oppida, may be seen as part of the package of
changes which spread through much of the Celtic world in the last decades of
the second century Bc.

The probability that much of the British Isles adhered to a somewhat
different belief system is suggested by the virtual absence of any form of burial
over much of the country before the beginning of the first century ¢, with the
exception of the cemeteries of the Arras culture in Yorkshire and the cist buri-
als of the South-West peninsula. The simplest explanation for this is that the
normal method for dealing with the dead body was by excarnation—that is, the
exposing of the body in some area set aside for the purpose. The bones would
cither be left there in the open or selectively brought back to the settlement for
curation or use in other rituals, Some such explanation accounts both for the
absence of evidence for regular interments and cremations and for the presence
of human bones in settlement contexts. It is quite possible that excarnation was
widely practised in other parts of Europe alongside other rites: its archacologi-
cal invisibility makes the issue difficult to judge.

The curation of human remains is dramatically reflected in the Celtic atti-
tude to the head. Diodorus Siculus, presumably quoting Poseidonius, offers the
standard disapproving view seen through the classical eyes:

They cut off the heads of enemies slain in battle and attach them to the necks of their
horses. These blood-stained spoils they hand over to their attendants and carry off as
booty, while striking up a pacan and singing a song of victory, and they nail up these first
fruits upon their houses just as do those who lay low wild animals in certain kinds of
hunting. They embalm in cedar-oil the heads of the most distinguished enemies and
preserve them carefully in a chest and display them with pride to strangers, saying that
for this head, one of their ancestors, or his father or the man himself, refused the offer of
alarge sum of money.  (Hist. 5. 29)

In comparing the human head taken in battle with that of wild animals caught
in the chase, Diodorus demeans the Celtic practice whether by ignorance or
design. But behind the second part of the quotation one can discern something

209


===== PAGE 237 (index-240_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

of the importance of the head in Celtic society: to own and to display a distin-
guished head was to retain and control the power of the dead person, which was
the inheritance of the lineage. Refusal to part with such a trophy is understand-
able in that it would diminish the holder’s power. Behind this might also lurk
the belief that the head, once freed from its captor or his successor, would be
able to work against them.

Reverence for the power of the head lies behind the story told by Livy of the
battle between the Boii and the Romans during which the Roman consul,
Postumus, was killed. His body was carried to the most prestigious temple of
the tribe and there decapitated, the skull being cleaned and mounted with gold
to serve as a cup in the deity’s honour. Evidently the skull of such a distin-
guished enemy was a gift appropriate to a god. Itis in this context that the skulls
found in the Celto-Ligurian sanctuaries are probably best interpreted. Their
power added to that of the god and was prevented from working against those
who brought about the death. Behind what the Greek and Roman writers saw
as a caricature of Celtic barbarism lay a complex pattern of values and beliefs.

That the Celts were, in Caesar’s words, extremely superstitious seems fair
comment. The gods, in their various guises, were everywhere and controlled
everything. They could communicate with man through augury and could be
cajoled or persuaded by sacrifice, but no contact was possible without the over-
sight of a trained practitioner—a Druid. Stated in these simple terms, Celtic
religion was much like any other in its basic form. It is only in its vibrant
mythology, still vivid in the Irish vernacular literature, that the rich complexity
of the inherited lore can be glimpsed.


===== PAGE 238 (index-241_1.jpg) =====
11
The Developed Celtic
World

THEe migratory movements which began towards the end of the fifth century
e were largely, but not entirely, over by the beginning of the second century,
by which time the immense energy spent on conquest and raiding was being
turned to more productive activities. The result was that throughout the Celtic
world intensification in production and exchange becomes evident on an
unprecedented scale. The reasons for these changes are complex, and their pace
and trajectory differed from place to place and over time, and yet the general-
ization holds good for a vast territory from the Middle Danube to south-east-
ern England and from northern Iberia to Bohemia. In attempting to draw out
the causal threads running through these developments we must begin by con-
sidering the impact of the extension of Roman influence, both direct and indi-
rect, on the communities around the Mediterranean core.

Rome survived the threat of the Second Punic War (218-202 B¢) and in the
aftermath embarked on the first significant stage of its territorial expansion. On
all fronts—in Iberia, southern Gaul, the Po Valley, lllyria, and Asia Minor—
Rome confronted Celtic peoples. While the pace and nature of the interactions
varied, the barbarian periphery cannot have failed to have undergone some
change as a consequence of contact with the energetically expanding economy
of the Mediterranean. These factors, together with the internally generated
social dynamics of the different Celtic communities, led to the emergence of
societies very different from those existing at the height of the migration period.

The Extension of Roman Power: 200-60 BC

The Second Punic War was a turning-point in Rome’s relations with the wider
world. Before the war began, Rome's interests were focused on peninsular Italy
and the seas around, the command of which required the control of the islands
to the westand the coasts of Hllyria to the east. The conflict with Carthage totally

2m


===== PAGE 239 (index-242_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

changed the perspective. As a result of Hannibal's energetic campaigns, Rome
was led to appreciate the strategic importance of controlling the Po Valley; her
armies were actively involved in the south-cast of the Iberian Peninsula, and
were regularly using the land route through Provence and Languedoc; while in
the cast, in the Balkans and Asia Minor, the potential dangers of political insta-
bility there were fast becoming apparent. To maintain and develop the Italian
core it was becoming necessary to control a much more extended periphery.

This was not just for reasons of military security. Active campaigning in dis-
tant territories provided a context for young men to gain experience and to
advance in the Roman social system. Indeed there are interesting comparisons
to be made between the importance of the raid in maintaining social hierar-
chies in the Celtic world and overseas campaigns in providing the aspiring
Roman with a context in which to progress his career through a display of mil-
itary excellence. Nor should the economic importance of overseas territories to
Rome’s development be underestimated. New territorial gains could yield raw
materials and slaves in desirable quantity. For example, huge amounts of gold,
silver, and copper were extracted from Iberia in the six years following the des-
truction of Carthaginian power, and Caesar's campaigns in Gaul are estimated
to have provided a million slaves, most of them destined for the Roman mar-
kets, The other great advantage of overseas territories was that they could pro-
vide markets for surpluses produced on the estates of the Roman aristocracy.
The quantity of north Italian wine offloaded in Gaulish markets in the early first
century Bc is thought to have been in the order of 100,000 hectolitres a year.
Interactions on this scale must have had an effect on native communities in the
areas peripheral to Roman activity.

Roman expansion into the Po Valley was rapid after the defeat of Hannibal.
Traditional fear of the Celts, intensified by an awareness of the weakness of
Rome’s northern borders and the value to a potential enemy of the large pool of
willing mercenaries provided by Cisalpine Celtic settlements, focused Rome’s
attention on the need for rapid conquest of the entire Po Valley. A series of
determined campaigns ensued. In 197 B¢ the Cenomani were defeated at the
Minico and forced into a treaty of friendship, and the next year the Insubres
were overcome at Como. In a later rebellion, aided by the Boii, the Insubres
were again unsuccessful, and in 194 the Boii were finally subdued, as the result
of which many of them retreated northwards back into Transalpine Europe.
Further campaigns in the west against the Ligurians and the east against the
Carni during the next few years extended Rome’s power to the southern fringes
of the Alps. By the end of the 180s nc the process of latinization was well under-
way and surplus native manpower was finding itself in Roman employ both as
auxiliary troops and as farm workers called accolae galli.

The romanization of Cisalpine Gaul meant that the routes through the Alps
were now firmly under Roman control, and, with the instability of the Po Valley
at an end, trade could begin to develop in a more regular and organized man-
ner. For the Alpine and Transalpine Celts the new political geography of the


===== PAGE 240 (index-243_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

south meant the beginning of a period of dramatic socio-economic develop-
ment.

In Iberia the capture of Cidiz in 206 sc marked the end of Carthaginian colo-
nial involvement and the beginning of Roman influence, while the foundation
of the two provinces of Hither and Further Spain in 197 Bc formalized the
process. For the next sixty-four years, until the capitulation of Numantia in 133,
Rome was in a state of almost constant war with the native tribes on the provin-
cial borders, most notably the Lusitani and the Celtiberians. These hostilities,
and the Social War which followed in the carly first century sc, part of which
was fought on Spanish soil, mitigated against the development of significant
trading systems between the native and Roman zones, and it was not until
Caesararrived in 61 8¢ that the west of Iberia began to be brought under Roman
control. By this stage, however, even the remote north-west—the region of the
Castro culture—had begun to absorb the concepts of Roman urbanism, fol-
lowing the expeditions into the region of Decimus Brutus in 138136, which ini-
tiated the opening-up of the Atlantic fringes.

The long and painful wars against the native [berians in the second century
Bc and the Social and Civil Wars of the first century created the need for a con-
stant movement of men and supplies to and from the Peninsula, a movement
enhanced by the outflow of raw materials from the highly productive Spanish
provinces. Although direct contact by sea was an option, the overland route
through southern Gaul was preferred, especially for the movement of troops
and military equipment. Thus, throughout the second and first centuries
Roman convoys passed through Provence and Languedoc across the now thor-
oughly hellenized coastal zone. The needs of the military quartermaster and the
entreprencurial activities of civilians travelling with the armies opened up the

AJ'
'i: M. TROHR Y

WAL B

23

173 The hilltop tovn of
Entremont, Bouches-du
Rhone, France, was the capi-
tal of the Saluvii, who
occupied the termtory in the
region of Aix-en-Provence,
The town was defended by a
stone wall with bastions
which derives its inspiration
from the Greek ity walls of
the southern French coast.
Entremont was destroyed by
the Romans in 123 we.


