            THE CLASSICAL PERIOD




H o w has this uneven distribution come about? W h y is virtually
all of the nation's swidden found today in Outer Indonesia and
more than three-quarters of her sawah concentrated in the inner
core of northwest, east, and central Java, south Bali and west
Lombok ? 1 W h a t factors shaped this peculiar pattern of land use
in the first place and what factors acted upon that pattern from
outside, complicating it, solidifying it and forcing it into its
present untractable, overdriven state? W h a t is the ecological his-
tory of the ossification of the Indonesian agrarian economy ?
   T h e flourishing of wet-rice agriculture on Java (since before the
Christian era) has generally been explained by a happy combina-
tion of, as the Dutch geologist Mohr put it, the four elements of
the ancient world: fire, water, earth and air. 2 T h e "fire" is pro-
vided by the intense volcanic activity of the more than thirty
working cones, which run lengthwise down the middle of the
island and supply the plant nutrients which the otherwise thin


  1 The swidden distribution is apparent from mere inspection; the sawah

proportions are calculated from Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, 1957,
pp. 46-49.
  ' Mohr, 1946.
THE CLASSICAL            PERIOD                                     39

soils lack. T h e "water" comes from the short, quick-running, silt-
laden rivers cradled between these cones which, draining one w a y
or another from the central range, carry the minerals it produces
southward toward the Indian Ocean or northward toward the
Java Sea. T h e "earth" is represented by the well-drained, gradu-
ally sloping, enclosed-plain relief formed by the basins of these
intermountain rivers which creates a series of well-defined natural
amphitheatres eminently suited to traditional gravity-feed irriga-
tion techniques. A n d the "air" is an outcome of the moderately
humid climate intermediate between the continual rainfall of
equatorial Sumatra, Borneo, Celebes, and the Moluccas and the
sharp biseasonality of the monsoonal Lesser Sundas, a tropical
compromise which avoids both the swamping and intense leach-
ing of the islands to the north and west and the excessive drying
and w i n d erosion of those to the south and east. Traditionally at
least, Java (with Bali and L o m b o k ) has formed not one huge
continous, dead flat river-plain rice belt, as, say, central China or
northwest India, but a number of separate, gently rounded pockets
of intense cultivation—a set of small-scale, richly alluvial galleries
hemmed in by volcanic mountains or unirrigable limestone hills. 3
(See M a p 2.)
  W i t h the partial exception of the A g a m and Toba regions of
central and north Sumatra, such nicely appropriate landscapes for
wet-rice cultivation do not exist in the Outer Islands. Sumatra is
sharply divided into precipitous western highlands and spongy
eastern swamp; Borneo is poorly drained on the coast, covered
with broken hills in the interior; Celebes is mountain-crowded,
with few sizable lowland areas; the Moluccas are fragmented
and very wet, the Lesser Sundas fragmented and, in the summer
monsoon, very dry. Sumatra has some active volcanoes, but most
of them throw off acidic rather than basic ejecta and so impover-


  ' T h e best synthetic works on Indonesian geography are Dobby, 1954,
and Robequain, 1954. For Java alone, Lekkerkerker, 1938, I, 13-90; and
Veth, 1912, Vol. III.
THE CLASSICAL             PERIOD                                        41


ish rather than enrich the land around them, while Borneo,
Celebes (except for its northern tip), and the Moluccas (except
for western Halmahera) have no active volcanoes.
  These climatological, topographical, and geological conditions
do not necessarily preclude wet-rice agriculture from these regions,
even with only traditional techniques. Its narrowly specialized
ecological requirements can be met in a great diversity of settings
and through a wide variety of means: the Tonkin Delta has no
volcanoes, Malaya is as wet as Sumatra or Borneo, and northern
Luzon is mountainous. But there is no doubt that in imposing a
complex of adverse conditions for sawah to overcome, these geo-
graphical realities have played a great part in discouraging its
establishment in the Outer Islands in favor of the more broadly
applicable swidden; nor that the natural advantages of Java's
small, volcano-rimmed river passages strongly encouraged its
implantation there.
  T h e first really effective integral wet-rice regimes seem to have
been set up in a number of such passages in the central and
eastern parts of the island. Perhaps the earliest of them appeared
in and around the majestic volcanic quadrangle formed by
Mounts Sumbing, Sindoro, Merbabu, and Merapi in the narrowed
middle neck of the island; that is, along the southward-running
Progo river in what is today the Magelang area, the upper Solo
(Dengkeng) river southwest of Surakarta, the Seraju valley above
present-day Banjumas, and the Lukolo and Bagawanta piedmonts
around Kebumen and Purwaredja (Kedu)—a region which after
the eighth century blossomed into the so-called Mataram empire.
Somewhat later, evidently, developed sawah appeared along the
upper and middle Brantas river around Malang and Kediri, and,
less extensively, in the Ponorogo area south of Madiun and the
Lumadjang area east of Malang—a region which flourished, as
did south Bali with which it had important connections, after
the tenth century. (See Map 3.) 4 Further archeological work may


  ' T h e best, and virtually the only, systematic attempt to relate the ad-
mittedly nonagricultural, archeological remains of the Hindu period to
42                                    THE CLASSICAL              PERIOD

render parts of this picture inaccurate in detail; but the general
pattern is clear. The earliest manifestations of developed wet-rice
agriculture almost certainly occurred either in the enclosed inner
reaches of the somewhat larger northward-flowing rivers or in
the upper basins of the generally shorter southward ones.

   The expansion of sawah cultivation beyond the boundaries of
these especially favorable regions (which are sometimes collec-
tively referred to as Kedjawén, or "Java Proper") in precolonial
times, and in fact up to the middle of the past century, was
gradual, tentative, fluctuating, and only partial.
   Essentially, such extension could take place in three directions
(see Map 4 ) : northward toward the deltaic Java Sea coast (the
south coast is about 80 percent calcareous), westward toward the
Sunda highlands, and eastward toward the drier regions of the
so-called "East Hook" (Pasuruan, Probolinggo, Besuki, and Ban-
juwangi). Each of these areas posed different technical problems
in irrigation, all of them difficult to solve with traditional methods.
In the littoral, which the Javanese call the pasisir ("strand,"
"coastline"), the problem was mainly one of perfecting water
control, that is, improving flood protection and drainage, because
of the great size of the river discharges (several times those of
comparable temperate latitude rivers) and their extraordinary
month-to-month, sometimes even day-to-day, variability.5 Fertil-

the Javanese landscape in order to draw some socioeconomic conclusions
is Schrieke, 1957, pp. 102-104, 288-301. Some interesting speculations about
Javanese agricultural history, based on distributional evidence can be found
in Terra, 1958. For a general review of Indonesian post-neolithic archeol-
ogy, see Bernet Kempers, 1959.
  5 The   Tjimanuk at Indramaju has a normal highest discharge rate of
25,000 cubic feet per second, a normal low of 600, with occasional floods of
34,000; the Pemali at Brebes runs between 25,000 and 250, with crests at
34,000; the Solo ranges between 70,000 and 810, with 90,000 floods ( ! ) .
On the general problem of the enormous river fluctuations in Java in terms
of its implications for irrigation, see van der Meulen,      1949-50.   Also,
Dobby, 1954, pp. 4 7 - 6 0 , 225.
THE    CLASSICAL          PERIOD                                         43

ity, particularly in the plain between Tjirebon and Djapara and
in the Solo and Brantas deltas, was high, because of heavy alluvial
deposits of volcanic and other sediment, and water was all too
plentiful; but the great susceptibility to swamping because of
near sea-level relief and the uncontrollable river spates made it
a treacherous landscape for sawah during the classical period and
well into the colonial. T h e Sunda highlands had sufficient water
and good drainage, but also lower fertility because of increased
leaching and less felicitous topographical arrangements. And the
east was pressed for water.
  As Mohr has noted, there are three independent aspects or
functions of irrigation which are often insufficiently distinguished:
the provision of moisture to otherwise arid soils—the "watering"
function; the regulation of a quantitatively sufficient but uncertain
and refractory water supply so as to avoid flooding—the "control"
function; and the enrichment of the field through the transporta-
tion of nutrients to it—the "fertilization" function. 8 Which aspect
is critical depends upon which factor in the environment is limit-
ing with respect to the regime concerned.7 Thus, where the avail-
ability of water is the limiting element, as in the East Hook, the
first aspect is problematic. Where rainfall or river volume are
irregular and unpredictable and drainage is difficult, as along the
north coast, the second aspect looms as central. And where plant
food is in short supply, as in Sunda, the third aspect is cardinal. 8
In spreading out from its enclosed-plain nurseries in the Ked-
jawen, wet-rice agriculture had not just a single, uniform problem
to solve, but, even in the broadest terms, three technically diverse
ones. That it proceeded slowly is understandable.




  ' Mohr, 1946.
  ' O n the concept of the limiting factor, "the factor that first stops the
growth and spread of [an organic system]," see Clarke, 1954, p. 20.
  'Mohr, 1946.
44                                      THE    CLASSICAL           PERIOD

   Westward, in Sunda, it never got particularly far. T h e first re-
ports of sawah penetration into the highlands come as late as
1750 from the Sumedang and Tasikmalaya areas, small piedmont
river valleys near the eastern edge of the highlands, and a half-
century later from the somewhat larger and higher plateau basins
of Bandung and Bogor to the west.9 But even today intensive
sawah cultivation is limited to these areas plus a few other favored
pockets (Tjiandjur, Sukabumi, the Garut plateau, and others).
Eastward, in the Hook, penetration began earlier, around 1200.
But as river water was in short supply the sawahs were dependent
upon what rainfall could be trapped within their dikes and so re-
mained limited in extent, reliability, and productivity until Dutch
plantation interests led to the construction of modern reservoirs
around the beginning of this century. 10 Even then, though its
productivity has improved, the scope of wet-rice cultivation has
not grown especially great, occupying, as in Sunda, around 15 per-
cent of the total land area, as against about 25 percent in the
Kedjawén and 35 percent along the Pasisir. 11
  The situation in the Pasisir, the north coast, is more complicated
but the result is about the same. Some wet-rice farming has, in all
probability, been carried on there at various points, particularly
around the hundreds of minute estuaries which perforate the
otherwise unvaried shore, since the earliest days. Some authorities

   ' T e r r a , 1958.
  10  Terra, 1958, and van der Meulen, 1949-50.
   " T h e s e figures calculated from Landbouwatlas van Java en Madoera,
1926, I, pp. l * - 5 5 * , Sunda being considered to consist of Banten, Bogor,
and Priangan; Pasisir of Djakarta, Tjirebon, Pekalongan, Semarang,
Djapara-Rembang, Bodjonegoro, and Surabaja; Kedjawén of Banjumas,
Kedu, Jogia, Solo, Madiun, and Kediri; and the East Hook of Malang
and Besuki. These are 1920 figures, but although the total cultivated area
has probably grown since that time, the inter-regional proportions have not
radically changed. The comparable figure for south Bali (Tabanan,
Badung, Gianjar, Bangli, and Klungkung) is 26 percent; see Raka, 1955,
p. 28.
THE      CLASSICAL              PERIOD                          45

have even speculated that the first footholds of sawah cultivation
on the island were secured in these small river mouths between
the larger, unmanageable deltas. 12 Yet, in a more general sense,
the coast always seems to have been a chancy and difficult en-
vironment for traditional sawah; it could exist there, but not
thrive.
   Because of the severe water-control problems (and perhaps for
other reasons as well—the malarial unhealthfulness of the region,
its vulnerability to military attack), the north never became the
center of a developed agrarian culture comparable to that of the
interior. After the inland civilization flourished, it moved hesi-
tantly toward the coast, drawn evidently by the attractions of a
burgeoning Java Sea trade economy; but it never really arrived.
Though the inland civilization periodically controlled the harbor
towns, it was never able to secure that control by establishing the
sort of developed wet-rice economy which supported its power in
the interior. In the few places where some success was achieved—
as at Demak and, perhaps, at Tjirebon—it was partial, aberrant,
and short-lived, a mere interlude of limited agricultural develop-
ment based on, if not shifting sands, then surging waters, and the
overwhelming supremacy of the interior in agrarian matters soon
reasserted itself. When the Dutch arrived in the seventeenth
century, more than three hundred years after this wistful drift
toward the coast began, and when the major ports, now Islamic
and only partly Javanese, were in full commercial swing, the
area in general was nonetheless sparsely settled, and the agri-
cultural center of gravity was still well inland, in the regions of
the old Mataram. 13 " T h e aforesaid [sultan of] Mataram has his
residence about five or six days journey from Djapara, in the
interior," wrote Jan Pieterszoon Coen, Holland's East India em-
pire builder, "where there are diverse large, populous towns, and


 12   Terra, 1958.
 13   Schriekc, 1955, p. 265.
46                                    THE CLASSICAL             PERIOD

the land is excellently abundant in rice and other victuals; all the
rice that is carried along the whole coast of Java to Molucca,
Johore, Ambon and Banda is usually loaded from here." 1 4
  14 Schrieke, 1955, p. 267. The Mataram here is of course the Islamic one

of the seventeenth century, not the Hindu one of the eighth; but the region
in which it was situated is more or less the same.
       4 . THE COLONIAL PERIOD:
       FOUNDATIONS




The Company
       At the inception of the colonial period, then, the over-all
ecological pattern was fairly well set: on Java, a wet-rice agrarian
heartland shading off into less developed regions to the west, east,
and north; in the Outer Islands, an immense tropical forest
worked only here and there by small tribes of swidden farmers.
The first object of interest of the Dutch, as of the Portuguese who
immediately preceded them, were the Moluccas, the fabled spice
islands; but their attention soon turned toward Java, and it is
upon it that they mainly superimposed their colonial economy,
turning back again to the Outer Islands only toward the end of
the past century.
  "Superimposed" is the proper word, because what the Dutch
were essentially concerned to do, from 1619 to 1942, was to pry
agricultural products out of the archipelago, and particularly out
of Java, which were saleable on world markets without changing
fundamentally the structure of the indigenous economy. T h e
Netherlands was never able, particularly after William I's attempt
to re-absorb Belgium failed, to develop a manufacture export
48            THE COLONIAL PERIOD:                       FOUNDATIONS

economy even remotely comparable to that of Britain, and so the
interest of the Dutch in Indonesia remained                   overwhelmingly
mercantilist to the end. T h e stimulation in Indonesia of extensive
markets for industrial goods, it was feared, would lead only to
increased British (or, later, Japanese) influence; the essential eco-
nomic task was to maintain a decent differential between the
import and re-export prices of East Indian agricultural products—
a task which implied the developing of Dutch commercial insti-
tutions and the discouraging of Indonesian ones. 1 A m i d                    the
apparent fluctuations of policy, the colonial period consists, from
the economic point of view, of one long attempt to bring Indo-
nesia's crops into the modern world, but not her people.
     T h e means for accomplishing this effort to keep the natives
native and yet get them to produce for world markets was the
formation of a chronically, and in fact intrinsically, unbalanced
economic structure sometimes referred to as "dual." 2 In the export
sector, there was administrative capitalism: a system in which the
holders of capital, the Dutch, regulated selling prices and wages,

  1 The   one exception, and that but a partial one, to this generalization
was the export of textiles to Indonesia from T w e n t e after 1870. See van
Klaaveren, 1955, pp. 133-136, 138, 164, 192. O f course, East India products
did not have to be carried to Holland before being "re-exported," but
could be taken directly to foreign ports (from 1928-1939 about 90 percent
of them were—see Boeke, 1947, p. 105).
  2 Boeke,   1953. T h e fact that Boeke's theoretical explanations for dualism
were largely unsound, his pessimistic assessment of its policy implications
arbitrary, and his views concerning Indonesian (or " E a s t e r n " ) "mentality"
fanciful (see Higgins, 1956) ought not to obscure the fact, as it sometimes
has, that, although mal-integration of labor-intensive and capital-intensive
sectors is a general phenomenon, in the Netherlands East Indies economy
this mal-integration was present to an extraordinarily high degree; and
that Boeke recognized this fact, even if he did not understand the reasons
for it, as early as his 1910 Leiden dissertation, long before the modern con-
cern with "factor proportions," "multi-sector models" and "discontinuous
investment functions" made it seem like an analytical commonplace. F o r
the half-century debate between Boeke and his critics in Holland, the
bulk of it rather beside the point, see Indonesian Economics, 1961.
THE     COLONIAL                PERIOD:   FOUNDATIONS            49

controlled output, and even dictated the processes of production.
In the domestic sector there was family-unit agriculture, a little
home industry, and some petty internal trade. As the first ex-
panded, stimulated by rising world commodity prices, the second
contracted; land and labor were taken out of rice and other village
staples and put into sugar, indigo, coffee, tobacco, and other com-
mercial crops. As the first contracted, responding to collapsing in-
ternational markets, the second expanded; and a steadily growing
peasant population attempted to compensate for a lost money in-
come, to which it had become increasingly accustomed, by intensi-
fied production of subsistence crops.
   With perfect flexibility, such a system might seem less disruptive
of traditional society than the more direct methods of other
colonial governments—and some disinterested observers, for ex-
ample Furnivall, have held it to be so.3 But it did not even ap-
proach perfect flexibility: the monopolistic nature of economic
organization on the dynamic European side, fused with the
political administration of the colony (at first explicitly, later
merely de facto), made stickiness inevitable. Not only did a
booming export market tend to compress the subsistence sector
beyond realistic limits, but the ability of Dutch economic leader-
ship to respond effectively to rapidly changing market conditions
and developing technology was constrained by the weight of
financial conservatism and by the political and economic vicissi-
tudes of the home country. The tendency was to maintain out-
moded policies to the point where the peasant subsidization of the
export sector through low rents and wages became so altogether
oppressive that articulate Dutch moralists would arise to stir
Holland's Calvinist conscience with the specter of "declining
native welfare." Then, after a few decades of ineffectual reform-
ist experimentation and increasing penetration of East Indies
trade by rival powers, a new program would be produced which
would promise, finally, to make it possible to draw a commercial


  ' F u r n i v a l l , 1948.
50          THE COLONIAL             PERIOD:       FOUNDATIONS

profit from Indonesia while leaving its inhabitants unharmed—
even, in any fundamental sense, untouched.
  However, it was always more or less the same program in, for
the times, modern guise. East Indian colonial history was marked
by a series of politico-economic devices (the East India Company,
the Culture System, the Corporate Plantation System) by means
of which the European "merchant capitalism" side of the dual
economy was to be more efficiently organized for the production
and marketing of export crops, and the Indonesian "peasant
household" side was to be better protected against the disruptive
effects of this large-scale commercial agriculture. Driven on by
ever-increasing capital requirements, the Dutch moved from the
institutional contrivances of adventurous capitalism in the eight-
eenth century, to those of state capitalism in the nineteenth, and
to those of bureaucratic capitalism in the twentieth. But, as each
contrivance or device, building upon the ruins of its predecessor,
entailed a yet deeper penetration of the rural economy by Western
enterprise, it actually made it more difficult to isolate native life
from the economic forces with which such enterprise deals.
Modern Indonesia was created both because of Dutch policies and
in spite of them.


   The Dutch East India Company, the first of these devices, was
formed in 1602 as a state-chartered far-eastern trade syndicate
with considerable autonomy ("a state within a state") in order to
counter the active competition of both Asiatic merchants and
other European powers trafficking around the archipelago. 4 At
first, the Company was only interested in commerce—in securing
by hook or by crook whatever products might be carried from
places where they abounded to those where they were scarce.
Aside from its depredations in the Moluccas, something of a
landmark in the history of mercantile brutality, its initial impact
  1
    The Company's activities were of course not confined to the Indonesian
area. The best book on its commercial aspects is Glamann, 1958. For its
social impact in Indonesia, see Gonggrijp, 1957, pp. 181-321.
THE COLONIAL             PERIOD:    FOUNDATIONS                  51

was mainly concentrated, therefore, in the passage ports of the
Java Sea, and particularly in those dotting Java's north coast. But,
in an age of rampant mercantilism, the catchword is not "busi-
ness is business" but "trade follows the flag": commercial de-
velopment implies political expansion. The Company—"tired of
the forcing up of tolls and market taxes and the constant giving
of presents to rulers and lords"—soon turned toward gaining a
more comprehensive control over sources of supply. 5 By 1684 it
dominated all of Sunda; by 1743 the entire Pasisir and most of the
East Hook; by 1755 the Kedjawen. (The Moluccas had been in
hand since about 1660.) What began as a trade combine ended,
not without struggle, as a sovereign.
  The colonial economy this marriage of the economic and the
political produced was one in which, as Gonggrijp has well said,
sharp distinctions among free, pre-emptive, quota and monopoly
commerce, all conducted under the shadow of the cannon, are
not too usefully made. 6 The Company, adjusting to local con-
ditions, functioned in diverse ways in different parts of its realm.
But its activities everywhere worked toward the same end: the
reduction of indigenous chiefs to dependents and the substitution
of tribute for trade.
   In the Moluccas, the luckless source of cloves and nutmeg,
the Dutch imposed restriction of cultivation, collective punish-
ment (for "smuggling"), and forced labor exercised through the
agency of humbled native rulers. In the pepper areas, Bantam-
Lampong and, to a lesser extent, central Sumatra, treaties with
harbor sultans established quotas and fixed prices. In the Priangan
highlands coffee gardens were introduced with traditional aristo-
crats acting as the Company's labor contractors. Immediately
around Batavia and the adjoining northwest coast, there were
 nearly a hundred private sugar estates, leased from local lordlings
 now converted to Company employees, the proprietors of which
 (almost all Chinese) consequently exercised seignorial rights over
   5 Schrieke, 1955, p. 62.
   ' Gonggrijp, 1957, p. 40.
52               THE C O L O N I A L              PERIOD:            FOUNDATIONS


the villagers who chanced to live on them. A n d in still but half-
subdued central Java were simple levies in rice, timber, cotton
thread, beans, and cash. By the time the Company dissolved in
bankruptcy on the last day of the eighteenth century, it had laid
down the general lines which the Netherlands East Indies econ-
omy followed to the end.
   But only the general lines. T h e Company established the Dutch
presence in the archipelago, introduced a few new cultivations
(mainly coffee; pepper, spices, and sugar preceded it) and de-
vised, in rough form, most of the techniques for skimming cash
crops off the surface of an immobilized subsistence economy
which later became so useful when Java filled up with peasants.
But its impact on the Indonesian ecological pattern as a whole
was marginal and unsystematic. It capitalized on it where it
could, demanding deliveries, fixing prices, restricting trade but,
with a few exceptions, such as the decimation of Banda, it did not
attempt to act upon it directly. Its work was pioneering; con-
solidation of the approach it established came after it with the
next major scheme to make Indonesia pay—the Culture System.


The Culture System
       T o speak of the Culture System 7 as a stage of Indonesian
economic history, however, is to speak synecdochically. T h a t
stroke of fiscal genius by Governor General van den Bosch which
we conceive to be the System proper—the remission of the peas-

  7   Cultuurstelsel. Properly, this t e r m o u g h t to be E n g l i s h e d as "Cultiva-
tion S y s t e m , " but the " C u l t u r e S y s t e m " mistranslation is so e m b e d d e d in
the literature that it seems less c o n f u s i n g to continue to e m p l o y it. A g r e a t
deal has been written about the C u l t u r e System                (see, for example, the
bibliography in R e i n s m a , 1955, pp. 183-189), but m u c h of it has been
m a r r e d by focus on its short-run i m p a c t at the expense of its long-run
effects, and in particular by an anxious concern with its i m m e d i a t e m o r a l
justifiability (or lack thereof) rather than its importance as part of the
crystallizing Colonial pattern in Indonesia a n d the role it consequently
played in the f o r m a t i o n of m o d e r n Indonesian society. T h e m o s t important
e x c e p t i o n T o this stricture is the discussion by B u r g e r , 1939, pp. 117-160.
THE COLONIAL                   PERIOD:   FOUNDATIONS             53


ant's land taxes in favor of his undertaking to cultivate govern-
ment-owned export crops on one-fifth of his fields or, alterna-
tively, to work sixty-six days of his year on government-owned
estates or other projects—was only part of a much larger complex
of politico-economic policies and institutions. Alongside the mam-
moth state plantation which this system tended to make of Java,
there was a whole series of adjuncts, related systems, and inde-
pendent growths, so that the picture of the island from 1830 to
1870 is a much more differentiated and much less static one than
that which has so often been drawn for us. A n d yet, in spite of
this, in spite of the fact that it never encompassed more than about
6 percent of Java's cultivated land or about a quarter of her people
in any one year, and although it was only fully applied for per-
haps two decades, van den Bosch's miraculous invention ("less
taxes but more Government revenue!" as de Graff exclaims in
mock wonder) does define the period. 8 And the period defines
the age: ecologically, at any rate, it was the most decisive of the
Dutch era, the classic stage of colonial history, as the Company
was the formative.
   The System, in this larger sense, was decisive in at least three
ways. By its intense concentration on Java it gave a final form to
the extreme contrast between Inner Indonesia and Outer which
thenceforth merely deepened. It stabilized and accentuated the
dual economy pattern of a capital-intensive Western sector and
a labor-intensive Eastern one by rapidly developing the first and
rigorously stereotyping the second, a gulf which also subsequently
merely widened as Dutch investment grew. And, most important
of all, it prevented the effects on Javanese peasantry and gentry
alike of an enormously deeper Western penetration into their life
from leading to autochthonous agricultural modernization at the
point it could most easily have occurred. Such charges, more seri-
ous than those usually leveled against the System by its enemies
(that it was brutal, corrupt or uneconomic), demand, clearly, both
explication and substantiation.
 8
     de Graff, 1949, p. 407.
54               THE COLONIAL PERIOD:                    FOUNDATIONS

     T h e impact of the Culture System upon indigenous Javanese
agriculture was, of course, mainly exercised through the agency
of the cultivations it imposed as substitutes for money taxes. 9
Under its aegis, virtually every crop which at the time might con-
ceivably be grown with profit was attempted: indigo, sugar,
coffee, tea, tobacco, pepper, cinchona, cinnamon, cotton, silk,
cocheneale; in Tjirebon, the government even tried for a while,
with disastrous results, to turn rice into a levy by demanding it
in lieu of taxes also and contracting with private millers to mill
it. 1 0 Almost all these experiments, save coffee and, most spectacu-
larly, sugar, eventually failed; but the effect of this tinkering with
the established ecosystems was nonetheless profound.                     Today
almost none of these crops are of central importance in Indonesian
exports, which—minerals aside—are dominated by rubber and
copra. But they established the matrix within which the present
farming system, steadily replacing profitless crops with profitable
ones, matured, and, in fact, over-ripened.
     In these terms, the imposed crops of the Culture System sorted
themselves out into two broad categories: annuals (sugar, indigo,
tobacco), which could be grown on sawahs in rotation with rice;
and perennials (coffee, tea, pepper, and less important cinchona
and cinnamon) which could not. 1 1 As a result, these two cultiva-
tions developed sharply contrasting modes of interaction with
the established biotic communities into which they were project-
 ing, by order of the King. T h e annuals tended to fall into a
mutualistic relationship with such communities, sharing their
 habitats with them, if not exactly without strain, at least without
 deterioration on either side and, in fact, with a degree of reciprocal
 encouragement. T h e perennials (except for the spices, which had
 been grown on swiddens since well before the Dutch advent)
 tended to fall into an insular relationship, pre-empting unused

     ' F o r a history of taxation practices in Java up to 1816, see Bastin, 1957.
     10   Gonggrijp, 1957, pp. 102-103.
     " T h i s point has been particularly well emphasized by van Klaveren,
 1955, pp. 18-19,118,120.
THE COLONIAL                         PERIOD:               FOUNDATIONS                                      55


h a b i t a t s a n d s e a l i n g t h e m s e l v e s off f r o m t h e i n d i g e n o u s      systems
as i n d e p e n d e n t e n c l a v e s . It is, t o a n t i c i p a t e , b u t a s o r t o f n a t u r a l
i r o n y , a k i n d o f i m m a n e n t p a r a b l e , t h a t , in t h e l o n g r u n , it w a s
t h e m u t u a l i s t i c r e l a t i o n s h i p w h i c h t u r n e d o u t t o b e t h e m o r e in-
j u r i o u s t o I n d o n e s i a n e c o n o m i c vitality.
   T h e t w o m a i n cultivations, the only ones w h i c h occupied m u c h
l a n d , a b s o r b e d s i g n i f i c a n t q u a n t i t i e s o f labor, s h o w e d     important
profit, o r e x e r c i s e d a l a s t i n g i n f l u e n c e o n t h e g e n e r a l s t r u c t u r e o f
the peasant e c o n o m y , w e r e sugar o n the annuals side a n d coffee
o n t h e p e r e n n i a l s , a n d t h e y m a y be t a k e n as t y p e c a s e s . 1 2

   Sugar d e m a n d s irrigation                  (and drainage)               and a general              en-
v i r o n m e n t a l m o s t i d e n t i c a l t o t h a t f o r w e t r i c e ; t h u s , it w a s a l m o s t
of necessity initially cultivated o n peasant sawah, for the m o s t p a r t
u n d e r the one-fifth remission of land-tax procedure.13 Coffee pre-

   13   In 1830, coffee accounted for about 36 percent of Netherlands East
Indies exports by value, sugar for about 13 percent; for 1850, the                                     figures
are 32 percent and 30 percent; for 1870, 43 percent and 45 percent. Cal-
culated from Furnivall, 1944, pp. 129, 169. F o r a while, indigo was im-
portant, particularly in some dense sawah areas (see, for example, van
D o o m , 1926, pp. 3 7 - 3 8 ) . But it never proved very profitable and eventually
became almost completely replaced by sugar as the latter                                    flourished.      In
1840 indigo accounted for nearly 9 percent of the export value; by 1870
for about 3 percent (Furnivall, as above), and eventually the invention of
synthetic dyes removed it from the scene more or less altogether. Coffee
and sugar largely dominated the later phases of the Company period too:
see Day, 1904, pp. 66-70.
   " In the indirectly ruled principalities of Surakarta and Jogjakarta, to
which this procedure did not formally extend, it was cultivated under the
seignorial village-lease system (in which the entrepreneurs rented what
were essentially political rights over the villages and the villagers who
lived in them from the Javanese aristocracy) which had by now migrated
from its original foothold on the northwest coast and shifted from Chinese
to European hands. In a few special areas, such as the still sparsely settled
Surabaja delta, the quasi-private entrepreneurs rented the necessary sawah
and hired the required labor from village authorities on a cash-and-carry
basis, usually with capital advanced by the government on condition that
the crops produced be sold to it at contracted prices. But these latter sys-
tems added up to mere variations on the basic approach—the establishment
56                  THE COLONIAL              PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS

fers a highland setting, does not need irrigation, and requires a
relatively constant labor force rather than the seasonally variable
one of sugar; thus, it was grown on so-called "waste" (that is,
uncultivated, not unculti\able) land, for the most part under the
labor-tax procedure. Sugar obligations were measured in terms of
units of land per village which had to be devoted to its cultiva-
tion; coffee assessments were levied in terms of the number of
trees each conscripted family had to care for.14 It would be ex-
pected, then, that sugar, integrated into the sawah regime, would
become a peasant crop and coffee, isolated from peasant agricul-
ture, would become an estate crop. Instead, however, in the final
three decades of the Colonial Period, about 60 percent of Indo-
nesia's coffee production was coming from (almost entirely
Outer Island) small holders, and more than 95 percent of her
sugar production (still wholly confined to Java) from Dutch-
owned corporate plantations.15
  This paradox dissolves, however, when the mutualistic and
"exclusivistic" relationships are considered. In the mutualistic re-
lationship, the expansion of one side, sugar cultivation, brings
with it the expansion of the other, wet-rice growing. The more
numerous and the better irrigated the terraces are, the more sugar

of a symbiosis between the Javanese subsistence economy and the Dutch
commercial economy. F o r a description of these variant arrangements, see
Reinsma, 1955, pp. 125-159.
     14 van     Klaaveren, 1955, p. 120. O f course, the relation between labor-force
requirements, environmental factors, and the location of the two sorts of
cultivation was again a systematic, not a linear one. In part, at least sugar
was planted in the lowlands, because that was where the usable population
was, coffee in the highlands, because that was where the usable land was.
T h e relative importance of ecological and economic variables in determining
the spatial distribution of estate agriculture in Java is difficult to determine
with any precision at this late date.
     15 F o r   coffee, Metcalf, 1952, p. 70. Small-holder sugar production, because
it was so marginal, is much harder to determine precisely; my 5 percent
or so estimate is based on the graph on p. 418, of van de Koppel, 1946.
A discussion of small-holder sugar-growing and the reasons for its weak-
ness can be found in van der Kolff, in Ruopp, 1953.
THE COLONIAL             PERIOD:   FOUNDATIONS                  57

can be grown; and the more people—a seasonal, readily available,
resident labor force (a sort of part-time proletariat)—supported
by these terraces during the nonsugar portion of the cycle, can
grow sugar.
   The dynamics on either side of this odd ecological bond sup-
port their respective growths. If terracing is improved or ex-
tended, because of more and better irrigation, the peasant food
production and commercial cultivation can both be increased
although they are being grown, so to speak, on the same land.
This, in turn, makes it possible to conscript maximum amounts
of land and labor into the commercial sector on a temporary basis
while leaving that sector "morally" free to contract whenever
market conditions so indicate, under the theory that the peasant
is only passively engaged in the wider economy and that such
contracting merely provides him—until prices recover—with
more land to farm and more time to farm it. For men whose
whole thought and feeling is consumed by export statistics, as
Gonggrijp has said of van den Bosch's, this is an attractive
arrangement. 16
  The pleasing symmetry of this picture assumes that population
increase is at least matched by the intensive or extensive growth
of sawah, and, as we shall see, this eventually came very much
not to be the case. It also assumes that the profits to be gained
from sugar (or other products) will not prove so fatally attractive
as to lead to an overexpansion of its cultivation at the peasant's
expense—a danger the government always seems to have realized
but not always seems to have been able, or perhaps willing, to
avoid. And, more to the immediate point, it assumes that there
will be no drift of the market mentality across the export-
subsistence line; namely, that Javanese peasants will not them-
selves replace the cultivation of rice on their lands by small-
holder sugar. If they do, the resultant pressure on the subsistence
base means that it will be more difficult to conscript peasant land


  " Gonggrijp, 1957, p. 195.
58         THE C O L O N I A L     PERIOD:       FOUNDATIONS

and labor. The workability of the whole mutualistic relationship
depends, in short, on each side "doing its job"—the subsistence
side feeding the labor force, and the commercial side producing
state revenue.
   Nor does this change essentially if, as also soon occurred, forced
labor is replaced by paid labor, if land is rented rather than its
use appropriated as a form of taxation, and if private entrepre-
neurs replace governmental managers. Then, it is a matter of
holding down money wages and rents and avoiding the formation
of a true proletariat without the productive means with which
to provide its own subsistence. 17 In the Culture System and its
appendages political control was pervasive enough, particularly
in the settled sawah areas, to prevent the expansion of peasant
cane growing: the main problem seems to have been to contain
the commercial pressures sufficiently to keep the peasants from
fleeing their land altogether. Later, Dutch control of milling,
legal restrictions, and semilegal pressures easily effected the same
aim of keeping small-holders out of the cane-growing business,
and there was no place left to which to flee. In the framework of
a colonial political system, the close ecological tie between sugar
and rice became the basis for their radical economic separation.
  For coffee, the situation was different. Introduced first during
the Company period in the Priangan highlands of Sunda under a
proto-Culture System arrangement, and later spread to the moun-
tainside areas of the still sparsely settled East Hook, and to some
extent of the Kedjawen, it became by the beginning of the nine-
teenth century Indonesia's most profitable export. ( W h e n the
Padri wars gave the Dutch their entree into the Padang high-
lands after 1837, the forced cultivation of coffee was introduced
there too, about the only important example of the Culture-
System type of approach outside of Java.) Cultivated, thus, on
"waste" land, coffee's fortunes were only indirectly linked with
those of peasant subsistence agriculture. Coffee did not demand

  " E v e n under the Culture System a certain quantity of money wages
and rents were paid. See Burger, 1939, pp. 140 ff.
THE C O L O N I A L      PERIOD:         FOUNDATIONS                      59

the periodic efforts of great hordes of peasant-coolies organized
ant-like into short, intensive "campaigns," but the steady, pains-
taking application of at least semiskilled labor, and so it was
cultivated by a labor force less massive and less fluctuating than
the one employed in sugar.
  Such a system naturally leads to the formation of enclave
estates, manned by permanent, fully-proletarianized workers.
Although under the Culture System labor was still drawn almost
wholly from the lower-lying rice villages, true plantations, with
coolie settlements established on or around them, soon devel-
oped, particularly in eastern Java where a supply of landless
peasants was available from well-populated but largely sawah-
less Madura. By the end of the colonial period, the divergence
between this pattern and that characteristic of sugar was virtu-
ally complete: of the four sugar enterprises studied by the Coolie
Budget Commission Report of 1939-40, none had any resident
cane workers; for the three coffee estates, 100 percent of the cool-
ies were housed on and by the estate.18
   Yet, at the same time, the Dutch were much less concerned
to discourage, or prohibit outright, peasant cultivation of coffee
than of sugar. A perennial, sugar could not be grown on sawah,
and as the government regarded all "waste" lands as its per-
sonal property, the reservation of uncultivated land to estate ex-
ploitation was easily managed. On the other hand, coffee-grow-
ing fitted well with swidden, particularly on hillsides, where
small gardens could be cared for without any real pressure on
subsistence cultivation and, in fact, as the trees helped with the
closed-cover problem, perhaps with some benefit to it. Coffee
trees could be planted in swiddens and, taking three or four
years before they became productive, could be maintained as
gardens after the other swidden crops—grains, legumes, roots—
had ceased to be economic and had been "shifted" to another

  " L i v i n g Conditions of Plantation Workers and Peasants on Java in
1939-1940, 1956, pp. 6, 13. The distinction is not always quite this sharp, of
course, but the contrast is clear over-all.
60           THE C O L O N I A L PERIOD:             FOUNDATIONS

plot, thus fitting neatly into the phased intercropping pattern of
swidden generally. Like pepper before it and rubber after it,
coffee could be woven directly into the fabric of swidden farm-
ing, and so it spread from its Dutch-established Outer Island
beachheads in west Sumatra, north central Celebes, and other
areas to free small-holder cultivation in a way sugar, bound to
sawah with that dismal combination of dependence and sepa-
ration we associate with Siamese twins, never did. 1 9
   This spread, like the full development of enclave plantations,
occurred well after the decline of the Culture System, when the
Outer Islands began to feel more directly the impact of Western
commercial interests. But the basis for the spread was laid during
the decline. The isolation of coffee cultivation on enclave Euro-
pean estates, like that of rubber later on, made the barrier to the
drift of a commercial orientation to agriculture into the peasant
sector much less formidable in the long run than did the mutual-
istic integration of sugar with wet-rice growing. Here, ecological
separation eventually reduced economic contrast, at least in the
sense that peasant agriculture became a functioning element in the
Indies' export economy rather than merely its backstop; peasant
agriculture was developed, at least in part, into a business proposi-
tion rather than becoming frozen into a kind of outdoor relief.
By the end of the colonial period, around 45 percent by value
of Outer Island peasant agriculture was embodied in export
crops as against food crops, in Java about 9 percent. Put another

  M For a discussion of the role of tree crops in the swidden cycle and their
continued harvesting over extensive periods, see Conklin, 1960. For the
integration of coffee trees into the swidden pattern in Outer Indonesia, see
van Hall, n.d., pp. 105-106; Paerels, 1946; and Pelzer, 1945, pp. 23-26. For
pepper, see Rutgers, 1946. For rubber, van Gelder, 1946; and Thomas, n.d.,
pp. 21-23 and Appendix H . Tree crop planting in swiddens is, of course,
not free of the adaptive constraints of the regime generally; much of south-
west Sumatra was planted with Robusta coffee trees in the early 1930's, only
to be abandoned with the collapse of coffee prices in the depression, leaving
vast areas to revert to imperata savannah (Benjamin Higgins, personal
communication).
 THE     COLONIAL             PERIOD:       FOUNDATIONS                     67


 way: though the production (by value) of food crops per capita
 was approximately the same, the per-capita value of export crops
 was about seven times as high in the Outer Islands. 20

   But despite this difference in relationship to existing ecological
patterns, annuals and perennials grown under Dutch auspices
shared another critical property that peasant cultivations (even
when they were the same crops and were grown for the same
commercial ends) lacked—they were integrated into a modern-
izing economy.
   This basic difference—a sociological and not an ecological one
now—split Netherlands East Indies agriculture into two radi-
cally unconformable strata which, despite Boeke's objections,
one can only call "native" and "foreign," or, perhaps better,
Indonesian and Dutch. 21 For the large-scale, well-capitalized,
rationally organized estate agriculture which by 1900 accounted
for 90 percent by value of Indonesia's exports (by 1938, after
Outer Island small holders got well established, 60 percent), was
essentially not part, save in a merely spatial or geographic sense,
of the Indonesian economy at all, but of the Dutch. 22 T h e uni-
versal practice of colonial historians of opposing the N E I econ-
omy as a unit on the one hand to the Netherlands economy as
a unit on the other merely obscures this crucial fact. There never
really was, even in Company times, a Netherlands East Indies
economy in an integral, analytic sense—there was just that, ad-
mittedly highly autonomous, branch of the Dutch economy which
was situated in the Indies ("tropical Holland," as it was some-

  20 Boeke,    1947, p. 25. As Boeke remarks, such figures (which are for 1939
and are computed on the agrarian population alone) can be at best general
estimates, particularly on the food crop side, but the order of magnitudes
is such that the broad picture is clear.
  21 Some     of the "Dutch" side actually came into British, American, etc.,
hands; by 1937 about a quarter (Allen and Donnithorne, 1957, p. 288).
Boeke's desperate attempt to dissociate dualism and colonialism is to be
found in his 1953, pp. 18-20 and passim.
  23 Metcalf,   1952, p. 8.
62                THE COLONIAL       PERIOD:   FOUNDATIONS

times called), and, cheek-by-jowl, the autonomous Indonesian
economy also situated there. And though, indeed, the two inter-
acted continuously in ways which fundamentally shaped their
separate courses, they steadily diverged, largely as a result of
this interaction, to the point where the structural contrasts be-
tween them were overwhelming. What Boeke regarded as an
intrinsic and permanent characteristic of Indonesian (or "East-
ern") economic life, "a primarily spiritual phenomenon," was
really an historically created condition; it grew not from the
immutable essence of the Eastern soul as it encountered the
incarnate spirit of Western dynamism, but from the in no way
predestined shape of colonial policy as it impressed itself upon
the traditional pattern of Indonesian agriculture.23
   This view, that the radical economic dualism which came to
characterize Indonesia was brought on by a set of colonial policies
may seem to be belied by the fact that it is found in countries
which are not colonies (Italy, for example) and also may persist
in former colonies (the Philippines, for example) after they
have become independent. But the fact that a phenomenon is
general does not mean that the particular occasions of its ap-
pearance may not be various, as the example of inflation only too
well demonstrates. Basically, the development of dualism con-
sists of a trend toward fixed (or presumed fixed) technical co-
efficients of production in more and more capital-intensive enter-
prises on the one hand, and toward variable ones in more and
more labor-intensive activities on the other, together with the
peculiarly lopsided pattern of investment, productivity, and em-
ployment which flows from this steadily widening disparity.24
Despite its formal identity from place to place, the ways in which
such a situation can arise historically are very diverse. And as
what we are concerned to understand here is not the mere pres-
ence but the extraordinary severity of this development so far as
Indonesia is concerned (with, so to speak, "runaway dualism"),

     M   Boeke, 1953, p. 14.
     " Higgins, 1959, pp. 325-340.
THE COLONIAL            PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS                     63

the nature of Dutch colonial policy, the decisive force on the
capital-intensive side, can hardly be irrelevant.
   T h e inability of Dutch private enterprise to provide the capi-
tal necessary to exploit Java efficiently was one of the main
motivating forces for the institution of the Culture System in
the first place. 25 F r o m 1816 ( w h e n the English interregnum
ended) to 1830 ( w h e n van den Bosch, plan in hand, arrived
in J a v a ) , the Dutch in Indonesia faced a situation similar to
that faced by some newly independent nations today. A once
effective mechanism for producing foreign exchange—the Com-
pany—had become exhausted and discredited, and had disap-
peared, leaving behind it an intense theoretical controversy over
how to increase the island's profitability. Land and labor were
available enough, but capital was in short supply, which ham-
pered rapid expansion of private enterprise (at least by the D u t c h )
of the sort desired by the Liberal opponents of van den Bosch. 26
Looked at against this background, the Culture System appears
to represent the kind of governmental mobilization of "redun-
dant" labor for capital creation projects which has been often
proposed and occasionally attempted in underdeveloped areas.
 W i t h i n the framework of the labor-tax system, itself cast in the
 mold of the traditional corvee powers of the indigenous aris-
 tocracy, the government built roads and bridges, expanded irri-
 gation facilities, cleared and improved large tracts of "waste"
 land, constructed buildings, and generally substituted the labor
 of the Javanese for the capital Holland lacked in laying the
 preparative foundations of a very rapidly accelerating, if dis-
 torted, process of economic growth.
  At first, such efforts to accumulate social capital by applying
redundant labor to government projects were, like the forced
work in cultivation itself, not altogether successful. (Nor was the
  26 Reinsma,  1955, pp. 17-21.
   " F o r a description and analysis of the Liberal-Conservative debate of
this period (and a spirited, not to say emotional, defense of the Conserva-
tive policy actually chosen), see Ottow, 1937.
64                THE    COLONIAL           PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS

labor always so simply redundant as it seemed, as the rice-crop
failures and attendant famines of the 1840's soon made clear.)
An estimated 100,000 days of unpaid labor on an irrigation sys-
tem in Demak went largely, and literally, down the drain,
when typical northcoast wet monsoon flooding washed out its
main work. 27 In Tjilatjap, on the south coast, even more work
seems to have been wasted when two large-scale attempts to
build a waterway to the harbor failed, one because an impossible
route had been chosen, the other because the banks caved in." 8
   But, as in the cultivations, experience proved a teacher, and
these projects soon grew more efficient and more extensive. In
the so-called Bagalen area west of Jogjakarta in the Kedjawen
a huge irrigation canal was built to support the forced indigo
cultivation and to provide water for the new "capital" of the
region of Purweredjo; the lower reaches of the Lukolo river were
rerouted to run more directly to the sea, thus draining a good part
of the coastal swamp which had made the littoral uncultivable
up to that time; and four large, as well as a great number of
small, indigo factories were built with taxation labor. 29 Clive
Day, drawing on a British government source, tells of 1,200 men,
cheered by musicians and dancing girls, laboring three months
on a single dam somewhere in Java during this period; and in
the Brantas delta around Sidoardjo, "private" entrepreneurs,
using government-supplied labor, began to build up what eventu-
ally became, after 1852, Indonesia's first technically modernized
irrigation system. 30 Concerning roadways and bridges, even fewer
 specific data seem to be available, but Furnivall remarks that in
 the beginning of the Culture System (when there was but a
 single trunk road to the interior), communications threatened

     27   Gonggrijp, 1957, p. 103.
     28   Day, 1904, p. 286. A third effort ultimately succeeded, however.
     28   Van D o o m , 1926, pp. 37-38. There was also a plan to build three sugar
mills which never materialized. Elsewhere in Java, however, government
labor was directed to mill construction: see Reinsma, 1955, p. 138.
     30   Day, 1904, pp. 285-286.
THE       COLONIAL         PERIOD:         FOUNDATIONS                     65

to be a greater bottleneck to Java's development than its fer-
tility:

. . . but the administrative machinery of van den Bosch gave the
State an almost unlimited command over free labor, and this was
employed so lavishly in some parts, if not everywhere, that in 1847
van Hoevell talks of the fine roads intersecting the countryside in
the Preangers, with bridges spanning the numerous streams and
of the imposing public buildings; and a few years later Money was
impressed by the superiority of the communications to those of
British India. 31


  F r o m the developmental point of view, therefore, the Culture
System represented an attempt to raise an estate economy by a
peasantry's bootstraps; and in this it was remarkably successful.
Benefiting from the external economies created by the formation
of social capital, the forced diffusion of plantation crops and
attendant labor skills over the island, and a certain amount of
more direct governmental assistance, private enterprises steadily
multiplied; soon their returns were great enough that they could
provide most of the investment required for the                   qualitative
changes in capital stock, particularly in sugar-milling,                which
were becoming necessary. 32 As Reinsma has well argued, the
protracted " f a l l " of the Culture System (which lasted from about
1850 to about 1915) and its gradual replacement by the Cor-
porate Plantation System were largely self-generated, because its
success in establishing a serviceable export economy infrastructure
made private entrepreneurship, originally so hampered by lack
of capital, progressively more feasible:


  81 Furnivall,   1944, p. 128. Van Hoevell was an archenemy of the system,
Money a British enthusiast for it.
  33 In   1840, private estates accounted for 17 percent of agricultural export
volume, government forced cultivation 78 percent. In 1850, the figures were
26 and 73; in I860, 58 and 39; in 1870, 43 and 52; in 1873, 72 and 19.
Reinsma, 1955, p. 157. F o r a general discussion of "social overhead capital,"
"external economies," and development, see Higgins, 1959, pp. 384-408.
66              THE     COLONIAL        PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS

A great many [private Netherlands East Indies] planters . . . had
their success to thank not to the [economic] renaissance of the
Netherlands, but to "the energy of pioneers, supported by specula-
tive elements in the Indies itself." So far as capital supply is con-
cerned, private enterprise in the motherland played a much less
powerful role in supporting the successors of the Culture System
than has commonly been suggested in the literature.33

  Like most Liberal analyses, this gives more weight to indi-
vidual character and less to social context than seems realistic.
But its essential point is accurate: though importantly assisted by
Netherlands investment in shipping and trade, the capital-inten-
sive side of the Indonesian dual economy was not merely im-
ported bodily from Holland like street canals and billiards, but
was a direct product of the workings of the Colonial System after
about 1830.
   If we look again at the two leading commercial crops of the
nineteenth century, coffee and sugar, a somewhat more palpable
picture of the developmental pattern appears, which the Culture
System "big push" generated. (Graph l . ) 3 4 T h e production of
coffee, the cultivation most immediately affected by the system,
rose sharply within ten years of the inception of mass-labor taxa-
tion to a new level as it spread extensively over the uncultivated
uplands of Java. (In 1833 somewhat more than 100 million trees
are said to have existed on Java; two years later, in 1835, about
twice that many, and by 1840-50 more than three times as
many. 35 ) But, not particularly susceptible to qualitative technical

  33 Reinsma,   1955, p. 171. T h e internal quotation is from a Dutch govern-
ment report on "the first commercial houses in Indonesia."
  " Based on figures in Furnivall, 1944, pp. 75, 104, 129, 171, 207. The be-
ginning and end points of the Culture System are the conventional ones,
and admittedly somewhat arbitrary. N o production figures for 1870 are
available, evidently.
  " V a n Klaaveren, 1955, p. 123. As not even Dutch civil servants can
have been so conscientious as to have counted 300 million coffee trees, such
figures   must, of course, be taken only as general,      order-of-magnitude
estimates.
           1807 13 2 3 3 0 33 40 43 30 33 60 63 70 73 60 83 90 53 ItOO




SOURCE: J. S. Furnivall, Netherlands   India, Cambridge (England): Cam-
bridge University Press, 1944, pp. 75, 109, 129, 171, 207.

improvement, this spread did not continue upward once it
reached its approximate limits; having found a higher level, it
oscillated around it. ( T h e severe dip in 1880-1890 was due to
disease, which was overcome in the 1890's by a shift in species.)
F o r the period of the Culture System proper, roughly the middle
half of the nineteenth century, coffee was to Java what textiles
were to England—it virtually carried the estate economy, ac-
counting in itself for between a quarter and a third of the
Indies' export income. 38

   "Furnivall, 1944, as in note 34. Though price movements obviously
shaped this pattern as it developed, they can in no simple way account for
it. From 1825 to 1855, the general trend of coffee prices was moderately
63            THE COLONIAL                 PERIOD:          FOUNDATIONS

   Sugar production, however, behaved differently. In the first
place, it rose less explosively (and also less erratically) under
the Culture System, mainly because its advances were based on
technical improvements, in both cultivation and milling, which
took time and capital to develop. Where the area planted in
cane increased only about 18 percent between 1833 and 1861, the
production per hectare of refined sugar about tripled. 37 And,
unlike the coffee expansion, this growth, once underway, con-
tinued at an accelerating rate: by 1900, productivity had doubled
again and, now that modern irrigation facilities were appearing
in significant quantity, planted area had about tripled, leading
to the five-fold output increase shown on the graph. 38 Thus, the
role of vanguard industry that coffee played up to about 1880,
sugar played for the last quarter of the nineteenth century and
into the twentieth, until in 1920 it earned more than a million
guilders of export revenue—more than all other products, min-
erals included, put together. 30

downward; after 1860 they rose rapidly until 1875, when they plunged
downward again, rising once more in 1890-1895 and falling off in 1900
 (calculated from Furnivall). Sugar prices were somewhat less fluctuating,
at least until 1885, but a similar analysis can be given for them.
   87
      Burger, 1939, pp. 130, 154. On the cultivation side the technical im-
provements consisted of more intensive planting and care under the so-
called Reynoso system; on the milling side of more and more elaborate
machinery. Between 1830 and 1839 machinery imports (mostly for sugar)
into the Netherlands East Indies averaged 1.48 million guilders annually;
1840-1849, 1.79; 1850-1859, 2.02; 1860-1869, 2.78 (Reinsma, 1955, p. 159).
Capitalization was increasing in other crops too: after 1859, the private
tobacco grower George Birnie spent more than 500,000 guilders on irriga-
tion works in Djember (Boeke, 1953, pp. 212-213.).
   " G o n g g r i j p , 1957, p. 121. Gonggrijp's figures do not entirely tally with
Burger's, but again the general direction, if not the precise values, is clear
enough. For the steady increase in per-hectare refined sugar productivity
from about 20 quintals in 1842 to about 165 in 1937, see Koningsberger,
in van Hall and van de Koppel, 1946, p. 291.
   "Furnivall, 1944, p. 337. About this time Java was contributing about
10 percent of the world's sugar supply; see graph in Bulletin of the Colonial
Institute of Amsterdam, 3:207 (1939).
THE C O L O N I A L       PERIOD:         FOUNDATIONS                     69

   In sum, if "take-off" is defined as a largely self-generated,
relatively sudden transition to sustained economic growth, then
there is at least presumptive evidence that something of the sort
occurred on the estate side of the dual economy during the
Culture System period, or—if the system itself be viewed as
merely establishing preconditions—just after it. 40 The fact that
the estate sector became progressively more closely integrated
into the modernizing Netherlands economy (and progressively
segregated from the rigidifying Javanese one) does not mean,
as has sometimes been asserted, that it was a simple creation of
that economy; it was a creation of Javanese land and labor
organized under Dutch colonial political direction. If anything,
the flow of support ran the other way: "The true measure of
[van den Bosch's] greatness," Furnivall has justly written, "is
the renascence of the Netherlands." 4 1

   The true measure of van den Bosch's malignancy, however, is
the stultification of Indonesia. For, although the Javanese helped
launch the estate sector, they were not properly part of it, nor
were they permitted to become so; it was just something they
did, or more exactly were obligated to do, in their spare time. On
their own time, they multiplied; and "take-off" on the peasant side
was of a less remunerative sort—into rapid and sustained popula-
tion growth. In 1830 there were probably about 7 million people
on Java; in 1840, 8.7; 1850 (when census-taking first became rea-
sonably systematic), 9.6; I860, 12.7; 1870, 162; 1880, 19.5; 1890,
23.6; 1900, 28A—an average annual increase of approximately 2
percent during seventy years. 42 And, here too, the pattern once

   " T h e "take-off" concept is from Rostow, 1960, pp. 36-58. However,
Rostow's analysis generally ignores the developmental patterns of colonial
economies.
  41 Furnivall, 1944, p. 152.

  "Reinsma, 1955, p. 175; The Population of Indonesia, p. 22; van Alphen,
1870, second part, p. 68. Not all these sources precisely agree, but the gen-
eral pattern is about the same. Also, of course, the rate of growth was not
steady: in the 1840's when there was famine, the annual increase seems to
70           THE COLONIAL             PERIOD:         FOUNDATIONS

established, persists (though the rate slows): 1920, 34.4; 1930,
41.7. What the precise causes of this "explosion" were and, par-
ticularly, how far it was directly rather than merely indirectly
detonated by Culture System policies, are, reliable data being
scarce, matters of debate. But there is little doubt that it was
during the Culture System period that the saying about the
Dutch growing in wealth and the Javanese in numbers first
hardened into a sociological reality. By the end of it, the Java-
nese had, as they have today, the worst of two possible worlds:
a static economy and a burgeoning population.
   The unreliability (as well as the scarcity) of agricultural sta-
tistics on the peasant sector during the nineteenth century, on both
the extent of cultivated land and the production of food crops,
makes an exact tracing of the way in which the Javanese coped
with this deepening demographic dilemma difficult. But, al-
though the stages through which their adaptation passed have
to be described in speculative terms, shored up only by frag-
mentary and indirect evidence plus some hard reasoning, the
over-all nature and direction of that adaptation are clear, and
comprise what I am going to call "agricultural involution."
   Unable to attack the problem head-on, let us attempt to get at
it by a circuitous route. Beginning with a picture of the general
situation at a later period, when statistics on peasant agriculture
are more reliable, we can try, first, to figure out how the situa-
tion characteristic of this later period could have been produced
and then, second, we can see whether the scattered historical
evidence supports the notion that it was in fact so produced.
Such a procedure amounts, admittedly, to doing history back-
wards. But it is doing history, not deducing logically the past
from the present. It is moving from a known result to an analysis
of a factually much less fully outlined process which seems to

have sunk to around 1 percent, in the 1850's to have risen to about 3 per
cent—though it is difficult to tell how much of such variation stems f r o m
irregularities in census-taking. For a review of the development of popula-
tion surveys in Indonesia, see van de Graaf, 1955, pp. 138-169.
THE C O L O N I A L      PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS                      71


have b r o u g h t the result about, in order to clarify that process a n d
give it a more concrete content.
  I n any case, the striking set of figures with which I w a n t to


                                TABLE     1

T H E LAND, POPULATION, AND RICE-PRODUCTION            CHARACTERISTICS
              OF THE SUGAR REGIONS OF JAVA IN 1 9 2 0


                                                                  Percent
                             Percent     Percent     Percent    of wet-rice
                             of land   of wet-rice   of popu-       pro-
                             of Java     land of      lation      duction
                                           Java      of Java      of Java

The 37 main sugar
  regencies                     34            46        50          49
  (47% of the total
  number of regencies)
The 98 main sugar
  districts                     15            22        24          24
  (22% of the total
  number of districts)
The 19 leading sugar
  districts                      2.6           4.6       5.3          5.2
  (4% of the total
  number of districts)

                                 Same with Percentage of Land Set
                                          as Index Base

The 37 main sugar
  regencies                    100            131      143         140
The 98 main sugar
  districts                    100            147      160         160
The 19 leading sugar
  districts                    100            178      204         200

  SOURCE: Calculated from data in: Landbouwatlas van Java en Madoera,
Mededeelingen van het Centraal Kantoor voor de Statistiek, No. 33,
Weltevreden: 1926, Part II, Tables I, III, IV, and V. In Mataram (which
in 1920 was organized slightly differently from the rest of Java), Bantul,
Sldman, and Kalasan have been counted as districts, Mataram itself as
a regency.
72               THE     COLONIAL              PERIOD:           FOUNDATIONS

                                        TABLE       2

 R E L A T I O N S H I P S B E T W E E N W E T - R I C E PRODUCTION, SAWAH          AREA,
 HARVESTED SAWAH A R E A , P E R - H E C T A R E W E T - R I C E Y I E L D S          AND
           P O P U L A T I O N I N T H E S U G A R A R E A S OF J A V A IN   1920
                 (Indexes only, with all-Java figure set as base)

                                  Ratio:     Ratio :  Percent of
                                Percent of Percent of   sawah                  Average
                                 wet-rice   wet-rice     area                    per-
                                 produc-    produc-   harvested                hectare
                                   tion/     tion/      in rice                yields of
                                percent of percent of (includes               harvested
                                  sawah     popula-    double                  (in rice)
                                    area      tion    cropping)                 sawah


The 37 main sugar
  regencies                         107              98             98              110
The 98 main sugar
  districts                         109            100              94              115
The 19 leading sugar
  districts                         113             98             85               128
All-Java (base)                     100            100            100               100

     SOURCE: S a m e a s T a b l e 1.


begin are those of Tables 1 and 2, which show the character of
the sugar areas of Java set against the population and rice-pro-
duction characteristics of the island as a whole in the year that
probably was the high-water mark of the colonial economy of
Indonesia—1920. Moving from the level of the larger and more
inclusive administrative unit, the regency, to the smaller, con-
stituent unit, the district, and then to selected districts, the tables
focus on the sugar areas of Java. 4 3
     T h e "thirty-seven main sugar regencies" are those in which
there were, in 1920, at least a thousand hectares planted in sugar.

     " T h e order of territorial administrative units in Java is: province, resi-
dency, regency, district, subdistrict. On the average there were slightly less
than six districts per regency in 1920.
74          THE COLONIAL              PERIOD:       FOUNDATIONS

The "ninety-eight main sugar districts" are those with more
than 10 percent of their total sawah acreage rented to sugar fac-
tories for cane growing in a single year (see Map 5 for their
distribution). The shift in criterion here is regrettable, but ne-
cessitated by the way in which the districts are presented in the
source. In any case, as about 94 percent of estate cane is planted on
rented peasant sawahs, the correlation of the two criteria is nearly
exact: all of the main districts lie within the main regencies.
Finally, the "nineteen leading districts" are those among the
ninety-eight "main" ones which have 25 percent or more of
their sawah so rented, the highest single percentage being a star-
tling 44 percent. Each of these categories is demarcated by sharp
cut-off points, and, therefore, all sugar areas of any consequence
are included in the table totals. (For Java as a whole, only about
8 percent of her sawah was in cane in 1920, so the concentration
in these areas was very sharp.) Table 2 presents indexes showing
how the three units compare with Java as a whole with respect
to the amount of rice produced for the amount of sawah and
population they contain, the percentage of their sawah harvested
in rice, and average per hectare yields of the sawah so harvested.44
  These figures show that within "Inner Indonesia" there is (or
was in 1920) yet another ecological nucleus, a sort of "inner"
Inner Indonesia. The sugar areas have proportionately: (1)
more sawah; (2) more population; and (3) even though more
of their sawah is occupied by sugar, more rice production than

   "Harvested area includes double (occasionally even triple) cropping, so
totals may exceed 100 percent. For example, Banjudono, a district in Sura-
karta, managed to harvest 147.5 percent of its total sawah acreage, even
though 26 percent of its sawah was rented to sugar companies! Such a
high over-all total is unusual for heavy sugar districts, however, which
averaged 90.4 percent for the 98 main districts and 81.4 percent for the 18
leading ones. But if only sawah planted in rice were considered, virtually
all such districts would be well over 100 percent. Landbouwatlas, 1926,
as in Tables I and II. T h e 8 percent of Javanese sawahs planted in cane
figure is from Huender, 1921, p. 83.
THE COLONIAL          PERIOD:       FOUNDATIONS                  75

the nonsugar areas. Further, the relationship strengthens mark-
edly, as the sugar areas are more precisely pinpointed by isolation
of the cane districts within the sugar regencies generally and
the leading cane districts among all such districts. Whatever the
causes, the tie between sugar, wet-rice, and population density
is unmistakable: all three "flourish," if that is the proper word,
together.
  In Table 2, the main factor which makes this seemingly
contradictory phenomenon possible is revealed: a progressively
higher per hectare sawah productivity. Taking Java-wide aver-
ages as a base, yields can be seen to rise as one moves to more
intensely planted sugar areas, a rise which, especially when com-
bined with the concurrent (but slower) rise in sawah, compen-
sates for the loss of rice land to cane. This, in turn, brings about
the more moderate rise in wet-rice production per total sawah
area. The question, then, is: why the higher yields?
   Two possibilities suggest themselves: (1) sugar tended to be
planted in the best rice areas; (2) rice cultivation was more effi-
ciently pursued in the sugar areas. Both of these factors certainly
were operative. Given the ecologically specialized, "aquarium"
nature of wet-rice growing, it is difficult to distinguish sharply
between them because fertility is so closely tied to level of tech-
nique rather than merely reflecting natural conditions; the best
rice areas are naturally the better-worked areas, and vice versa.
As already explained, the ecological requirements for cane and
rice are similar, therefore sugar gravitated to the most fertile
(i.e., the best-irrigated) sawahs and, by financing water-control
facilities, the companies improved and expanded such areas.
  This thesis that sugar cultivation (and to a lesser extent other
mutualistic plantation cultivations) was an operative, not merely
an accidental or derivative, link between high density, high
"sawah-ization," and high productivity is strengthened by the
following argument. First, though on the whole sugar districts
tended to be dense (and the densest districts tended to be sugar
76            THE C O L O N I A L         PERIOD:          FOUNDATIONS

districts), not all dense districts w e r e also sugar districts. 4 5 Sec-
o n d , t h o u g h sugar districts t e n d e d to be productive rice districts,
not all of the m o s t productive rice districts w e r e also cane dis-
tricts ( t h o u g h if the sugar industry h a d continued to expand,
perhaps nearly all w o u l d eventually have b e c o m e s o ) . 4 0 T h i r d ,
a similar proposition holds for percentage of total arable land
irrigated. 4 7 F o u r t h , a n d finally, if sugar districts are t h e n elimi-
nated f r o m consideration,         the close correlation b e t w e e n      per-
hectare wet-rice yields, population density, and percentage                     of
arable l a n d w h i c h is irrigated disappears or at least is noticeably
w e a k e n e d . A s K u p e r u s has s h o w n , for the universe of   nonsugar
districts ( w h a t he calls "districts i n the i n d i g e n o u s sphere") the
highest-yield districts are not those w i t h the densest population,



   "Excluding the heavy urban concentrations (Djakarta, Bandung, Sura-
karta, Jogjakarta, Semarang, and Surabaja), of the 27 districts which had
more than 700 persons per square kilometer in 1920, 20 were "main" sugar
districts; of the 78 which had more than 500, 49 were "main" sugar dis-
tricts. Landbouwatlas, Vol. II, "Text and Tables," Table I.
   48
      Of the 77 districts in which rice yields were more than 20 percent
above the Java-wide average, 38 were "main" sugar districts, 39 were not.
Landbouwatlas, Table III. The bulk of the latter were, however, con-
tiguous to sugar districts and so were subject to some of the same influ-
ences. Of the 121 districts with yields 20 percent below the Java average,
only three were "main" sugar districts, and they were just barely below
the line.
   17
      For the 37 main sugar regencies, the percentage of total cultivated land
which was irrigated was about 50, for the 98 main sugar districts 56, for the
19 leading districts, 64; for all Java, 45. Landbouwatlas, Table I. Actually,
the index problem is complicated here by the fact that many less developed
districts, especially in west Java, without much cultivated land of any
kind have what little they do have in sawah, while others, especially in
east Java, have what little they do have in dry fields, so that an aggregate
distribution by percent of land irrigated gives a misleading and incom-
prehensible picture. If one could group villages into subtypes according to
general level of agricultural development and then compare within sub-
types, the picture would be clear and systematic; but this is difficult to do
in a nonarbitrary way on the basis of the Landbouwatlas data.
THE C O L O N I A L        PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS                       77


those with the highest sawah proportions are not the densest, nor
those with the highest sawah proportions the most productive. 4 8
Evidently, sugar cultivation, through its improvement of local
ecological conditions for rice, binds those three together when
they are found together, and pushed all of t h e m to the higher
than average levels shown above. 4 9
   B u t without m o r e effective cultivation methods the Javanese
could hardly have taken advantage of these better facilities. A n d
as there was virtually no variation in capital inputs in sawah
agriculture f r o m one part of the island to another, aside f r o m
irrigation works, this greater efficiency in cultivation             derived
almost entirely f r o m a greater intensification of labor—an inten-
sification m a d e both possible and necessary by the increasing
population. T h e       practices have already been       mentioned—pre-
germination, transplanting, m o r e thorough land preparation, fas-
tidious planting and weeding, razor-blade harvesting,                double-
cropping, a m o r e exact regulation of terrace-flooding, and the

  48   Kuperus, 1930.
  48   Kuperus, who is concerned to show that Java's failure to progress is
due not to colonial impact but to internal stagnation of Javanese "culture"
since classical times, has tried to deny a link between rice yields, Western
irrigation methods, and population density for sugar areas as well. ( " T h e
Javanese culture . . . since the fall of Madjapahit has been a   fellah-culture.
T h e Javanese people have had their culture and try now only to hang on
to what cultural resources they once had. Javanese culture has stagnated
and the problem of population pressure is therefore more closely connected
to the ancient times than to the past one hundred           years of    Euro-
peanization.") Kuperus, 1930, and 1938. But as this conclusion is based on
the study of three closely grouped districts in the Tjireborn-Pekalongan
northcoast plain, two of which happen to be among the least productive of
the sugar districts, the argument is unconvincing. Only when one takes the
whole universe of sugar districts does the relative importance of various
determinants and their interactions emerge. By selecting an area in which,
evidently for local ecological reasons (abundance of water together with
distance from sources of volcanic fertilization), expansion of percentage of
land in sawah has played a greater role than increasing yields, Kuperus got
a reversed picture of their general relationship.
78            THE   COLONIAL           PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS

addition of more fields at the edges of volcanoes.50 The concen-
trative, inflatable quality of sawah, its labor-absorbing capacity,
was an almost ideal (in an ecological, not a social, sense) com-
plement to capital-intensive sugar-growing. As Table 2 shows,
it enabled the densest regions of Java to keep pace (at least until
1920) with the per-capita output of rice of the island as a whole.
   The process resembles nothing else so much as treading water.
Higher-level densities are offset by greater labor inputs into the
same productive system, but output per head (or per mouth) re-
mains more or less constant from region to region. This, how-
ever, is only the synchronic picture. From the diachronic point
of view, the important questions are: how long has this water-
treading been going on? What set it off? What sustained it?
And in this respect, two otherwise isolated facts take on signifi-
cance: first, that local overcrowding begins to be reported from
Java as early as the beginning of the nineteenth century, when
the island had a density about like that of Thailand today; 51
second, that, with the exception of a disproportionate expansion
in the Brantas basin, due mainly to large-scale irrigation improve-
ments carried out in the 1890's, the distribution of sugar cultiva-
tion in 1860, and for the most part even in 1833, was about the
same as it was in 1920, though only about a sixth as much acreage
was involved.52

  50 Though    they tend to increase labor intensification, such procedures as
double-cropping or pushing terraces up mountainsides do not, of course,
necessarily increase per-harvested-hectare yields, but increase production
mainly by increasing harvested area.
   51 Boeke, 1953, pp. 166-167. In 1817 Raffles remarks that "the population

of Java is very unequally distributed," and that the bulk of the rice pro-
duction comes from about one-eighth of the island. Raffles, 1830, I, 68, 71,
119. On the basis of colonial reports Kuperus (1930) estimates a nutri-
tional density for 1827 Java of .35 ha. cultivated land per capita. In the
"mid-1950's" Burma's nutritional density was about .44, Thailand's .38,
Malaya's .31, the Philippines' .27 (Java, 1956, .15). Ginsburg, 1961, p. 46;
Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, 1957, p. 46.
   82 Burger, 1939, p. 132.
THE COLONIAL             PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS                    79

   These fragments suggest that the ever-more energetic, region-
ally uneven process of water-treading which led to the swollen
population and intensely driven rice terraces of 1920 and later
went on steadily during the whole of the past century. F r o m
1850 on there are even some reasonably reliable figures to sup-
port this view: the per-capita production of rice between 1850
and 1900, when population was mounting as rapidly as it prob-
ably ever has in Java, is given as averaging about 106 kilograms,
with no clear trend in any direction: 1850, 106; 1865, 97 (the l o w ) ;
1885, 119 (the high); 1895, 105; 1900, 98, and so on. 53 After the
turn of the century the 1900-1940 average declined to about 96. 54
But, as we shall see, by then the expanded cultivation of dry
crops had begun to take up the slack and total per-capita output
probably remained at about the nineteenth-century level. In a
general review of the problem, Hollinger has written: " T a k i n g
all the historical evidence available into consideration, we con-
clude that per capita food consumption has been maintained
through the period of rapid population increase, but it has never
risen above a minimal level." 5 5 Less circumspect, Boeke summed
the whole picture up in a single, mordant phrase: "static ex-
pansion." 5 6
  The superimposition of sugar cultivation on the already un-
equal distribution of sawah and population over Java left the
Javanese peasantry with essentially a single choice in coping with
their rising numbers: driving their terraces, and in fact all their
agricultural resources, harder by working them more carefully.
There was no industrial sector into which to move and, as the
returns from cultivation went, in Furnivall's words, to keep the
   63 Table quoted from A. M. P. A. Scheltema, 1936, Table 11.10, in Hol-

linger, 1953b. The maintenance of the level after about 1880 seems to have
been due not only to increasing yields but new terrace construction m a d e
possible by expanded irrigation systems, particularly in the northwestern
and eastern parts of the island.
  " Hollinger, 1953b.
  B Hollinger, 1953a. See also, Wertheim and T h e Siauw Giap, 1962.

  M Boeke, 1953, p. 174.
80          THE C O L O N I A L       PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS

Netherlands from becoming another Portugal, none was devel-
oped. 57 Coffee-growing was still almost wholly a forced-labor
occupation and no real substitute for subsistence cultivation; and
the same was true of the other Culture System crops. The Java-
nese could not themselves become part of the estate economy,
and they could not transform their general pattern of already
intensive farming in an extensive direction, for they lacked cap-
ital, had no way to shuck off excess labor, and were adminis-
tratively barred from the bulk of their own frontier, the so-
called "waste lands" which were filling up with coffee trees.
Slowly, steadily, relentlessly, they were forced into a more and
more labor-stuffed sawah pattern of the sort the 1920 figures
show: tremendous populations absorbed on minuscule rice farms,
particularly in areas where sugar cultivation led to improved
irrigation; consequent rises in per-hectare productivity; and, with
the assistance after about 1900 of an expansion in dry-crop
cultivation, a probably largely stable, or very gradually rising,
standard of living. Wet-rice cultivation, with its extraordinary
ability to maintain levels of marginal labor productivity by al-
ways managing to work one more man in without a serious
fall in per-capita income, soaked up almost the whole of the
additional population that Western intrusion created, 58 at least
indirectly. It is this ultimately self-defeating process that I have
proposed to call "agricultural involution."
  I take the concept of "involution" from the American anthro-
pologist Alexander Goldenweiser, who devised it to describe those
  " F u r n i v a l l , 1944, p. 151.
  68 Just what the factors producing the population rise in the nineteenth

century were is not quite so clear as the usual references to the removal of
Malthus' positive checks would make it seem. Improved hygiene could
hardly have played a major role until fairly late. The Pax Nederlandica
had perhaps more effect, but probably not so much because so many people
had been killed in wars in the precolonial period but because the attendant
destruction of crops ceased. Probably most important, and least discussed,
was the expansion of the transport network which prevented local crop
failures f r o m turning into famines.
THE    COLONIAL              PERIOD:        FOUNDATIONS                        81

culture patterns which, after having reached what would seem
to be a definitive form, nonetheless fail either to stabilize or
transform themselves into a new pattern but rather continue to
develop by becoming internally more complicated:

The application of the pattern concept to a cultural feature in the
process of development provides . . . a way of explaining one
peculiarity of primitive cultures. The primary effect of pattern is
. . . to check development, or at least to limit it. As soon as the
pattern form is reached further change is inhibited by the tenacity of
the pattern. . . . But there are also instances where pattern merely
sets a limit, a frame . . . within which further change is permitted
if not invited. Take, for instance, the decorative art of the Maori,
distinguished by its complexity, elaborateness, and the extent to
which the entire decorated object is pervaded by the decoration. On
analysis the unit elements of the design are found to be few in num-
ber; in some instances, in fact, the complex design is brought about
through a multiplicity of spatial arrangements of one and the same
unit. What we have here is pattern plus continued development.
The pattern precludes the use of another unit or units, but it is not
inimical to play within the unit or units. The inevitable result is
progressive complication, a variety within uniformity, virtuosity
within monotony. This is involution. A parallel instance . . . is
provided by what is called ornateness in art, as in the late Gothic.
The basic forms of art have reached finality, the structural features
are fixed beyond variation, inventive originality is exhausted. Still,
development goes on. Being hemmed in on all sides by a crystallized
pattern, it takes the function of elaborateness. Expansive creativeness
having dried up at the source, a special kind of virtuosity takes its
place, a sort of technical hairsplitting. . . . Anyone familiar with
primitive cultures will think of similar instances in other cultural
domains.59
  From the point of view of general theory, there is much mis-
placed concreteness in this formulation; but for our purposes

  68 Goldenweiser,   1936. As his own reference to late Gothic art demon-
strates, however,    there   is nothing   particularly   "primitive"   about   this
process.
82         THE   COLONIAL        PERIOD:      FOUNDATIONS

we want only the analytic concept—that of the overdriving of
an established form in such a way that it becomes rigid through
an inward overelaboration of detail—not the hazy cultural vital-
ism in which it is here embedded.
   T h e general earmarks of involution that Goldenweiser lists
for aesthetic phenomena characterized the development of the
sawah system after about the middle of the nineteenth century:
increasing tenacity of basic pattern; internal elaboration and
ornateness; technical hairsplitting, and unending virtuosity. And
this "late Gothic" quality of agriculture increasingly pervaded
the whole rural economy: tenure systems grew more intricate;
tenancy relationships more complicated; cooperative labor ar-
rangements more complex—all in an effort to provide everyone
with some niche, however small, in the over-all system. If the
original establishment of terraces in Java's little interior river
galleries was but a preliminary sketch of the wet-rice mode of
adaptation, and the time of the Javanese states and of the Com-
pany saw a filling in of solid compositional substance, the Cul-
ture System period brought an overornamentation, a Gothic
elaboration of technical and organizational detail. But what
makes this development tragic rather than merely decadent is
that around 1830 the Javanese (and, thus, the Indonesian) econ-
omy could have made the transition to modernism, never a pain-
less experience, with more ease than it can do today. T o see how
this is so, however, it is necessary to look at the last major
colonial device for exploiting the archipelago, the Corporate
Plantation System, for it is under its aegis that all the immobi-
lizing processes which the Culture System so powerfully pro-
pelled settled into their definitive form.
