       1. THE ECOLOGICAL APPROACH
       IN ANTHROPOLOGY




The recent burst of efforts to adapt the biological discipline of
ecology—the science which deals with the functional relationships
between organisms and their environment—to the study of man
is not simply one more expression of the common ambition of
social scientists to disguise themselves as "real scientists," nor is
it a mere fad. The necessity of seeing man against the well-out-
lined background of his habitat is an old, ineradicable theme in
anthropology, a fundamental premise. But until recently this
premise worked out in practice in one of two unsatisfying forms,
"anthropogeography" or "possibilism"; and the turn to ecology
represents a search for a more penetrating frame of analysis
within which to study the interaction of man with the rest of na-
ture than either of these provides.

The Limitations of Traditional Approaches
       In the anthropogeographic approach, of which the clima-
tological theories of Elsworth Huntington are the most famous,
if hardly the most sophisticated, example, the problem was
phrased in terms of an investigation of the degree and manner
in which human culture was shaped by environmental condi-
2                                THE ECOLOGICAL                APPROACH

tions.1 This position did not necessarily involve a thorough-
going environmental determinism, because some variation in hu-
man culture independent of geographic forces was admitted by
even the most extreme members of this school. But such varia-
tions were put down to "accident," the escape hatch of ethnology,
or, on occasion, to "race," the escape hatch of biology. In the
possibilist approach, on the other hand, the environment was
seen not as causative but as merely limiting or selective. Geo-
graphical factors did not shape human culture—a wholly his-
torical, even "superorganic" phenomenon—but they set bound-
aries to the forms it could take at any place and time. A. L.
Kroeber's classic discussion of the confinement of maize-growing
in aboriginal North America to regions where a 120-day period
with sufficient rain and without killing frosts existed, is an ex-
ample of this even more popular type of analysis: the nature
of the environment does nothing in itself to stimulate the grow-
ing of maize, but it can insure the nongrowing of it.2
   Neither of these views is simply wrong, yet both are inade-
quate for precise analysis. Geographic factors do often seem to
play, as the anthropogeographers argued against the possibilists,
a dynamic, not merely a passive role in the development of hu-
man culture. But at the same time the direct derivation of virtu-
ally any specific cultural practice from the nature of the geo-
graphical habitat as such seems to be, as the possibilists argued
against the anthropogeographers, a nonsequitur: maize-farming
may have been well adapted to the physical conditions of the
pre-Columbian Southwest (or those conditions to it), but it can
hardly be said to have been caused by them. The indeterminacy
on either side here actually stems from a serious conceptual defect
the two approaches share. Both initially separate the works of
man and the processes of nature into different spheres—"culture"
and "environment"—and then attempt subsequently to see how
    1   Huntington, 1945. See also, Semple, 1911.
    * Kroeber, 1939, pp. 207-212. For other statements of the possibilist posi-
tion, see Forde, 1948; and Wissler, 1926.
THE ECOLOGICAL                 APPROACH                                 3

as independent wholes these externally related spheres affect one
another. With such a formulation, one can ask only the grossest
of questions: "How far is culture influenced by environment?"
"How far is the environment modified by the activities of man?"
And can give only the grossest of answers: "To a degree, but not
completely."
   The ecological approach attempts to achieve a more exact speci-
fication of the relations between selected human activities, bio-
logical transactions, and physical processes by including them
within a single analytical system, an ecosystem. In ecology gen-
erally, an ecosystem consists of a biotic community of inter-
related organisms together with their common habitat and can
range in size, scope, and durability from a drop of pond water
together with the micro-organisms which live within it to the
entire earth with all of its plant and animal inhabitants.3 The
concept of an ecosystem thus emphasizes the material inter-
dependencies among the group of organisms which form a com-
munity and the relevant physical features of the setting in which
they are found, and the scientific task becomes one of investigat-
ing the internal dynamics of such systems and the ways in which
they develop and change. "When the ecologist enters a field or
meadow," Paul Sears has written, "he sees not what is there but
what is happening there." 4
  What is happening there is a patterned interchange of energy
among the various components of the ecosystem as living things
take in material as food from their surroundings and discharge
material back into those surroundings as waste products, a proc-
ess Haeckel, who was perhaps the founder of the field of ecology
(at least he coined its name), aptly called "external physiology." 5
And as in internal physiology, so in external, the maintenance

  'Dice, 1955, p. 2.
  1 Scars, 1939, quoted in Clarke,   1954, p. 16.
  5 "Just
        as morphology falls into two main divisions of anatomy and de-
velopment, so physiology may be divided into a study of inner and outer
phenomena. . . . The first is concerned with the functioning of the organ-
4                            THE ECOLOGICAL                APPROACH

of system equilibrium or homeostasis is the central organizing
force, commonly referred to in this context as "the balance of
nature." 6 If one takes, for example, a flock of sheep in a pasture,
the sheep are, with their sharp, close-cropping teeth, apparently
destroying the grass by ingesting it. But the sheep are also ferti-
lizing the pasture with their manure. Thus, if the sheep were re-
moved the pasture would, at least in many cases, be removed
too; for trees would begin to seed and grow, finally killing off
the pasture grass, and where once was a field would now be a
wood. T h e sheep and the pasture form an integrated, equilibrated
system, each of them dependent upon the other for its existence.
Such equilibria are commonly, of course, quite complex—con-
sider the neat balance between water, oxygen, light, heat, green
plants, microscopic animals, insects, and fishes in a pond.
   Nor does the inclusion of man as an element in an ecosystem
change the nature of the basic principles. Clarke, from whom
the sheep-in-the-pasture example is drawn, tells of ranchers who,
disturbed by losses of young sheep to coyotes, slaughtered, through
collective effort, nearly all coyotes in the immediate area. Follow-
ing the removal of coyotes, the rabbits, field mice, and other small
rodents, upon whom the coyotes had previously preyed, multi-
plied rapidly and made serious inroads on the grass of the pas-
tures. W h e n this was realized, the sheep men ceased to kill
coyotes and instituted an elaborate program for the poisoning of
rodents. T h e coyotes filtered in from the surrounding areas, but
finding their natural rodent food now scarce, were forced to


ism in itself, the second with its relationships with the outer world. . . .
By ecology, we understand the study of the economy, of the household, of
animal organisms. This includes the relationships of animals with both the
organic and inorganic environments, above all the beneficial and inimical
relations with other animals and plants, whether direct or indirect."
Haeckel, 1870; quoted in Bates, 1953.
  6
    Odum, 1959, p. 25. The most systematic treatment of homeostasis as a
general phenomenon is Ashby, 1960.
THE ECOLOGICAL               APPROACH                                     5


turn with even greater intensity to the young sheep as their only
available source of food. 7
   Nevertheless, the adaptation of the principles of ecological analy-
sis and of the concepts in terms of which they are expressed
(niche, succession, climax, food chain, commensality, trophic
level, productivity, and so on) to the study of man can be con-
ducted in a variety of manners, not all of which are equally
useful. 8 T h e simplest method is merely to view the whole of
human society as basically a biotic phenomenon like any other
and to apply ecological concepts to it directly and comprehen-
sively, an approach characteristic of the school of "urban," "so-
cial," or "human" ecology founded by the sociologist Robert
Park. 9 In practice, most of such analyses turn out to be investi-
gations in what might be more properly called "locational theory"
than ecology. N o t only are the biological concepts employed
more analogically than literally, but a fundamentally a-cultural
view of human society is adopted which sees settlement patterns,
and in fact human activities generally, as an inevitable result
of the free play of competitive "natural" (or "economic") forces,
regulated, save for slight and temporary distortions introduced
by customs, sentiments and values, by the principle of least costs.
In any case, this reductionist use of ecology as an exclusive and
comprehensive frame for the analysis of human community struc-
ture is not intended here. W h e n we speak of ecological analysis
we are concerned not with "explaining the territorial arrange-
ments that social activities assume . . . the regularities which ap-
pear in man's adaptation to space," 10 but with determining the

  'Clarke, 1954, p. 19.
  8
    Bates, 1953, offers a survey of the divergent ways in which ecology has
been used as a label for human studies, some of which amount to hardly
more than sloganeering.
  "Park, 1934, 1936. For more recent formulations, see Hawley, 1950; and
Quinn, 1950. For a brilliant and devastating critique of his whole approach,
see Firey, 1947, pp. 3-38.
  10
     Firey, 1947, p. 3.
6                                    THE E C O L O G I C A L   APPROACH

relationships which obtain between the processes of external physi-
ology in which man is, in the nature of things, inextricably
embedded, and the social and cultural processes in which he is,
with equal inextricability, also embedded.


Cultural Ecology
       Much closer to the perspective adopted here is that of
Julian Steward, who has been developing a mode of analysis he
calls "cultural ecology." 1 1 The distinctive feature of his approach
is a strict confinement of the application of ecological principles
and concepts to explicitly delimited aspects of human social and
cultural life for which they are particularly appropriate rather
than extending them, broadly and grandly, to the whole of it.
The still powerful anthropological doctrine of "holism," which
holds all aspects of culture to be fully interdependent, leads to a
formulation of the culture-environment problem in gross over-
all terms and thus to the "there is something in both arguments"
paradox already mentioned. Generally characterized habitat types
—"the tropics," "the polar regions," "the high plains"—are
matched to whole, and presumptively integral, cultures—"the
Javanese," "the Eskimo," "the Sioux." On such a global level,
Huntington, for all his simplistic excesses, can make a case that
climate does somehow affect culture, for surely there is something
vaguely arctic about the Eskimo, tropical about the Javanese. But
Hegel can, with equal plausibility, dismiss environmental de-
terminism with the fine Johnsonian argument that "where the
Greeks once lived, the Turks now live; and that's an end on the
matter."
  Steward, however, rather than asserting that all aspects of cul-
ture are, in some indeterminate way, functionally interrelated,
argues that the degree and kind of interrelationship is not the
same in all aspects of culture, but varies. H e attempts to isolate
in the culture he analyzes certain aspects in which functional

    11   Steward, 1955, pp. 30-42.
THE      ECOLOGICAL           APPROACH                              7

ties with the natural setting are most explicit, in which the
interdependency between cultural patterns and organism-environ-
ment relationship is most apparent and most crucial. These as-
pects of the wider culture he terms the "cultural core," while
to aspects not so closely related to adaptive processes he merely
refers, rather lamely, as "the rest of culture." A n d it is to the
core alone that ecological analysis is relevant:

[The cultural core refers to] the constellation of features which
are most closely related to subsistence activities and economic ar-
rangements. The core includes such social, political and religious
patterns as are empirically determined to be closely connected with
these arrangements. Innumerable other features may have greater
potential variability because they are less strongly tied to the core.
These latter, or secondary features, are determined to a greater ex-
tent by purely cultural-historical factors—by random innovations or
by diffusion—and they give the appearance of outward distinctive-
ness to cultures with similar cores. Cultural ecology pays primary
attention to those features which empirical analysis shows to be most
closely involved in the utilization of environment in culturally pre-
scribed ways. 12

   A correlative analysis of the environmental side of the equa-
tion is also undertaken. It is reduced f r o m a gross variable more
or less identical to the whole habitat, geographically considered,
to those selected features which actually have functional signifi-
cance for h u m a n adaptation in any given case. Steward points
out, for example, that noncultivating societies with essentially
the same hunting technology (bow, spears, deadfalls) may differ
in various ways as a result of the kind of animals which exist in
their environment. If the main game animal exists in large herds,
say, bison or caribou, it is adaptive to engage in cooperative
hunting on a fairly sizable scale. Considerable numbers of peo-
ple are likely to remain together throughout the year, following
the herds as they move, driving them in mass surrounds, and so

  u
      Steward, 1955, p. 37.
8                                 THE E C O L O G I C A L   APPROACH

on. If, however, the game is of the sort which occurs in small
scattered groups and does not migrate, it is better hunted piece-
meal by small groups of men who know their immediate terri-
tory extremely well—large population concentrations being im-
possible at any rate. In the first situation, Steward argues, the
elementary community will tend to be a relatively large, multi-
family group, while in the second it will tend to be a small,
localized patrilineal band. These cross-cultural organizational
similarities occur, in either situation, not because of total habitat
similarity, but because crucial elements in the environment—the
type and distribution of game—are similar. Thus, the patrilineal-
band—small-animal situation is found among the Bushmen, who
live in a desert, the Negritos, who live in rain forests, and the
Fuegians, who live on a cold, rainy littoral plain. These groups
show similar social structural features despite this contrast in
habitats, because their environments are similar in the important
matter, for hunting peoples, of the type of game they contain. 13
  These two exercises in the disaggregation of global variables,
the discrimination of the "cultural core," and the definition of
the relevant environment, are directly reciprocal endeavors. If one
empirically determines the constellation of cultural features which
are most unequivocally related to the processes of energy inter-
change between man and his surroundings in any given instance,
one necessarily also determines which environmental features
have primary relevance for those same processes. The sharpness
of the division between analyses from the side of "man" and
analyses from the side of "nature" therefore disappears, for the
two approaches are essentially alternative and interchangeable
conceptualizations of the same systemic process. Ashby has form-
ulated this fundamental principle in more general terms:

As the organism and its environment are to be treated as a single
system, the dividing line between "organism" and "environment"
becomes partly conceptual, and to that extent arbitrary. Anatomically
and physically, of course, there is usually a unique and obvious dis-
    13
         Steward, 1955, pp. 122-50.
THE    ECOLOGICAL          APPROACH                                 9

tinction between the two parts of the system; but if we view the
system functionally, ignoring purely anatomical facts as irrelevant,
the division of the system into "organism" and "environment" be-
comes vague. Thus, if a mechanic with an artificial arm is trying to
repair an engine, then the arm may be regarded either as part of
the organism that is struggling with the engine, or as part of the
machinery with which man is struggling . . . The chisel in a
sculptor's hand can be regarded either as part of the complex bio-
physical mechanism that is shaping the marble, or it can be re-
garded as part of the material which the nervous system is attempt-
ing to control. 14

  O n a more explicitly cultural level the situation is similar.
T h e Eskimo's igloo can be seen as a most important cultural
weapon in his resourceful struggle against the arctic climate, or
it can be seen as a, to him, highly relevant feature of the physical
landscape within which he is set and in terms of which he must
adapt. A Javanese peasant's terrace, to use a more directly perti-
nent example, is both a product of an extended historical process
of cultural development and perhaps the most immediately sig-
nificant constituent of his "natural" environment.
  Nor, again, are only elements of so-called "material culture"
conceivable in such terms. Intimately connected with the igloo
are Eskimo settlement patterns, family organization, and sexual
division of labor. Javanese rice terraces are closely integrated with
modes of work organization, forms of village structure,          and
processes of social stratification. As one specifies more fully the
precise nature of a people's adaptation from the geographical side,
one inescapably specifies, at the same time and to the same de-
gree, their adaptation from the cultural side, and vice versa. One
delineates, in short, an ecosystem within which certain selected
cultural, biological, and physical variables are determinately inter-
related, and which will yield to the same general mode of analysis
as ecosystems within which human organisms do not happen to
play a role.

  "Ashby, 1960, p. 40.
70                        THE E C O L O G I C A L     APPROACH

   This mode of analysis is of a sort which trains attention on
the pervasive properties of systems qua systems (system structure,
system equilibrium, system change) rather than on the point-to-
point relationships between paired variables of the "culture" and
"nature" variety. The guiding question shifts from: "Do habitat
conditions (partly or completely) cause culture or do they merely
limit it?" to such more incisive queries as: "Given an ecosystem
defined through the parallel discrimination of cultural core and
relevant environment, how is it organized?" "What are the mech-
anisms which regulate its functioning?" "What degree and type
of stability does it have?" "What is its characteristic line of de-
velopment and decline?" "How does it compare in these matters
with other such systems?" And so on. One conceives of the tech-
niques of swidden agriculture as an integral part of a larger
whole which includes alike the edaphic and climatological char-
acteristics of tropical forest landscapes, the social organization of
a labor force which must be shifted continually from field to
field, and the empirical and nonempirical beliefs which influence
the utilization of scattered and varied land resources. Considera-
tion of wet-rice terracing widens out into the complex dynamics
of a sort of self-sustaining aquarium on the one hand, and into
questions of demography, underemployment, and moral valua-
tions with respect to cooperative endeavor on the other. Yet such
systems are bounded; they do not include everything. And, so
bounded, the processes by which they develop, maintain their
identity, transform themselves or deteriorate, can be specified—
as can the influence of the external, parametric conditions which
most significantly play upon them. Cultural ecology, like ecology
generally, forms an explicitly delimited field of inquiry, not a
comprehensive master science.
  Yet it is necessary also explicitly to dissent from Steward's ap-
parent assumption that although cultural ecology is not a com-
prehensive science it is nevertheless a privileged one. Referring to
that part of culture "most closely related to subsistence activities
and economic arrangements" as the "core" of it, while denoting
THE ECOLOGICAL                 APPROACH                          11

the rest of culture as "secondary," indeterminately shaped by the
accidents of random innovation and diffusion, means begging
the question. There is no a priori reason why the adaptive real-
ities a given sociocultural system faces have greater or lesser con-
trol over its general pattern of development than various other
realities with which it is also faced. The best that can be said
for such a statement as "over the millennia cultures in different
environments have changed tremendously, and these changes are
basically traceable to new adaptations required by changing tech-
nology and productive arrangements" is that it brings what is
elsewhere in Steward's work a petitio principii out in the open
as a mere prejudice.15 It is a commendably ambitious proposition,
but one which needs proof, not mere assertion. How much of
the past growth and present state of Indonesian culture and soci-
ety is attributable to ecological processes is something to be de-
termined, if at all, at the end of inquiry, not at the beginning of
it. And as political, stratificatory, commercial, and intellectual
developments, at least, seem to have acted as important ordering
processes in Indonesian history, the final awarding of prepotency
to ecological developments seems no more likely than that they
will turn out to have been inconsequential.

  15 Steward,   1955, p. 15.
      2 . TWO TYPES OF ECOSYSTEMS




Inner vs. Outer Indonesia
       A handful of mere statistics of the most routine, humdrum
sort can sketch a picture of the basic characteristics of the Indo-
nesian archipelago as a human habitat with more immediacy
than pages of vivid prose about steaming volcanoes, serpentine
river basins, and still, dark jungles. The land area of the country
amounts to about one and one-half million square kilometers, or
about that of Alaska. Of this only about one hundred and thirty-
two thousand square kilometers are in Java, the rest making up
what are usually called "the Outer Islands"—Sumatra, Borneo
(Kalimantan), Celebes (Sulawesi), the Moluccas, and the Lesser
Sundas (Nusa Tenggara). But the country's total population
(1961) is around ninety-seven million, while Java's population
alone is about sixty-three million. That is to say, about 9 percent
of the land area supports nearly two-thirds of the population;
or, reciprocally, more than 90 percent of the land area supports
approximately one-third of the population. Put in density terms,
Indonesia as a whole has about 60 persons per square kilometer;
Java has 480, and the more crowded areas of the central and
east-central parts of the island more than a thousand. On the
TWO TYPES OF                ECOSYSTEMS                                    13

other hand, the whole of Indonesia minus Java (i.e., the Outer
Islands) has a density of around twenty-four per square kilo-
meter. T o summarize: all over, 60; the Outer Islands, 24; Java,
480: if ever there was a tail which wagged a dog, Java is the
tail, Indonesia the dog. 1
  T h e same plenum and vacuum pattern of contrast between
Java and the Outer Islands appears in land utilization. Almost
70 percent of Java is cultivated yearly—one of the highest pro-
portions of cropland to total area of any extensive region in the
world—but only about 4 percent of the Outer Islands. Estate
agriculture aside, of the minute part of the Outer Islands which
is cultivated, about 90 percent is farmed by what is variously
known as swidden agriculture, shifting cultivation, or slash-and-
burn farming, in which fields are cleared, farmed for one or more
years, and then allowed to return to bush for fallowing, usually
eventually to be recultivated. On Java, where nearly half the
smallholder's crop area is under irrigation, virtually no swidden
agriculture remains. In the irrigated regions, field land is in wet-
rice terraces, about half of them double-cropped, either with more
wet rice or with one or several secondary dry crops. In the un-
irrigated regions, these dry crops (maize, cassava, sweet potatoes,
peanuts, dry rice, vegetables, and others) are grown in a crop-
and-fallow regime. Production statistics present, of course, the
same picture: in 1956 approximately 63 percent of Indonesia's
rice, 74 percent of her maize, 70 percent of her cassava, 60 percent
of her sweet potatoes, 86 percent of her peanuts, and 90 percent
of her soya beans were produced in Java. 2
  Actually, this fundamental axis of ecological contrast in Indo-


  1   Sumaniwata, 1962. Madura is included with Java in the calculations but
the transitional area of West New Guinea (Irian) is not included. For a
useful general summary of Indonesian demographic realities, see T h e
Population of Indonesia, 1956.
  ' Metcalf, 1952. Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, 1957, p. 51. Com-
mercial crop cultivation shows, however, a sharply contrasting pattern.
14                        T W O TYPES OF         ECOSYSTEMS

nesia is not altogether accurately demarcated when one phrases
it, following the received practice of the census takers, simply
in terms of Java (and Madura) versus the Outer Islands, because
in fact the "Javanese" pattern is found in southern Bali and west-
ern Lombok as well, and is but weakly represented in the south-
western corner of Java (South Bantam and South Priangan)
where a pattern more like that of the Outer Islands, including
a certain amount of swidden, is found. Thus, we might better
refer to the contrast as one between "Inner Indonesia"—north-
west, central, and east Java, south Bali, and west Lombok; and
"Outer Indonesia"—the rest of the Outer Islands plus southwest
Java, which do in fact form more or less of an arc pivoted on
central Java. (See Map 1.) Such a division is, in any case, a
gross one which needs modification in detail: patches of rela-
tively intensive irrigation agriculture are found at either tip,
T W O TYPES OF               ECOSYSTEMS                              75

around Lake Toba, and in the western highlands in Sumatra as
well as in the southwest arm of the Celebes, for example, and
eastern Madura deviates somewhat from the Javanese norm. 3 But
it does lead, in a broad and general way, to a fruitful discrimina-
tion of two different sorts of ecosystems with two different sorts
of dynamics—one centering on swidden agriculture, one on wet-
rice agriculture—in terms of which the striking differences in
population density, modes of land use, and agricultural pro-
ductivity can be understood.


Swidden
       As Conklin has pointed out, much of the inadequate treat-
ment swidden agriculture has received in the literature is a result
of the fact that characterizations of it have tended to be nega-
tively phrased. 4 Thus, Gourou outlines as its four most distinc-
tive features: (1) it is practiced on very poor tropical soils; (2)
it represents an elementary agricultural technique which utilizes
no tool except the axe; (3) it is marked by a low density of
population; and (4) it involves a low level of consumption. 5
Similarly, Pelzer says that it is marked by a lack of tillage, less
labor input than other methods of cultivation, the nonutilization
of draft animals and manuring, and the absence of a concept of
private landownership. 6 For Dobby, it represents "a special stage
in the evolution from hunting and food gathering to sedentary
farming," this specialness evidently consisting of such null traits
as nonrelation to pastoral pursuits and the production of very
little which is of trading or commercial significance. 7 And for
many, by far its most outstanding feature is that singled out by
Spate—namely, that its practice is "attended by serious defores-


 8                                   «
    Terra, 1958.                         Pelzer, 1945, pp. 16 ff.
  4
    Conklin, 1957, p. 149.           7
                                         Dobby, 1954, pp. 347-349.
  6
    Gourou, 1956.
16                            T W O T Y P E S OF         ECOSYSTEMS

tation and soil erosion." 8 Aside from the fact that most of these
depreciatory statements are dubious as unqualified generaliza-
tions (and a few are simply incorrect), they are not of much
help in understanding how swidden farming systems work.


   In ecological terms, the most distinctive positive characteristic
of swidden agriculture (and the characteristic most in contrast to
wet-rice agriculture) is that it is integrated into and, when genu-
inely adaptive, maintains the general structure of the pre-existing
natural ecosystem into which it is projected, rather than creating
and sustaining one organized along novel lines and displaying
novel dynamics. In the tropics, to which, for reasons we may post-
pone considering, this form of cultivation is today largely con-
fined, the systemic congruity between the biotic community man
artificially establishes on his swidden plot and that which exists
there in stable climax independent of his interference (in the
main, some variety of tropical forest) is striking. Any form of
agriculture represents an effort to alter a given ecosystem in such
a way as to increase the flow of energy to man: but a wet-rice
terrace accomplishes this through a bold reworking of the natural
landscape; a swidden through a canny imitation of it.
   The first systemic characteristic in which a swidden plot simu-
lates a tropical forest is in degree of generalization. By a general-
ized ecosystem is meant one in which a great variety of species
exists, so that the energy produced by the system is distributed
among a relatively large number of different species, each of
which is represented by a relatively small number of individuals.
If, on the contrary, the system is one with a relatively small num-
ber of species, each of which is represented by a relatively large
number of individuals, it is said to be specialized. Put somewhat
more technically, if the ratio between number of species and
number of organisms in a biotic community is called its diversity
index, then a generalized ecosystem is one characterized by a

  ' Spate, 1945, p. 527, quoted in Leach, 1954, p. 22.
T W O T Y P E S OP      ECOSYSTEMS                                   17

community with a high diversity index, a specialized one by a
community with a low diversity index. Natural communities
tend to vary widely in their degree of generalization, or the size
of their diversity index: a tropical forest, and in particular a rain
forest, is a very generalized, very diverse community, with an
enormous variety of plant and animal species sporadically repre-
sented; a tundra is characterized by a very specialized, uniform
community, with relatively few species but, at least in the sub-
arctic, a large number of clustered individuals. 9
   Much of the most effective human utilization of the natural
habitat consists of changing generalized communities into more
specialized ones, as when natural ponds containing a wide variety
of green plants, aquatic animals, and fishes are transformed into
managed ones in which the number of types of primary plant
producers is sharply reduced to those which will support a few
select types of fish edible by man. The rice terrace, which can, in
these terms, be viewed as a sort of slowly drained, managed pond
focused on an edible plant, is an outstanding example of arti-
ficially created specialization. The reverse process, increased gen-
eralization, also occurs, of course, as when man introduces into
a temperate grassland area (for example, the American prairie) a
wide variety of interrelated domestic plants and animals, which,
though they constitute a much more diverse community than that
indigenous to the area, nonetheless prove to be viable within it.
  Still other human adaptations, however, attempt to utilize the
habitat not through altering its diversity index, but through more
or less maintaining its over-all pattern of composition while
changing selected items of its content; that is, by substituting
certain humanly preferred species for others in functional roles
("niches") within the pre-existing biotic community. This is not
to say that such adaptations do not seriously alter the indigenous
ecosystem (as, in a gross sense, most hunting and gathering adap-
tations do not), or that their general effect on the balance of

  "These concepts are taken from Odum, 1959, pp. ii, 50-51, 77, 281-283,
316, and 435^37.
78                              T W O T Y P E S OF          ECOSYSTEMS

nature may not sometimes be a radical one; but merely that they
alter the indigenous ecosystem by seeking to replace it with a
system which, although some of its concrete elements are differ-
ent, is similar to it in form, rather than by a system significantly
more specialized or more generalized. Large-scale cattle herding
during the nineteenth century on the previously buffalo-domi-
nated southern and western plains is an example of this type of
adaptation within a specialized system. Swidden agriculture is
certainly an example of it within a generalized one.
   The extraordinarily high diversity index of the tropical forest,
the kind of natural climax community which still characterizes
the bulk of Outer Indonesia, has already been mentioned. Though
there are probably more floral species in this region than any
other of comparable size in the world (van Steenis has estimated
that between twenty and thirty thousand species of flowering
plants, belonging to about 2,500 families, can be found in the
archipelago), continuous stands of trees or other plants are rare,
and the occurrence of as many as thirty different species of trees
within a hundred square yards is not at all uncommon. 1 0 Simi-
larly, on about a three-acre swidden plot in the Philippines (de-
tailed field studies are lacking for Indonesia as such) Conklin has
seen as many as forty different sorts of crops growing simul-
taneously, and one informant drew an ideal plot containing at
one time forty-eight basic kinds of plants. The people of the area,
the Hanunóo of Mindoro, distinguish more than sixteen hundred
different plant types (which is a finer classification than that em-
ployed by systematic botanists), including the astounding number

   " v a n Steenis, 1935; and Dobby, 1954, p. 61. This floral diversity is paral-
leled by an equally great wealth of fauna: the industrious as well as famous
naturalist A. R. Wallace found 200 species of beetles in a square mile of
Singapore forest and brought back a total of more than 125,000 animal
specimens from the general Malaysian region. Robequain, 1954, pp. 38-59.
For a general ecological analysis of tropical forest plant diversity, see Rich-
ards, 1952, pp. 231-268. More popular accounts, but which include some
discussion of fauna as well, are Bates, 1952, pp. 175-211; and Collins, 1959.
T W O TYPES OF                    ECOSYSTEMS                                                 79

of four hundred thirty cultivates. 11 Conklin's vivid description of
what a H a n u n o o swidden in full swing looks like gives an ex-
cellent picture of the degree to which this agriculture apes the
generalized diversity of the jungle which it temporarily replaces:

Hanunoo agriculture emphasizes the intercropping of many types
of domesticated plants. During the late rice-growing seasons, a cross
section view of a new [plot] illustrates the complexity of this type
of swidden cropping (which contrasts remarkably with the type of
field cropping more familiar to temperate zone farmers). At the
sides and against the swidden fences there is found an association
dominated by low, climbing or sprawling legumes (asparagus beans,
sieva beans, hyacinth beans, string beans, and cowpeas). As one
goes out into the center of the swidden, one passes through an
association dominated by ripening grain crops but also including
numerous maturing root crops, shrub legumes and tree crops. Pole-
climbing yam vines, heart-shaped taro leaves, ground-hugging sweet
potato vines, and shrublike manioc stems are the only visible signs
of the large store of starch staples which is building up under-
ground, while the grain crops fruit a meter or so above the swidden
floor before giving way to the more widely spaced and less rapidly-
maturing tree crops. Over the first two years a new swidden pro-
duces a steady stream of harvestable food in the form of seed grains,
pulses, sturdy tubers, and underground stems, and bananas, from
a meter below to more than 2 meters above the ground level. And
many other vegetable, spice and nonfood crops are grown simultane-
ously. 12


   T h e second formal characteristic common to the tropical-forest
and swidden-agriculture ecosystems is the ratio of the quantity

  11   C o n k l i n , 1954. Other valuable field studies of s w i d d e n in Malaysia in-
clude, F r e e m a n , 1955 (on diversity, pp. 5 1 - 5 4 ) ; a n d G e d d e s , 1954      (on
diversity, pp. 6 4 - 6 5 ) . A brief description of s w i d d e n - m a k i n g in E a s t Indo-
nesia can be f o u n d in Goethals, 1961, pp. 25-29.
  " C o n k l i n , 1957, p. 147. Conklin estimates that in the first a n d m o s t
active year of the s w i d d e n cycle up to 150 specific crop types m a y                   be
planted at one time or another.
20                         TWO TYPES          OF    ECOSYSTEMS

of nutrients locked up in living forms (that is, the biotic com-
munity) to that stored in the soil (that is, the physical sub-
stratum) : in both it is extremely high. Though, as with the
tropical forest itself, much variation is found, tropical soils are
in general extensively laterized. As precipitation in most of the
humid, rain-heavy tropics greatly exceeds evaporation, there is
a significant downward percolation through the soil of relatively
pure, lukewarm water, a type of leaching process whose main
effect is to carry away the more highly soluble silicates and bases,
while leaving behind a dreary mixture of iron oxides and stable
clays. Carried to an extreme, this produces ferralite, a porous,
crumbly, bright-red, acidic soil which, however excellent the
Indonesians find it for making bricks without straw, is of much
less value from the point of view of the support of plant life.
Protected to a certain extent by the shielding effects of the thick
 vegetation cover, most tropical soils have not developed such a
serious case of what Gourou has called pedological leprosy. 13 But
 the great majority of them, having been exposed to these ultra-
 stable climatic conditions over very long periods of time, are
 markedly leached, and thus seriously impoverished in minerals
 requisite to the sustenance of life. 14
  This apparent and oft-remarked paradox of a rich plant and
animal life supported on a thin soil is resolved by the fact that
the cycling of material and energy among the various components
of a tropical forest is both so rapid and so nearly closed that only
the uppermost layers of the soil are directly and significantly in-
volved in it, and they but momentarily. The intense humidity and
more or less even distribution of rainfall, the equable, moderately
elevated temperatures, the small month-to-month variations in
day length and amount of sunlight—all the monotonous con-

    Gourou, 1953b, p. 21.
     13

    This paragraph and those immediately following are based mainly on
     14

Richards, 1952, pp. 203-26; Dobby, 1954, pp. 74-84; and Gourou, 1953b,
pp. 13-24. However, much remains to be learned about soil factors in the
tropics.
 T W O T Y P E S OF       ECOSYSTEMS                              21

 stancies of the tropics—are conducive to a high rate of both de-
 composition and regeneration of animal and vegetable material.
 Speedy decomposition is insured by the multiplication of bac-
 teria, fungi and other decomposers and transformers which the
 humid conditions favor, as well as by the multitude of herbiver-
 ous animals and insects who are so ravenous that, as Bates re-
marks, virtually "every fruit and every leaf [in the tropical forest]
has been eaten by something." 15 An enormous amount of dead
matter is thus always accumulating on the forest floor—leaves,
branches, vines, whole plants, faunal remains and wastes; but
their rapid decay and the high absorptive capacity of the luxuriant
vegetation means that the nutrients in this dead organic matter
are reutilized almost immediately, rather than remaining stored
to any great extent or for any great length of time in the soil
where they are prey to the leaching process.
   T h e role of humus in creating a topsoil storehouse of nutrient
 materials in colloidal form to be drawn upon gradually as needed,
 which looms so prominently in ecosystems at higher latitudes, is
here minimized; organic materials rarely extend in significant
quantity more than a few inches beneath the forest floor, because
the nutrients set free by the rapid decay of dead matter arc
quickly taken up again by the shallow, splayed root systems of
the intensely competitive plants. Thus, despite the heavy rains,
loss of nutrients due to runoff in this process of transfer is very
slight, so that quite marginal additions of energy from outside
the system through nitrogen fixing in leguminous trees and ad-
sorption of minerals released by rock decomposition are them-
selves enough to compensate for it. The climax community, once
established, through still imperfectly understood processes of
ecological succession, is thus virtually self-perpetuating. By main-
taining most of its energy in the form of living things most of
the time, the tropical-forest ecosystem is able to prevent any sig-
nificant escape of energy across its boundaries and to circumvent


 " Bates, 1952, p. 209.
22                            TWO TYPES OF               ECOSYSTEMS

the problem of impoverished soil conditions by feeding largely
upon itself.
   Swidden agriculture operates in essentially this same superna-
tant, plant-to-plant, direct cycling manner. The burning of the
slashed plot is at base a means both of accelerating the process of
decay and of directing that process in such a fashion that the nu-
trients it releases are channeled as fully as possible into certain se-
lected food-producing plants. A significant proportion of the min-
eral energy upon which swidden cultivates, and especially the
grains, draw for their growth comes from the ash remains of the
fired forest, rather than from the soil as such, so that the com-
pleteness with which a plot is burnt is a crucial factor in deter-
mining its yield, a fact of which probably all swidden cultivators
are aware. 16 A good burn, in turn, is dependent on the one hand
upon the care and thoroughness with which the vegetation has
been cut, and on the other upon the dryness of the weather dur-
ing the cutting-planting period. Over the thoroughness of the
cutting the cultivators have a high degree of control and, though
different groups of swidden agriculturalists, as any other type of
farmers, vary widely in their skills, yet their felling, slashing,
trimming techniques, as well as their actual firing methods, are
commonly well developed. Over the weather they have, of course,
 no control (though they are usually adept at estimating it), and
intense ritual activity is commonly directed toward preventing
 rain, or at least maintaining confidence, during the anxious, all-
 important few weeks between cutting and sowing. At any rate,
 the primary function of "slash and burn" activities is not mere
 clearing of the land (the use of the term "clearing," with respect


  16 For example, among the Mandaya of eastern Mindanao, those cultivat-

ing over 1,700 feet where burning is impossible because of the absence of a
dry period harvest about 10 to 15 cavans of rice per hectare, while those
cultivating in lower areas where burning is possible average 30-35; A r a m
A. Yengoyan, personal communication. In general, however, the precise
effect of firing as a fertilizing mechanism remains to be investigated experi-
mentally, like so much else about swidden.
TWO       TYPES          OF       ECOSYSTEMS                             23

to swiddens is actually somewhat misleading) but rather the
transfer of the rich store of nutrients locked up in the prolific
vegetation of the tropical forest to a botanical complex whose
general ecological productivity, in the sense of the total energy
flow in the system, may be substantially smaller but whose yield
to man is a great deal larger. 17
   General ecological productivity is lower because this transfer is
less efficient than that which takes place under natural conditions
of decay and regeneration. Here, a large amount of energy does
escape across the boundaries of the system. Gourou estimates that
between six and nine hundred pounds of nitrogen alone go up in
smoke in the burning of a single acre of forest; and, despite the
utmost shrewdness in judging the weather and the greatest speed
in firing and planting, much ash is inevitably washed away by
the rains before it can be utilized by the cultivates, fast growing
as they tend to be. 18 Further, as the cultivates are less woody in
substance than those indigenous to the forest, they do not form
a very appropriate material for the technique of accelerating and
channeling nutrient transfer through the deliberate production of
ash, and so the firing process is not continuously repeatable. T h e
result is, of course, the well-known drop in fertility on swidden
plots (rice output of south Sumatran plots is known to drop as
 much as 80 percent between a first and second cropping), and the
 surrender of the plot to natural regeneration. 19
  But, despite the fact that secondary forest growth is, at least
in the earlier phases of regeneration, notably less luxuriant than
primary, if the period of cultivation is not too long and the period
of fallow long enough, an equilibrated, nondeteriorating and rea-
sonably productive farming regime (productive in the sense of

  " T h i s analysis is based on the descriptions of swidden techniques given
in Conklin, 1957, pp. 4 9 - 7 2 ; Freeman, 1955, pp. 4 0 - 4 8 ; and Hose and
MacDougal, 1912. F o r the distinction between ecological productivity and
yield to man, see Clarke, 1954, pp. 482-500.
  " G o u r o u , 1953b, p. 26.
  " P e l z e r , 1945, p. 16.
24                              T W O T Y P E S OF        ECOSYSTEMS

yield to man) can be sustained, again to a significant degree irre-
spective of the rather impoverished soil base on which it rests. 20
The burned forest provides most of the resources for the culti-
vates; the decaying cultivates (nothing but the edible portions of
plants is removed from the plot) and the natural processes of
secondary succession, including invasions from the surrounding
forest within which plots are usually broadly dispersed rather than
tightly clustered, provide most of the resources for the rapidly
recuperating forest. As in the undisturbed forest, "what happens"
in an adapted swidden ecosystem happens predominantly in the
biotic community rather than in the physical substratum.


   Finally, a third systemic property in which the tropical forest
and the swidden plot tend to converge is general architecture:
both are "closed-cover" structures. T h e tropical forest has often
been compared to a parasol, because of the effectiveness with
which the tall, closely packed, large-crowned, evergreen trees
both deflect the rain and shut out the sun so as to protect the soil
against the worst effects of the leaching process, against baking,
and against erosion. Photosynthesis takes place almost entirely
at the very top of the forest, from a hundred to a hundred and
fifty feet up, and so most of the growing things (as well as much
of the faunal life) reach desperately toward this upper canopy
seeking their small place in the sun, either by climbing, as the
thousands of woody lianas and other vines, by finding an epi-
phytic perch, as the orchids and ferns, or by mere giantism, as
the dominant trees and the bamboos, leaving the darkened floor
relatively free of living plants. 21 In a swidden, this canopy is, of
course, radically lowered, but much of its umbrella-like continuity
is maintained, in part by planting cultigens not in an open field,
crop-row manner, but helter-skelter in a tightly woven, dense
botanical fabric, in part by planting shrub and tree crops of vari-

 30
      Conklin, 1957, p. 152; Lcach, 1954, p. 24; and Geddes, 1954, pp. 65-68.
 31
      Bates, 1952, pp. 200-203.
TWO TYPES OF            ECOSYSTEMS                                    25

ous sorts (coconuts, areca, jakfruit, banana, papaya, and today in
more commercial areas rubber, pepper, abaca, and coffee), and in
part by leaving some trees standing. In such a way, excessive
exposure of the soil to rain and sun is minimized and weeding,
exhausting task in any case, is brought within reasonable propor-
tions because light penetration to the floor is kept down to a much
lower level than in an open-field system.22

   In sum, a description of swidden farming as a system in which
"a natural forest is transformed into a harvestable forest" seems
a rather apt one.23 With respect to degree of generalization (di-
versity), to proportion of total system resources stored in living
forms, and to closed-cover protection of an already weakened soil
against the direct impact of rain and sun, the swidden plot is not
a "field" at all in the proper sense, but a miniaturized tropical
forest, composed mainly of food-producing and other useful culti-
vates. Yet, as is well known, though less well understood, the
equilibrium of this domesticated form of forest system is a great
deal more delicate than that of the natural form. Given less than
ideal conditions, it is highly susceptible to breakdown into an
irreversible process of ecological deterioration; that is, a pattern
of change leading not to repeated forest recuperation but to a
 replacement of tree cover altogether by the notorious imperata
 savannah grass which has turned so much of Southeast Asia into
a green desert.24

  M F o r an excellent description of the concurrent employment by recent

immigrant Javanese farmers of an open-field system and by indigenous
farmers of a closed-field one in the Lampong area of south Sumatra, and of
the essential defeat of the former by the weeding problem, see, Kampto
Utomo, 1957, pp. 127-132. Some forms of partial swidden-farming—i.e.,
where swidden is auxiliary to other forms of cultivation—are, however,
open-field systems; while integral systems—i.e., where swidden is the sole
form of cultivation—commonly are not. I owe this point to Harold Conklin.
  23 Kampto Utomo, 1957, p. 129.
  !1 Gourou, 1953a, p. 288, estimates that about 40 percent of the Philip-
pines and 30 percent of Indonesia are covered with imperata, presumably
26                             TWO     TYPES      OF    ECOSYSTEMS


   Swidden cultivation may turn thus maladaptive in at least three
ways: by an increase in population which causes old plots to be
recultivated too soon; by prodigal or inept agricultural practices
which sacrifice future prospects to present convenience; and by an
extension into an insufficiently humid environment in which the
more deciduous forests have a much slower recovery rate and in
which clearing fires are likely to burn off accidentally great stands
of timber. 25 The population problem has been much discussed,
though exact figures are difficult to obtain. Van Beukering has
put the population ceiling for swidden in Indonesia over-all at
about 50 per square kilometer, Conklin estimates that the Ha-
nunoo area can carry 48 per square kilometer without deteriora-
tion, and Freeman calculates 20-25 as the maximum in his central
Sarawak region; but it is not known to what degree the various
local population densities in Outer Indonesia now exceed critical
limits and are producing grassland climaxes as a result of the
need for more rapid ^cultivation. 26 With the population of the
region now increasing at 2 percent or more annually, however,
the problem seems likely to become overtly pressing in the not
too distant future; glib references to Outer Indonesia as "grossly
underpopulated" constitute a simplistically quantitative and eco-
logically naive view of demography.
  The fact that wasteful or inept methods may be destructive to
the long-run equilibrium of swidden agriculture not only under-
scores the wide variation in proficiency with which different
groups of shifting cultivators operate, but, even more important,

nearly all of it caused by man. These figures may be somewhat high, how-
ever: Pelzer, 1945, p. 19, estimates the Philippine grassland percentage
at 18.
  26 A   full consideration of the factors relating to the breakdown of the
swidden cycle into a deflected grassland succession would need, of course,
to consider topographical and edaphic variables, the role of animal hus-
bandry, associated hunting practices, and so on. For such a micro-analysis,
see Conklin, 1959.
  x   Van Beukering, 1947. Conklin, 1957, pp. 146-147. Freeman, 1955, pp.
134-135. These various figures are all somewhat differently calculated.
T W O TYPES OF              ECOSYSTEMS                                        27

demonstrates that cultural, social, and psychological variables are
at least as crucial as environmental ones in determining the
stability of human modes of adaptation. An example of such a
thriftless use of resources by swidden farmers is provided by Free-
man who says that the Iban have been less shifting cultivators
than mangeurs de bois,27 Located in a primary forest area into
which they have fairly recently expanded at the expense of in-
digenous tribes, the Iban are well below maximum population
densities. But they nevertheless seriously overcultivate, often using
a single plot three years in succession or returning to a fallowed
one within five years, and thereby causing widespread deforesta-
tion. The reasons for this overcultivation are various, including an
historically rooted conviction that there are always other forests
to conquer, a warrior's view of natural resources as plunder to be
exploited, a large village settlement pattern which makes shifting
between plots a more than usually onerous task, and, perhaps, a
superior indifference toward agricultural proficiency. But, again,
to what degree such prodigality exists among the swidden agri-
culturalists of Outer Indonesia is virtually unknown.
   As for the climatic factor, the most highly generalized, ever-
green, closed-cover tropical forest, commonly specified as "rain
forest" is chiefly characteristic of equatorial lowland areas where a
marked dry season is absent; as one moves toward higher-latitude
areas with a marked dry season, it shades off, more or less gradu-
ally, into a shorter, more open, less diverse, and at least partly
deciduous variety of tropical forest, usually called "monsoon
forest." 28 The delicacy of swidden equilibrium increases at equal
pace with this transition toward a more subtropical environment
because of the steadily diminishing power of the natural com-
munity rapidly to reconstitute itself after human interference. The
greater ease, and uncontrollability, with which such drier wood-

  27 Freeman,   1955, pp. 135-141.
  ^ D o b b y , 1954, pp. 62, 65-70. Variation in tropical forest composition is
also affected by altitude, soil, and local land mass configurations. F o r a full
discussion, see Richards, 1952, pp. 315-374.
28                              T W O T Y P E S OF        ECOSYSTEMS

lands burn, fanned often by stronger winds than are common in
the rain forest areas, only increases the danger of deterioration to
grassland or scrub savannah and, in time, by erosion to an almost
desert-like state. The southeast portion of the Indonesian archi-
pelago, the Lesser Sundas, where the parching Australian mon-
soon blows for several months a year, has been particularly ex-
posed to this general process of ecological decline, and in some
places devastation is widespread. 29 All in all, the critical limits
within which swidden cultivation is an adaptive agricultural
regime in Outer Indonesia are fairly narrow.

Sawah
      The micro-ecology of the flooded paddy field has yet to be
written. Though extensive and detailed researches into the botan-
ical characteristics of wet rice, its natural requirements, the tech-
niques of its cultivation, the methods by means of which it is
processed into food, and its nutritional value have been made, the
fundamental dynamics of the individual terrace as an integrated
ecosystem remain unclear. 30 The contrast between such a terrace
—an artificial, maximally specialized, continuous-cultivation,
open-field structure to a swidden plot could hardly be more ex-
treme; yet how it operates as an organized unit is far from being
understood. Knowledge remains on the one hand specialized and
technical, with developed, even experimental, analyses of breed-
ing and selection, water supply and control, manuring and weed-
ing, and so on, and, on the other, commonsensical, resting on a
vast, unexamined accumulation of proverbial, rice-roots wisdom
concerning similar matters. But a coherent description of the
manner in which the various ecological components of a terrace
 interrelate to form a functioning productive system remains
 noticeable by its absence. So far as I am aware, a genuinely de-
 tailed and circumstantial analysis of any actual wet-rice field (or
 group of fields) as a set of "living organisms and nonliving sub-

     " See Ormeling, 1956.
       For an encyclopedic summary of such researches, see Grist, 1959.
TWO        TYPES        OF   ECOSYSTEMS                                29

stances interacting to produce an exchange of material between
with living and the non-living parts" does not exist in the
literature. 31


   The most striking feature of the terrace as an ecosystem, and
the one most in need of explanation, is its extraordinary stability
or durability, the degree to which it can continue to produce,
year after year, and often twice in one year, a virtually undimin-
ished yield. 32 "Rice grown under irrigation is a unique crop,"
the geographer Murphey has written,

   . . . soil fertility does affect its yield, as does fertilization, but
it does not appear to exhaust the soil even over long periods with-
out fertilization, and in many cases it may actually improve the soil.
On virgin soils a rapid decline in yield usually takes place, in the
absence of fertilization, within the first two or three years, but after
ten or twenty years the yield tends to remain stable more or less
indefinitely. This has been borne out by experiments in various
parts of tropical Asia, by increased knowledge of the processes in-
volved, and by accumulated experience. On infertile soils and with
inadequate fertilization the field stabilizes at a very low level, as is
the case now in Ceylon and most of South Asia, but it does stabilize.
Why this should be so is not yet entirely understood.33

  T h e answer to this puzzle almost certainly lies in the paramount
role played by water in the dynamics of the rice terrace. Here, the
characteristic thinness of tropical soils is circumvented through
the bringing of nutrients onto the terrace by the irrigation water
to replace those drawn from the soil; through the fixation of
nitrogen by the blue-green algae which proliferate in the warm
water; through the chemical and bacterial decomposition of or-
ganic material, including the remains of harvested crops in that
water; through the aeration of the soil by the gentle movement

  81 The quotation is the formal definition of an ecosystem given in Odum,

1959, p. 10.
  M Gourou, 1953b, p. 100; and 1953a, p. 74.

  33   Murphey, 1957.
30                           T W O T Y P E S OF        ECOSYSTEMS

of the water in the terrace; and, no doubt, through other ecolog-
ical functions performed by irrigation which are as yet un-
known. 34 Thus, although, contrary to appearances, the paddy
plant actually requires no more water than dry-land crops
for simple transpirational purposes, "the supply and control of
water . . . is the most important aspect of irrigated paddy culti-
vation; given an adequate and well-controlled water supply the
crop will grow in a wide range of soils and in many climates.
It is therefore more important than the type of soil." 3 5
  This primary reliance on the material which envelops the
biotic community (the "medium") for nourishment rather than
on the solid surface in which it is rooted (the "substratum"),
makes possible the same maintenance of an effective agricultural
regime on indifferent soils that the direct cycling pattern of
energy exchange makes possible on swiddens. 36 Even that soil
quality which is of clearest positive value for paddy growing, a
heavy consistency which irrigation water will not readily per-
colate away, is more clearly related to the semiaquatic nature of
the cultivation process than to its nutritional demands, and paddy
can be effectively grown on soils which are "unbelievably poor in
plant nutrients." 37 This is not to say that natural soil fertility
has no effect on wet-rice yields, but merely that, as "paddy soils
tend to acquire their own special properties after long use," a
low natural fertility is not in itself a prohibitive factor if adequate
water resources are available.38 Like swidden, wet-rice cultivation
is essentially an ingenious device for the agricultural exploitation
of a habitat in which heavy reliance on soil processes is impossible

  " I n addition to the mentioned Grist (esp. pp. 28-49), Gourou, and
Murphey references, useful, if unsystematic, material on the micro-ecology
of irrigated rice can be found in Pelzer, 1945, pp. 47-51, and especially in
Matsuo, 1955, pp. 109-12.
  * Grist, 1959, pp. 28, 29.
  "For the distinction between "medium" and "substratum," see Clarke,
1954, pp. 23-58,59-89.
  "Pendleton, 1947; quoted in Grist, 1959, p. 11.
  "Murphey, 1957.
T W O T Y P E S OF          ECOSYSTEMS                                    31

and where other means for converting natural energy into food
are therefore necessary. Only here we have not the imitation of a
tropical forest, but the fabrication of an aquarium.
   The supply and control of water is therefore the key factor in
wet-rice growing—a seemingly self-evident proposition which
conceals some complexities because the regulation of water in a
terrace is a matter of some delicacy. Excessive flooding is often as
great a threat as insufficient inundation; drainage is frequently
a more intractable problem than irrigation. Not merely the gross
quantity of water, but its quality, in terms of the fertilizing sub-
stances it contains (and thus the source from which it comes) is
a crucial variable in determining productivity. Timing is also
important: paddy should be planted in a well-soaked field with
little standing water and then the depth of the water increased
gradually up to six to twelve inches as the plant grows and
flowers, after which it should be gradually drawn off until at
harvest the field is dry. Further, the water should not be allowed
to stagnate but, as much as possible, kept gently flowing, and
periodic drainings are generally advisable for purposes of weed-
ing and fertilizing. 39 Although with traditional (and in some
landscapes, even modern) methods of water control the degree to
which these various optimal conditions can be met is limited,
even at its simplest, least productive, and most primitive this
form of cultivation tends to be technically intricate.
  And this is true not only for the terrace itself, but for the sys-
tem of auxiliary water works within which it is set. W e need not
accept Karl Wittfogel's theories about "hydraulic societies" and
"oriental despotisms" to agree that while the mobility of water
makes it "the natural variable par excellence" in those landscapes
where its manipulation is agriculturally profitable, its bulkiness
makes such manipulation difficult, and manageable only with
significant inputs of "preparatory" labor and at least a certain

  39
       Grist, 1959, pp. 28-32. One of the primary functions, aside from nutri-
tion, of irrigation water is, in fact, the inhibition of weed growth.
32                          T W O T Y P E S OF      ECOSYSTEMS

amount of engineering skill. 40 T h e construction and maintenance
of even the simplest water-control system, as in rainfall farms,
requires such ancillary efforts: ditches must be dug and kept
clean, sluices constructed and repaired, terraces leveled and dyked;
and in more developed true irrigation systems dams, reservoirs,
aqueducts, tunnels, wells and the like become necessary. Even
such larger works can be built up slowly, piece by piece, over ex-
tended periods and kept in repair by continuous, routine care.
But, small or large, waterworks represent a level and kind of
investment in "capital equipment" foreign not only to shifting
cultivation but to virtually all unirrigated forms of premodern
agriculture.

   This complex of systemic characteristics—settled stability, "me-
dium" rather than "substratum" nutrition, technical complexity
and significant overhead labor investment—produce in turn what
is perhaps the sociologically most critical feature of wet-rice agri-
culture: its marked tendency (and ability) to respond to a rising
population through intensification; that is, through absorbing
increased numbers of cultivators on a unit of cultivated land. Such
a course is largely precluded to swidden farmers, at least under
traditional conditions, because of the precarious equilibrium of the
shifting regime. If their population increases they must, before
long, spread out more widely over the countryside in order to
bring more land into cultivation; otherwise the deterioration to
savannah process which results from too rapid recultivation will
set in and their position will become even more untenable. T o
some extent, such horizontal expansion is, of course, possible for
traditional wet-rice agriculturalists as well, and has in fact
(though more slowly and hesitantly than is sometimes imagined)
occurred. But the pattern of ecological pressures here increasingly
encourages the opposite practice: working old plots harder rather
than establishing new ones.
  T h e reasons for this introversive tendency follow directly f r o m
 "Wittfogel, 1957, p. 15.
T W O TYPES OF          ECOSYSTEMS                                 33

the listed systemic characteristics. The stability of the rice terrace
as an ecosystem makes the tendency possible in the first place.
Because even the most intense population pressure does not lead
to a breakdown of the system on the physical side (though it may
lead to extreme impoverishment on the human side), such pres-
sure can reach a height limited only by the capacity of those who
exploit it to subsist on steadily diminishing per capita returns for
their labor. Where swidden "overpopulation" results in a deterio-
ration of the habitat, in a wet-rice regime it results in the support
of an ever-increasing number of people within an undamaged
habitat. Restricted areas of Java today—for example, Adiwerna,
an alluvial region in the north-central part of the island—reach
extraordinary rural population densities of nearly 2,000 persons
per square kilometer without any significant decline in per-
hectare rice production. Nor does there seem to be any region on
the island in which wet-rice growing was employed effectively in
the past but cannot now be so employed due to human over-
driving of the landscape. Given maintenance of irrigation facili-
ties, a reasonable level of farming technique, and no autogenous
changes in the physical setting, the sawah (as the Javanese call
the rice terrace) seems virtually indestructible.
  Second, the "medium-focused" quality of the regime limits it
fairly sharply to those areas in which topography, water resources,
and soluble nutrients combine to make the complex ecological
integration of sawah farming (whatever that may turn out in
detail to be) possible. All agricultural regimes are, of course,
limited by the environmental conditions upon which they rely.
But wet-rice cultivation, particularly under premodern techno-
logical conditions, is perhaps even more limited than most and,
within Indonesia, certainly more than swidden, which can be
carried out over the greater part of the archipelago, including, as
it once was, most of those parts now pre-empted by sawah.
Swidden can be pursued on rugged hillsides, in wet lowland
forests, and in relatively dry monsoon country where, at least
without the assistance of modern methods of water control, con-
34                             T W O TYPES OF             ECOSYSTEMS

servation, and regulation, sawah cannot. Exact data are difficult
to obtain but the great extension of irrigated rice-farming in
Indonesia and the rest of Southeast Asia during the last hundred
years or so as a result of the application of Western technology
ought not to obscure the fact that before the middle of the nine-
teenth century such farming was restricted to a few, particularly
favorable areas. In 1833, when Java was just on the eve of her
most disastrous period of social change, the island, which today
has about three and a half million hectares of sawah had only
slightly more than a third that much. 41
   Yet there is another introversive implication of the technical
complexity aspect of traditional wet-rice cultivation. Because pro-
ductivity is so dependent on the quality of water regulation,
labor applied to the improvement of such regulation can often
have a greater marginal productivity than that same labor applied
to constructing new, but less adequately managed, terraces and
new works to support them. Under premodern conditions,
gradual perfection of irrigation techniques is perhaps the major
way to raise productivity not only per hectare but per man. To
develop further water works already in being is often more profit-
able than to construct new ones at the established technical level;
and, in fact, the ingenious traditional water-control systems of
Java and Bali can only have been created during a long period
of persistent trial-and-error refinement of established systems.
Once created, an irrigation system has a momentum of its own,
which continues, and even increases, to the point where the
limits of traditional skills and resources are reached. And, as the
gap between the first rainfall, stream-bank, or swamp-plot sawah
and those limits is usually great, economic progress through step-
by-step technological advance within a specifically focused system
can be an extended process, as shown in the following description
of a Ceylonese system:


  " T h e contemporary figure is f r o m Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia,
1957, p. 46; the 1833 figure (1,270,000 ha.) f r o m van Klaveren, 1955, p. 23.
T W O TYPES OF          ECOSYSTEMS                                 35

. . . the Kalawewa canal system—now has a giant tank at its head
which leads into a fifty-five mile long watercourse, which in turn
feeds into three large tanks which provide water for the ancient
capital of Anuradhapura. It all looks like a colossal and highly
organized piece of bureaucratic planning, the work of one of Witt-
fogel's idealised Oriental Despots. But if so, the planning must have
been done by a kind of Durkheimian group mind! The original
Tissawewa tank at the bottom end of the system was first constructed
about 300 B.C. The Kalawewa tank at the top end of the system was
first constructed about 800 years later and elaborations and modifica-
tions went on for at least another 600 years.42

   However, as mentioned, it is not only with respect to ancillary
waterworks that wet-rice agriculture tends toward technical com-
plexity, but on a more microscopic level with respect to the indi-
vidual terrace itself. In addition to improving the general irriga-
tion system within which a terrace is set, the output of most
terraces can be almost indefinitely increased by more careful,
fine-comb cultivation techniques; it seems almost always possible
somehow to squeeze just a little more out of even a mediocre
sawah by working it just a little bit harder. Seeds can be sown
in nurseries and then transplanted instead of broadcast; they can
even be pregerminated in the house. Yield can be increased by
planting shoots in exactly spaced rows, more frequent and com-
plete weeding, periodic draining of the terrace during the grow-
ing season for purposes of aeration, more thorough ploughing,
raking, and leveling of the muddy soil before planting, placing
selected organic debris on the plot, and so o n ; harvesting tech-
niques can be similarly perfected both to reap the fullest percent-
age of the yield and leave the greatest amount of the harvested
crop on the field to refertilize it, such as the technique of using
the razor-like hand blade found over most of inner Indonesia;
double cropping and, in some favorable areas, perhaps triple
cropping, can be instituted. T h e capacity of most terraces to re-
spond to loving care is amazing. As we shall see, a whole series

  " Leach, 1959.
36                         TWO TYPES OF            ECOSYSTEMS

of such labor-absorbing improvements in cultivation methods
have played a central role in permitting the Javanese rural econ-
omy to soak up the bulk of the island's exploding population.
   Finally, independently of the advantages of technical perfec-
tion, the mere quantity of preparatory (and thus not immediately
productive) labor in creating new works and bringing them up
to the level of existing ones tends to discourage a rapid expansion
of terraced areas in favor of fragmentation and more intensive
working of existing ones. In developed systems, this is apparent;
a people who have spent 1,400 years in building an irrigation
system are not likely to leave it readily for pioneering activities,
even if the established system becomes overcrowded. They have
too much tied up in it, and at most they will gradually create a
few new terraces on the periphery of the already well-irrigated
area, where water resources and terrain permit. But this reluctance
to initiate new terrace construction because of the heavy "over-
head" labor investment is characteristic even of areas where irri-
gation is still undeveloped, because of the inability or the un-
willingness of peasants to divert resources from present produc-
tion. In contemporary Laos, for example,

Most villagers are only semi-permanent and forest land is still avail-
able. The irrigated rice fields have become fragmented because their
yields are more reliable than those of the [swidden]. The creation
of new [sawahs] is not easily done, for it involves the extension of
irrigation ditches and major investment of labor. This labor must be
hired or supplied by the family itself, and implies existing fluid
capital or a large extended family containing a number of able-
bodied workers. Neither of these situations commonly occurs among
Lao peasants, and therefore the progressive division of existing
[wet rice] land and cultivation of [swidden] which requires less
initial labor.43

  Therefore, the characteristics of swidden and sawah as ecosys-
tems are clear and critical: On the one hand a multicrop, highly
diverse regime, a cycling of nutrients between living forms, a
     " Halpern, 1961.
T W O T Y P E S OF     ECOSYSTEMS                                37

closed-cover architecture, and a delicate equilibrium; on the other,
on open-field, monocrop, highly specialized regime, a heavy de-
pendency on water-born minerals for nutrition, a reliance on
man-made waterworks, and a stable equilibrium. Though these
are not the only two traditional agricultural systems in Indonesia,
they are by far the most important and have set the framework
within which the general agricultural economy of the country has
developed. In their contrasting responses to forces making for an
increase in population—the dispersive, inelastic quality of the one
and the concentrative, inflatable quality of the other—lies much
of the explanation for the uneven distribution of population in
Indonesia and the ineluctable social and cultural quandaries which
followed from it.
       PART II

The Crystallization of the Pattern




