AGRICULTURAL INVOLUTION
             ASSOCIATION       OF   ASIAN   STUDIES

             MONOGRAPHS        AND    PAPERS



     XI. Agricultural Involution



    Agricultural
    Involution
THE PROCESS OF ECOLOGICAL CHANGE

    IN INDONESIA.            By Clifford Geertz




    PUBLISHED FOR THE ASSOCIATION OF ASIAN STUDIES    BY


    UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS                         1966
    Berkeley and Los Angeles
        Publication of this volume has been made
        possible by a generous grant to the Associa-
        tion of Asian Studies by the Ford Foundation.




        University of California Press
        Berkeley and Los Angeles, California

        Cambridge University Press
        Cambridge, England

© 1963 by The Regents of the University of California
       Second Printing, 1966
        Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 63-20356
        Printed in the United States of America
          Just as the progress of a disease shows
          a doctor the secret life of a body, so
          to the historian the progress of a great
          calamity yields valuable information about
          the nature of the society so stricken.
         FOREWORD




Interdisciplinary research is always a gamble. All too often it re-
sults in a series of discrete articles or monographs with no very
clear connecting theme. When the interdisciplinary research is
applied to a political or geographic area such as Indonesia, the
danger is that the spatial limits will be the only common feature
of the products of the different disciplines. Accordingly, when the
contributions from various disciplines to the study of a particular
area produce genuine synthesis, the result is of unusual interest.
Such a synthesis seems to have emerged from the work done
on Indonesia under the auspices of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Center for International Studies.
  The Center's research on Indonesia fell into two broad cate-
gories: the work of the Indonesia Project, under my direction,
which was one of the four major undertakings of the Economic
and Political Development Program; and the Indonesia Field
Team, under the direction of Rufus Hendon, of which Clifford
Geertz, author of the present study, was a member. The field
work of both projects was undertaken in the period 1952-1959,
and was concentrated mainly in the first half of this period.
During the writing-up phase, starting in the second half of this
vi/i                                                   FOREWORD

period and only now nearing its end, there has been more or less
continuous discussion between the two teams, and particularly
between Dr. Geertz and myself.
   T h e M. I. T . Indonesia project was in any case a loosely defined
affair, the precise composition of which changed from year to
year. It was more a "community of scholars" with a special interest
in Indonesia than a tightly organized and centrally directed pro-
gram of team research. Indeed, I was the only one to be continu-
ously on the payroll throughout the five years of the project's
official life. When, however, most of the people who had been
associated with the project were gathered together for several days
of discussion shortly before the official termination of the project,
it became apparent that together we had arrived at an integrated
view of Indonesia and its problems. As the various pieces of the
picture were laid down, they fitted together like parts of a jig-saw
puzzle. Each of us, using the methods of his own discipline—with
some tendency in each case to stray over the borderlines of his
field—had arrived at essentially the same broad analytical frame-
work, and at the same general conception of the task that lies
ahead of the Indonesian people if the high hopes of their revolu-
tion are to be realized.
  T h e anthropologist's version of this common picture is set forth
more clearly in the present volume than in Dr. Geertz's two
earlier works on Indonesia, the first of which deals with religion
in Java, whereas the other compares entrepreneurship in Bali
with that in east-central Java. T h e first of these stays closer to the
traditional scope and method of anthropology, although the
underlying interest in entrepreneurship and economic develop-
ment is already apparent. This interest is more explicit in the
second volume. T h e present work, however, is nothing less than
a social-economic history of Java, that goes far to explain the
difficulties that independent Indonesia is experiencing in launch-
ing a takeoff into sustained economic growth, after three centuries
of apparently static living levels under Dutch colonialism.
  It may help the reader to put D r . Geertz's latest volume on
FOREWORD                                                          ix


Indonesia into its broader context if a brief outline of the common
thesis—common to the economists, political scientists, historians,
sociologists, anthropologists, and geographers associated with our
Indonesian venture—is provided here by way of introduction.
The language is my own, and I would not wish to commit any
other member of the group to it; but I have tried to render as
faithfully as possible the common viewpoint expressed on those
occasions when we have met together.
   In Indonesia a "big push" is needed, not only from the eco-
nomic point of view, but from the sociological and political view-
points as well. There seems to be in the history of each country an
"optimal moment" for launching development, a short period of
time when sociological, political, and economic factors coalesce
to provide a climate unusually favorable for a take-off into eco-
nomic growth. If such an optimal moment is missed, it may take
several generations to reproduce a similar set of favorable condi-
tions. In simplest form the thesis sounds a bit tautological: a
take-off is most likely when the growth of an indigenous entre-
preneurial class occurs simultaneously with the appearance of a
political elite which has the power and the will to provide a policy
framework favorable for the exercise of entrepreneurial talents—
whether in the public or the private sector. Yet as a guide to
historical analysis—and even for prognosis—the thesis seems to us
a useful one.
   The story of Java seems to be one of repeated nipping off of a
budding entrepreneurial upsurge by a political elite essentially
hostile to it. It may even be that Javanese trade was prevented
from expanding by Portuguese enterprise. Certainly any hopes
the Mataram Empire may have had of reuniting Indonesia—to
the degree, say, that the country was united by the Madjapahit
Empire two centuries earlier—were destroyed through use of main
force by the Netherlands East India Company.
   About 1850, under the impetus of the Culture System and the
first wave of Dutch settlement and plantation enterprise, another
incipient "take-off" emerged. The Dutch settlement also launched
X                                                    FOREWORD


a population explosion; but there is reason to believe that, had the
new class of Javanese entrepreneurs been given their head, they
would have brought increases in productivity and changes in so-
cial structure and attitudes that would have permitted a continued
rise in the per-capita income nonetheless. Unfortunately, the
Dutch colonial administrators were the effective political elite at
the time, and Dutch colonial policy was not directed toward the
encouragement of any such form of development. There is some
evidence—not too clear—that the great depression of the 1930's,
by bringing Dutch enterprise to a standstill, provided a last in-
jection of encouragement to Javanese industry and rubber ex-
porters. On the other hand, the depression killed off whatever
remained of Javanese enterprise in sugar. Such potential as
Javanese society still had for generating the conjuncture of eco-
nomic and political leadership needed for a take-off was subse-
quently destroyed by the war, the Japanese occupation, the revo-
lution, and the subsequent political chaos.
  Meanwhile—for all their "hands-off" policy—the intensity of
Dutch economic activity in Java detraditionalized Javanese society.
When Javanese aristocrats, thwarted in their efforts to extend
their leadership into the economic field, retreated into Javanese
tradition—except for a handful with Western training who
sought the political sphere as an outlet for their talents and am-
bitions—they were pursuing a shibboleth. Traditional Javanese
society no longer existed. It is for this reason that the only leader-
ship capable of arousing a mass following in Java in recent years
have been of persuasions—Communist or extreme nationalist—
having little or nothing to do with Javanese tradition. But while
Communists and nationalists provide political leadership, they do
not at this stage provide economic leadership or entrepreneur-
ship—if anything, their actions and attitudes are such as to dis-
courage the growth of entrepreneurial activity.
   In the rest of Indonesia the impact of the Dutch came much
later, was limited to a few decades, and was neither so wide nor
so deep in its effects as it was in Java. T h e societies of North
FOREWORD                                                          xi

Sumatra (Batak), Central Sumatra (Minangkebau), Bali, Sula-
wesi, and Kalimantan (Dajak) were much less detraditionalized
by contact with the Dutch. Consequently, they now have a chance
to evolve in terms of their own cultural dynamics, stimulated by
the liberating effect of the revolution. Each of these societies has
developed a group of indigenous entrepreneurs, some of whom—
especially Batak and Minangkebau—are providing economic
leadership to Java as well as to their own regions. Moreover,
these societies—again, especially Batak and Minangkebau—are
providing political leadership far out of proportion to their num-
bers, on the national scene as well as at home. In the Outer
Islands there is still reason to hope for the kind of interaction of
entrepreneur and elite that could give rise to sustained economic
growth. It is not just that the Outer Islands have a much more
favorable resource-population pattern than Java, although that is
also true; it is the Outer Islands that constitute the "growing
points and leading sectors" in sociological terms as well. Here is
part of the explanation of the "dualism" so often noted in the
Indonesian economy.
   This "dualism" resulted in large measure from the special
form of industrialization by foreign enterprise after the Napole-
onic wars. Until about 1820 the entire country was given over to
small holders' and peasant agriculture, with no marked difference
in technique from one sector or region to another. The popula-
tion of Indonesia was small—less than 10 percent of its present
level, with less than 5 million people on Java and perhaps 3 mil-
lion in the Outer Islands. Land was therefore relatively abundant.
There was no serious population pressure anywhere in the coun-
try and, while standards of living were not high, there was little
real hardship. The Dutch were for the most part content to trade
with the Indonesians (to a large extent through Chinese middle-
men) and later to obtain forced deliveries of export products,
without themselves settling in the country.
 After the brief interlude of British rule during the Napoleonic
wars, the Dutch colonial administration in Indonesia gradually
xii                                                 FOREWORD

shifted to plantation agriculture. Some decades later the develop-
ment of the mining, petroleum, and processing industries began.
This industrialization seems to have brought an initial increase
in per capita incomes of Indonesians. However, instead of lead-
ing to permanent improvement in Indonesian living standards,
this initial increase in incomes was rapidly offset by accelerated
population growth. The higher incomes afforded subsistence for
greater numbers. Moreover, the shift in policy brought Indo-
nesians in closer contact with Western civilization: industrializa-
tion meant settlement by Europeans. Efforts were made to raise
levels of health and to maintain peace and order among the In-
donesians who were previously rather given to fighting each
other. Death rates dropped. It may also be—although this is less
clear—that improved health and nutrition raised fertility rates.
The form of development, centered on plantations, mines, and
oil fields, all of which produced raw materials for export, brought
more industrialization than urbanization; the checks on family
size brought by urban industrialization of Europe and the New
World were therefore less effective in Indonesia. The net effect
was that the total population increased more than fourfold in
three generations.
   The sector of the economy in which new investments were be-
ing made was totally incapable of absorbing the increase in popu-
lation which it generated, because the plantation, industry, oil and
mining operations were land- and capital-intensive; technical co-
efficients either were, or were assumed to be, relatively fixed. The
increased numbers inevitably led to a return flow into peasant
agriculture and small cottage industries, where technical coeffi-
cients were relatively variable and opportunities for obtaining a
living still existed within the village structure. With abundant
labor and scarce capital—and in Java scarce land as well—pro-
duction methods in this sector became highly labor-intensive.
(Even in the Outer Islands, there is now no obvious superabun-
dance of fertile, easily cleared, readily cultivatable land. And in
recent decades population growth in the Outer Islands has been
FOREWORD                                                         xiii


nearly as rapid as it was in Java during the late nineteenth cen-
tury.) Eventually labor became redundant in this sector (mar-
ginal productivity fell to zero) and the growing population led
merely to work spreading, underemployment and unemploy-
ment. Per capita incomes in this sector returned to the subsistence
level.
   Technological progress was confined largely to the capital-in-
tensive sector. In the labor-intensive sector, meanwhile, thif rate
of population growth far exceeded capital accumulation. More
recently, trade union activity and government policy have estab-
lished industrial wage levels which, low as they are, are some-
times high in relation to the marginal productivity of labor. This
situation further aggravates the tendency to use labor-saving de-
vices wherever possible in the industrial sector. On the other hand,
there is no incentive for groups of individual farmers or small
enterprises to introduce labor-saving but capital-absorbing innova-
tions in the rural sector. A technology that will raise man-hour
productivity without net investment has yet to be discovered.
Nor is there any incentive for labor as a group to increase its
efforts, since the labor supply is already redundant. Thus methods
remain labor-intensive, and levels of technique, man-hour pro-
ductivity, and economic and social welfare remain low in the
peasant-agriculture and small-industry sector.
  Both the economic and the political aspects of this problem are
made more difficult of solution by the fact that the two sectors
conform roughly to two regions: Java and the Outer Islands. The
main development of plantations, mines, and oil fields took place
on the Outer Islands, especially Sumatra, Kalimantan, and Sula-
wesi. The big growth of population, however, took place where
the soil was most fertile and best suited for growing foodstuffs,
and where most of the people already were—Java. Employment
in cottage and small industry is also highest in Java.
  Here then is a country in which two-thirds of the population
are crowded on one relatively small island, engaged mainly in the
production of foodstuffs or simple handicrafts and small-scale
x/V                                                  FOREWORD

manufacturing for home consumption, and dependent on im-
ports for textiles and other essential items of consumption; while
the other third of the population is scattered through an enormous
area, in which there are some highly efficient large-scale industries
producing mainly for export. With such a discrepancy in current
economic conditions, as well as in capacity for generating leader-
ship for economic growth, it is small wonder that there are
stresses and strains between Java and the Outer Islands.
   The implications of this analysis are far-reaching indeed. For
one thing, it means that President Sukarno was responding to a
very real problem in demanding constitutional reform in the
direction of "democracy with leadership." At this stage ordinary
parliamentary democracy must mean essentially rule by Java,
since Java has two-thirds of the electorate. The only way in which
Java could now provide the required coalescence of entrepreneurs
and elite would be through growth of the Communist party and
the establishment of a Communist regime. Yet the leaders of the
Revolutionary Government (P.R.R.I.) were also right; maximiz-
ing the growth potential of the Indonesian economy means not
only allocating more of the development budget to public or pri-
vate projects in the Outer Islands, it also means allocating much
more responsibility for financing and executing development to
the regions.
    The current Eight Year Plan falls short of requirements cast
 in such terms. It seeks to crystallize the conception of Indonesian
 democracy and to define the sort of society the plan is expected to
produce. The spirit of the plan is well indicated by its division
into 8 volumes, 17 parts, and 1,945 paragraphs, to symbolize the
Proclamation of Independence on August 17, 1945. The Indo-
nesian national identity, the plan states, is to be sought in the
 traditional culture—the songs, the dance, the wayang, the litera-
 ture. The goal must be "a just and prosperous society based on
the Pantja Sila," the five pillars of Indonesian social and political
philosophy—nationalism, humanitarianism, democracy, social jus-
tice, and belief in God. It must also be a "family-like society,"
FOREWORD                                                          xv


reproducing at the national level the spirit of village organization.
   T h e definition of "socialism a la Indonesia" is useful; but the
plan does not really tackle the basic economic problem. It does
not impose any " m i n i m u m effort" on the government. T h e plan
for the central government—and there is no authorized and de-
tailed plan for the regional and local governments or for private
enterprise—is essentially a projection of programs already under
way in the various departments. T h e plan does not require of the
government anything essentially new, let alone bold or imagina-
tive, in the way of developmental effort. It does not really bind
the government to actions constituting a clean break from what
they have been doing in the past. Consequently, it does not en-
force on the government any of the basic decisions on economic
policy that must be made before development can proceed. On
the contrary, it permits the government to go on postponing
really serious consideration of the development problem, while
stating to themselves and to the people that they are "carrying out
a development plan."
  Indonesian development will be expensive. Yet the events of
1957 and 1958, together with stagnation of real income and
mounting inflation, m a k e it abundantly clear that if Indonesia is
to become a genuinely unified and prosperous nation, a take-off
into visible economic growth cannot be delayed much longer.
  T h e more purely economic aspect of Indonesia's history and
current problems will be analyzed in the final volume of the
M . I. T . project. Dr. Geertz's present study provides the socio-
cultural setting and makes the economist's task much easier.

                                              BENJAMIN    HIGGINS
Berkeley, California, May, 1963
        ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




This monograph is an expansion and comprehensive revision of
the first section of my earlier programmatic essay, "The Devel-
opment of the Javanese Economy: A Socio-Cultural Approach,"
issued in dittoed form by the Center for International Studies of
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1956 as document
C/56-1 in their Economic Development Program series. I am
most grateful to the Center and to its director, Max Millikan, for
supporting both the writing of that original report and the an-
thropological fieldwork I carried out in Java, as part of the
"Modjokuto Project," in 1952-1954, in the course of which most
of the ideas and interpretations here worked out in historical
terms were originally developed.
  The writing of the present study has been made possible by
the Committee for the Comparative Study of New Nations of
the University of Chicago, and I am grateful to the Committee
as a whole, to its chairman, Edward Shils, and to its individual
members for providing this opportunity. Among those who have
read and criticized various drafts of this work are: Robert M .
Adams, Harold Conklin, Lloyd A. Fallers, Hildred Geertz,
Benjamin Higgins, Robert Jay, Morris Janowitz, Kampto Utomo,
xvi/7                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

W . F. Wertheim, and Aram Yengoyan, and I wish to express my
appreciation for their assistance. Messrs. Conklin, Higgins,
Kampto Utomo, and Yengoyan, in particular, provided extensive
and detailed comments and criticism, most of which I have in
some way incorporated into the work, though they are, of course,
not to be held responsible for my interpretations of their argu-
ments. I am indebted to Donald McVicker for rendering the
charts and maps.
  In most general terms, this book is an attempt to apply to the
interpretation of—in this case, economic—history some concepts
and findings of social anthropology, to utilize the insights de-
rived from microsociological analysis for understanding macro-
sociological problems, and to establish a fruitful interaction
between the biological, social, and historical sciences. However
well or poorly this particular work effects such an integration of
different scholarly perspectives, I am convinced that an adequate
understanding of the new countries of the "third world" demands
that one pursue scientific quarry across any fenced-off academic
fields into which it may happen to wander. And whatever sub-
stantive merits my analysis may have, I hope that my effort will
at least suggest the profits to be gained in such poaching expedi-
tions.
                                                          C. G.
Chicago, January, 1963.
       CONTENTS




I: STARTING POINTS, THEORETICAL AND FACTUAL

     1. THE ECOLOGICAL APPROACH IN ANTHROPOLOGY
         The Limitations of Traditional Approaches    1
         Cultural Ecology                             6

     2. TWO TYPES OF ECOSYSTEM                       12
         Inner vs. Outer Indonesia                   12
         Swidden                                     15
         Sawah                                       28

II: THE CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE PATTERN

     3. THE CLASSICAL PERIOD                         38

     4. THE COLONIAL PERIOD: FOUNDATIONS             47
         The Company                                 47
         The Culture System                          52

     5. THE COLONIAL PERIOD: FLORESCENCE             83
         The Corporate Plantation System             83
         The Development of Outer Indonesia         103
xx                                            CONTENTS

III: THE OUTCOME

     6. COMPARISONS AND PROSPECTS                    124
         The Present Situation                       124
         Java and Japan                              130
         The Outline of the Future                   143

     BIBLIOGRAPHY                                    157

     INDEX                                           173
      PART I

Starting Points, Theoretical and Factual




