          5 . THE COLONIAL PERIOD:
          FLORESCENCE




The Corporate Plantation System
         T h e rapid mechanization of sugar-milling in the second
half of the nineteenth century steadily made obsolete the Culture
System, based on the substitution of (Javanese) labor for (Dutch)
capital. With such substitution rendered progressively less prac-
tical by technological advance, effective colonial management
became less a matter of mobilization of labor and more of regu-
lating the relationship between the highly capitalized                sugar
"factory," or other crop-processing enterprises, and the peasant
village to which it was symbiotically tied. 1
  T o this end, the Dutch introduced, in 1870, the Agrarian
Land Law. Together with various ancillary enactments, this
statute made it possible to transfer direct responsibility for in-
suring Java's profitability to private enterprises while prevent-
ing such enterprises from destroying the village economy upon
which that profitability depended. In it, the convenient notion,
current since the Raffles interregnum at the beginning of the

  1   It must be remembered, however, that although sugar production be-
came steadily more capital intensive, it continued to use large quantities of
unskilled seasonal labor on the cultivation side of its operations.
84             THE COLONIAL PERIOD:              FLORESCENCE

century, that all uncultivated "waste land" is inalienable state
property was for the first time officially codified, making it pos-
sible for private plantation concerns to lease such land on a
regularized, long-term contractual basis from Batavia and to use
such legal titles for the purposes of obtaining credit. Further,
the prohibition of outright alienation of peasant land to foreigners
embodied in Javanese customary law was given formal legal
backing by the government, permitting the systematization of
rules and regulations for a similar long-term leasing of it to
plantation companies for commercial use by its millions of small-
holders. At base, the law, which inaugurates the Corporate
Plantation period in East Indian economic history, represents one
more effort to superimpose commercial economy upon subsist-
ence economy in such a way as to stimulate the first and tran-
quilize the second.
   The immediate beneficiaries of this legal innovation were the
individual private Netherlands East Indies planters who had
been created by the workings of the Culture System they pro-
fessed to despise. This was particularly true in sugar, where
privately planted cane made up about 9 percent of the total in
1870 and about 97 percent two decades later, though enterprise
in coffee, tobacco, and even rice also appeared. 2 But the depres-
sion of the middle eighties (coffee prices fell by half, sugar prices
by even more), 3 assisted by the onset of crop diseases in both
coffee and sugar, wrecked the jerry-built financial structure of
the Indies beyond repair. The self-styled "pioneers [ a n d ] specu-
lative elements in the Indies itself," whom Reinsma celebrates,
were consequently driven into the now waiting arms of large-
scale Dutch finance, and they soon disappeared into enormous,
multi-enterprise, limited-liability corporations rooted firmly in
the motherland, or, in some cases, in other European countries.
The Amsterdam and Rotterdam merchants of great traffic did
not create, as they later came to claim, the Netherlands East

 3 Burger,   1939, p. 177.
 a Furnivall, 1944, p. 196.
THE   COLONIAL           PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE                 85

Indies estate economy. They bought it—and rather cheaply, con-
sidering the social costs of its production—at auction.
   By 1900 the reorganization was well underway and the replace-
ment of state mercantilism by corporate nearly complete. The
Nederlandsche Handel Maatschappij ( N H M ) , established as an
imperial shipping company by William I in 1824 to prevent the
English merchant marine from dominating the Far East and,
when that effort failed, to carry Culture System products to Hol-
land, transformed itself from crown's agent to private investment
firm, half bank and half planter. By 1915 it owned, in whole or
part, sixteen sugar factories, and had effective control over twenty-
two others, plus fourteen tobacco, twelve tea and fourteen rubber
estates.4 By the same year, the Handels Vereeningen Amsterdam
( H V A ) , founded as late as 1878, controlled fourteen sugar estates
and managed one tapioca, one combined coffee-rubber and two
fiber (sisal) plantations.5 In the principalities, the dozens of inde-
pendent planters of the Culture System period collapsed into the
Cultuur Maatschappij der Vorstenlanden, which had twenty sugar
enterprises by 1913, plus three in coffee, one in tobacco and one
in tea. After the introduction of tobacco into northeast Sumatra
in 1864, the Deli Maatschappij flourished and eventually spread
its interests into rubber, oilpalm, sisal, tea and coffee.6
   Backed by a network of banks—the Java Bank, the Neder-
lands-Indische Handelsbank, and others, as well as some foreign
concerns, such as the Chartered Bank—the corporations diversi-
fied plantation production beyond the staple sugar and coffee of
the nineteenth century, spread it to restricted parts of Outer
Indonesia, built railroads and modern irrigation works, set up
agricultural experimental stations to improve yields, and in gen-
eral created a comprehensive agro-industrial structure probably
unmatched for complexity, efficiency, and scale anywhere in the

  ' Encyclopedic van Nederlandsche-Indie, II, 53.
  6 Encyclopedic van Nederlandsche-Indie, II, 53.
  "Encyclopedic van Nederlandsche-Indie, II, 53; Allen and Donnithorne,
1957, pp. 97-99.
86            THE COLONIAL              PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE

world. By 1938 there were 2,400 estates in Indonesia, equally
divided between Java and the Outer Islands, occupying about
two and a half million hectares and controlled for the most part
by a few large and, "under a coordinating superstructure of
large syndicates and cartels," interlocked companies.7
   But for all the structural changes within the Dutch side of
dual economy which this transition to large-scale corporate ac-
tivity brought about, it seems unlikely that the peasants noticed
any essential difference, save perhaps that the pressure exerted on
them was better organized. Indeed, even after the revolution,
when the Dutch presence had just about evaporated, older Indo-
nesians still tended to refer to the whole prewar complex of
colonial institutions, political and economic alike, as "The Com-
pany." Nor, from their point of view, were they so much behind
the times as it might appear. If ever the plus ga change maxim
has held, it was with respect to the meeting of Dutch merchant
and Javanese rice peasant in Indonesia.
   Sugar, which remained Indonesia's most important export crop
until the thirties, continued its mutualistic relationship with wet
rice in but slightly changed guise. As cane was no longer grown
on peasant land by government fiat and large-scale "waste-land"
tracts suitable for it were scarce, now that Java was so crowded,
a complex land-rent system was developed to obtain the use of
sawah. A village, sometimes willingly, sometimes coerced by its
leaders and local civil servants, contracted a 211/2-year lease with
an estate. The estate then planted one-third of the village sawah
in cane. The cane occupied these fields for about fifteen months;


   7 Van de Koppel, 1946. Only about 1.2 million hectares or 47 percent of

the land controlled by the estates was actually planted. A systematic, de-
tailed history of the development of corporate enterprise in the Netherlands
Indies remains to be written; but a general, rather routine, survey can be
found in Allen and Donnithorne, 1957, esp. chapter x, pp. 181-199. For a
literally bird's-eye view of corporation Java around 1927, plus a certain
amount of unsystematized data on the various companies, see de Vries, n.d.
The internal quotation is from Wertheim, 1956, p. 99.
THE C O L O N I A L     PERIOD:       FLORESCENCE                     87

after eighteen months the land was returned to the holders and
another third of the village's land was taken for sugar, and so
on around the cycle. But, as the new cane planting usually took
place before the old one was harvested, any particular field
was in sugar about a half rather than a third of the t i m e ; or to
put it aggregatively, an average of about one-half the village's
land, now one-third, now two-thirds, was in sugar, and half in
peasant crops—either rice, or dry-season second crops such as
soya or peanuts. One entire cycle therefore took three years, and
seven such cycles could be completed during a single leasehold.
T h e model example of such a cycle shown in Table 3 should
clarify this only superficially complicated system, which in terms
of formal aesthetics, if nothing else, must have appealed to the
numerologically inclined Javanese.
   T h e product of this complex and intimate interlocking of the
rigorous cultivation rhythms of large-scale corporate agriculture
and the more pliable ones of traditional household f a r m i n g was
an odd centauric social unit which was neither a proper planta-
tion nor yet a peasant community, but different from either of
them. T h e centaur's head was the mill. This heavily capitalized
factory in the field (average outstanding investment in a single
sugar enterprise seems to have run in the neighborhood of a
million dollars during the thirties) with its steam- or electric-
driven crushers, filters, centrifuges, evaporators, and vacuum
cookers, was run by a European managerial staff of twenty men
or so, settled with their families in neat bungalows huddled be-
side its walls, and processed the cane production of about a
thousand hectares a year. 8 T h e centaur's body was the peasantry,
upon w h o m the mill drew not just for land, but for the casual,
seasonally extremely variable labor force it needed to clear fields,

  8 On sugar-milling technology, see Koningsberger, 1946. The investment

estimate is based broadly on calculations with the very rough data given
in Appendix II of Allen and Donnithorne, 1957, pp. 288-299, f r o m which
source the estimates of European staff and hectarage per mill also come
(p. 84).
88           THE    COLONIAL         PERIOD:           FLORESCENCE


                                TABLE     3

      A TYPICAL CROPPING C Y C L E FOR SAWAH LAND LEASED
            TO SUGAR COMPANIES IN JAVA AFTER            1900


                       1st third           2d third         3d third
                      of sawahs           of sawahs        of sawahs

East monsoon
  (dry season)      newly planted    harvestable         dry crops
  year 1                cane            cane

West monsoon
 (wet season)       growing cane        wet rice         wet rice
 year I

East monsoon        harves table                         newly planted
  year 2               cane          dry crops               cane

West monsoon
 year 2             wet rice         wet rice            growing cane

East monsoon
  year 3            dry crops        newly planted       harvestable
                                         cane               cane

West monsoon
 year 3             wet rice            growing cane     wet rice

East monsoon
  year 4               the same as in the east monsoon in year 1

   SOURCE: After Koningsberger, Y. J., "De Europese Suikerrietcultuur
en Suikerfabricatie," in van Hall, C. and C. van de Koppel, De Landbouw
in De Indische Archipel, s'Gravenhage: van Hoeve, Part IIA, p. 326.


dig trenches, plant, harvest, carry cane to the mills, and perform
countless other occasional tasks connected with the industry. By
1930, sugar concerns were employing more than 800,000 Javanese
—men, women, and children—at one point or another during a
year; or, as there were some 180 factories, an average of 4,000-
THE C O L O N I A L          PERIOD:   FLORESCENCE                89

5,000 per mill. 9 Clearly, not all the "indirect-rule," "native-wel-
fare," "East-is-East-and-West-is-West" colonial policies in the
world could keep an encounter with big business of these di-
mensions from having a profound effect on rural life. And, as
the leasing arrangement was also applied, in somewhat varying
and less penetrating forms, to the commercial cultivation of other
annuals—tobacco, cassava, agave, even rice—the effect spread, to
some degree, over a fair part of the countryside. 10 A s van der
Kolff has said, in Java the clash of cultures came in the form
of a clash of cultivations. 11

  Even more peculiarly distinctive of the Javanese situation—
for the clash of cultivations has, after all, occurred elsewhere, and
with perhaps even greater violence—is the fact that this clash
took place largely within the context of a well-established, fully
crystallized village social system, which though squeezed, de-
formed, and enervated was not destroyed by it. T h e sugar-lease
system and, to a lesser extent, the similar practices connected
with other crops, did not isolate the disequilibrating forces of
commercial capitalism from village life; they introduced them,
following the path the Company and the Culture System had
blazed, into the very heart of it. Unlike, say, in Jamaica, the
sugar industry in Java was not built up on the basis of imported
slaves lacking peasant traditions. Unlike, say, in Puerto Rico, it
did not forcibly marshal an embryonic peasantry onto enclave
plantations and degrade it into a fully proletarianized, essentially
landless labor force. 12 T h e Javanese cane worker remained a
peasant at the same time that he became a coolie, persisted as a
community-oriented household farmer at the same time that he
became an industrial wage laborer. H e had one foot in the rice
terrace and the other in the mill. And, in order for h i m to main-

  " Allen and Donnithorne, 1957; Boeke, 1953, p. 141.
  10 Boeke,   1953, p. 91.
  u   Van der Kolff, 1953.
  " M i n t z , 1951.
90          THE COLONIAL           PERIOD:      FLORESCENCE

tain this precarious and uncomfortable stance, not only did the
estate have to adapt to the village through the land-lease system
and various other "native-protection" devices forced on it by an
"ethical" colonial government, but, even more comprehensively,
the village had to adapt to the estate.
   T h e mode of its adaptation was again involutional. T h e basic
pattern of village life was maintained, in some ways even
strengthened, and the adjustment to the impingements of high
capitalism effected through the complication of established insti-
tutions and practices. In land tenure, in crop regime, in work
organization, and in the less directly economic aspects of social
structure as well, the village, "hemmed in on all sides by a
crystallized pattern" (to quote Goldenweiser again), faced the
problems posed by a rising population, increased monetization,
greater dependence on the market, mass labor organization, more
intimate contact with bureaucratic government and the like, not
by a dissolution of the traditional pattern into an individualistic
"rural proletarian" anomie, nor yet by a metamorphosis of it into a
modern commercial farming community. Rather, by means of
"a special kind of virtuosity," "a sort of technical hairsplitting,"
it maintained the over-all outlines of that pattern while driving
the elements of which it was composed to ever-higher degrees of
ornate elaboration and Gothic intricacy. Unable either to stabilize
the equilibrated wet-rice system it had autochthonously achieved
before 1830, or yet to achieve a modern form on, say, the Japa-
nese model, the twentieth-century lowland Javanese village—a
great, sprawling community of desperately marginal agricul-
turalists, petty traders, and day laborers—can perhaps only be
referred to, rather lamely, as "post-traditional."
  T h e durability of the basic framework of the post-traditional
rural economy is apparent no matter at which aspect of it one
looks. On the side of land tenure, the so-called "communal
ownership" systems under which the village as a corporate body
exercises various kinds of residual rights of control over fields
seem actually to have been strengthened, at least in relative terms,
THE C O L O N I A L      PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE                      97


in the sugar-area villages. 13 The need on the mill's side for a sim-
ple, flexible, and comprehensive land-owning unit within which
cane cultivation could move freely from one block of terraces
to the next, unobstructed by a cloud of separate, individualized
land rights, and the need on the villagers' side for a reasonably
equitable sharing throughout the community of the burdens im-
posed by the system as it so moved from field to field, made the
collective apportionment procedures of traditional communal
tenure functional to both parties. With such devices, the mill
could treat with the village as a whole through the agency of its
headman and plan its regime in terms of ecological units large
enough to be economic. And with the same devices, the village
could insure—by means either of a periodic rotation and re-
division of plots among qualified families or of a carefully ad-
justed scattering of the plots allotted such families through all
three crop-sequence subareas—that at any point in the cycle none
of its "landowners" would be entirely deprived of fields due to
pre-emption by the mills. In brief, communal tenure allowed
the mills to operate in terms of a large-field system appropriate
to plantation sugar and, simultaneously, the village to operate
in terms of the small-field system appropriate to sawah rice.
   In this through-the-looking-glass world, even a major technical
innovation in village agriculture—the emergence of unirrigated,
annual food crops as true staples alongside paddy—acted more
to dampen structural change in the rural economy than to
strengthen it. With the exception of soya beans (and, of course,
  13 Van der Kolff, 1929; van Gelderen, 1929. Van der Kolff, in fact, traces

the origins of this whole process, too, back into the Culture System period
when, "if the indigo and sugar crops were to be a success they had to be
grown in rotation on different sites, and since, from the point of view of
supervision and irrigation, it was much easier to deal with compact blocks
of land, it was to the advantage of the government to regulate matters
with a powerful village council rather than with individual landowners"
(van der Kolff, 1929, p. 111). For a general survey of traditional Javanese
tenure systems, see Vollenhoven, 1906, pp. 604-634. For a more recent dis-
cussion, see van der Kroef, 1960.
92           THE    COLONIAL          PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE

unirrigated rice) all the dry-field annuals which are today im-
portant in Java—maize, cassava, sweet potatoes, peanuts—were
introduced subsequent to European contact, and their penetration
into the by then long-established sawah ecosystem was very
gradual. In 1817, Raffles speaks of a recent increase in maize-
growing on previously uncultivated poor-soil hill ranges "in the
more populous parts of Java . . . where the sawahs do not
afford a sufficient supply of rice," but other dry-field crops seem
to be of but marginal importance. 14 Cassava began to spread
over some less fertile areas in Bantam, Djapara, Semarang, and
the Priangan after the experimental station in Buitenzorg im-
ported shoots from Surinam in 1852, but it is only in this century
that it has become an important diet item generally. 15 It was, in
fact, not until the 1885 depression, when colonial officials actively
promoted their use to increase native food production, that such
crops—called collectively palawidja—began      to play a vital role
in the peasant economy. 1 6 By the first decade of this century
they had become a fully integral part of village agriculture,
both as east-monsoon second crops or sawahs and in crop-and-
fallow dry fields, called tegal. Agricultural statistics before 1915
are scarce, contradictory, and unreliable, but Table 4 gives at
least a global picture of the nature and magnitude of the change.

  T h e necessity of using incommensurate time periods and vari-
ant classifications introduces a degree of uncertainty into the
interpretation of this table beyond that which stems from the
mere insubstantiality of the data upon which it is based. But
that there was a burst of palawidja cultivation around the turn

     Raffles, 1830,1,134-137.
     11

     Koens, 1946. This was not the very first entry of cassava into the
     1B

archipelago; Rumphius, "the blind seer of Ambon," reports it as early as
the seventeenth century from the Moluccas.
  18 De Vries, quoted in Burger, 1939, p. 232. Scheltema (1930) quotes a

Koloniaal    Verslag for 1889 which claims that planted rice area increased
about 8 percent over the 1817-1878 decade and that of palawidja by 24 per-
cent, almost the whole (23 percent) of the latter increase coming in the
form of second-crop planting on sawahs!
THE C O L O N I A L       PERIOD:         FLORESCENCE                           93


                                  TABLE        4

         T H E GROWTH OF D R Y - C R O P CULTIVATION IN JAVA


                                 Estimated percent increase in amount of
                                   cultivated land in J a v a and M a d u r a

                                       sawah                     tegal

         1888-1900 1                      8                        24
         1900-1915 1                     16                       150
         1916-1928                       10                        26
         1928-1938                        3                         5

                                        Estimated percent increase
                                            in harvested area

                                      wet rice                palawidja 2

         1888-1904 1                      7                        32'
         1903-1920                       15«                      191
         1916-1928                       13                        81
         1928-1938                       19                        16

                               Estimated percent of rice and nonrice crops
                                 in harvested area (peasant sector only)

                                        rice'                   nonrice

         1888                            65                        35
         1910                            58                        42
         1920                            51                        49
         1938                            45                        55

   1
     Excludes the principalities and the particulière landerijen. Were these
included, the figures would probably be very slightly lower.
   2
     Includes, in conflict with Javanese usage but in harmony with eco-
logical reality, uniirigated rice (gaga). Relatively little dry rice is grown
in J a v a in any case.
   3
     1888-1903.
   4
     1904-1920.
   6
     Includes unirrigated rice, as breakdown not given in 1910 figures.
   SOURCES: Scheltema, A. M. P. A., "De Sawahoccupatie op J a v a en
Madoerain 1928 en 1888," Korte Mededeelingen van het Centraal Kantoor
voor de Statistiek, Buitenzorg, 1930. Huender, W., Overzicht van den Eco-
nomischen Toestand der Inheemsche Bevolking van Java en Madoera,
s'Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff, 1921, pp. 35-37. Van Hall, C. J. J.
Insulinde, De Inheemsche Landbouw, Deventer: Van Hoeve, n.d., pp.
216-217. Cabaton, A., Java, Sumatra, and the Other Islands of the Dutch
East Indies, New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1911, p. 213. Statistical
Pocks.tbook of Indonesia, 1957, D j a k a r t a : Biro Pusat St&tistik, pp. 47-48.
94           THE C O L O N I A L      PERIOD:       FLORESCENCE

of the century is beyond doubt. The over-all pattern of develop-
ment seems to have been one of a slow expansion of such plant-
ing, using nearby unirrigable land in a nonintensive, merely
supplementary fashion, up to the end of the Culture System
period; the penetration of it into the sawah complex proper
in the form of the second-crop regime—ecologically, the decisive
development—from about 1870 to 1900; and then a final, more
intensive expansion of tegal clearing as virtually all of the re-
maining cultivable land of the island was brought under the
plow. Sawah expanded too during this period, as a result of
large-scale irrigation improvements, particularly along the north-
west coast and in the Brantas-Solo delta; and the release by the
sugar mills of more than three-quarters of their rented fields
after the 1930 crash permitted a last-gasp expansion of the area
cropped both in wet rice and, now that the dry monsoon regime
was firmly established, in palawidja as well. But the really signifi-
cant change is clearly the movement away from a typical South-
east Asian lowland rice monoculture toward a level of diversifi-
cation unique for the region. By the mid-thirties the percentage
of total peasant cropped land in rice in Java was, as the table
indicates, about 45; in Thailand it was 90, in Indochina, 85, and
in Burma and the Philippines, 65—that is, just about what it had
been in Java in 1888.17
   Yet, as noted, what is striking about this development is not
how much it affected the general pattern of village economic
life, but how little. Agricultural revolutions have been built on
less, but in Java thorough-going diversification of traditional
monoculture led only to the extension of the already far-advanced
involutional process.
   The penetration of maize, soyabeans, peanuts, and other crops
into the sawah ecosystem did not change its essential structure.
Poured into a rice mold, these crops merely reinforced it. They
made it possible to drive a terrace just that much harder, to keep
  " Wickizer and Bennett, 1941, p. 31; Thompson, 1946, p. 295; Scheltem.a,
1930.
THE C O L O N I A L      PERIOD:          FLORESCENCE             95


pace with a rising population and, in the sugar areas, with the
increasing external pre-emption of village lands, by increasing
labor inputs into an already hyperintensive productive system.
Thus, the all-Java ratio of harvested wet-rice acreage to total
sawah acreage remained virtually constant between 1888 and
1928 at just about 1:1, increases in some regions being offset by
decreases in others—mainly, as one would expect, sugar areas.
But the ratio of harvested palawidja acreage on sawahs (i.e.,
terraces used during the west monsoon for p a d d y ) to total sawah
acreage rose about 25 percent from about .33:1 to .42:1, the main
gains again coming, the special cases of arid M a d u r a and in-
fertile Rembang aside, in the principal sugar areas. 18 In short, the
result of the expansion of palawidja cultivation was the same as
that of virtually every other technological innovation in the
peasant sector after about 1830—the maintenance of the marginal
productivity of labor at some low but nearly constant (or perhaps
gradually declining) figure. It merely gave the multiplying Java-
nese a bigger pool in which more of them could tread water.
   This is no less true of the palawidja produced by crop-and-
fallow farming on unirrigated tegals than of that grown on
sawahs as east monsoon crops. Tegal cultivation did not lead to
a significantly more extensive or more highly capitalized farm-
ing pattern nor, despite the freer entry of some of the crops
into the market, to the growth of a commercial approach to
agriculture. It led, rather, to the supplementation of intensive,
small-scale rice-farming by intensive, small-scale dry crop-farm-
ing modeled almost exactly upon it. T h e size of the individual
farm remained Lilliputian. T o w a r d the rainy west it tended to
be smaller with a greater percentage of sawah, toward the dry
east larger but with a smaller sawah component. But it was
essentially the same sort of farm—in fact essentially the same
farm as had existed before the tegal expansion at the turn of the
century. T h e ecological elasticity of wet rice having at last be-
g u n to fail him, the Javanese peasant turned toward diversified

  18 Calculated from Scheltema,   1930.
96            THE C O L O N I A L       PERIOD:         FLORESCENCE

dry cropping to eke out, by the most labor-intensive pattern
such crops could sustain, his customary meager living. And if
one approaches the problem from the consumption side, one
comes to the same conclusion as the Dutch agronomist Tergast:

On densely populated Java the rice production could not keep step
[after 1900] with the increase in population. Increasing cultivation
of other foodstuffs in rotation with rice and on dry lands has met
the rising need for food. Around 1900 the amount of annual per
capita quantity available was about 110 kg of rice, 30 kg of tubers,
and 3 kg of pulses. Around 1940 this had changed to 85 kg rice,
40 kg maize, 180 kg tubers, and about 10 kg pulses. This change has
locally reduced, often seriously, the quality of the diet. Expressed
in calories there was little change between 1900 and 1940; the daily
menu per capita has been kept on a level somewhat lower than 2,000
calories. That Java, in spite of the heavy population increase and the
small possibility of expanding the cultivated area, has been in a
position to maintain the calorie level of the diet is due principally
to the intensification of rotation on rice fields and more intensive
use of the dry lands.19

  In addition to land tenure and land use, the involutional
process also worked its peculiar pattern of changeless change on
  19
     Tergast, 1950. Of course, Tergast's calculations are merely broad
estimates also, perhaps even less precise than the more straightforward
estimates of arable land and harvested area. In fact, it seems likely that
there was actually a decline in caloric intake between 1900 and 1940. For a
summary of other estimates of daily caloric intake (one of which sees it as
declining from about 1,850 in 1921 to about 1,750 in 1938 and the other of
which sees it as declining from about 2,000 to 1,900 over the same period),
see van de Koppel, 1946. For yet another estimate of quantities of various
food crops available per capita from 1913 to 1940 showing a pattern gen-
erally similar to Tergast's, see Pelzer, 1945, p. 259. In addition, both these
calculations and my own analysis in the text omit, mainly because of
measurement difficulties, consideration of the extreme intensification of
grainless cultivation in house gardens (pe\arangan), where on an average
plot of some thirty square meters a Javanese family may grow literally
dozens of different fruits, vegetables, and herbs, and produce, in extreme
cases, as much as two-fifths of its caloric intake. See Terra, 1946.
THE C O L O N I A L         PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE                      97

the distribution side. With the steady growth of population
came also the elaboration and extension of mechanisms through
which agricultural product was spread, if not altogether evenly,
at least relatively so, throughout the huge human horde which
was obliged to subsist on it. Under the pressure of increasing
numbers and limited resources Javanese village society did not
bifurcate, as did that of so many other "underdeveloped" nations,
into a group of large landlords and a group of oppressed near-
serfs. Rather it maintained a comparatively high degree of social
and economic homogeneity by dividing the economic pie into
a steadily increasing number of minute pieces, a process to which
I have referred elsewhere as "shared poverty." 20 Rather than
haves and have-nots, there were, in the delicately muted ver-
nacular of peasant life, only t\u\upans and \e\urangans—"just
enoughs" and "not-quite enoughs."
   By and large, the set of mechanisms producing this fractioniza-
tion of output seems to have been centered less on land owner-
ship than on land-working. Equal inheritance, reduction in size
of communal shares to permit more shareholders in the same
quantity of village land, and within-village bits-and-pieces land
sale—all no doubt produced some diminution in the extent of
individual holdings. But Javanese farms were small to start
with. Though striking local exceptions can be found—again,
particularly in the sugar areas where villagers were forced into
more extreme measures—there is little evidence for any large-
scale secular decline (or increase) in average farm size over Java
as a whole during the colonial period. The estimates of mean—
and modal—individual holding given by Raffles in 1817 and by
Boeke in 1940 run just about the same: slightly under one
hectare.21 The greater part of the dispersion of output, which in

  20   Geertz, C „ 1956.
  21   Raffles, 1830, I, 162; Boeke, 1953, pp. 52-143. Additional evidence that
it was not, in the prewar period at least, changes on the ownership side
which facilitated "sharing the poverty" comes from the fact that parceliza-
tion—the splitting of single holdings into a large number of very small
98               THE       COLONIAL              PERIOD:   FLORESCENCE


the n a t u r e of t h e case m u s t have occurred, seems t o h a v e been
m e d i a t e d not t h r o u g h changes in the general structure of pro-
prietary control, but t h r o u g h a m a r k e d elaboration a n d e x p a n -
sion of the traditional system of labor relations—in               particular,
of t h e institution of s h a r e c r o p p i n g . 2 2
   Javanese sharecropping consists of a l a r g e n u m b e r of ad h o c
variations on a h a n d f u l of structural themes. I t permits almost
every case to be a special one, responsive t o t h e peculiar                cir-
c u m s t a n c e of the individual contract, but at t h e s a m e t i m e      a
concrete e x a m p l e of a well-defined general type. I t is this          flexi-
bility within fixity w h i c h has given it its peculiar usefulness as
a n involutional m e c h a n i s m .
   A g a i n s t the b a c k g r o u n d of a f e w precisely formalized,    tra-

scattered plots—was not particularly extensive in Java (being about half
the level of India or China), nor does it seem to have increased in the
immediate prewar period. Further, leaving aside the "Outer Indonesia"
region of Preanger only a (very grossly) estimated 2,000 Javanese owned
more than 18 hectares of land in 1925. Scheltema, 1931, p. 275. One of the
sources of the widespread notion of a radical decrease in average farm
size in Java seems to be mere astonishment at its present smallness. Thus
Mears (1961) writes: "With the increase in population density on Java,
the size of individual holdings has declined to the point where approxi-
mately 90 percent of the farmers cultivate less than 1 hectare . . . of land.
Almost 70 percent farm less than one-half hectare. Large holdings . . . are
the exception with less than one percent of the agricultural holdings ex-
ceeding 10 hectares." When it is noted, however, that a survey taken in
1903, when the population was around half what it was in 1958 (and ex-
cluding the principalities where farms have always been if anything smaller
than average), found that 15.8 percent of the farms were under .18 ha,
32.8 percent under .35 ha, 47.2 percent under .53 ha, 70.9 percent under .71
ha, 89.1 percent under 1.42 ha, and only 3.9 percent over 2.8 ha, the de-
cline, though real, seems a great deal less precipitous and can in no sense
account for the absorption of the bulk of the population increase into the
village economy. Pelzer, 1945, p. 166.
  23 For an encyclopedic review of traditional forms of sharecropping in

both Inner and Outer Indonesia, see Scheltema, 1931. For a more general
discussion of the whole range of types of traditional agricultural labor
relations, see de Bie, 1902, pp. 67-74.
THE COLONIAL              PERIOD:         FLORESCENCE                       99


ditionally rooted model procedures (e.g., the maron, or half-
half, procedure) landowner and land tenant could reach a settle-
ment concerning responsibilities for inputs (seed, oxen, labor,
land taxes); could adjust the apportionment of output to
whatever pre-existing social relationships obtained between them,
as well as to type of land, type of crop, and so on; and could
take into account the vagaries of local custom, individual moral
sense, and momentary economic reality. Further, a nearly limit-
less divisibility of inputs and outputs was possible through
combining these procedures both with each other and with
other sorts of labor agreements—subcontracting, renting, pawn-
ing, jobbing, work exchange, collective harvesting and, latterly,
wage work.
   The productive system of the post-traditional village developed,
therefore, into a dense web of finely spun work rights and work
responsibilities spread, like the reticulate veins of the hand,
throughout the whole body of the village lands. 23 A man will
let out part of his one hectare to a tenant—or to two or three
—while at the same time seeking tenancies on the lands of
other men, thus balancing his obligations to give work (to his
relatives, to his dependents, or even to his close friends and
neighbors) against his own subsistence requirements. A man
will rent or pawn his land to another for a money payment and
then serve as a tenant on that land himself, perhaps in turn
letting subtenancies out to others. A man may agree, or be
granted the opportunity, to perform the planting and weeding
tasks for one-fifth of the harvest and job the actual work in turn
to someone else, who may, in his turn, employ wage laborers
or enter into an exchange relationship with neighbors to obtain
the necessary labor. The structure of land ownership is thus only
an indifferent guide to the social pattern of agricultural ex-
ploitation, the specific form of which emerges only in the in-
tricate institutional fretwork through which land and labor are
   23 In fact, the "share-crop" principle is applied not only to agriculture but

also to farm animals. See Scheltema, 1931, pp. 243-252.
700             THE C O L O N I A L      PERIOD:         FLORESCENCE


actually brought together. 24 In share tenancy and associated
practices the ever-driven wet-rice village found the means by
which to divide its growing economic pie into a greater number
of traditionally fixed pieces and so to hold an enormous popula-
tion on the land at a comparatively very homogeneous, if grim,
level of living. What elsewhere has been sought through land
reform—the minimization of socioeconomic contrasts based on
differential control of agricultural resources—the Javanese peasant,
whose farms were minute to start with, achieved through that
more ancient weapon of the poor: work spreading.
   On the technical level this choice, if one can call it that, to
diffuse increases in per-hectare productivity through a larger
labor force, thus maintaining a constant or near-constant per-
worker productivity, has the effect of leading toward more fixed
(or presumed fixed) coefficients of production on the peasant
side similar to (but precisely reversed from) those on the planta-
tion—or, more accurately, to coefficients variable only in one
direction. Once the radical intensification of agriculture is accom-
plished, it is difficult to retreat from it. Sawah terraces are pushed
up the sides of mountains and along the faces of river banks,
where their narrowed form often means a reversion to plow-
less cultivation. Land fragmentation, so far as it occurs, has a
similar effect, because as the edge of the terrace must always be
worked with a hoe, the smaller the terrace the less advantageous
the use of the plow. (Even in the absence of ownership frag-
mentation, florescence of in-kind tenancy patterns would seem to
stimulate a reduction in the size of individual terraces, as would
more labor-intensive methods generally, though this is impos-
sible to prove.) Double cropping, more careful micro-regulation

  24 Aside   from often applying to the same man at the same time, the
terms "landlord" and "share tenant" may even be slightly misleading in
their usual connotation in this context where, as Boeke remarks,           the
cropper is often the stronger party. 1953, p. 58. See also, in this connection,
Burger, 1930.
THE   COLONIAL         PERIOD:      FLORESCENCE                  101


of irrigation in and around the terrace, stalk-by-stalk, not to say
grain-by-grain, cultivation, reaping and milling methods, de-
veloped share-cropping, and other labor innovations all are dif-
ficult to abandon once they are firmly instituted. Thus, as the
Dutch planter comes to feel that the only possible direction of
increased rationalization is in the direction of greater investment
in machinery, modern irrigation, scientific experimentation, and
so on, the Javanese peasant comes to feel that the only feasible
way at least to maintain his living standard, much less raise it,
is through more fine-comb agricultural methods, and tends to
become increasingly skeptical of the possibilities of improvement
through mechanization. Where the plantation sector becomes
addicted to capital, the peasant sector becomes addicted to labor
—the more they use the more they need. A sort of mirror-image
ratchet effect, to change the metaphor, begins in which it be-
comes relatively easy for the planter to increase capital inputs, but
difficult to reduce them; and relatively easy for the peasant to
increase labor inputs but difficult to reduce them. T h e produc-
tive process of the one sector becomes steadily more capital-in-
tensive and that of the other steadily more labor-intensive, until
the dualistic gulf which yawns between them seems unbridge-
able, as it did to Boeke.
   T h e conservation of traditional land-tenure systems, the assimi-
lation of dry crops to the wet-rice pattern of land use, and the
elaboration of established systems of labor relationship are thus
all of a piece. They represent a reaction—for all its oft-admired
ingeniousness, almost wholly defensive—to the twin pressures of
a rising population and a superimposed plantation economy.
But they do not exhaust that reaction, for it was as much a
cultural and social structural process as an economic and ecologi-
cal one. T h e involution of the productive process in Javanese
agriculture was matched and supported by a similar involution
in rural family life, social stratification, political organization,
 religious practice, as well as in the "folk-culture" value system—
7 02            THE C O L O N I A L P E R I O D :            FLORESCENCE

w h a t I h a v e elsewhere called the abangan          w o r l d view—in terms
of which it w a s normatively regulated a n d ethically justified. 2 5
  T h u s , at each stage of the development which w e have been
f o l l o w i n g o n the level of the rice terrace a n d the cane field, w e
could presumably have traced similar processes in the various
social a n d cultural institutions which comprise the b a c k b o n e of
village life. T h e elaboration of a complex r a n k i n g system tied
to c o m m u n a l tenure, the       fluctuating   relationships between kin-
ship, patron-dependent a n d territorial ties, the vicissitudes of the
position of the village h e a d m a n a n d his staff, the               changing
content of village rights as a corporate unit, a n d even the trans-
f o r m a t i o n s of the abangan    "little t r a d i t i o n " as it absorbed into
itself a w i d e r a n g e of foreign elements a n d turned t h e m to its
o w n ends—all these w o u l d a d d substance to the "cultural core"
side of our description of the history of a h u m a n                   ecosystem.
B u t if statistics are uncertain before this century, c o m m u n i t y -
level ethnographies are nonexistent; a n d even the h a n d f u l of
village studies carried out in the closing phases of colonial rule
are, t h o u g h excellent in themselves, a l m o s t wholly oriented to
economic a n d agrarian matters—to an obsessive concern with that
elusive entity, "native welfare"—rather than to the close analysis
of social structure a n d culture patterns. 2 6 B y looking at the r a n g e
of variation a m o n g contemporary villages, by s q u e e z i n g dry w h a t
f e w f r a g m e n t s of local ethnography w e have f r o m the colonial
period, a n d by deductively e m p l o y i n g s o m e general sociological
principles, w e can get an over-all sense for the things which
m u s t have happened to the Javanese village in its journey t o w a r d
post-traditionality, b u t the details of " w h a t h a p p e n e d " are in-
accessible to us.

   P e r h a p s the most trenchant phrase which has been coined to
s u m m a r i z e w h a t seems to have been the career of the Inner
Indonesian village over the past century a n d a half is " t h e ad-

   Geertz, C. 1960.
  25

   For some of the more important such studies, see Adam, n.d.; Burger,
  26

1928; Burger, 1930; van Doom, 1926; and van der Kolff, 1937.
THE C O L O N I A L      PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE                     103


vance toward vagueness." T h e peculiarly passive social-change
experience which, especially in "inner" Inner Indonesia, rural
society has been obliged to endure seems to have induced in it an
indeterminateness which did not so much transform traditional
patterns as elasticize them. Such flaccid indeterminateness is
highly functional to a society which is allowed to evade, adjust,
absorb, and adapt but not really allowed to change, much as
similar traits are useful on an individual level to persons con-
tained in "total institutions"—prisons, mental hospitals, concen-
tration camps, and the like. 27 Pulled this way and that, hammered
by forces over which it had no control and denied the means for
actively reconstructing itself, the village both clung to the husks
of selected established institutions and limbered them internally
in such a way as to permit a greater flexibility, a freer play of
social relationships within a generally stereotyped framework.
T h e result was an arabesque pattern of life, both reduced and
elaborated, both enormously complicated and marvelously simple:
complicated in the diversity, variability, fragility, fluidity, shal-
lowness, and unreliability of interpersonal ties: simple in the
meager institutional resources by which such ties were organized.
T h e quality of everyday existence in a fully involuted Javanese
village is comparable to that in the other formless human com-
munity, the American suburb: a richness of social surfaces and
a monotonous poverty of social substance. 28


The Development of Outer Indonesia
       But while Java was attaining the higher reaches of involu-
tion, a different process was taking place in the Outer Islands—
or, more accurately, in some narrowly delimited sections of them.
There, the enclave, not the mutualistic, pattern was flourishing, a
true proletariat was being forged from a mass of imported

  " Gofiman, 1961.
  28 For discussions of some "suburban" aspects of contemporary Javanese

villages, see Jay, 1956; and Geertz, 1959. I have incorporated a few phrases
from the latter paper in the paragraph above.
104            THE COLONIAL               PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE

coolies, and small-holder cultivation of export crops was increas-
ing at an accelerating pace. The simplified statistics of Table 5
present the outlines of a pattern of dualistic development much
more comparable to the segregative one of Malaya than to the
symbiotic one of Java.

                              TABLE        5

         VALUE OF N I N E LEADING EXPORTS, JAVA VERSUS THE
                     OUTER ISLANDS,        1870-1930


                                                     Percentage of
                         Indexes                     N.E.I, exports

                                 Outer                          Outer
                  Java          Islands          Java          Islands

       1870        100              100             87           13
       1900        172              400             70           30
       19301       555             3671             44           56

 1
   All petroleum accounted to Outer Islands.
 SOURCE: Calculated from J. S. Furnivall, Netherlands India, New York:
Macmillan, 1944, p. 337.

   Three characteristics of this Outer Island (or Outer Indonesia)
development, each of them sharply contrasting to the Javanese
pattern, serve to define it. 20 First, the development was geo-
graphically extraordinarily localized, particularly on the capital
intensive side. Of the 1930 Outer Island export value, 600 million
guilders, about a third originated from the East Coast of Sumatra
alone, where the great tobacco, rubber, tea, and oilpalm planta-
tions were concentrated in an area (Deli and its environs) down-
ward of 10,000 square kilometers, or less than one percent of the
total Outer Island area. Another third came from the oil fields
  29
    If the figures underlying Table 5 could be broken down along the
Outer versus Inner Indonesia divide, thus throwing the west Javanese tea
development on the other side of the line where most of it properly be-
longs, the picture given would be even more dramatic.
THE C O L O N I A L      PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE                     J 05

clustered around Palembang-Djambi in south Sumatra and
Balikpapan in east Borneo. A n d the tenth represented by tin
came entirely from the three small islands of Bangka, Bilitung,
and Singkep off the Sumatran south coast. 30 Second, rather than
being focused on condiments, confections, and stimulants the
development centered on the production of industrial r a w ma-
terials—a reflex, as Wertheim has pointed out, of the alteration
in world market conditions attendant upon the spectacular
growth of large-scale manufacturing in the West after the middle
of the nineteenth century. 3 1 In 1900, rubber, tin, and petroleum
—almost entirely Outer Island products—accounted for about
17 percent of Indonesia's export value; in 1920 about 20 percent;
in 1930 about 37 percent; in 1940, after the collapse of sugar in
the depression, about 66 percent. 32 A n d third, as indicated earlier,
the peasantry played a relatively much greater role in the export
economy, the small-holder share of the 1930 Outer Island figure
being about 35 percent (all of it, of course, from agricultural
rather than mineral production) as against a comparable Javanese
figure of about 15 percent. 33
  Except for tin, which was mined on Bangka as early as the
seventeenth century, virtually the entire Outer Island develop-
ment can be dated from the impulse in 1863 of the obscure
tobacco planter Jacob Nienhuys to move from East Java to Deli. 3 4
     Furnivall, 1944, p. 336; de Ridder, n.d., p. 77; van de Koppel, 1946,
p. 393. A t the end of the twenties, three-quarters of the total planted
estate area outside of Java was situated in the residency of the east coast
of Sumatra (van Gelderen, 1929).
  al Wertheim, 1956, pp. 67, 97.

  M Furnivall, 1944, pp. 36-37; Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, p. 135.
  "Furnivall, 1944, p. 337; van de Koppel, 1946, p. 411. Taking agricultural
exports alone (i.e., excluding tin and petroleum), the Outer Island small-
holder share was about 53 percent as against the Javanese 17 percent. Van
de Koppel, 1946. In per-capita terms the contrast is, of course, more strik-
ing: in 1927, about 21 guilders per head in the Outer Islands, about 2 in
Java (van Gelderen, 1929); in 1939, 14 and 2 (Boeke, 1947, p. 25).
  " O n Nienhuys, see Boeke, 1953, pp. 220-221, 223; and van der Laan,
1946.
706             THE C O L O N I A L   PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE

In a Surabaja trading house, Nienhuys, a Schumpeterian entre-
preneur, met a certain Abdullah, an Arab who, passing himself
ofi as a Sumatran prince, spoke glowingly of the native-grown
tobacco of the island's little-known northeast coast and of the
profits to be made from it. H e may not have been a prince, but
he was an Arab, and his sense for commercial possibility unerr-
ing. Having failed in Java, Nienhuys gathered together a hand-
ful of doubtful credits and departed forthwith to Deli to found
what became in time one of the most profitable tobacco enter-
prises—per unit of tobacco produced, the most profitable—in
the world. 35
  From the ecological point of view, tobacco was in many ways
the ideal crop to serve as bridge between the sawahs of Inner
Indonesia and the swiddens of Outer. An unirrigated, commer-
cial annual with a short growing season and no technical dis-
continuities in scale, it could be fitted into virtually every sort of
agricultural pattern found in Indonesia. In Java it was grown as
a palawidja small-holder crop on dry-monsoon sawahs and on
unirrigated tegals, the only nonfood crop so cultivated in sig-
nificant quantities. 36 In Sumatra, and sporadically elsewhere in
the Outer Islands, it was integrated into the multicrop fabric of
the swidden system, the pattern Nienhuys found established in
Deli. 37 On the estate side the same gamut appears. In the central
Javanese principalities (Jogjakarta and Surakarta) a version of
the rotating lease system already described for sugar was em-
ployed, with the estate conscripting the peasants' land and labor
every other year for tobacco cultivation under European direc-
tion. 38 In the other important estate tobacco area of Java, the

  36 In1938 the world price of Deli tobacco was four to five times higher
than that of any other cigar tobacco, including Cuban. Van der Laan, 1946.
At the beginning of the century some Deli tobacco companies were paying
dividends as high as 111 percent. Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1911.
  M Van den Broek,   1946.
  37 Van den Broek, 1946; van Hall, n.d., p. 69; Lekkerkerker, 1916, p. 243.
  " Beets, 1946. As the leasing system in the principalities was modeled on
the so-called appanage system by which the royal courts of the indigenous
THE    COLONIAL          PERIOD:       FLORESCENCE                     107

East Hook, the peasants grew the crop themselves and merely
sold it to the estates, though by providing seedlings, paying land
taxes, and advancing premiums the estates soon contractually
bound them hand and foot to do so. 39 And, finally, in Sumatra
yet another ingenious leasing system was devised, which per-
mitted the Dutch planter to become a swidden farmer, like the
local peasant.
. . . the famous Deli wrapper tobacco is grown only on land which
has been lying under forest fallow for at least seven or eight years.
. . . The tobacco planter of East Sumatra is thus a shifting cultivator
who raises tobacco only once in a cycle of eight years, and each
tobacco plantation therefore requires about eight times as much
land as is planted in any one year.
. . . When the tobacco companies originally applied to the sultans
for agricultural concessions, no attempt was made to set aside suffi-
cient land for the peasantry, although the contracts stipulated that
the companies had to give each peasant family 4 bouw (2.9 hectares)
of land so that it could carry on its own traditional form of agricul-
ture. But instead of reducing the size of their concessions by turn-
ing over to each family within the concession the stipulated amount
of land, the planters preferred to have the use of all the land and
to lend the harvested tobacco land to the peasants raising a single
rice crop. This meant that the planter had access to all but the
actual village land within his concession, while the East-Coast peas-
ant no longer had to clear land for his own [swidden]. Instead, he
received from the estate each year in May or June the same amount
of land ready for the sowing of upland rice that he would have had
to clear had he not lived within a tobacco concession.40


state of Mataram were supported, the peasant rendering three-fifths of his
crop to the king or his agents, the provision of both land and labor to the
estates was compulsory. Also as tobacco is only a dry-season crop, during
the year the estate had possession of the peasant's sawah a wet-rice crop
could also be grown (called, with fine irony, "permitted paddy") which
was share-cropped on the usual half-and-half basis, with the estate as the
landlord and a peasant, commonly the land owner, as the tenant.
   38 Boeke, 1953, pp. 212-213.

   "Pelzer, 1957. Actually, the eight-year cycle was not so rigid; in 1940,
108              THE COLONIAL            PERIOD:         FLORESCENCE

  A t first glance, it m i g h t seem that this relationship between
swidden     tobacco   and    swidden     rice was    also symbiotic;       and
Pelzer uses that t e r m to describe it. 4 1 B u t in ecological, or at
least cultural-ecological, terms it was not symbiotic, if by that is
m e a n t a relationship f r o m which one or both ecosystems benefit
and neither is h a r m e d . 4 2 R a t h e r it was neutral (i.e., a relation-
ship which has no significant effect on either system) or, perhaps,
mildly antagonistic      (i.e., one which affects either or both ad-
versely). 4 3 In Java, the sugar estate and the rice village c a m e to
occupy complementary niches in one, closely integrated                  wider


about 7 percent of the tobacco land was recultivated in seven or less years,
about 33 percent in nine or more years. Van der Laan, 1946.
   11 Pelzer, 1957.

   42 Clarke, 1954, pp. 363-364. Clarke's conceptualization is cast in terms of

species but is clearly extendable to ecological populations, communities,
systems, etc.
   "Clarke, 1954, pp. 363-364. By "beneficial" and "harmful" are meant,
of course, the implications of the relationship for the equilibrium and per-
sistence of the system qua system, not its value in terms of human welfare,
so that "eufunctional" and "disfunctional" might be better terms (see,
Levy, 1952, pp. 76-82). Using a plus to indicate a eufunctional ("bene-
ficial") association, a minus to indicate a disfunctional ("harmful") one,
and zero to indicate a functional neutral one, Clarke presents the following
paradigm:


Species [ecosystem] A Species [ecosystem] B                  Relation

          plus                  plus            mutualism
                                                                   symbiosis
          plus                  zero            commensalism

          zero                  zero            toleration         neutrality

          zero                  minus           antibiosis
          plus                  minus           exploitation       antagonism
          minus                 minus           competition


In terms of these rubrics, which of course shade into one another, the
sugar-sawah system falls under mutualism, the tobacco-swidden system
under toleration or (mild) antibiosis.
THE COLONIAL             PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE                     709


ecosystem; they were mutually adapted to one another in such a
way that each made a positive contribution to the other's viability.
In Deli, the tobacco estates and the autochthonous peasantry
operated in parallels; they were not integrated into a single
ecosystem but into two separate ones of a somewhat similar type.
They were functional alternatives, not complements, and their
joint persistence was the result not of positive mutual adaptation
but of an elaborate program for keeping out of one another's
way.
  It was, of course, the swidden cultivator who for the most part
was obliged to keep out of the way of the tobacco planter, rather
than the other way around. There were few of him in any case:
in 1915, the autochthonous population density in east Sumatra
seems to have been less than six per square kilometer, which is
low even for a swidden area. 44 Further, the evolution of the
legal framework governing the concession contracts—which were,
at least in the formative period of the industry, made between
the local harbor sultans and the tobacco corporations, not be-
tween peasants and the corporations—steadily constricted the
scope of operation for swidden cultivators. In 1884, when the
rights of the peasants within concession areas were first given
explicit legal form, the contracts guaranteed "a harvest year"
to the peasant following tobacco cultivation, but by 1892 they
guaranteed only "a harvest." Where the contracts originally had
permitted the growing of "rice and maize," they now permitted
only "rice or maize." Where cultivation rights had been allowed
to anyone holding traditional, customary-law tenure claims over
land in the new concession, only those actually dwelling on the
concession—often a relative matter for a swidden farmer—were

   "Calculated from Lekkerkerker, 1916, pp. 271, 339. In calculating the
size of the indigenous population I have subtracted only the total of extra-
Sumatran Indonesian coolies from the "natives" total, ignoring any families
they may have had and whatever Indonesians, Sumatrans, or "foreigners"
were engaged in noncoolie occupations, so that in fact the estimate of the
swidden peasant density is a maximum, the density probably being in fact
closer to four per square kilometer than six.
110          THE COLONIAL PERIOD:                    FLORESCENCE

to be granted such rights. Where all harvested tobacco fields
had been accessible, only those which peasants had in fact earlier
cultivated were considered as open. And where the area allotted
to each family had been a fixed quantity, the total land to be
given out for swidden was henceforth limited to no more than
half the cleared tobacco fields, thereby preventing any significant
increase in the number of peasant cultivators on the concession.45
Thus, the swidden cultivator had every reason to suspect that
the tobacco planter really did not want him around at all. In
fact, when the system of land concessions granted by local lord-
lings was abandoned after 1919 for a straightforward "waste
land" type of lease from the Netherlands East Indies government
—one legally free of encumbrances by customary native rights—
the estates began to consider simply relinquishing a portion of
their concessions to the swidden population outright in exchange
for being permitted to bar native cultivators from tobacco lands
altogether—a complete divorce which was about to be finally
consummated when the colonial period ended. 46
  The separation between tobacco plantation and swidden farm
is even clearer on the labor side. In contrast to Java, the local
population of east Sumatra was not drawn upon for estate work,
both because it was quantitatively insufficient and, having enough
land and freedom, psychologically disinclined. Instead, first
Chinese and later Javanese workers were brought in as a fully
proletarianized indentured labor force. In 1913 about 48,000
Chinese and 27,000 Javanese coolies worked on east Sumatra
tobacco estates, and of the total work force of more than 85,000,
less than 1,000 were natives of the area itself.47 Brought there by
contract and held there by the notorious "penal sanction" which

  " De Ridder, n.d., p. 45.
  " Van der Laan, 1946. For a review of the variety of legal forms under
which Western enterprises gained title to Indonesian land, see Allen and
Donnithorne, 1957, pp. 67-70; and van de Koppel, 1946.
   " Lekkerkerker, 1916, p. 272. More than 95 percent of the over-all total
were contract coolies but of the small local group 95 percent were
free. (By 1931, however, almost half of all coolies, now some 350,000, were
free. Furnivall, 1944, p. 356.)
THE COLONIAL               PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE                      111


provided prison terms for runaways, this uprooted labor force
was as much an enclave in indigenous Deli society as was the
Dutch managerial class. The Malays and Bataks of Deli were
in the European estates but, unlike their counterparts in Java,
not of them.
   The swidden ecosystem was, therefore, not seriously altered,
even in an involutional manner, by its encounter with the estate
tobacco system. In the first place, unlike the sawah system, it
was incapable of such alteration; any serious attempt to intensify
it would have led to grass-field erosion, and would have harmed
both systems rather than benefit them in the way that improved
irrigation, better land care, and crop diversification benefited
them in Java. In the second place, the Sumatra estates, facing a
labor shortage and a land surplus, rather than the reverse, did
not see the indigenous population as a usable resource in the
way the sugar planter saw the population of crowded Java, but
merely as a local nuisance, like mosquitoes. 48 Whatever effects
the estate regime had on swidden were probably—there are, to
my knowledge, no detailed studies on the matter—in the direc-
tion of impoverishment. The fact that the swidden farmer did
 not have to clear the land of forest was, of course, an important
labor-saving for him; but that he was restricted to planting
 second-season land, largely confined to a single crop, and limited
 as to the area he could plant, must have reduced the per-capita
 productivity of the regime. The over-all result was, in all likeli-
 hood (though, again, specific data to prove it seem to be un-
 available), to thin further the peasant population living on the
 estates, or at least to lead those who lived on them to clear land
 outside of them as well.
   In any case, as the Deli economy diversified beyond tobacco
to shrub and tree-crop perennials—oil palm, agava, tea, and
especially rubber—the ecological insulation of the peasant from
the estate became virtually absolute, because no swidden farmers
lived on such estates (see Map 6). The movement to diversifica-
  48   For a similar argument, a little differently put, see van Gelderen, 1929,
esp., p. 100.
tion began early, for even the hardy Nienhuys tried to grow black
pepper, nutmeg, rice, opium, and coffee as well as tobacco on his
newly found land.49 But it was not until the rubber industry
took hold that the whole direction of the Deli complex, and in
fact of the whole Outer Indonesian economy, changed drastically.
Planted first (in the form of ficus elastica, the Asian species) on a
very small scale in Java in the 1860's, rubber was not introduced
into Sumatra's east coast until 1906, long after tobacco was well

 " Boekc, 1953, p. 223.
THE COLONIAL              PERIOD:       FLORESCENCE                   113

established, and subsequent to the famous abduction of havea
brasiliensis to Malaya via the Kew Gardens. But once there, it
initiated "one of the most remarkable periods of development in
the history of agriculture." 50 Between 1913, when the trees first
began to become tappable, and 1922, Outer Island estate-rubber
production (about three-quarters of which derived from Sumatra's
east coast) went from 3,000 metric tons to 43,000; in another
decade (1931) it had reached 95,000; by the end of the colonial
period (1940) 182,000—approximately one-third of the total world
production.51
   It was with respect to rubber that the small-holder export
economy of the Outer Islands really "took off." Tobacco was
effectively barred from most of the tropical-forest environment,
except for small patches in the swidden fabric. It flourished in
Deli because of the hyperextensive nature of the regime and
because the northeast coast is one of the very few areas of Sumatra
enriched by recent volcanic action.52 But rubber is a tropical-
forest product par excellence, a tree crop as readily integrated
into a swidden complex as sugar was into a sawah complex, and
hence spread rapidly and easily from its east-coast beachhead
through most of Sumatra, to parts of Borneo and, to a lesser
extent, to the Outer Indonesia sections of Java (Bantam, Prian-
gan, Buitenzorg, and Batavia); by 1938 an estimated 60 percent
of Netherland East India rubber exports by weight came from
  M Allen   and Donnithorne, 1957, pp. 117-118.
  1,1 Robequain,   1954, p. 166; Maas and Bokma, 1946; van dc Koppel, 1946.
Estate production rose on Java too, where rubber was sometimes "mixed"
with coffee or tea on a single plantation in a lowland-highland arrange-
ment. T h e comparable Java figures are 1913, 1,000; 1922, 29,000;    1940,
99,000 metric tons. Maas and Bokma, 1946. Unlike almost all other estate
cultivations which were predominantly Dutch, somewhat less than half the
investment in rubber was Dutch, and the largest single estate was Ameri-
can. A somewhat similar pattern, a little differently organized, occurred
also in petroleum, where nearly 60 percent of the investment came from
the Anglo-Dutch "Shell" combine and about a third from the United
States. Allen and Donnithorne, 1957, pp. 288-289.
  " Mohr, 1945.
114           THE COLONIAL PERIOD:                     FLORESCENCE

nearly 800,000 small holders. 53 The colonial paradox held once
again: ecological separation reduced rather than accentuated eco-
nomic contrast. The Indonesians whose relationship to the estates
was indirect benefited most from them.
  Stimulated by the demonstration effect of rubber and paced by
the general upsurge of commercial spirit in the Outer Islands
after the turn of the century, the small-holder cultivation of
other export perennials also flourished, at least until the 1930
depression. Copra export volume, nearly all of which came from
small holders, grew more than sevenfold between 1900 and
1930.54 Coffee exports from Outer Island small holders almost
doubled, both by weight and value, in three short years (1925—
1928) coming thereby to account for about half the total coffee
production and nearly three-quarters of the coffee export of the
Netherlands East Indies generally. 55 Pepper, exclusively a swid-
den small-holder crop since the days of the Company and be-
fore, spurted also, exports going from 25,000 to 40,000 tons
between 1910 and 1925.56 And even tea, until about 1910 al-
most exclusively an estate crop, was increasingly cultivated by
small-holders, especially in the Outer Indonesia parts of west
Java, reaching nearly a quarter of the marketed product by 1926.57
But in Inner Indonesia the peasant economy continued to ex-
   53 Van Gelder, 1946. Because of the generally inferior quality of small-

holder rubber as against estate rubber, the percentage by value was some-
what lower; about 45 percent (1937). Boeke, 1953, pp. 128-129; Allen and
Donnithorne, 1957, p. 291. Between 1925 and 1940 small-holder rubber
area increased f r o m about 300,000 ha. to about 1,220,000 ha. Thomas, n.d.,
p. 21.
  " Reyne, 1946; van de Koppel, 1946.
  "Paerals, 1946; Boeke, 1947, pp. 23, 68; Allen and Donnithorne, 1957,
pp. 291-292. About 9 percent of Netherlands East Indies small-holder coffee
was produced on Java in both years, so that it also increased in absolute
terms; virtually all of it was domestically consumed, however. Paerals,
1946.
  "Rutgers, 1946. In this case, the advance continued, even accelerated,
after the depression, reaching nearly 80,000 tons in 1935.
  57 Van Hall, 1946.
THE COLONIAL PERIOD:                   FLORESCENCE                    115


pand only statically. Squeezed by paddy, small-holder sugar never
got off the ground; squeezed by palawidja food crops, small-
holder tobacco, though much more significant than sugar, seems
actually to have lost ground to estate cultivation over the first
third of the century—at least as an export product. 58
  F o r the general pattern of peasant life, the outcome of this
radical social change—which raised the peasant share of total
Netherlands East Indies export value from about 10 percent in
1894 to nearly 50 percent in 1937—was different from the in-
volutional pattern traced for Java. 5 9 But if          prerevolutionary
Javanese community studies are scarce, none exist for the Outer
Islands, so that it is impossible to trace the transformations
wrought in swidden and in the cultural "core" within which it
is set by this commercial revolution. Looking here and there
and adding bits and pieces, we can, at best, get an over-all
picture whose outlines may be bold but whose details are dim.
  T h e first such outline is that the impact of small-holder com-
mercialization on the huge Outer Indonesia mass was uneven
and highly focused. More than a quarter of the small-holder
rubber trees were (1938) in the south Sumatra residency of
Palembang alone; if the east coast of Sumatra, Djambi                 (the
Sumatra central coast), and the western and southeastern corners
of Borneo are added, nearly 80 percent are accounted for. 6 0 O f
the total copra export, more than a third came (1939) from the
Minahasa residency in northern Celebes; if the western edge
of Borneo and the tiny Riau archipelago are added, the total

  58 Van de Koppel, 1946; van den Broek, 1946. Most Javanese small-holder
tobacco production went either into "direct consumption" (i.e., hand-
rolled straw-wrapped cigarettes), the tobacco for which was sold in
shredded bulk form in local markets, or into domestic cigarette industries.
In 1935, of a total Javanese production of 66,000 tons, about 55 percent
was "directly consumed," about 25 percent worked by domestic (Chinese
and Javanese) cigarette industries and only about 20 percent was exported.
Van den Broek, 1946.
  ™ Van Hall, n.d., p. 205.
  M Van Gelder, 1946.
116           THE COLONIAL           PERIOD:       FLORESCENCE

rises to three-fifths. 61 Eighty-five percent of the pepper came
(1935) from the Lampong districts at the southern tip of Su-
matra, 95 percent of the peasant-grown tea from the Priangan
highlands of west Java. 62 Small-holder coffee was less focused,
but even there the bulk of the output came from central and
south central Sumatra, with north Bali, central Celebes, and
Timor as secondary centers.63 The growing points of peasant
enterprise in Outer Indonesia were themselves islands in a broad
sea of essentially unchanged swidden-making. As the Inner
Indonesian heartland filled up to become a largely homogeneous,
post-traditional rural slum, the Outer Indonesian arc differenti-
ated into a plurality of sharply distinct enclaves of social and
economic dynamism scattered through a monotonous expanse of
enduring stability.
  One such enclave on which (as a result of a single study done
by the brilliant Dutch sociologist Schrieke in 1928) some circum-
stantial material exists concerning socio-economic change in
Outer Indonesia as a result of the spurt in small-holder export
cultivation, is the Minangkabau region of west central Sumatra. 64
This region—roughly the present residency of west Sumatra
(Sumatra Barat)—is not the most typical example one might
have chosen to represent the Outer Indonesia development
generally. Not only is it the most densely populated area out-
side of Java and Bali (1930), but also one of the few places in
the Outer Islands where irrigated rice was (and is) to be found
on a fairly extensive scale, and perhaps the only one where small-
holder coffee, rubber, and copra all came to be widely culti-
vated.85 Yet, at the same time, this ecological heterogeneity,
  61 Reync, 1946.
  " Rutgers, 1946, van Hall, 1946.
  " Paerals, 1946.
  M Schrieke, 1955, pp. 83-166. Schrieke's study (The Causes and Effects

of Communism on the West Coast of Sumatra) was originally pre-
sented as the summary report of an Netherlands East Indies Government
Investigation Committee set up, with Schrieke as chairman, to look into
Communist-inspired political disturbances on the west coast in 1926.
  " Indonesia, 1956, I, 81; Schrieke, 1955. The Minangkabaus are; th?
THE COLONIAL PERIOD:                   FLORESCENCE                     117


combining sawah and swidden elements, makes the Minangkabau
case of the commercial transformation of shifting cultivation all
the more telling. Because Minangkabau agriculture developed
differently in response to external challenges and pressures it is
a particularly instructive example.
  T h e Minangkabau cultural hearth lies in the Agam plateau, a
nine-hundred-meter-high tuff tableland strangely corrugated by
a series of broad, flat-bottom canyons, which, winding among a
cluster of irregular schistose hills and towering volcanic cones,
joins the three classical capitals of Bukit Tinggi, Pajakumbuh,
and Batu Sangkar (see Map 7).66          In this landscape the sawah
system, aided by effusions from the cones, crystallized, and the
character of Minangkabau culture—an unusual fusion of Islam-
ism, matrilineality, and gnomic moralism—took form. 67                 But
around this hearth—in the narrow coastlands to the west (Pari-
aman, Padang, Painan), the flat marshes to the east (Bangkinang,
Taluk, Sungaidareh), the highland river galleries to the north
(Libuk Sikaping, Panti, R a u ) , and the rugged Kerintji mountain
areas of the south (Muara Labuh, Sungai Penuh)—lies an en-
veloping tropical forest frontier into which the Minangkabau
and their culture have evidently been spreading for centuries.
It is in this periphery that swidden was concentrated, that peas-
ants encountered at least the distant shock waves of the estate
explosion, and that Schrieke found "the beginnings of an agrarian
revolution":



most numerous people in Sumatra, forming about one-quarter of its popu-
lation. Robequain, 1954, p. 157.
  66 Lekkerkerker,1916, pp. 32-35; Robequain, 1954, pp. 157-158. Agam
(or "old Agam") is perhaps more often used to refer to the plateau directly
around Bukit Tinggi, different names being given to the linked ones of
Pajakumbuh and Batu Sangkar.
   " Robequain, 1954. A secondary sawah development is to be found on
the lower (350 meters) Solok plain directly south of Lake Singkarak.
Minangkabau sawah technique is different from Javanese, being in general
less labor intensive. See van der Veer, 1946; and Terra, 1958.
The contrast we have in mind is . . . that between the predomi-
nantly [wet] rice producing areas and those where the cultivation
of commercial crops is coming to the forefront; where, that is to
say, commodity production takes place. In the latter areas money
incomes are increasing by leaps and bounds compared with the
former. But this contrast is not "remarkable" at all in reality; it is
simply logical.68

  Schrieke dates this "great change" from 1908-1912, when the
last of the government-imposed restrictions on indigenous agri-
culture and trade were abolished, and when, more importantly,
 " Schrieke, 1955.
THE C O L O N I A L PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE                779

the stimulus of rapidly expanding export markets began to be
felt, at least in the marches. In the Kerintji highlands, the
southern outlier, coffee exports rose from 190 tons in 1913, to
300 in 1923, to nearly 3,000 in 1926. In Muara Labuh, an isolated
foothill region on the northern side of the mountain which gives
Kerintji its name, children and even teachers stay away from
school to work in the gardens, for "they see that a coffee farmer
earns more than a miserable petty official, who is, moreover,
obliged to work away from his native village." In Inderapura,
also in the south, but on the coastal plain, "vast plantations can
now be found where three years ago no coffee existed," and
scarcely a garden is more than seven years old. Painan, in the
western lowlands but farther north, "is still fairly backward,
being a narrow and rather insignificant coastal region," but even
here "the population has recently gone over to the cultivation of
coffee." Coffee also flourishes northward in Lubuk Sikaping and
eastward in Taluk; and "while in former days a large percentage
of the population was driven to leave [these regions] for Malaya
owing to shortage of food, many are returning now that gardens
are being opened in their native [villages]."
  In the lowland regions, especially those fringing the great
eastern marsh, rubber is also of great, commonly even greater,
importance, as for example in Bangkinang, where in 1925 a
population of only 40,000 managed to export 1,250 tons of havea
to Singapore, earning 180,000 pounds sterling. In two other low-
land margin areas, one in the extreme north, the other in the ex-
treme south, which twelve years earlier were so backward and im-
poverished that "the government had not dared to encourage
rubber cultivation—in spite of the fact that . . . the population
had the greatest difficulty paying its taxes, even when these were
at a very low rate of assessment," there are nowadays people
"to whom a rubber transaction running into some hundreds of
pounds means nothing very extraordinary." Copra too is wide-
spread, being most prominent around Pariaman on the north-
west coast, where the growers not only process the coconuts
themselves but carry the meat to market, thus eliminating the
J 20         THE C O L O N I A L P E R I O D :      FLORESCENCE

hated, expensive middleman. "Here we have to do," Schrieke
sums up, "with a revolution in spirit similar to that of the early
capitalist period in Europe as indicated by Max Weber and
Sombart. T h e 'economic mentality' has made its entry upon the
scene." 6 9
  This mentality has had its customary sociocultural accom-
paniments: increasing flexibility of land tenure; growth of in-
dividualism and slackening of extended family ties; greater class
differentiation and conflict, intensified opposition between young
and old, modern and conservative; weakening of traditional
authority and wavering of traditional social standards; and even
the growth of "Protestant ethic" religious ideologies. 70 What
changed here (as in Java though in a different way) was not
just a pattern of land use or a set of productive techniques but a
system of functionally interrelated, adaptively relevant institu-
tions, practices and ideas—a "cultural core."
  The precise nature of the changes in the more technical aspects
of this core is not fully spelled out by Schrieke; but the main
development seems to have been a slowing down of the shifting
cycle so as to lead to a transformation of the swidden pattern
toward a more or less fixed gardening one. Rubber and coconut
trees grown originally in or around swiddens eventually tend to
become permanent or semipermanent groves if they are of com-
mercial importance, because they are perennials, less easily
choked by weeds, and less draining of the thin soil than are
grains. Coffee is a greater problem because, more bush than
tree, it provides less cover for the soil and has a shorter life span.
But planted under specially selected shade trees on protected,
or even terraced, highland slopes, coffee also can become an
effective garden cultivation. 71 More than anything else it is rice,

  " T h e preceding two paragraphs from Schrieke, 1955, esp., pp. 98-106.
  70 Schrieke, 1955, pp. 107 ff.

  71 Paerals, 1946. In the lowland areas coffee remained   firmly enclosed
within the swidden pattern, though even there it extended the life of a
plot from two or three to seven or eight years, as well as leading to a
THE COLONIAL            PERIOD: FLORESCENCE                          121

demanding light, encouraging weeds, and exhausting minerals,
which makes shifting cultivation—at least in Southeast Asia—
shift.
   Thus, the reduction in the relative role of rice production as
against tree crops has brought a movement away from true
swidden toward permanent or semipermanent gardening.
"Thinly populated" Muara Labuh, a onetime surplus swidden-
rice producer, has turned into a heavy importer because "the
inhabitants are too busily occupied cultivating coffee—to have
time left for rice growing." In Inderapura, the population "can-
not cope with [its] vast gardens owing to shortage of labor . . .
[and consequently] tends to neglect rice growing—in favour of
the cultivation of commercial crops." Rice fields are still being
planted there, but under pressure exerted by the native admin-
istration, and it "is only achieved with difficulty." Rice exports
from Kerintji have dropped nearly 75 percent in three years;
and in Lubuk Sikaping "the cultivation of rubber and coffee
has now put altogether an end to rice growing in forest clear-
ings, the so-called 'shifting-cultivation.'" 7 2
   T h e reduction, or at least the limitation, of rice production in
favor of commercial crops led of course to greater rice imports
—in the first instance, from the plateau sawah areas, where this
process was less in evidence than it was in the pioneering
 marches; in the second, from Java, which was having increasing
 difficulty merely feeding itself; and, finally, from surplus regions
 outside the archipelago (Burma, Thailand, Indochina). The
 process was cumulative. Where around 1922 a significant (within-
 Indonesia) rice export was still flowing from the west coast
 residency as a whole, most of it evidently from the heartland,
 by 1930 "the cultivation of coconuts, coffee and rubber had
 pushed rice into the background" to the point where the region

more careful temporal coordination of parallel swiddens. See Pelzer, 1945,
pp. 25-26.
  72
     Schrieke, 1955.
122             THE    COLONIAL          PERIOD:       FLORESCENCE

was importing nearly 700 tons a year; by 1938, 3,300. 73 Thus, in
two decades of an arm's-length encounter with European capital-
ism, the Minangkabau swidden peasant became what the
Javanese sawah peasant, struggling to keep head above water
for more than a century, never did: an acquisitive businessman
fully enmeshed in a pecuniary nexus.
   Again, the Minangkabau experience is perhaps not typical of
Outer Indonesian development in all details. Each of the small-
holder growing points was somewhat different culturally, so-
cially, and ecologically, and so the exact pattern of their re-
sponse to commercial opportunity was different. T h e heavy
concentration on coconut gardens around Menado in northern
Celebes (Minahasa) turned the region—which in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries had been "the rice barn for the Moluc-
cas"—into an inflexibly one-crop export economy at the full
mercy of the copra market, because rice could not be grown in
the shade of the long-lived coconut groves, and a decline in ex-
port returns thus brought almost immediate food shortages. 74
In the great rubber flats of Djambi, Palembang, and coastal
Borneo, where the trees were more integrated into the estab-
lished swidden complex, the situation was more flexible, for a
decline in rubber prices could be at least partly compensated
for by neglecting tapping for rice growing. 75 But even here the
planting of rubber trees sometimes tended to transform sub-
sistence peasants into export farmers and to crowd out food culti-
vation altogether, for example, at Benkalis along the Malacca

  73   Van de Koppel, 1946. Some of this rice went to feed laborers on Dutch
concerns, for example the coal miners in the fields around Sawah Lunto.
There were also some coffee, tea, and quinine estates, especially around
Kerintji. In general, however, European enterprise in the west coast was
limited.
  " V a n de Koppel, 1946.
  m    Van de Koppel, 1946. Around Deli much of the imported rice went to
feed the imported Javanese and Chinese coolies. In 1931-1938 the residency
of the east coast of Sumatra accounted for nearly half the rice imports into
Outer Indonesia. Van de Koppel, 1946.
THE C O L O N I A L      PERIOD:        FLORESCENCE                     123


Strait where "rubber gardens occupied so large an area that there
was actually a scarcity of land suitable for the making of new
[swiddens] for food crops, and rubber trees had to be cut
d o w n . " 7 6 In Atjeh, in Tapanuli, in the Lampungs, even in parts
of the Lesser Sundas, such as Timor, the same picture of in-
creased commercial exports and increased rice imports appears;
while in the Moluccas, traditionally a sago-growing region, com-
mercial gardening of coconuts permitted significant imports of
rice into some areas. 77
  Thus, as the bulk of the Javanese peasants moved toward agri-
cultural involution, shared poverty, social elasticity, and cul-
tural vagueness, a small minority of the Outer Island peasants
moved toward agricultural specialization, frank individualism,
social conflict, and cultural rationalization. The second course
was the more perilous, and to some minds it may seem both less
defensible morally and less attractive aesthetically. But at least it
did not foredoom the future.

  ™ Pelzer, 1945, p. 25. Actually, scarcity of labor may have been as im-
portant a factor as scarcity of land; and, in any case, it evidently was the
Dutch administration, not the peasants, who decided the trees " h a d " to be
cut down.
  " V a n de Koppel, 1946; Ormeling, 1956. In a number of the Lesser
Sundas, cattle and timber export played a minor role.
       PART III

The Outcome



       6. COMPARISONS AND PROSPECTS




The future came soon enough. The crash occurred in 1930:
During the next four years, Netherlands East Indies export
income dropped 70 percent. 1 In May, 1940, the Netherlands was
occupied by the Germans, leaving the Indies in the unfamiliar
role of a colony without a home country. By 1942 the vacuum
was filled: its metropole was Tokyo. In August, 1945, the In-
donesian Republic declared its Independence; by the end of
1949 it achieved it. Depression, war, occupation, and revolution—
all in two decades.2 About all that was left to happen was civil
war and runaway inflation—and they came in the fifties.3

The Present Situation
       But the effect of this series of convulsions on the basic pat-
tern of the Indonesian economy has been less than one might
expect. The transfer of sovereignty, the comprehensive politiciza-
  1
    Van de Koppel, 1946.
  3
    The definitive work on this period is Kahin, 1952. For economic de-
velopments during it, see Sutter, 1959, esp., Vols. I and II.
  8
    O n civil war, see van der Kroef, 1958; and Hanna, 1961, chapter vii.
On inflation, see Higgins, 1957, pp. 13-25, 166-167.
C O M P A R I S O N S AND          PROSPECTS                             125


tion of society, and the triumph of radical nationalism have pro-
foundly altered the moral environment of economic activity. But
for the general form of that activity Bergson's extravagantly his-
toricist aphorism very nearly holds: there is nothing in the pres-
ent but the past. The economy functions much less effectively,
but (or, more exactly, because) it is the same economy. The
threefold thematic structure announced by the Company, devel-
oped by the Culture System, and resolved by the Corporate
Plantation System—technological dualism, regional imbalance,
and ecological involution—persists; and the frustration of In-
donesian aspirations persists with it.
   Within the confines of this general framework, however, many
things have changed. Petroleum aside, Europeans play a much
reduced role in the capital intensive sector of the dual economy,
and the Dutch, since the government takeover of their proper-
ties in December 1957, play virtually none at all.4 The sugar in-
dustry, by far the hardest hit estate enterprise in the depression,
much of its equipment reduced to scrap iron by the single-
minded Japanese, and many of its mills burned to the ground
by resentful Indonesian revolutionists, is but a shadow of its
former self despite a recent upturn. 5 In Deli and environs hordes
of peasant squatters—unemployed Javanese coolies, Sumatrans
in-migrant from less fertile adjacent regions, local peasants freed
at last from colonial regulations—have appropriated more than
a hundred thousand hectares of former plantation land of all
sorts for subsistence agriculture, a process started by Japanese
attempts to make the area self-sufficient by setting plantation

   ' T h e mass takeover ostensibly stimulated by the West New Guinea
(Irian) issue, affected more than 400 agricultural estates, as well as a num-
ber of banks, industrial firms, and transport lines. Paauw, in press.
   ' S u g a r production fell from nearly 3,000,000 tons to 500,000 between
1930 and 1935, the only important estate crop to show a serious drop in
output in the crisis. By 1940 it had recovered to about 1,500,000 tons, but
in 1950 it was down to 275,000. Since then it has slowly risen to somewhat
less than one-half the 1940 figures, one-quarter the 1930 figures. Van der
Koppel, 1946; Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, p. 68.
126                      COMPARISONS AND                   PROSPECTS

laborers to work cultivating food crops on unused estates.8 Be-
tween 1938 and 1955 the number of estates in exploitation in
Indonesia just about halved; though in terms of actual planted
area the decline was only slightly more than a quarter. 7
   At the same time the half-century drift toward industrial raw
material exports at the expense of foodstuffs, spices, fibers, and
the like had continued apace: between 1940 and 1956 the export
volume of rubber, tin, and petroleum rose 40 percent while that
of all other products fell by about a half; and the two-thirds of
total 1940 export value quoted earlier for these three products
had by 1956 become nearly three-quarters. 8 Thus the export
sector of the economy narrowed down even more finely to Outer
Indonesian—and especially Sumatran—products. Even the slight
revival of sugar production in Java has done little to alter this
 picture, for the bulk of this product is now consumed do-
 mestically. If anything, regional imbalance has widened: in 1939
 about 35 percent (by value) of Indonesian exports was shipped
 from Javanese ports, in 1956 only 17 percent. 9
   Involution, too, has proceeded relentlessly onward, or per-
haps one should say outward, for a process which began to be
felt first in full force mainly in the sugar regions is now found
over almost the whole of Java. Against the background of our
1920 figure, those based on the 1955 election-registration (dis-
trict analyses of the 1961 census figures are not yet available)
show an assimilation of more and more of the island to the demo-
graphic—and, one presumes, the social—conditions prevailing in
the densest ones during the earlier period (Graph 2). The mean

  "Pelzer, 1957. A similar phenomenon, on a less extensive scale, has oc-
curred on a number of the enclave-type estates in eastern Java.
  * Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, pp. 64-65.
  * Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, pp. 108, 129, 135.
   "Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, p. 105. Actually as there was a
significant amount of smuggling of small-holder copra and rubber from
the Outer Islands in the latter year, the contrast was probably even greater;
a point which obtains for the relative role of industrial raw materials in
total export argument as well.
                                       GRAPH 2


                     1920                              1955




       under 300   300 — 500    over 500       under 300   300 — 500   over 500
                                   INHABITANTS PER KM.2


SOURCE: Calculated from Iso Reksohadiprodjo and Soedarsono Hadisapoe-
tro, "Perubahan Kepadatan Penduduk dan Penghasilan Bahan Markanan
(Padi) di Djawa dan Madura," Agricultura (Jogjakarta), I (1960), 3-107.


of this distribution of districts is about the same, but what was
once the minority, the hyperpopulated district, is now the mode
and what was once the mode, the comparatively                      moderately
populated one, is now the minority. Analyzing these data more
carefully, Iso Reksohadiprodjo            and Soedarsono        Hadisapoetro
point out that, with           a few    exceptions, regions with         heavy
population remained in the same general density class from 1920
to 1930, but "regions with a low density of population in 1920
showed a tendency to a higher density in 1930 and still more
markedly in 1 9 5 5 . " 1 0 T h u s , where the all-Java density rose by

  10 Iso Reksohadiprodjo and Soedarsono Hadisapoetro, 1960. A few areas

with clearly adverse natural conditions, particularly with respect to irriga-
128                          COMPARISONS                     AND         PROSPECTS


about 5 4     percent     between       1920    and      1955,    that   of the      main
( f o r m e r ) s u g a r districts rose only by about 12, e v i d e n t l y — t h o u g h
n o figures are available to prove it—as a result of greater u r b a n
m i g r a t i o n f r o m these depression-blighted areas, and perhaps in
part of interregional m i g r a t i o n to less populated rural                    areas. 1 1
The    per-capita      rice-production         figures    give the s a m e        picture.
Such production fell by about a fifth in J a v a over these three
a n d a half decades, b u t only by about a tenth in the sugar dis-
tricts, partly because of the release of s a w a h f r o m cane, w h i c h
in s o m e areas—notably the Sidoardjo delta south o f S u r a b a j a —
actually m a n a g e d to p e r m i t a m a i n t e n a n c e of the 1920 per-capita
p a d d y p r o d u c t i o n . 1 2 I n short, the sharpness of the line between
"inner Inner Indonesia" and "Inner                       I n d o n e s i a " generally   has
been t h o r o u g h l y blurred. W h a t w a s o n c e a local pathology is
n o w an epidemic disease. 1 3


tion, are an exception in that they have remained at a low level. Iso
Reksohadiprodjo and Soedarsono Hadisapoetro, 1960.
   "Calculated from footnote 10 and Landbouwatlas. As the 1955 figures
are only for Indonesian citizens and those for 1920 presumably for all
residents, the totals are not precisely comparable, but the error thus intro-
duced is minor. Also only 73 of the original 98 sugar districts can be used
due to lacunae in the 1955 data and to administrative reorganizations be-
tween the two dates. The 25 omitted districts are, however, well scattered,
and their inclusion is not likely to change the relationships significantly.
  "Calculated from footnote 10. T h e Brantas-delta regencies of Sidardjo
and Modjokerto, nearly a third of whose sawah was in cane in 1920, had
a per-capita production of about 450 kg in that year, about 453 in 1955,
in the face of a 10 percent population increase. Footnote 10, and Wertheim,
1956, p. 371. T h e generally more favorable ecological conditions in the
former sugar areas, permitting terraces to be more thoroughly squeezed,
also played a role; but these figures are only for rice, and the areas would
probably be pretty well offset by more dry land (tegal) cultivation in the
nonsugar districts, were the data available.
    " Another sign that involution is now entering its acute phase is that
 fragmentation of ownership seems also to be spreading now that virtually
 no more land is available to bring into cultivation and the island is ex-
 tremely crowded almost everywhere. In Malang regency, Bennet (1961)
 found that the average size of sawah holding dropped 9 percent between
COMPARISONS             AND       PROSPECTS                            129

   Thus, although political, economic, and intellectual disorder
has reached—at least on the national level—a stage of near catas-
trophe, ecologically speaking the postwar picture in Indonesia
is about the same as before the war, perhaps more so. Most of
Java is crowded with post-traditional wet-rice peasant villages:
large, dense, vague, dispirited communities—the raw material
of a rural, nonindustrialized mass society. In the rest of Inner
Indonesia—Bali, Lombok, and some of the less involuted areas
of Java—as well as in some Outer Indonesian pockets (the Min-
angkabau heartland, the Tapanuli Batak, southwest Celebes),
traditional wet-rice peasant villages predominate, where density,
though high, is not yet overwhelming, and the established kin-
ship, political, and religious institutions remain powerful. Outer
Indonesia is characterized by localized plantation and mining
enclaves, where capital-intensive techniques are mixed with an
uprooted labor force; by the small-holder export crop gardeners
—now seriously hampered by government economic policies—
clustered in certain areas; and by the traditional, mainly kinship-
organized swidden cultivations spread over the rainforest in-
teriors of the larger western islands and the rugged monsoon
forest hills of the smaller eastern islands.14

1942 and 1953, of tegal holdings 13 percent, while population climbed
about 11 percent, "possibly indicating that increasing densities of popula-
tion are being reflected here less in an absence of sawah holding and more
in a diminishing size of the average holding." He estimates that although
85 percent of the households have some land, only about 64 percent of
them have holdings of a size adequate to their subsistence needs.
  " T h i s typology, intentionally gross and ignoring urban settlements al-
together, is based on the more discriminating classification of Indonesian
communities in H. Geertz, in press. There are, also, as a result of both
pre- and post-revolutionary government efforts, some Javanese, Sundanese,
and Balinese "transmigrated" wet-rice settlements in the Lampungs at
the southern tip of Sumatra, and to a much lesser extent in southwest
Celebes. Between 1937 (when there were already some 60,000 Inner Indo-
nesian settlers in the Lampongs) and 1956, about 286,000 people either
moved or were (voluntarily) moved from Java to these areas. Robequain,
1954, p. 162; Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, p. 17. For a description
130                     COMPARISONS             AND      PROSPECTS

   In human history "final" pictures are final until they change.
But, despite the sloganeering about "winds of change," "the
awakening East," or "the revolution of rising expectations,"
and despite, too, the real possibility of a totalitarian triumph in
Djakarta, there is no evidence that the major outlines of the
Indonesian pattern of adaptation, of the plurality of diverse cul-
tural cores which compose it, are likely to alter in the foreseeable
future. For all the proclaimed, if only half-believed, optimism at
its apex, Indonesia at its base is an anthology of missed oppor-
tunities, a conservatory of squandered possibilities.


Java and Japan
       A sharper sense for these lost opportunities and possibili-
ties is developed if one looks to another area where they were
seized—not allowed to slip through the fingers like the proverbial
chances of a lifetime. Historically, "what might have happened"
of course did not; and from one point of view there is little
else to be said about it. But the fact that it might have is not
without significance, for "there are moments in history the whole
record of which is not contained in the story of what happened,
and the meaning of which is not disclosed except in an estimate
of what never came to be." 1 5 It is, as Frost has written, roads
not taken which make all the difference.
  For Java, the obvious comparative case is Japan. Much differs
between them: geography, history, culture, and, of course, per-
capita income—Japan's being about twice Java's. 18 But much,
too, is similar. Both are heavily populated. Both rest agricul-
turally on a labor-intensive, small-farm, multicrop cultivation
regime centering on wet rice. Both have managed to maintain

of transmigration efforts in the Colonial Period, see Pelzer, 1945; in the
Republican period, Utomo, 1957.
  15 Brinkley, 1935, p. 299.

  "Estimated gross national product per capita (1955) for Japan is about
$240, for Indonesia about $127. Ginsburg, 1961, p. 18. Javanese per-capita
product is, of course, below that of Indonesia as a whole, though by how
much it is impossible to say.
COMPARISONS               AND      PROSPECTS                              131

a significant degree of social and cultural traditionalism in the
face of profound encounter with the West and extensive do-
mestic change. In fact, in agriculture, the further back one goes
toward the mid-nineteenth century the more the two resemble
one another. Japanese per-hectare rice yields at the beginning of
Meiji (1868) were probably about the same as those of Java at
the beginning of the Corporate Plantation System (1870); today
they are about two and a half times as high. 17 Between 1878 and
1942 the percentage of the Japanese labor force employed in
agriculture dropped from around 80 to around 40; the Javanese
figure for the end of the nineteenth century is not known, but
in 1930—and probably still today—it had not fallen below 65
percent. 18 And, though it is even more a matter of head-long
estimate, the percentage of aggregate net income contributed by
agricultural production in the Japan of the 1880's was of the
same general order as that in the Java of the 1950's, by which
time the Japanese percentage was only a third as large. 19 Given,
then, all the admittedly important background differences, one
can hardly forbear to ask when one looks at these two societies:
"What has happened in the one which did not happen in the
other?"
   A satisfactory answer to such a question would involve the
whole economic, political and cultural history of the two civiliza-
tions; but even if we confine ourselves to predominantly ecologi-
cal considerations, a number of dramatic differences leap to the
eye. T h e most striking—and the most decisive—is the contrast
between the way Japan utilized its rapid population increase and
the way Java utilized hers. Between 1870 and 1940 Java absorbed
the bulk of her increase in numbers—about thirty million people
  17   Ohkawa and Rosovsky, 1960; FAO Yearbook, pp. 36-37.
   Ohkawa and Rosovsky, 1960; Statistical Abstract for the Netherlands
  ls

East Indies, 1935, pp. 143-146.
   " O h k a w a and Rosovsky, 1960. Mears, 1961. The Javanese figure is again
estimated on the basis of the all-Indonesia figure, the percentage of in-
come from agriculture being probably lower in Java than in the Outer
Islands.
132                       COMPARISONS             AND       PROSPECTS

—into post-traditional village social systems of the sort already
described, but
in the first century of modernization, Japan maintained a relatively
unchanging population in agriculture while the total population
increased two and one-half fold. Practically all the increase in the
labor force was absorbed in non-agricultural activities. There was
little change in the size of the rural population. Almost all the
natural increase of the national population was absorbed in urban
areas.20

   From 1872 to 1940, the Japanese farm population remained vir-
tually constant around 14 million people (or 5^2 million house-
holds) at the same time as the total population grew approxi-
mately 35 million.21 Comparable statistics on the farm popula-
tion of Java are not available, but that it grew at better than an
average of one percent a year during this entire period seems a
conservative estimate.22 Japan, in short, did not involute; which
should cut the ground out from under any charges of "paddy-
field determinism" which might be brought against our Javanese
analysis. But what, then, did it do ?
   For one thing, it increased agricultural productivity per
wor\er, not just per terrace. "Using the latest and best computa-
tions," Ohkawa and Rosovsky estimate that the productivity of
agricultural labor (net output/labor force in agriculture) in-
creased 2.6 percent annually between 1878 and 1917.23 Thus, as
I have attempted (with much less adequate computations) to
  M Taeuber,   1960.
  21 Namiki,   1960; Ohkawa and Rosovsky, 1960.
  " Starting around 1920, Javanese towns seem to have begun, evidently
for the first time, to grow more rapidly than the general population, and
this trend has accelerated since the revolution (Wertheim, 1956, pp. 185-
186; T h e Siau Giap, 1959). However even today they come nowhere near
absorbing the entire increase as the Japanese towns seem to have done since
the last quarter of the nineteenth century.
  s   Ohkawa and Rosovsky, 1960. Toward the end of the period this rate
tended to slacken, and after the first world war it dropped to about 1
percent. But by that time Japan's industrial sector had been firmly launched.
COMPARISONS              AND      PROSPECTS                              133

demonstrate, where Java increased per-hectare yields at least to
the First World War but not per worker yields, Japan increased
both over roughly the same period. The contrast is all the more
impressive, because, in Japan as in Java, the basic structure of
proprietary control, the general form of the producing unit, and
the over-all pattern of rural culture seem to have been relatively
unaltered:
The increases in output and productivity were based on the tradi-
tional patterns of rural organization inherited, in the main, from the
Tokugawa period. The small family farm, averaging about 1 hec-
tare per household, the distribution between peasant proprietors
and tenants, high rents in kind—all of these characteristics were
maintained during the [1878-1917] period. At the same time, there
was no strong trend of land consolidation and this preserved the
scattered holdings of tiny plots of ground.24
No move to extensify agriculture; no marked trend toward a
class polarization of large landlord and rural proletarian; no
radical reorganization of the family-based productive unit—
characteristics of Java and Japan alike since the turn of the
century. 26 But Japan increased productivity per agricultural
worker 236 percent, Java—the estates aside for the moment—
hardly increased it at all. 26 For Java, plus ça change, plus c'est la
même chose may be a fitting epitome. But for Japan it would have
to read plus c'est la même chose, plus ça          change.
  The readiest explanation for this difference—and the one most
commonly invoked—is the greater technological advance in Jap-
anese agriculture. Irrigation was expanded, land reclaimed, seed

   24 Ohkawa and Rosovsky, 1960. For a description of the still fairly tradi-

tional quality of village life in Japan—in many ways more traditional
than in Java—see Beardsley, Hall and W a r d , 1959.
   x As the fundamental groundwork for the Javanese type of pattern was

laid in the Culture System period, so that for the Japanese was laid in
the equally decisive Tokugawa (1600-1868), particularly the later phases
of it. On this, see Smith, 1959.
   °° Ohkawa and Rosovsky, 1960.
134                      COMPARISONS AND                   PROSPECTS

selection improved and fertilizer use increased, cooperative activ-
ity became more effective and widespread, planting was intensi-
fied, weeding and harvesting methods developed, agricultural
knowledge increased. 27 Though the contrast between the two
technologies is often exaggerated, on one level this thesis is
beyond question—the sharp rise in productivity per farmer in
Japan clearly must rest on "key improvements in Japanese agri-
cultural practice in keeping with the small unit of production." 2 8
Yet it is, nonetheless, unsatisfactory. First, it involves a some-
what uncritical reading of the present into the past. Until about
the turn of the century, by which time Japan had irrevocably
"taken off" and Java had definitively involuted, the difference be-
tween either the rate or level of technological advance in the two
peasant agricultures was not so great as it has been since then. 29
Second, even to the extent the argument is factually valid, it
merely restates the question: it is just this difference in tech-
nological progress that we wish to explain. There is little in


  27 Ohkawa and Rosovsky, 1960; Dorè, 1960. Again, as in Java, these

changes began well back in the previous (here the Tokugawa) period. See
Smith, 1959, pp. 87-107.
  28 Ohkawa and Rosovsky, 1960.
  29 Rostow tentatively dates Japanese take-off in the 1878-1900 period,
1960, p. 38. A full documentation of the argument that Javanese techno-
logical advance in agriculture very nearly kept pace with the Japanese
until the beginning of this century or the end of the last would require
a thorough review of the two technological histories, which—particularly
as the Javanese one has yet to be written—cannot be attempted here. It
is worth pointing out, however, that all main improvements listed for
pre-twentieth century Japanese agriculture, with the partial exception of
artificial fertilization, seem to have been present in Java. Also, it is of
note in this connection that in 1910-1911, when the first reliable com-
parative figures appear, Japanese per-hectare rice yields are only 80 percent
higher than Javanese, while a decade later they are 300 percent higher
(Wickizer and Bennett, 1941, p. 318), the difference evidently stemming
from radically rising inputs of (now mostly commercial) fertilizer, which
increased more than 650 percent between 1898-1902 and 1913-1917
 (Ohkawa and Rosovsky, 1960).
C O M P A R I S O N S AND     PROSPECTS                         735

the two technologies around, say, 1870—the end alike of the
Culture System and of the Tokugawa period, which could account
for their divergence since that time.
   More genuinely determinative of the separation into con-
trasting courses was the manner in which a traditional labor-
intensive, Lilliputian, family-farm, wet-rice-and-second-crop type
of ecosystem came to be related to a set of modern economic
institutions. Specifically, where Japanese peasant agriculture
came to be complementarily related to an expanding manufac-
turing system in indigenous hands, Javanese peasant agricul-
ture came to be complementarily related to an expanding agro-
industrial structure under foreign management. As labor pro-
ductivity in the capital-intensive sector in Japan increased, it
increased also in the labor-intensive sector; as it increased in the
capital-intensive sector in Java it remained approximately con-
stant in the labor-intensive one. In Japan, the peasant sector
supported the industrial one during the crucial three decades of
the latter's emergence largely by means of extremely heavy land
taxation; in Java, the peasant sector supported the industrial one
through the provision of underpriced labor and land. In Japan,
the industrial sector, once underway, then re-invigorated the
peasant sector through the provision of cheap commercial fer-
tilizer, more effective farm tools, support of technical education
and extension work and, eventually, after the First World War,
simple mechanization, as well as by offering expanded markets
for agricultural products of all sorts; in Java most of the invigor-
ating effect of the flourishing agro-industrial sector was exercised
upon Holland, and its impact upon the peasant sector was, as we
have seen, enervating. The dynamic interaction between the
two sectors which kept Japan moving and ultimately pushed her
over the hump to sustained growth was absent in Java. Japan
 had and maintained, but Java had and lost, an integrated econ-
 omy.
  To a great extent, Japan maintained it and Java lost it in the
critical four decades of the mid-nineteenth century—1830-1870.
136                      COMPARISONS               AND       PROSPECTS

A t the same time that van den Bosch was superimposing                     an
export-crop economy upon the traditional Javanese sawah sys-
tem, Japan had locked herself away f r o m W e s t e r n interference
and was m o v i n g toward a m o r e commercialized, less immobile
rural economy on its o w n . 3 0 In both societies, peasant agricul-
ture was becoming, within a generally unchanging basic pattern,
steadily m o r e labor intensive, m o r e skillful and m o r e       produc-
tive. B u t in J a v a the increase in output was soon s w a m p e d by
the attendant spurt in population; in Japan the population re-
mained virtually constant. 3 1 In both societies, the peasant's agri-
cultural productivity increased. B u t in one it was, so t o speak,
reserved (largely through the operation of a tributational t a x sys-
t e m ) for, as it turned out, future investment in an indigenous
manufacturing      system. In the other, it was immediately                ex-
pended to subsidize the swelling part-time labor force (i.e., the
peasant in his two-fifths corvee role) of a foreign-run plantation
system, and its potential for financing a properly Indonesian take-
off dissipated.

  " S m i t h , 1959. This movement went on, to some extent, during the
whole Tokugawa period, though it seems to have come to a climax in
the last century of it, and was further speeded up after Perry's visit in
1853, at which time the seclusion policy was, at least officially, ended.
In any case, steady, if slow and locally uneven improvement in Javanese
agriculture might also be traced well back into the seventeenth century
were the material available. It is possible that Japan "started lower" than
Java, its natural conditions being less suitable for rice, so that its growth
in productivity between the beginning of the seventeenth century and
the end of the nineteenth would have had to have been greater in order
for it to achieve Javanese levels by the later date. See Rosovsky, 1961, p. 81,
note 104.
  111 Japanese population seems to have increased more or less steadily from

about the end of the twelfth century to the beginning of the eighteenth,
at which time it stabilized, evidently because the traditional ecosystem
had found its climax equilibrium. Between 1726 and 1852 population was
virtually constant. After 1852 and contact with the West it began to rise,
but slowly and irregularly. After 1870 rapid rise began, moving from
about 35 to 55 million in less than half a century (1873-1918). Taeuber,
1958, pp. 20-25,44-45.
COMPARISONS AND                    PROSPECTS                                  137


   But to comprehend this tale of two economies fully requires
also a comparison of the denouements, which means extending
the four-decade critical period to its nine-decade consummation
in take-off into sustained growth on the one hand and in involu-
tion into static expansion on the other. In outline form, the con-
trasting patterns of development in the two societies between
approximately 1830 and the end of the First World W a r can
be summarized as follows:
                            JAVA                               JAPAN


TECHNIQUE     Gradual improvement through         Gradual improvement through
              the entire period (and in all       the entire period (and, in fact,
              likelihood before), but in a        the whole Tokugawa period).
              wholly labor-intensive manner.      This also took place mainly in
                                                  a labor-intensive manner until
                                                  around 1900, after which rap-
                                                  idly increasing capital inputs,
                                                  mostly in the form of fertilizer,
                                                  took place.

POPULATION    Rapid growth after 1830, evi-       Rapid growth began only after
              dently as a result of declining     1870, evidently as a result of a
              mortality due to improved           decline in the death rate at-
              communications and greater se-      tendant on a rising national
              curity and of increased fertility   standard of living and of in-
              due to the labor-tax pressures      creasing fertility due (indi-
              of the Culture System; but not,     rectly) to expanding employ-
              save possibly for a brief initial   ment opportunities in manufac-
              period, as a result of generally    turing. 82
              rising Indonesian living stand-
              ards.

EMPLOYMENT    N o significant expansion out-      Rapid expansion in the indus-
              side of traditional agricultural    trial sector, absorbing the whole
              pursuits, but a rapid expansion     population increase. Agricul-
              within them made possible by        tural employment virtually con-
              the perfection of labor-absorb-     stant, both land and labor
              ing     productive    techniques    productivity rising, the latter
              which raised land but not labor     about 70 percent more rap-
              productivity. Peasants provided     idly.®
              unskilled occasional labor for
              (first government, then pri-
              vate) plantations, but at a price
              well below its marginal pro-
138                                    C O M P A R I S O N S AND                            PROSPECTS

                                             JAVA                                           JAPAN

                          ductivity, the costs of their sub-
                          sistence being largely borne by
                          the village economy.

URBANIZATION              Retarded. Towns and cities                     Accelerated, particularly after
                          grew much less rapidly than                    the Restoration. Towns and
                          total population, and the de-                  cities grew much more rapidly
                          pressive effect upon fertility                 than total population. As rates
                          rates commonly associated with                 of natural increase were mod-
                          urban life were largely absent,                erately depressed in the urban
                          delaying the usual postindus-                  areas, this was in the main due
                          trial slowing of population                    to a j u m p in rural-urban mi-
                          growth.**                                      gration. 30

PER-CAPITA                Probably close to constant over                Rising with increasing rapidity
INCOME                    the whole period in the peas-                  in the peasant sector, the rise
                          ant sector; rapidly rising in the              being used to finance an even
                          plantation sector.                             more rapid rise in the manu-
                                                                         facturing sector after Meiji."

ECONOMIC                  Increasingly severe. Increased                 Marked, but moderated by close
DUALISM                   capital inputs into the planta-                cultural, social, and economic
                          tion sector, increased labor in-               connections between the two
                          puts into the peasant. Separa-                 sectors and by the flowering of
                          tion between the t w o sectors                 small-scale industrial activity.®7
                          cultural, social, and technologi-
                          cal at the same time, with little
                          intermediate industrial activity.

   32
        T h e d i a c h r o n i c c o m p a r i s o n of t h e t w o d e m o g r a p h i c d e v e l o p m e n t s is
p e r h a p s m o s t s i m p l y expressed i n t e r m s of t h e c h a n g i n g r a t i o of                  the
Japanese to Javanese p o p u l a t i o n : 1830, 3.8; 1870, 2.1; 1900, 1.6; 1920, 1.6;
1955, 1.6 ( c a l c u l a t e d f r o m T a e u b e r , 1958, p p . 22, 46, 70; a n d f r o m sources
g i v e n in n o t e 42, c h a p t e r iv, a b o v e ) . T h u s , t h e early rise of                   Japanese
p o p u l a t i o n g a v e it s o m e w h e r e a r o u n d 3/4 to 4 t i m e s t h e Javanese total by
t h e b e g i n n i n g of t h e n i n e t e e n t h c e n t u r y , a g a p t h e Javanese             explosion
n e a r l y cut in half b y 1870, a f t e r w h i c h t i m e t h e c o n v e r g e n c e s l o w e d as
t h e t w o p o p u l a t i o n s g r e w a f t e r 1900 at a b o u t t h e s a m e a n n u a l rate—be-
t w e e n 1 a n d IVi p e r c e n t .
        O h k a w a a n d Rosovsky, 1960.
   34
        " D e v e l o p m e n t in [ S o u t h e a s t ] Asia, c e n t e r e d as it w a s o n p l a n t a t i o n s ,
m i n e s , oil fields a n d exports of r a w m a t e r i a l s , b r o u g h t m o r e                  industrial-
ization      t h a n urbanization;         t h e checks o n f a m i l y size b r o u g h t by t h e u r b a n
industrialization            and     the N e w        World       operated        less effectively i n           the
COMPARISONS               AND      PROSPECTS                              139


W h a t e v e r value this comparison of J a v a and J a p a n m a y     have
does not lie in any assumption that had Java been "left a l o n e "
she w o u l d h a v e followed the Japanese path, or even t h a t she
w o u l d n o w be in an economically m o r e viable state. W h a t w o u l d
h a v e h a p p e n e d h a d the D u t c h not colonized the Indies is clearly
not even an hypothetically answerable question, for it depends
upon w h a t historical events w o u l d have occurred instead,            and
their n u m b e r is infinite. N o r does the value of the c o m p a r i s o n
rest o n the assumption that Java's course n o w m u s t be t o re-
enact s o m e h o w the Japanese pattern if take-off is to be at length
accomplished. T h e w o r l d has m o v e d on, both in a n d          outside
Java, a n d t h e alternatives w h i c h face her today are not those
w h i c h faced J a p a n a century ago. Its value lies in providing a
contrasting, yet c o m p a r a b l e case w h i c h can shed light on w h a t


underdeveloped countries. The drops in fertility rates came eventually
in most Asian countries too, but too late to prevent serious population
pressure from arising before planned economic development began."
Higgins, 1958.
  " T a e u b e r , 1960. Here, it was not so much the fact that urbanization
showed an initially higher over-all growth, but rather its greater develop-
ment prevented Japanese transition rates from climbing as high between
1880 and 1920 or so as Javanese ones seem to have climbed between 1840
and 1880.
  88 "Being fearful of the political consequences of foreign      borrowing,
the [Meiji] government financed investment almost entirely from do-
mestic sources—mainly agriculture. The land tax accounted for 7 8 % of
ordinary revenues (the bulk of total revenues) from 1868 to 1881, and al-
though the figure tended to fall after that it still stood at 5 0 % in 1890.
High as the rate of tax on land was, however, it did not represent an
increase over the Tokugawa period. Already at the end of that period
the take from agriculture by the warrior class was immense, and the Meiji
government merely redirected it into new channels. Modernization was
achieved, therefore, without reducing rural living standards or even tak-
ing the increase in productivity that occurred." Smith, 1959, p. 211. As
this view seems to neglect increased efficiency in tax collection it may
be slightly optimistic so far as pressure on the peasants is concerned.
   On the importance of Japanese small industry, see Rosovsky and
   37

Ohkawa, 1960.
140                     COMPARISONS             AND      PROSPECTS

happened in Java and therefore on the nature of her present situa-
tion. The economic history of Japan is not a norm from which
Java has, alas, departed, nor that of Java a pathology from which
Japan has, praise God, escaped. Rather Japanese economic history
is Javanese with a few crucial parameters changed (a proposition
which could be stated equally well the other way around), and
in this consists its comparative significance.
   There are two major parameters which are so changed: the
existence of colonial government in Java is replaced in Japan
by the existence of a powerful indigenous elite; the development
of capital-intensive agriculture in Java is replaced in Japan by
the development of a capital-intensive manufacturing system. Be-
hind these major parametric differences lie a host of others. The
strength of the Japanese elite grew out of the traditional, reli-
giously supported patterns of political loyalty characteristic of the
culture generally; 38 Java's colonization was in part a mere reflex
of her geographical location at the cross-roads of the Orient, of
her neighbors' possession of the right spices at the wrong time,
and of the inherent fragility of the classical Indonesian states. The
tropical climate and other physical characteristics of Java which,
as noted, made export sugar and subsistence rice natural dualistic
partners were lacking in Japan, whose more temperate condi-
tions perhaps made a plantation farming pattern less adaptive.
Other differences—in the world views of both masses and elites,
in micro-ecological conditions, in pre-seventeenth-century histori-
cal development, in patterns of social stratification and mobility,
in market systems, and so on—could also be cited in the same
connection. A full comparative analysis would have to trace
them out (or at least the more powerful of them—for the list of
parameters whose change might affect the behavior of any given
system has no end) and attempt to assess their relative weight. 39

  38 On Japanese concepts of loyalty (or "obligation") see Benedict, 1946;

on their religious basis, Bellah, 1957.
  39 For an incisive theoretical discussion of the role of the concept of

parameter in system analysis, see Ashby, 1960, esp. pp. 71-79.
COMPARISONS                AND      PROSPECTS                          141

But on the ecological, and to an extent the economic, level their
expression was funneled through these two most immediately
decisive differences. It is the predicament of all science that it
lives by simplification and withers from simplicisticism.
   T h e existence of colonial government was decisive because it
meant that the growth potential inherent in the traditional
Javanese economy—"the excess labor on the land and the re-
serves of productivity in the land," to use a phrase which has
been applied to the "slack" in the Japanese traditional economy at
the Restoration—was harnessed not to Javanese (or Indonesian)
development but to Dutch. 4 0 This is not a mere matter of mone-
tary returns (though, leaving subsistence farming aside, in 1939
assessed per-capita income in the European community in In-
donesia was more than a hundred times that in the Indonesian
community), 4 1 for certainly the growth of the plantation indus-
try made possible greatly increased "native welfare" expendi-
tures—on health, rural credit, and so on—in Java. Nor is it a mere
matter of immediate benefit or harm, for some accompaniments
of its growth certainly redounded, in a residual way, to the
short-run advantage of the peasantry—better irrigation, improved
communications, increased availability of foreign manufactures,
and the like. Fundamentally, it is a matter of the transformative
impact upon society implicit in modern industry. T h e improve-
ment of human capital and the expansion of physical capital;
the creation of a modern business class and the crystallization of
 an efficient market system; the formation of a skilled and dis-

  10   The quotation is from Ranis, 1959; cited in Rosovsky, 1961.
  41 Calculated from Kahin, 1952, p. 36. The figures are income-tax sta-
tistics, and as Indonesian wage incomes under 900 guilders were not as-
sessed, they exaggerate the contrast somewhat. On the other hand, they
included Outer Island Indonesian "commercial" incomes, and, as we have
seen, these were significantly higher than Javanese. Finally, the 1939 popu-
lation is estimated, the last colonial census having occurred in 1930. On
balance, the times-a-hundred figure is probably conservative. An estimate
including Indonesian subsistence production put the 1939 ratio at about
60 to 1. Polak, 1942, p. 60.
742                    COMPARISONS AND                   PROSPECTS

ciplined work force and the raising of labor productivity; the
stimulation of higher propensities to save and the construction
of workable financial institutions; the inculcation of an entre-
preneurial outlook and the development of more effective forms
of economic organization—all these to a significant extent endog-
enously generated cultural, social, and psychological resources
upon which industrialism feeds were in a sense exported with the
commodities the plantations produced. The difference in "eco-
nomic mentality" between Dutch and Javanese which Boeke
took to be the cause of dualism was in fact in great part its
result. T h e Javanese did not become impoverished because they
were "static"; they became "static" because they were impover-
ished.
   T h e fact that the form in which capital-intensive industry
came to Java was agricultural simply reinforced this process.
Much more than manufacturing, industrial agriculture—and
especially sugar cultivation—permits a sharp division of labor
between a traditionalized labor force and a modernized man-
agerial elite. T h e Japanese peasant had to go to town and become
a full-time, reasonably disciplined member of a manufacturing
system, even if the organization of his factory was modeled along
traditional lines and his ties with his village homeland were
kept green to ease the transition. 42 The Javanese peasant did not,
literally, even have to move from his rice terrace. Plantation
agriculture is a much more effective way of marrying a non-
industrial labor force to an industrial productive apparatus than
is manufacturing, whose functional requirements are inevitably
more stringent. N o matter how strongly traditional elements are
maintained in manufacturing, they inevitably result in some
serious dislocations in life-ways and some major reorientations in
outlook for those caught up in them at all levels. They are a
common school for modernism, as Japanese history since 1920,
and especially since 1945, demonstrates. Whether the blunting of

  " O n the persistence of traditional social and cultural forms in modern
industrial settings in Japan, see Abegglen, 1958.
COMPARISONS              AND      PROSPECTS                              143


such effects is an essential characteristic of plantation industry or
a merely accidental one is perhaps debatable, and it is always
all too easy to assume that the way things worked out in fact
is the way things had to work out in principle. One might at
least conceive of an agro-industrial system which is as effective
a school for mass economic modernization as manufacturing,
and in Hawaii, for example, one might actually find an approxi-
mation of one. But it can hardly be gainsaid that such a system
has a strong natural bias toward the production of what Mintz
has called a rural proletariat—a hapless coolie labor force which
achieves the agonies attendant upon industrialization without
achieving its cultural, social, and psychological fruits. 43 The real
tragedy of colonial history in Java after 1830 is not that the peas-
antry suffered. It suffered much worse elsewhere, and, if one
surveys the miseries of the submerged classes of the nineteenth
century generally, it may even seem to have gotten off relatively
lightly. T h e tragedy is that it suffered for nothing.


The Outline of the Future
       Yet, though much has been lost, much remains. In-
donesia's per-capita food consumption may now finally be fall-
ing after its long period of relative constancy, but it is still not
so low as it is in India, Morocco, Tanganyika, or Burma—in
fact, in South and Southeast Asia it is significantly exceeded
probably only by Malaya and the Philippines. 44 Nor is there a
  43   Mintz, 1956.
  " See Ginsburg, 1961, p. 30, for estimated per-capita per-day caloric
intake for 93 countries, among which Indonesia stands 73d at about 2,040.
In 1957, the "ideal" (i.e., satisfactory) carbohydrate consumption per per-
son per year was set by the Nutrition Institute in Djakarta at about 160 kg
(standardized in terms of the caloric content of rice), in which year it
was in fact an estimated 159 in Java, 170 in the Outer Islands, 162 over-all.
Even without food imports it was about 155, 159, and 155. Calculated
from Mears, Afiff and Wreksoatmodjo, 1958. The Moluccas, where data
are inadequate, have been omitted. As only rice, maize, cassava, and
sweet potatoes were used in the calculation, it is conservative, 160 kg of
144                         COMPARISONS              AND      PROSPECTS

radically uneven distribution of national wealth—Indonesia prob-
ably has less of a plutocratic problem than any other country in
Asia save possibly China. And, even more important, for all its
century-and-a-half drift toward economic paralysis Indonesia's
economy still has some "slack" left in it, some exploitable po-
tentialities for growth. It is discouraging that these seem in the
process of being squandered too.
   Aside from petroleum and other mining enterprises, and what
manufacturing exists, the main possibilities of investing capital
in agricultural economy would seem to be three. First, there is
the one major technical advance in Japanese farming which has
not as yet been fully applied in Java—fertilization, and in asso-
ciation with it, improved seed selection. 45 Second, there is the
swidden-to-commercial-gardening "agricultural revolution" in
some parts of Outer Indonesia. And third, there is the old estate
sector, now mostly under Indonesian state management. But
capitalizing on these various opportunities is more difficult than
it often looks to agronomists, economists, or nationalist politi-
cians.
   T h e fact that fertilization (and improved seed selection) could
significantly increase Indonesia's, including even Java's, farm
yields seems well established.40 In seven hundred and fifty field
trials in Java it was found that "any suitable [chemical] fertiliza-
tion gives a crop response of at least 20%, in many cases 30%, and

rice per person per year amounting to approximately 1,600 calories per
person per day. Even aside from the intrinsic unreliability of the data,
caloric intake is, of course, a very gross measure of food supply, but the
Indonesian diet is probably not yet radically deficient in vitamins and
minerals either.
  46   A certain amount of sawah fertilization took place, largely as a second-
ary result of sugar-growing, in the last years of the colonial period, and
American aid programs provided some $50 million worth of fertilizer
in the first years following independence. H o w much scientifically based
rice-seed improvement there has been is less clear.
  " F o r a general review, see Mears, 1957.
COMPARISONS                  AND      PROSPECTS                       145

in some cases much higher." 4 7 Even allowing for the possi-
bility that some of these increases may prove less spectacular and
less lasting in practice than they have in trials, the potential for
increasing Indonesia's food supply through artificial fertilizers
can hardly be doubted. But, problems of manufacture, costs, and
so on aside, a merely technological view is inadequate. No more
than the earlier improvements in irrigation, cultivation tech-
niques, and crop diversification can an increase in yields through
fertilization be viewed as a way out of Java's—and Indonesia's—
agrarian dilemma. T h e figures in Table 4 with respect to the
expansion of nonrice cultivation indicate more than a 20 percent
rise in agricultural productivity over a few decades, but nothing
ultimately came of that in the way of increases in per-capita
income, much less sustained growth. It has been estimated that
the Dutch spent 250 million guilders on the construction of
irrigation and flood-control facilities between about 1880 and
1939, but the Javanese peasant at the end of it was just where
he had been at the beginning. 48 The central problem is not
whether Java can still increase her output: the central problem is
whether, as in Japan, this increase (perhaps at long last the
traditional terrace's final spurt) can be captured to finance an
industrial sector into which the increasing population can be
absorbed. Otherwise the economy is still treading water, which
is a dubious improvement over drowning outright unless help
eventually arrives.
  Since the revolution, a rising proportion of the population
increase has been absorbed—"collected" would be a better word—
into the towns as redundant civil servants, time-passing students,
underemployed traders, and all but workless unskilled laborers.
Thus Indonesia is moving from industrialization without urban-

  " Hauser, Georg, an F A O agricultural chemist and adviser to the Insti-
tute of Soil Research in Bogor, as quoted in Mears, Afiff and Wreksoat-
modjo, 1958.
  48 Irrigation   investment estimates from Pelzer, 1945.
146                     COMPARISONS AND                   PROSPECTS

ization toward urbanization without industrialization. 49             And
so far as nonagricultural production fails to rise, the economic
effect is much the same as if the population shunted off to the
towns was being taken directly into the village system (where,
in fact, the bulk of the increase is still being absorbed), for the
share-the-poverty pattern is simply extended to embrace both
rural and urban dwellers. A rise in agricultural productivity
would certainly alleviate this for a time; but it would only post-
pone a day of reckoning probably already too long put off. Only
if most of the rise can be siphoned off into industrial investment
(including investment in "human capital") does it seem that
fertilizers and the rest will really contribute something dynamic
to the general economic situation. If it is not so siphoned off, it
will merely further accelerate the process of involution, not just
in agriculture now, but throughout the whole society.
  It is, thus, an ironic and melancholy fact that so far as fer-
tilizer application is, in truth, Java's last trump in peasant agri-
culture, it is being played at a time when the general political
and cultural atmosphere is such that it almost certainly is being
wasted, in much the same way as all her earlier trumps were
wasted. In the absence of any genuine reconstruction of In-
donesian civilization, despite the rhetoric of revolutionary popu-
lism, any alteration of the persisting direction of its development,
pouring fertilizer onto Java's Lilliputian fields is likely, as modern
irrigation, labor-intensive    cultivation    and crop     diversification
before it, to make only one thing grow: paralysis. This is not an
argument against the technical improvement of peasant farming.
It is not an argument against the openness of human history.
It is an argument against a myopic pragmatic optimism which


  " N o t that there has been no industrialization. But where total popula-
tion seems to have grown about 10 percent between 1940 and 1952, "total
industrial employment" seems to have grown only about seven. A com-
parable figure for urban population growth is unavailable, but as the urban
population more than doubled between 1930 and 1952, it would almost
certainly be much higher. Paauw, in press; T h e Population of Indonesia.
COMPARISONS            AND      PROSPECTS                          747


allows short-run gains to obscure the general trend of events,
which isolates purely technical improvements from the histor-
ically created cultural, social, and psychological context in which
they are set, and which, because of these failings, exacerbates the
ailments it sets out to cure.
  T h e potentialities inherent in the Outer Island swidden-to-
export garden development are equally real and, for about the
same reasons, equally problematical. That small scale-commercial
farming of industrial crops can be a powerful source of economic
dynamism in Indonesia is amply proved by the prewar experi-
ence, when, for example, small-holder rubber acreage jumped
more than 300 percent in a decade and a half (1925-1940) and
"brought forth a stream of money the like of which was un-
known in the Indies." 60 But enthusiasm is tempered by the mere
fact that Outer Indonesia is, after all, part of Indonesia as a
whole. T h e involutional process in Java, even more than world
price movements or technological change, is the most immediate
constituent of the economic landscape within which such farm-
ing takes place. T h a t such a landscape is an unpromising one
for growth ought to be apparent by now.
  T h e whole problem can best be seen in terms of rubber, in-
creasingly the preponderant small-holder export crop. 61 T o say
small-holder export farmer today is largely to say rubber grower
(or, to a secondary extent, coffee or copra grower), and so the
question of the power of Outer Island agriculture to jolt In-
donesia's economy out of its deepening rut largely comes down
to the question of whether rubber can become a leading sector in
a national transition to sustained growth.
  Obviously, a wide range of special factors, stretching from the
  i0
     The statistic is from Bauer, 1948, p. 16; the quotation is from van
Gelderen, 1961.
  51
     With 1938 as 100, the small-holder production of rubber was 327 in
1954; coffee 68, copra 54, pepper 23, average of all small-holder export
production excluding rubber, 48. In value terms, returns from small-
holder rubber were about 60 percent more than from coffee, copra, and
pepper combined. Higgins, 1957, pp. 149, 155 (calculated).
148                                 COMPARISONS                        AND         PROSPECTS

competition of synthetics to the changing input needs of world
industry, is relevant to any such assessment, to say nothing of
international political conditions. (Small-holder rubber produc-
tion reached its highest point in history during the Korean
war. 5 2 ) But, in terms of the analysis being pursued here, they all
come to an immediate focus in two main considerations: the
degree to which rubber-farming is a more profitable use of Outer
Island land and labor than subsistence farming, and the degree
to which the difference can be channeled into growth invest-
ment, either in the extension and improvement of the rubber
industry itself, or in other productive enterprises. In these terms,
the Javanese involutional process acts against development: as it
progresses it converts more of the export income earned by rubber
etc. into imported foodstuffs and other consumption necessities
(textiles, etc.), and so gradually incorporates rubber into itself,
as it has already incorporated irrigation improvements and crop
diversification, and threatens to incorporate fertilization. The
cultivation and export of rubber become just one more way in
which per-capita income can be maintained at a nearly con-
stant level as population growth continues at a relatively un-
changed rate. 63 Outer Island export farming becomes a mere
tail to the kite of Javanese subsistence farming; rather than pull-
ing it in new directions, it is merely dragged along after it; rather
than jolting, it stabilizes it.
   N o more than in fertilization, irrigation, or crop diversifica-
tion, however, is this an inevitable outcome, an intrinsic product
  52   T h o m a s , K . D . , n.d., A p p e n d i x A , T a b l e I. D o m e s t i c m a r k e t i n g ar-
r a n g e m e n t s are also of central importance, of course; see T h o m a s , n.d.,
pp. 45-58.
  53   In 1939, the i m p o r t value of the four m o s t important                      consumption
necessities (rice, wheat flour, fish, a n d textiles) was about 8 percent of
the total import value, about 5 percent of the total export value. F o r 1950—
1956 it was 15 percent of the i m p o r t value, 12 percent of the export value.
Calculated f r o m Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, pp. I l l , 99. By 1959,
rice alone h a d reached nearly 20 percent of the total i m p o r t value. P a a u w ,
in press.
COMPARISONS               AND       PROSPECTS                              149

of some mysterious developmental force, but merely, in the
present state of Indonesian national life, a likely outcome, and in
fact is already occurring. In particular, it has been a combination
of deficit financing—including subsidization of rice imports—
and an unrealistically "favorable" official exchange rate which
has been the mechanism through which an increasing proportion
of the energizing force of the Outer Indonesian "agricultural
revolution" has been converted into Inner Indonesian "static ex-
pansion." 5 4 T h e result of such policies (and others) has been to
arrest the swidden-to-garden transition in mid-passage. The
rising local price of rice and other consumption goods relative
to that of rubber, the inability of small holders to gain control
of the capital to invest in processing equipment, planting mate-
rial, labor and so forth, and the general disincentive quality at-
tached to a sense that the bulk of locally earned revenue is being
utilized extralocally, have combined to discourage not so much
production as, more importantly, any improvement in produc-
tivity. 55
  T h e prewar "agricultural revolution" of the rubber areas was
in truth but a semirevolution :

To [capitalize on the potential value of vast stretches of available
land extremely suitable for the growing of rubber trees] it was not
necessary to break with the old system of cultivation. On the
abandonment of an exhausted [swidden], rubber-tree seeds were left

   54 For a review of Indonesian fiscal policies until 1956, see Higgins, 1957,

pp. 1-36.
   66 From   1950-1955 small-holder rubber production remained more or
less constant (Higgins, 1957, p. 149); since then it may have declined
somewhat, but due to the problem of smuggling the exact picture is not
clear. The Population of Indonesia authors estimate 1950-1954 small-
holder per-hectare yields of rubber at a constant 4.2 (as against 5.8 for the
somewhat bedeviled estates), but this is the grossest of guesses. There is a
difference in quality as well: small-holder production averaged about 65
percent of total output during 1951-1955, but small-holder value only 58
percent of total value. Thomas, K. D., n.d., Appendix A, Table I, and
Appendix E, note.
150                     COMPARISONS          AND      PROSPECTS

in the ground. After some years the result was a growth of trees
ready for tapping. In this way the [swidden] system itself produced
groves over a series of years culminating around 1910, as a result
of which rapid increase in production was possible after 1916.
Moreover, there was more systematic planting of rubber trees inde-
pendent of food crops, particularly in Tapanuli and in regions out-
side Sumatra. But even in such cases one can hardly speak of a
higher form of production. The owners of the rubber groves merely
applied the separo ["halves"] system traditionally used for food
crops. Under it the worker was rewarded with half of whatever yield
he had produced. A characteristic trait of the adaptation is that the
owner buys the product from his workers at the current local price.
Hence his gross income is the same as that of all his workers to-
gether. Their wages are determined directly by the market price of
the product. As long as that is high enough to provide a level of
 living sufficiently inducing for them to go on tapping, production
 continues. The lower limit is thus that at which half of the produc-
 tion provides the workers with the minimum level of subsistence
acceptable. Other costs are negligible. Practically nothing is done
 towards the systematic maintenance of the groves, the construction of
 processing equipment, and the like. The most expensive piece of
 machinery is a hand mangle for pressing slabs. On the other hand,
 in the present situation in the Indies the upper limit for Native
 production is not determined by the natural limit, that is to say
 the number of tappable trees and their production capacity, but by
 the amount of labour available. There are still extensive areas wait-
 ing to be tapped. The link with food production has not been
 broken . . . the people can constantly fall back on their food-crop
 fields.56

  As in the Javanese one-foot-in-the-terrace,-one-in-the-mill pat-
tern, this arrangement was commonly praised by colonial schol-
ars and officials (a) for its elasticity, in that it could expand
and contract with changing market conditions, thus protecting
the peasant against the vagaries of international commodity
markets, and (b) for its adaptability, in that in terms of given

  M   Van Gelderen, 1961.
COMPARISONS               AND    PROSPECTS                           151


factor proportions (high land, low labor, low capital) it was the
most efficient use of resources.57 But, as we have seen, the max-
imization of adaptability is a spiritless goal, elasticity perpetuated
becomes flaccidity, and a highly efficient combination of re-
sources in terms of "given" production coefficients may be a
simple alternative to the more genuinely entrepreneurial activity
of changing the coefficients. If small-holder rubber (or some
other commercial crop) is to be a leading sector in take-off, it
will have to be pursued with a fullness of commitment—and an
acceptance of attendant risk—which will make its sustained
development possible. It will have to become a growing industry,
not a functional equivalent, in a habitat which cannot support
wet rice, for that most highly perfected device for running faster
while staying in the same place, the Javanese sawah. The "ex-
tensive areas waiting to be tapped" will hardly prove much of a
dynamic force when they are tapped if labor productivity about
matches "the minimum level of subsistence acceptable," and
population (now probably increasing at better than 2 percent a
year in the Outer Islands) 58 and aggregate income once more
advance pari passu.
   The completion of the swidden-to-garden revolution, whether
in rubber, copra, or coffee, demands increased investments in
planting materials, improved labor methods, more careful proc-
essing, and a more effective distributive network. That this is
not occurring seems apparent in the face of conversion of an
increasing percentage of foreign exchange into imported sub-
sistence goods and a narrowing of the price differential between
rubber and rice.59 Small-holder cultivation of export crops re-

  " Van Gelderen, 1961.
  M   Sumaniwata, 1962.
  H   As all figures for rubber are export and not production figures and
since no detailed research has been undertaken into small-holder rubber-
growing, it is difficult to pin down what is happening at the ecological
level. But it seems clear that planting, even under the most favorable
estimates, is not keeping pace with even the replacement demands im-
752                      COMPARISONS AND                    PROSPECTS

mains a source of succor for the hard-pressed Indonesian econ-
omy, but it is hardly even approaching the status of a driving
force.

   The prospects for the third possible source of dynamism in
the agriculture sector, the plantations, seem, at the moment, even
less promising. The fact that the estates were in foreign hands
until recently, has made their effective functioning in an atmos-
phere of ardent nationalism extremely difficult. Squatters, in-
security, labor difficulties, the prospective lapsing and nonre-
newal of leases, and the ever-present threat of expropriation (a
threat which has now been realized so far as the Dutch are
concerned) do not add up to an environment conducive to
foreign investment. 60 The tobacco estates have been hampered
—mainly by squatters—to the point where plantation tobacco
production in 1955 was about a fifth that of 1939, and continues
to fall. 61 Tea was similarly hard hit, production falling 70 per-
cent in the same period. 62 In fact, of all the estate crops, only
rubber showed an increase—about 35 percent—and, again, the
rise in output gives a deceptively optimistic picture: to maintain

plicit in current production so that "most of the acreage is over 25 years
old" (and much is over 35), as does the fact that planting materials remain
poor. Quality assessment likewise is an elusive matter, but there is also
little doubt that small-holder quality remains low because of undeveloped
technique even in terms of present technology (which is itself unchang-
ing). For a balanced view of the technical side of small-holder rubber-
growing, hampered only by the absence of reliable data, see Thomas,
K. D., n.d., passim. Allen and Donnithorne (1957, p. 137) estimate that
about a fifth of Indonesian small-holder rubber acreage is now "practi-
cally worthless" due to age and overlapping, so that "high production by
the peasants has been accompanied . . . by a very large consumption of
capital invested in rubber."
   60
      For a description of the political context within which the estates op-
erated during the first five years of independence, see Sutter, 1959, III,
pp. 695-766. For 1955-59, see Hanna, 1961, chapter iv.
   "Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, p. 61.
   62
      Statistical Pocketbook of Indonesia, p. 61.
COMPARISONS AND                 PROSPECTS                           153


productivity the estates estimate they should have replanted
160,000 hectares between 1945 and 1955; they seem to have
actually replanted about 35,000.63 T h e result is "that Indonesia,
which in the thirties had been ahead of other countries in tech-
nique has now fallen behind Malaya in the use of up-to-date-
methods" and "the danger is that Indonesia may be unable to
compete, not merely with synthetic rubber but with natural rub-
ber produced by other regions which have invested new capital
in high-grade planting material and up-to-date processing
plants." 6 4 Over-all, estate export production in 1955 was about
three-quarters of what it had been in 1938; if rubber, living
evidently on borrowed time, is excluded, the figure drops to less
than half. 65 Estate agriculture hardly seems like the leading edge
of anything right now, unless it be collapse.
  With the 1957 expropriation of the Dutch plantations, about
half of the total estate output has come under direct govern-
mental control, the other half remaining, for the while, in trem-
bling foreign hands. 66 Whether this nationalization, that at long
last reduced the racial element in dualism and brought the
capital-intensive sector more firmly within the boundaries of the
Indonesian economy proper, is a prelude to a revival of the
estate sector remains to be seen. But the shortage of trained
managerial personnel, the relentless spread of governmental im-
mobilism, and the flourishing of ideological extremism born of
a general failure of nerve makes it most unlikely. "The economic
situation of the state is deteriorating," said President Sukarno,
who certainly ought to know, in mid-1959. "The financial situa-
tion of the state is deteriorating, the social condition of society is
  63
     Thomas, K. D., n.d., p. 17.
  " A l l e n and Donnithorne, 1957, pp. 136, 137. Indonesia which became
the world's largest rubber producer for a while after World War II is
now again second to Malaya, her production having fallen about 7.5 per-
cent since the Korean war boom of 1951, "at a time when world pro-
duction, demand and prices are rising." Hanna, 1961, chapter iv.
  65
     Higgins, 1957, p. 149.
  " Paauw, in press.
154                    COMPARISONS         AND     PROSPECTS


deteriorating—in all fields we are deteriorating."67 A search for
the true diagnosis of the Indonesian malaise, takes one, thus, far
beyond the analysis of ecological and economic processes to an
investigation into the nation's political, social, and cultural
dynamics.

 " Quoted in Hanna, 1961, chapter ii.
