===== PAGE 114 =====

T

The Rise of Anthropological Theory | 8. Dialectical Materialism

takes the form of rote or unconscious acceptance of principles which
have been elaborated in response to the Marxist challenge. These vis-
ceral “critiques” of Marxism have their counterpart in the degraded
Marxist catechisms and “Manuals” directed against “bourgeois” social
science. To the bourgeois and Marxist ideologues, a new generation
says, a plague on both your houses.

MARX'S INFLUENCE

Many have argued that Marx was wrong; few have argued
that his ideas can or should be ignored. Pitirim Sorokin’s (1928:522)
contention that one Georg Wilhelm von Raumer anticipated Marx’s
“economic conception of history” has succeeded neither in detracting
attention from Marx nor in rescuing von Raumer from obscurity.
Sorokin is one of the few who have claimed that Marx and Engels
were so far from being “Darwins or Galileos” that “There is no reason
even for regarding their scientific contribution as something above the
average” (ibid.:545). But the lifework of the most esteemed figures
of non-Marxist twentieth-century sociology weighs against this pique.
Almost the entire galaxy of great figures in early twentieth-century
sociology were, as the non-Marxist sociologist T. B. Bottomore (1965:
11ff.) maintains, “discussants of Marx.” One simply cannot under-
stand Max Weber, Emile Durkheim, Georges Sorel, Vilfredo Pareto,
or George Simmel without taking into consideration the fact that
they come after Marx. The same is true of Thorstein Veblen, Wer-
ner Sombart, Karl Mannheim, Lester Ward, and Alfred Keller.

Even to understand Sorokin, one must consider first and foremost
his hatred of Bolshevism. It is historically indisputable that no nine-
teenth-century figure has exerted an influence upon non-Marxist
twentieth-century sociology which in any significant respect approaches
that of Marx and Engels. Nor can it be denied that this prominence
is deserved regardless of political issues. It is one thing to compare
Marx with Max Weber, his greatest twentieth-century critic, but quite
another to compare Marx with his floundering contemporaries. The
historically informed non-Marxist who is aware of Marx’s errors of
fact and theory is also aware of the blunders and inanities of Comte,
J. S. Mill, and Spencer. In the final analysis, Engels’s graveside claim
boils down to this: either Marx (with Engels’s help) was the Darwin
of the social sciences, or nobody was. To quote from another promi-
nent avowedly non-Marxist sociologist, C. Wright Mills (1962:35),
Karl Marx “was the social and political thinker of the nineteenth
century.” It remains to be shown, however, that this eminence adds

218

up to a scientific contribution analogous to that which is generally
attributed to Darwin. Most non-Marxist social scientists scem to
believe that their Darwin has yet to be born.

DID MARX DISCOVER THE LAW OF
CULTURAL EVOLUTION?

In my opinion, Engels was correct when he attributed to
Marx the “discovery of the law of evolution in human history.” Yet
it is possible to hold this view and to deny that Marx’s fole in the
development of social science was like that of Darwin in the de-
velopment of biology. Marx formulated a scientific prinmplg at least
as powerful as Darwin’s natural selection—a general principle that
showed how a science of human history might be constructed. Yet
Marx glimpsed this principle only after a long journey through the
thicket of Hegelian philosophy and in the midst of a political career
predicated on an imminent proletarian revolution. Both of these cir-
cumstances had a corrosive effect on Marx’s ability to found a true
science of history. In order to apply Marx’s “law of history,” the non-
Marxist social scientist must strip away the Hegelian and political
accretions, the one with its ponderous double-talk, the other with
its unrequited debt to nineteenth-century communism. What remains
will scarcely satisfy the doctrinaire Marxist, for it is no longer mainly
a theory of proletarian revolution in Euro-American capitalist society.
Stripped of the burden of the dialectic and of the necessity for pro-
viding not only a theory but also the ideology of revolution, Marx’s
sociology will strike the faithful as singularly uninteresting. But even
a deHegelianized, de-proletarianized Marx subsumes several of the
major trends in contemporary anthropological theory and challenges
the remainder.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE UNITY OF
THEORY AND PRACTICE

To rescue Marx’s “law of history” for non-Marxist applica-
tions, we must break the grip which political activism holds on the
scientific aspects of his contribution. It was Marx himself, of course,
who insisted that social science and political action were inseparable.
This scientifically unacceptable proposition was first enunciated by
Marx in his critique of the philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach: “The
philosophers have interpreted the world in various ways: the point
however is to change it” (1941:82). In this view, only a theory of

219

!
]
J
i
]
]



===== PAGE 115 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

history which enables men to make history is worth the effort. Thus,
the only effective answer to the challenge presented by alternative
interpretations is to prove them wrong by helping to bring about the
predictions of onc’s own theory.

There is a superficial resemblance between the test of “changing
the world” and the fulfillment of prediction in conformity with the
rules of the scientific method. Thus, engineers do prove that their
interpretations of the laws of aerodynamics and hydraulics are correct
when the airplanes they design and help to build fly, or when the
dams they design and help to build hold back the river. But the so-
called unity of theory and practice cannot be applied in most of the
nonlaboratory sciences. No one insists that geologists must justify their
respective models of the ice ages by producing new advances of the
continental glaciers. Nor do we expect that alternative explanations of
meteorological phenomena require made-to-order hurricanes, torna-
does, and thunderstorms.

In the historical sciences, the doctrine of the unity of theory and
practice is rendered superfluous by the possibility of subjecting one’s
predictions to the test not of future, but of past events. That is, there
is no reason why the social sciences cannot accept retrodiction as the
test of theory. Thus, the retrodiction of irrigation agriculture in the
highland meso-American formative period, does not require an ar-
chaeologist to establish the truth by digging irrigation ditches. It suf-
fices that the archacologist find the evidence that the ditches once
existed. Similarly, if one suspects a correlation between patrilineal
descent and Omaha kinship terminology, the evidence from extinct
cases is as acceptable as that from present or future cases, while the

question of helping to build an Omaha terminology is obviously ir-
relevant.

THE THREAT OF POLITICS

The Marxist stress on the unity of theory and practice con-
tains an implicit threat to the most fundamental rule of the scientific
method, namely, the obligation to report data honestly. Marx himself
took pains to elevate scientific responsibility over class interests.

Thus, according to Karl Wittfogel (1953:355), Marx demanded that
scholars:

be oriented toward the interests of mankind as a whole and seek
the truth in accordance with the immanent needs of science, no
matter how this affccted the fate of any particular class, capital-
ists, landowners, or workers. Marx praised Ricardo for taking this

220

Rl

8. Dialectical Materialism

attitude, which he called “not only scientifically honest but also
scientifically required.” For the same reason, he condemned as
“mean” a person who subordinated scientific objectivity to ex-
traneous purposes: “. . . a man who tries to accommodate sci-
ence to a standpoint which is not derived from its [the science’s]
own interests, however erroneous, but from outside, alien, and ex-
traneous interests, [such a man] I call ‘mean’ (gemein).”

But Wittfogel goes on to accuse Marx of “violating his own scientific
principles” (ibid.:359) in his persistent refusal to acknowledge that
in the Oriental state it was the bureaucracy that constituted the rul-
ing class (see page 671). Regardless of Marx’s intentions, it is clear
that a science which is explicitly bound to a political program is
dangerously exposed to the possibility that the values of that program
will gain the ascendancy over the values of science. It is a matter of
historical record that Lenin and Stalin were fully prepared to corrupt
scientific standards in order to prove by practice what their theories
predicted. As Wittfogel (ibid.:355) has stated.

Starting from Lenin’s thesis that all socialist literature must be
party literature, which must “merge with the movement of the
really most progressive and consistently revolutionary class,” they
scorn objectivity and exalt in its stead the “partisanship” (parti-
inost) of science.

The admission that a particular proletarian movement lacks the
conditions for the growth of class consciousness necessarily weakens
that movement’s revolutionary potential. If the point is to change the
world, rather than to interpret it, the Marxist sociologist ought not to
hesitate to falsify data in order to make it more nseful. When the
ethics of social science are derived primarily from the class struggle,
information, as in any war, is an important weapon. Thus the Marxist
sociologist would seem to enjoy a mandate to change data in order to
make it more useful in changing the world, subject only to the usual
limitations imposed upon wartime propaganda: on the one hand,
repeated falsification diminishes credibility and runs the risk of self-
defeat; on the other, acceptance of one’s own propaganda may
eventually destroy the objective basis of action. Under Stalin, the con-
sistent errors in the interpretation of the class structure of the United
States by Communist observers no doubt reflected in part this
aspect of the unity of theory and practice. The failure among Marxist
theoreticians to expose Morgan’s principal blunders likewise reflects
the tendency of politicized social science to harden into dogma. Witt-
fogel (1957:360ff.) has shown how the ideologues of the Soviet

221

i



===== PAGE 116 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Communist Party even succeeded in repressing Marx's concept of
an oriental mode of production in an attempt to prepare the way for
the spread of Communism to China.

Of course, Marxists are not the only ones whose facts and theories
are vulnerable to political currents. Many non-Marxists consciously
or unconsciously accept the view that political goals must take prece-
dence over scientific ones and consciously or unconsciously suppress
or distort findings which support the Marxist interpretation of history.
As I have previously had occasion to stress, ethical and political neu-
trality in the realm of social-science research is a limiting condition
which cannot be approached by a posture of indifference. Neither
the researcher who preaches the partisanship of science, nor he who
professes complete political apathy, is to be trusted. Naturally, we
demand that the scientific ethic—fidelity to data—must be the
foundation of all research. But we must also demand that scientific
research be oriented by explicit hypotheses, whose political and
moral consequences in both an active and passive sense are under-
stood and rendered explicit by the researcher.

MARX AS AN EVOLUTIONIST

In explaining Marx’s theories from the perspective of the
development of anthropology, it is appropriate first of all to empha-
size the many parallels that link Marx, along with Darwin, Morgan,
Spencer, and Tylor, to a common heritage of eighteenth-century doc-
trines. Marx’s belief in the generally progressive nature of history is
distinctive only in the strength of its apocalyptic emphasis. Poverty
and exploitation in all its forms are destined by the workings of nat-
ural law to be eliminated as a result of the proletarian revolution.
The strong utopian ingredient in Marx’s vision of progress is illus-
trated in the distinctive motto of ultimate communism: “from each
according to his abilities, to each according to his needs.” However,
the ultimate stages of Spencer’s industrial society do not lack for
similar manifestations of spontaneous altruism. As Marxism pre-
dicted the end of exploitation in the communist millennium, Spencer-
ism predicted a future society in which the desires of each individual
would be in adaptive equilibrium with the desires of all others and
with the means of satisfying them (cf. HIMMELFARB 1959:347).

Marx shared with Darwin and Spencer that curious nineteenth-
century faith in the ability of violence and struggle to bring about
unlimited social improvement. The publication of Darwin’s Origin of
Species at once found Marx and Engels clucking happily over

222

Dalle

8. Dialectical Materialism

what they took to be the natural-history analogue to their own ma-
terialist interpretation of nature. Marx declared, upon first reading
the Origin of Species, that it provided “a basis in natural science for
the class struggle in history”; recommending it to Lasalle, he wrote,
“Despite all deficiencies, not only is a death-blow dealt here for the first
time to teleology in the natural sciences, but their rational meaning is
empirically examined” (MARX, quoted in HIMMELFARB 1959:347).
‘Within a month of the publication of Darwin’s book, Engels wrote to
Marx (December 12, 1859): “Darwin, whom I am first now reading,
is splendid” (quoted in ZIRKLE 1959:85).

THE CONVERGENCE OF MARX AND
SPENCER

Although Marx and Engels thought it highly amusing that
Darwin had been able to understand the animal kingdom by an
analogy with the animallike behavior of British capitalist society,
and although they detested Malthus, they were not beyond having
their own principle of the survival of the fittest. Indeed, both Spen-
cer and Marx warned against the deleterious effect of diminished
competition. The only difference was that for Spencer, the danger
lay in the possibility that individuals would somehow manage to
avoid natural selection because of misguided altruism; while in Marx’s
version of progress-through-struggle, the danger lay in the failure of
one class to perceive another as its enemy. Spencer’s fetishistic ven-
eration of competition as expressed in the phrase “survival of the
fittest,” has its counterpart in Marx’s Hegelian infatuation with
“contradictions.” The class struggle is simply an expression of irrecon-
cilable competition between proletarians and bourgeoisie for control
of the means of production.

Even in regard to the relationship with Malthus, there is much
that unites the Spencerians and Marxists. This commonality is ob-
scured by the fact that Darwin gratefully attributed his main inspira-
tion to Malthus’s theory of population. Marx, on the other hand, had
nothing but contempt for Malthus and called him “the mountebank
parson . . . a bought advocate” and “a shameless sycophant of the
ruling classes” (quoted in ZIRKLE 1959:66-67). What Marx objected
to in Malthus was the assumption that the “struggle-forlife” charac-
teristic of capitalism was equally prevalent in all forms of society.
Instead of sceing the struggle for survival in nature as the justification
for a similar struggle in society, Marx regarded the similarity between
the animal and human condition as an indictment of capitalism:

223

l
!
f



===== PAGE 117 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

“nothing discredits modern bourgeois development so much as the
fact that it has not succeceded in getting beyond the economic
forms of the animal world . . .” (ibid.:go). But the main thrust of
Spencerism is precisely that man must overcome the animal pro-
pensity to destructive competition. This change in human nature
will take place in Spencer's scheme only if industrial society is
permitted to evolve unhampered by state interference. As we have
already seen, Spencerism rose to ideological pre-eminence not be-
cause it confirmed but because it denied Malthus’s dire predictions.
Marx, of course, regarded the Spencerian advocacy of progress through
struggle as a mere bourgeois maneuver calculated to appease the
conscience of the capitalist exploiters. Thus the concrete brutality of
the present was to be justified by an illusory future. But Marx’s
scheme also had its brutal interlude. To overcome Malthus’s predic-
tions, it too urged the continuation of an animal-like struggle out of
which alone would come a future better life (see p. 468).

MARX'S EVOLUTIONARY SCHEME

Like all the other mid-nineteenth-century cultural evolu-
tionists, Marx and Engels had their scheme of world historical stages.
By means of these stages, the degree of progress toward communist
perfection could be measured. Distinctively, their periodization of
universal history was based on the forms of property associated
with various modes of production. Several different versions were
offered, each of which contained baffling ambiguities, which to this
day are the bane of Marxist exegesists.

In Marx and Engels's “The German Ideology” (196s; orig. ms.
1846), the first stage was described as based on “tribal ownership” and
was associated with the “undeveloped stage of production at which a
people lives by hunting and fishing, by the rearing of beasts or, in the
highest stage, agriculture.” (ibid.:122). The main feature of social
structure at this stage is the family and its extensions. With increase
in population, families develop distinctions between commoners and
chieftains and slavery begins to develop. The second stage is based
upon “ancient communal and state ownership” (ibid.:123) and is
accompanied by the formation of cities through voluntary tribal
merger and conquest. Land and slaves are at first held in common,
but private ownership of immovable property soon begins to assert
itself. With the growth of private property in land, the tribal collec-
tive decays. The development of the ancient city-state, of which
Roman society was the ultimate expression, marks the culmination

224

?‘

8. Dialectical Materialism

of these trends. The third stage is based on “feudal or estate prop-
erty” (ibid.:125). Feudal lords collectively own the land which is
worked not by slaves but by serfs. During this same period, there is
an analogous organization in the towns, whereby guilds of master
craftsmen and merchants control the work of apprentices and jour-
neymen.

In this scheme, the relationship between the ancient city-state
and feudalism is difficult to decipher. There appears to be no neces-
sary relationship between one and the other. Indeed, Eric Hobs-
bawm (1965:28) argues that feudalism appears to be an dlternative
evolutionary path out of “primitive communalism” under conditions
of low regional population density and no large cities. Yet it is
clear that Marx and Engels treat only that feudalism which followed
on the collapse of the Roman Empire—the feudalism which “is pre-
pared by the Roman conquests and the spread of agriculture con-
nected with these.” There is no doubt, however, that the next stage,
capitalism, arises only on the basis of feudalism, with the emergence
of the burgher classes dedicated to trade and manufacture.

In the brief historical sections of their 1848 Communist Manifesto,
Marx and Engels described an evolutionary sequence of class society,
consisting of the slave society of antiquity, feudalism, and capitalism.
No treatment is accorded the prehistoric, classless socicties. Once
again, the question of a necessary connection between slave society
and feudalism is left in doubt.

MARX NOT A UNILINEAR EVOLUTIONIST

Up until 1941, the definitive listing of the evolutionary stages
of class society was regarded as those given in Marx’s “Preface” to
The Critique of Political Economy (19o4; orig. 1859), namely, the
“Asiatic, ancient, feudal, and modern bourgeoisie.” However, in 1939-
41 a manuscript written by Marx in preparation for The Critique of
Political Economy was published under the title Grundrisse der
Kritik der politischen (Okonomie (Outlines of a Critique of Political
Economy). This work, composed in 1857-58, contained a section,
entitled “Formen,” dealing with precapitalist economic formations
which has now become the most important source of information
concerning Marx’s evolutionary periodization.

In the “Formen,” the transition from the stage of tribal economic
types is definitely presented as following a number of different
Toutes, apparently dictated by local conditions, the nature of which
Temains disappointingly obscure. Specifically identified are the orien-

225



===== PAGE 118 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tal, with a Slavonic-Rumanian variant, the ancient, and the Ger-
manic. Marx makes it clear that all of these forms of property and
production may progress into feudalism, although with different prob-
abilities. Thus the stereotyped interpretation of Marx as a unilinear
evolutionist is as defective as the common stercotype of unilinear
evolution applied by the Boasians to the anthropological evolutionists.

MARX ANTICIPATES MAINE

Marx’s interest in the precapitalist economic forms is totally
marginal to his consideration of the feudalism-capitalism transition,
which in turn is marginal to his major concern, the analysis of capi-
talist society. The step from tribal communities to the oriental, an-
cient, and Germanic levels receives cursory if not sloppy treatment.
Apparently, the guiding thread in Marx’s periodization is the progres-
sive and gradual emergence of alienated men conditioned to sell
their only possession—their labor, which they cease to regard as a
part of themselves. Thus, the ancient slave societies are more “pro-
gressive” than the Asiatic type, because they allow for considerable
private holdings in land and slaves and a complex individualized
monetary economy (MARX 1065:83).

In the Asiatic type, communalism “survives longest and most stub-
bornly” (ibid.).

This is due to the fundamental principle on which it is based,
that is, that the individual does not become independent of the
community; that the circle of production is [a] self-sustaining
unity of agriculture and craft manufacture, etc. [ibid.].

In the ancient slave societies, however, the city rather than the land
is the basis of the lingering communalism:

The community is here also the first precondition, but unlike our
first case, it is not here the substance of which the individuals are
mere accidents or of which they form mere spontancously natural
parts. The basis here is not the land, but the city as already cre-
ated seat (center) of the rural population (landowners). The
cultivated area appears as the territory of the city; not, as in the
other case, the village as a mere appendage to the land
[ibid.:71].

In describing the influence of communalism in the ancient states,
Marx anticipated major points in the analyses of Maine and Morgan,
by giving emphasis to emerging tribal and kinship relations: “The

226

B sl

8. Dialectical Materialism

tribes of the ancient states were constituted in one of two ways,
cither by kinship or by locdlity. Kinship tribes historically precede
locality tribes and are almost everywhere displaced by them” (ibid.:
76). The new manuscripts of 1857-58 therefore lend support to
Engels’s (1954a:132; orig. 1884) claim that he and Marx had set
forth Henry Maine’s ideas about the transition from “status to con-
tract” as far back as 1848.

H. S. Maine, the English jurist, believed that he had made a co-
lossal discovery when he said that our entire progress in compar-
ison with previous epochs consists in our having evolved from
status to contract, from an inherited state of affairs to one volun-
tarily contracted—a statement which in so far as it is correct, was
contained long ago in the Communist Manifesto.

Actually, of course, Ferguson and Millar were responsible for a still
earlier formulation of the same trend of thought.

MARX'S IGNORANCE OF PRIMITIVES

Despite occasional insights, Marx’s treatment of prefeudal
society is highly schematic, superficial, and disorganized. The an-
cient type includes varieties which evolved over thousands of years
from tiny city-states to the Roman Empire. Asiatic society includes
independent village communities and gigantic Oriental despotisms:
societies as diverse as those of peasant Russia, Mexico, Peru, “the
ancient Celts and some tribes of India” (Marx 1965:70; orig. 1857~
58). As for the stage of primitive communalism, it is obvious
that Marx’s knowledge of ethnography had still not advanced much
beyond that of Turgot or Rousseau. As in “The German Ideology,”
pastoral, agricultural, and hunting modes of existence are indiscrim-
inately associated with “tribal community, the natural common
body” (ibid.:68). Hobsbawm, who attempts to defend Marx and
Engels’s understanding of Greco-Roman history and of India (al-
though Henry Maine clearly surpassed them in both areas) frankly
admits the poverty of their knowledge of primitive societies:

At the time the Formen (1857-8) were written, Marx’s and
Engels’ knowledge of primitive society was . . . not based on
any serious knowledge of tribal societies, for modern anthropology
was in its infancy . . . [HOBSBAWM 1965:25].

The ignorance of Marx and Engels with respect to nine-tenths of
human history does not appear quite as natural to the anthropologist
as to the Marxist philosopher. Granted that anthropology was in its

227

i



===== PAGE 119 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

infancy when Marx wrote The Critique of Political Economy (1859),
it does not follow that the failure to use ethnographic data was pri-
marily a reflection of that circumstance. Rather we must consider
the fact that almost all of the sources employed by Tylor in his
Researches into the Early History of Mankind were already available.
Instead of the infancy of anthropology, one suspects the dead hand
of Hegel, with the latter's contempt for knowledge of the “unpro-
gressive” parts of mankind. When Marx and Engels declared in the
very first line of the Communist Manifesto, “The history of all
hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles,” the im-
mense residual category, “prehistory,” during which there are no
classes, is banished from view, not simply because it deals with
classless societies, but because such societies were conventionally re-
garded as uninteresting and unilluminating.

No prejudice is more calculated to arouse bitter feelings among
anthropologists than that of the Furopean historian who feels he has
nothing to learn from the history of savages, because savages cannot
“contribute to history.” This bitterness arises not only from the senti-
ment that primitives are human too, but from a practical conviction
that ethnographic data are indispensable for a science of culture. In
this context it might seem that the profound neglect of Marx by
anthropology is merely the reciprocal of Marx’s neglect of primitives.
It would at least seem the better part of charity to attribute the an-
thropologist’s ignorance of Marx, in contrast to his knowledge of
such third-order luminaries as Gustav Klemm and Adolf Bastian,
to this quid pro quo. But other circumstances intervene and compel
us toward different conclusions.

MARX AND ANTHROPOLOGY

There is no doubt that a consensus exists among con-
temporary anthropologists that Marx and Engels are irrelevant to the
history of anthropological theory. Robert Lowie did not even
permit these names to appear in his index; while T. K. Penniman
(1965:52-53) allots Marx a few disjointed lines, and A. I. Hallowell
(1960) mentions Comte and Buckle but not Marx. According to Al-
fred Meyer (1954:22), cultural anthropology “developed entirely
independently from Marxism.” This neglect, if true, was surely un-
deserved. There are additional aspects of Marx and Engels’s ap-
proach to cultural evolution which demand that their work be
placed in the mainstream of the history of anthropological theory.
First, despite Marx and Engels’s initial neglect of ethnographic data,

228

B ool

8. Dialectical Materialism

their formulation of the principles of cultural evolution was intended
as a contribution to the explanation of cultural differences and simi-
larities with respect to all cultural types. It is in this regard that their
contribution was strictly analogous to Darwin’s principle of “natural
selection”—as an explanatory principle, applicable not just to one
phylum or genus, but to the evolution of all life forms. Second, toward
the end of his life, Marx seized upon the opportunity furnished by the
publication of Morgan’s Ancient Society to redress his neglect of the
primitive world. His notes furnished the inspiration for Engels's The
Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, an event which,
as we shall see, destroys Meyer’s claims about the lack of relationship
between Marxism and the development of cultural anthropology. But
first we must attend to the nature of these theories themselves.

MARX S PRINCIPLE OF CULTURAL
SELECTION

In the “Preface” to The Critique of Political Economy
(not included in the original 1859 edition), Marx summed up his
strategy for achieving an explanation of cultural evolution, in what is
undoubtedly the closest equivalent in the social sciences to Darwin’s
pnncnple of natural sclection:

In the social production “luch men carry on they enter into
definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their
will; these relations of production correspond to a definite stage of
development of their material powers of production. The sum total
of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure
of society—the real foundation, on which rise legal and political
superstructures and to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness. The mode of production in material life determines
the general character of the social, political and spiritual processes
of life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their
existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence determines
their consciousness [1904:11~12].

Beyond this point, Marx’s exposition, while no less lucid, refers not
to social life in general, but rather to class society. Thus, we learn
that the “material forces of produchon .. . come in conflict with the
existing relations of production,” and that thence commences “the
period of social revolution” when “the entire immense superstruc-
ture is more or less rapidly transformed.” Here the Hegelian and
revolutionary activist ingredients in Marx would come forward to
overwhelm the more general strategy.

229



===== PAGE 120 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE HEGELIAN MONKEY

If we grant the relevance of Marx’s analysis of the “inner
contradictions” of nineteenth-century capitalism, there remains con-
siderable doubt concerning the relevance of the same analysis with
respect to the modified capitalism of the modern industrially advanced
Euro-American nations. In some cases at least—as in the mixed econo-
mies of the Scandinavian democracies—capitalism’s “internal contra-
dictions” seem to have been solved by multiple compromises, by
the dreaded “revisionism,” rather than by the “negation of the nega-
tion.” The dialectic, however, grows less useful as its principles of anal-
ysis are applied to situations increasingly remote from the social system
which inspired its founders. Marx’s attempt to identify the inner
Hegelian logic of the breakdown of the Greco-Roman world into
feudalism was singularly unsuccessful. His treatment of the Asiatic
type was even less rewarding. If the great oriental despotisms of
Egypt and Babylonia contained the seeds of their own destruction,
they remained dormant for remarkably long epochs. When we get
to the domain of pre-state societies, however, the dialectic is clearly
just so much excess baggage. Morgan, of course, pictured progress
from Savagery to Civilization as a smooth unfolding of germ ideas
under the tutelage of natural selection. As we shall see, when Engels
attempted to assimilate Morgan’s scheme to a materialist view of
world history, his vague dialectical excursions become wholly super-
fluous and inconsequential. It seems impossible not to conclude, there-
fore, that if dialectical materialism is a useful guide to sociocultural
analysis, it is as a special case of a more general materialist strategy.
As a local mode of analysis, which arose at the juncture of romanticism
and industrialism, it is ill suited for the general history of mankind.
It is a romanticized, mysticized, partisan materialism, appropriate to
men who wish to foment a revolution based on mid-nineteenth-cen-
tury European class structure and ideology. It is Marx’s more general
materialist formulation that deserves our closest scrutiny.

MARX AND ENGELS: CULTURAL
MATERIALISTS

Despite the Hegelian monkey on their back, Marx and En-
gels must be credited with an important “breakthrough.” There

were many predecessors and contemporaries who were convinced that
natural law governed the rcalm of sociocultural phenomena. But

230

8. Dialectical Materialism

Marx and Engels were the first to show how the problem of con-
sciousness and the subjective experience of the importance of ideas
for behavior could be reconciled with causation on the physicalist
model. If there had been an orderliness in human history, it cannot,
as the Enlightenment philosophers supposed, have originated from
the orderliness of men’s thoughts. Men do not think their way into
matrilineality, the couvade, or Iroquois cousin terminology. In the
abstract, can a good reason be found why anyone should bother to
think such apparently improbable thoughts? And if one man had
thought of them, whence arose the compulsion and the power to
convince others of their propriety? For surely it could not be that
these improbable ideas construed as mere spontancous products of
fancy occur simultaneously to dozens of people at a time. Obviously,
therefore, thoughts must be subject to constraints; that is, they have
causes and are made more or less probable in individuals and groups
of individuals by prior conditions.

It is tempting to suppose that these prior conditions are prior
thoughts, and that, as in the Enlightenment model, one idea leads
to another. The development of mathematics and the physical sci-
ences might be described fairly successfully in this manner, but the
same track takes us nowhere if we seek to explain matrilineality or
the couvade. There is no purely logical progression which unites these
practices with prior or subsequent practices. Indeed, as we have seen,
one of the main sources of error of late-nineteenth-century attempts
to reconstruct world history was the assumption that logic alone
would suffice to unravel the relationship between matrilineality and
patrilineality, exogamy and endogamy, and all the other aspects of
cultural evolution.

We are led inexorably to conclude that thoughts about institutions
are constrained by the institutions under which men do their thinking.
Now there arises the question, whence come the institutions?
Marx attempted to answer this question by giving separate consider-
ation to different varieties of institutions. He split the nonideological
aspects of sociocultural life into two parts: the economic structure
(“the real foundation”) and the “legal and political superstructure.”
He came to distinguish, therefore, three major sociocultural seg-
ments: (1) the economic base; (2) the legal-political arrangements,
which in modemn terms correspond to social structure, or social organi-
zation; and (3) “social consciousness” or ideology. Marx and Engels
then boldly proclaimed that it was in the economic base that the
explanation for both parts of the superstructure—social organization
and ideology—were to be found.

231

|
|
i



===== PAGE 121 =====

T

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 8. Dialectical Materialism

Why was it not the other way round? Why not the dominance of
social organization over economics? The answer here is contained in
the phrase which associates “relations of production” with “a definite
stage of development” of man’s “material powers of production.” It
is the stage of development of the material powers of production
which renders the “relations of production” independent of man’s
will. For no group of men can will into existence whenever and
wherever they choose, the apparatus of production—coup de poing,
plows, or Bessemer converters—except in a definite order of progres-
sion. That order of progression corresponds precisely to what the
combined efforts of archaeologists and ethnographers have revealed
it to be. The unbroken chain of technological innovations which
connects digital computers with Oldowan choppers does not admit
of deviations or leaps (although the rate of change might conceivably
vary rather widely). Stone tools had to come before metal tools;
spears Niad to come before bows and arrows; hunting and gathering
had to precede pastoralism and agriculture; the digging stick had to
precede the plow; the flint strike-a-light had to be invented before
the safety match; oars and sails had to precede the steamboat; and
handicrafts had to precede industrial manufacture. Indeed, none of
the major opponents of cultural materialism has ever seriously ques-
tioned these facts.

The Boasians, for example, frequently pointed out that technology
is cumulative and that objective measures of progress are possible in
this realm. Thus, the only point at issue (aside from details con-
cerning the order of emergence of certain innovations) is whether
“the mode of production in material life determines the general
character of the social, political and spiritual” aspects of sociocultural
life. This, it will be seen at once, is an eminently empirical issue, not
to be answered by logic alone.

THE MEANINGC OF ‘‘MODE OF
PRODUCTION’’

Unfortunately, the formulation of the empirical tests of the
cultural-materialist strategy has been impaired by ambiguities inherent
in Marx and Engels’s definition of “base.” A large literature has
accumulated concerning whether or not Marx and Engels intended to
give the technological factors cqual weight with the “relations” or
organization of production (cf. BOBER 1927). One of the prin-
cipal sources of this confusion resides in the fact that Marx and En-
gels did not relate the transformation of feudalism into capitalism

232

to changes in the technology of production. Instead, the transition to
capitalism is supposed to occur as a result of the organization of the
craft and merchant guilds. Capitalism was in existence for two hun-
dred years before innovations in the technology of production be-
come important in Marx’s analysis. Here we may venture to express
our disinterest in the attempt to find out precisely what Marx and
Engels intended by the phrase “mode of production.” It is as evi-
dent as it is understandable that an operationalized metataxonomy of
sociocultural entities was not achieved by Marx and Engels any more
than it has been achieved by the entire combined effort of twentieth-
century social science. For most social scientists, the boundary be-
tween economics and technology remains as hazy today as it was a
hundred years ago. The same may be said with respect to another
evident fault in Marx’s threefold sectioning of sociocultural systems,
namely, the failure to consider the modifying effect of environment
upon the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of a “definite
stage of production.” Moving toward the other end of the economic
sector, we may also note the continued vagueness of the line which
separates the organization of work from the organization of law and
order and social interaction. Indeed, there is no more widely mis-
understood term than “work” itself. Since all behavior produces
some environmental effect, what portion is not “production”? Fi-
nally, we may take brief notice of the failure of social science to
ground its categories in definite etic operations, with the result that
mentalistic, subjective, and idealist—i.e., “emic”’—entities contami-
nate even the most devotedly materialist analyses (see Chap. 20).
We may take it as axiomatic that precise demarcation of the sectors
of sociocultural systems is not possible without the prior establishment
of an etic data language.

THE GREAT UP-ENDING

Despite the shadowy fringes on the concept “mode of pro-
duction,” there never has been any confusion concerning the general
nature of the factors to which Marx pointed as the key to the under-
standing of sociocultural causality. It was not merely Hegel whom
Marx “found standing on his head,” but the entire body of Enlighten-
ment social philosophy. Before Marx, the analysis of “mind” was re-
garded as the only conceivable understanding to which man, the “ra-
tional animal,” could aspire. It is a pity that Marx’s dialectical fixation
has deprived so many social scientists of the enjoyment of that great
up-ending of “heaven and earth.”

233


===== PAGE 122 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

In direct contrast to German philosophy, which descends from
heaven to earth, here we ascend from earth to heaven. That is to
say, we do not set out from what men say, imagine, or conceive,
nor from what has been said, thought, imagined, or conceived of
men, in order to arrive at men in the flesh. We begin with real,
active men, and from their real life-process show the development
of the ideological reflexes and echoes of this life-process . . .
[MARX and ENGELS in BOTTOMORE 1956:75].

Let us take note at this juncture of a second enduring theme in
Marx and Engels’s materialist program, the distinction between what
men “say, imagine and conceive” about themselves and their social
life and the actual or “real” nature of that life—their “real life-
processes.” To be sure, this theme is not specific to cultural ma-
terialism; it has already been encountered in the works of Ferguson
and Millar (see p. 51); and it will recur in the discussions of
Durkheim, British social anthropology, Freudian psychological an-
thropology, and French structuralism. All of these approaches are
predicated upon the assumption that the actual participants in social
life are incapable of an objective description of their own behavior
or of a scientifically valid explanation of that behavior. All of these
approaches thus share in common a commitment to clearing away
the errors of autoanalysis, the fagade of ideology, the rationalized
appearances of things, in order to penetrate into the deeper levels
of both thought and action. In several instances, however, as in
the culture and personality and French schools, the penetration
beneath the surface aims at a deeper understanding of what the
actor thinks or feels, rather than at an explanation of the socio-
cultural factors which constrain and direct his thoughts and feel-
ings. In other instances, most notably in Durkheim and the British
social anthropologists, the focus more closely resembles that of
cultural materialism. The announced goal at least is to explain social
facts in terms of social facts, rather than ideas in terms of other ideas.
But the structural-functionalists, as we shall see, do not even pretend
to be able to explain sociocultural differences and similarities. Their
insistence upon rendering psychological facts in a “structural” idiom
is thus itself a most remarkable sociocultural phenomenon, calling
for an extensive application of the principle that manifest content
and autoanalysis are not to be trusted. In contrast, the relationship
of the priority of observer-orientation over actor-orientation is an
integral part of the cultural-materialist program. The hypothesis that
causal explanations reside in the material conditions of life énjoins
an attitude of extreme skepticism toward the relevance of the manifest

234

e

8. Dialectical Materialism

meanings of all verbal events. This is beautifully expressed in Marx’s
critique of Feuerbach: “Social life is essentially practical. All mys-
teries which mislead theory to mysticism find their rational solution
in human practice and in the comprehension of this practice” (MARx

1941:82).

DIACHRONIC CAUSAL FUNCTIONALISM

Although many readers will regard it as self-evident, we
should also note that Marx and Engels depended upon a “func-
tionalist” model of sociocultural life. This in itself was not re-
markable, since Comte, Spencer, and Morgan were also functionalists,
long before the German diffusionists and the Boasians gave Bronislaw
Malinowski the pretext for supposing that there was some novelty
attached to the idea that the parts of culture are interrelated. More-
over, Marx and Engels shared with Comte, Spencer, and Morgan a
functionalism which was fully compatible, indeed was deliberately
subordinate to an interest in change, in contrast to the twentieth-
century functionalists who were capable only of synchronic analysis.
But there is one respect in which the functionalism of Marx and
Engels merits special comment. As a causal, as well as diachronic
and synchronic model, the economic-structural-ideological concate-
nation provides the basis for stipulating the more or less durable and
influential parts of the system. This provides, in theory at least, some
prospect of being able to discern degrees of functional effectiveness or
“fit,” as between an innovation and an older element in the system.
The measurement of degrees of functional effectiveness is essential to
diachronic functionalism, if one intends eventually to account for the
fact that the path of evolution is littered with extinct forms whose
parts were once eminently functional. It is thus the cause-effect
relationship between base and superstructure which provides “the
strain toward consistency,” a feature which gets introduced into non-
causal functional models as a mysterious “essence” or “propensity”
of social systems.

Thus, the Marxian functionalist model escapes the ultimate vapidity

of the modern synchronic functionalist schools, by explicitly denying’

that all the features of a sociocultural system contribute equally to
its maintenance. Indeed, as a result of the dialectic aspects of Marx's
scheme, dysfunctional ingredients are not only accommodated, but
assigned a central role as system-changing variables. Such variables
are functional in a diachronic sense, since they are responsible for the
emergence of a new adaptive system out of the old.

235

NN



===== PAGE 123 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

It cannot be denied that the Hegelian heritage has its merits at
this juncture, since it is wholly concerned with the problem of how
conflict leads to “higher” unity. We shall in a later chapter have
occasion to observe the antics of the synchronic functionalists as they
attempt to interpret hate, witchcraft, and violence as functional, sys-
tem-maintaining variables. On the other hand, it is not necessary to
concede to the dialectic a monopoly on functional models capable of
handling conflict. The decisive advantage of the Marxian model is
that it is diachronic and evolutionary, not that it is dialectic. Any
diachronic model is capable of accommodating the fact that strains
may accumulate until consistency on the old basis is no longer fea-
sible, and there is a violent collapse in the whole system. But there is
another kind of accumulation of dysfunctional strains which defeats
the Hegelian dialectic: evolution through the slow accumulation of
minor changes wrought by minor adjustments to minor stresses.
What is needed is a causal-functional model which can explain all
varieties of evolutionary processes.

WERE MARX AND ENGELS RACISTS?

The Marxian strategy was remarkably free of the endemic
racism of the nincteenth century. Marx explicitly conceived it as his
historical mission to link Hegelianism with eighteenth-century ma-
terialism. As materialists, Marx and Engels considered themselves the
heirs of D'Holbach and Helvetius, whom they traced to Locke through
the French philosopher Etienne Bonnot de Condillac. In The Holy.
Family (1845), they wrote:

[Condillac] expounded Locke’s ideas and proved that not only the
soul, but the senses too, not only the art of creating ideas, but
also the art of sensuous perception are matters of experience and
habit. The whole development of man therefore depends on edu-
cation and environment [quoted in SELsamM and MARTEL 1963:

58-59]-
It is clear that Marx and Engels’s political program was predicated on
the same radical emphasis upon experience that had served as the
ideology of the French Revolution. They belicved in the “omnipo-
tence of education” and regarded socialism and communism as vir-
tually synonymous with radical environmentalism:

There is no need of any great penetration to see from the teaching
of materialism on the original goodness and equal intellectual
endowment of man, the omnipotence of experience, habit, and

236

8. Dialectical Materialism

education, and the influence of environment on man, the great
significance of industry, the justification of enjoyment, etc., how
necessarily materialism is connected with communism and social-

ism [ibid.:60].

This does not mean that Marx and Engels achieved a modern
understanding of the relationship between heredity and encultura-
tion. Their environmentalism, like that of Monboddo, Condorcet,
Samuel Stanhopce Smith, and Lamarck, provided for a rapid, direct
feedback between race and culture. The inheritance of acquired
characteristics was for them the main vehicle of bio-evolutionary
change. For example, Engels’s explanation of the “transition from
ape to man” invoked a process of increasing manual dexterity
passed on by heredity from one generation to the next:

.. . But the decisive step was taken: the hand became free and
could henccforth attain ever greater dexterity and skill, and the
greater flexibility thus acquired was inherited and increased from
generation to generation.

Thus the hand is not only the organ of labour, it is also the
product of labour. Only by labour, by adaptation to ever new
operations, by inheritance of the resulting special development of
muscles, ligaments, and, over longer periods of time, bones as
well, and by the ever renewed employment of these inherited im-
provements in new, more and more complicated operations, has
the human hand attained the high degree of perfection that has
enabled it to conjure into being the pictures of Raphael, the statues
of Thorwaldsen, the music of Paganini [1954b:230; orig. 1876;
quoted in ZIRKLE 1959:107].

It was this strong Lamarckian theme which laid the foundation for
the twenticth-century disaster of Soviet genetics. Under Lysenko, it
became a Stalinist dogma that the direct feedback between cytoplasm
and environment, rather than the indirect feedback mediated by
Mendelian genetic processes, was responsible for bio-evolutionary nov-
elty. The magnitude of this error cannot be overemphasized. But
the attempt on the part of certain biologists to compound the dis-
repute of Lysenko by linking Lamarckianism to racism is an equally
grave disservice to science (to social science). Thus, H. J. Muller
gave as one of his reasons for resigning from the U.S.S.R. Academy
of Science the fact that

. . the inheritance of acquired characters must lead inevitably,
and indeed by the admission of some of its adherents, to the same
dangerous Fascistic conclusions as that of the Nazis; that the

237

i
}
|



===== PAGE 124 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

economically less advanced peoples and classes of the world have
become actually inferior in their heredity. The Nazis would have
the allegedly lower genetic status, a cause, while the Lysenkoists
would have it an effect of the lower opportunity of the less fortu-
nate groups for mental and physical development [quoted in ZIRKLE

1959:109].
Zitkle goes on to indict both Engels and Marx with racist propensities,
as evidenced by their obvious lack of sensitivity to the feelings of
Negroes and Jews. Engels, extolling the importance of “the principle
of the origin of all thought content from experience” (ie., Locke’s
principle), attempts to show how the same principle can be applied
to the social group as a whole:

By recognizing the inheritance of acquired characters . . . in-
dividual experience can be replaced to a certain extent by the
results of the experiences of a number of its ancestors. If, for
instance, among us the mathematical axioms seem self-evident to
every eight-year-old child, and in no need of proof from experience,
this is solely the result of “accumulated inheritance.” It would be
difficult to teach them by a proof to a bushman or Australian

negro [1954b:353].
Zitkle goes on to insist that Marx “also esteemed the different races
very differently” and that “toward some of them, he was openly
contemptuous.” He then quotes Marx’s letter of July 30, 1862,

addressed to Engels, on the subject of Ferdinand Lassalle’s failure
to provide him with a loan:

The Jewish nigger Lassalle, who fortunately left at the end of the
week, has, again fortunately, lost 5000 Thaler in a bad specula-
tion. . . . Now it is completely clear to me that, as his head shape
and hair growth prove, he is descended from the Negroes who
joined Moses on the journey out of Egypt (if not, his mother or
grandmother on his father’s side crossed with a nigger). Now this
combination of Judaism and Teutonism with a negroid ground
substance must produce a wonderful product. The obtrusiveness of
the fellow is indecd mnegroid. . . . One of the great discoveries
of our nigger—which he shared with me as a “most trusted
friend”—is that the Pelagians stemmed from the Semites . . .
[quoted in ZIRKLE 1959:111].

Despite this display of bad taste, directed as much against his own
ancestry as against Lassalle’s, Marx simply will not fit the mold of the
racial determinist. Nor docs the history of the principle of acquired
characteristics admit of a close association with racism. Both Samuel

238

B ol

8. Dialectical Materialism

Stanhope Smith and Herbert Spencer believed in the inheritance of
acquired characteristics. For the one, this meant that physical and
psychological racial differences were as evanescent as sicknesses; for
the other, it meant that no fundamental social change could occur
until human nature slowly evolved to a higher plane.

The crucial question concerning race at mid-century was not whether
there were biological differences, nor whether these were subject to
environmental modification, but rather how long it would take to
change them. The answer of Marx and Engels was contrary to the
prevailing view: they predicted great changes in their own lifetime.

Although Marx believed that there were individual differences in
intellectual and physical aptitudes, he clearly saw these as subordinate
to the effects of societal, class, and individual learning experiences:
“In principle a porter differs less from a philosopher than a mastiff
from a greyhound. It is the division of labor which has set a gulf be-
tween them” (MARXx 1963:120; orig. 1847). Marx declared in
his critique of Proudhon, “all history is nothing but a continuous
transformation of human nature” (ibid.:147). Now while this was a
position to which the Spencerians also wholeheartedly subscribed, there
was a fundamental difference. Marx was a revolutionary who devoted
his life to the assumption that radical political changes, involving the
up-ending of the social order on a global scale, could be accomplished
within one or two generations. The Spencerians, on the other hand,
while equally devoted to their own brand of “progress,” warned
that human nature could be changed only at a rate commensurate
with the workings of natural selection. The differential consequences
of the biological feedback in Marx’s and Spencer’s theories are well
understood in the political implications of the vernacular contrast
between “revolution” and “evolution” (a distinction which, in an-
other sense, is technically incorrect, since revolution is a form of
evolution). Thus while Marx shared with Spencer the prevailing and
erroneous notion of a Lamarckian feedback between behavior and
heredity, his conclusions concerning the human potentiality for rapid
change correspond to the modern post-Boasian understanding of the
relative strengths of enculturation and racial variables.

The same must be said of Engels, who explicitly associated his
view about the mathematical capacities of various races with Spencer’s
belief that the sense of mathematical proof is acquired and trans-
mitted through heredity: “Spencer is right in as much as what thus
appears to us to be the self-evidence of these axioms is inherited”
(ENGELS 1954b:340). The implications of these views, however, are al-
most totally at variance with their usual significance among nineteenth-

239



===== PAGE 125 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

century Spencerians. For Engels, the hereditary Euclidean incapacities
of bushmen were evanescent effects brought on by the same sort of
deprivations which kept Monboddo’s chimpanzees from learned dis-
course with the philosophes. Thus Engels, in Origin of the Family,
Private Property and the State, shared with Gobineau and the entire
corps of mid-century anthropologists, including Tylor, Morgan and
Spencer, the belief that the Germans were “a highly gifted Aryan
tribe” (1954a:254). But he went out of his way to give a sociocultural,
rather than a racist, explanation for this stereotype. “What was the
mysterious charm with which the Germans infused new vitality into
dying Europe? Was it the innate power of the German race, as our
jingo historians would have it?” (ibid.).

By no means . . . their personal efficiency and bravery, their love
of liberty, and their democratic instinct, which regarded all public
affairs as its own affairs, in short, all these qualities which the
Romans had lost and which were alone capable of forming new
states and of raising new nationalities out of the muck of the
Roman world—what were they but the characteristic features of
barbarians in the upper stage, fruits of their gentile constitution
[i.e., their clan organization] [ibid.:254~55]?

THE STRATEGY OF CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

It should be obvious to all scholars who are genuinely con-
cerned with the scientific study of human history, that despite their
Hegelian and revolutionary political environments, Marx and Engels
had succeeded in going further than any of their contemporaries
toward the formulation of a “law” of cultural evolution. The major
ingredients in this “law” in retrospect may be seen as: (1) the
trisection of sociocultural systems into techno-economic base, social
organization, and ideology; (2) the explanation of ideology and
social organization as adaptive responses to techno-economic condi-
tions; (3) the formulation of a functionalist model providing for
interactive effects between all parts of the system; (4) the provision
for analysis of both system-maintaining and system-destroying var-
iables; and, (5) the pre-eminence of culture over race.

The greatest caution is required if we are to comprehend the sense
in which it is legitimate to ascribe to this unprecedented ensemble
of proposals a status equivalent to Darwin’s discovery of the “law of
evolution.” It must be established with uncompromising clarity that
Darwin’s so-called “law of evolution” was not a “law” but a strategy:
a master research design for explaining the course of bio-evolu-

240

8. Dialectical Materialism

tion. This strategy was introduced by Darwin in the guise of what he
called “the principle of natural selection.” The latter purports to
explain dll biotransformation; yet in actuality, it explains none. Its
value resides exclusively in the general directions it imparts to the
researcher, who seeks an understanding in nomothetic terms of the
trajectory of phylogenetic modifications. It does not matter whether
the researcher is interested in amphibia or mammals, worms or fish,
the strategy is the same: the explanation of biological transforma-
tions is to be found in the adaptative advantages (measured in
terms of reproductive success), which particular innovations confer
upon the organism and its lineage. The statement of this strategy
per se yields no specific information concerning the quantitative
or qualitative nature of the advantages in question. We are not told
whether it is resistance to stress, avoidance of predators, improvement
in thermal efficiency, invasion of new ecological zones, better care
of young, etc. Each application of the principle of natural selection
results in a separate theory, the confirmation or rejection of which
is dependent upon logical and empirical operations whose specific
terms and instruments cannot be deduced from the general statement.

The admissible sense in which one may propose Marx as the dis-
coverer of a “law of cultural evolution” is that which separates the
specific application of the cultural-materialist program on behalf of
explaining capitalism from the general strategy set forth in the “Pref-
ace” to The Critique of Political Economy. This strategy states
that the explanation for cultural differences and similarities is to be
found in the techno-economic processes responsible for the production
of the material requirements of biosocial survival. It states that the
techno-economic parameters of sociocultural systems exert selective
pressures in favor of certain types of organizational structures and
upon the survival and spread of definite types of ideological complexes.

It states that in principle, all of the major problems of sociocultural -

differences and similarities can be solved by identifying the precise
nature of these selective parameters; yet as a general principle, it does
not commit itself to the explanation of any specific sociocultural
type or any specific set of institutions. It is possible, in other words,
to accept Marx’s research strategy without accepting any of his analy-
ses of the specific phenomena of capitalist and feudal societies. This is
not to suggest that Marx’s analysis of nineteenth-century capitalism,
the F.rcnch Revolution, or of feudalism can be demeaned or ignored,
but simply that in anthropological perspective, a strategy purportedly
applicable to the study of three thousand sociocultural systems is an

event of far greater significance than the application of that strategy
to one or two of them.

241

|


===== PAGE 126 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE MYTH OF THE MONADIC
EXPLANATION

Before discussing the application of Marx and Engels’s pro-
posal to ethnographic data, we must take note of what is probably the
most frequently misunderstood and misrepresented aspect of the
cultural-materialist strategy. It is repeated ad nauseam by persons
unfamiliar with the research and data-processing requirements of cul-
tural hypotheses, that sociocultural phenomena are “too complex to be
explained by any one factor.” We hear over and over again the refrain
that economic explanations of phenomena are “single-factor explana-
tions” and that economic explanations are therefore invariably “simplis-
tic explanations.” For example, the historical particularist Melville
Herskovits (1953:118) lauded Franz Boas for his lack of economic,
geographical, and racial determinism, with the following “simplistic”
reference: “He was obviously no Marxist—we have seen how vigor-
ously he rejected any simplistic explanation of social phenomena,
whose complexity none realized better than he.” One does not know
to which “Marxists” Herskovits was referring, but there are at least
two who are not easily associated with simplemindedness, namely,
Marx and Engels. One more typical instance of the simplistic single-
factor myth can be seen in the following passage from the historian
Frederick Teggart (1941:233):

This theory, then, . . . is unacceptable as an explanation of how
man has come to be as he is, for . . . it is based upon a limited
view of the facts, and represents a projection of a single factor upon
the complexity of human experience.

The purely customary status of this argument is exposed as soon as
one actually begins to work on a specific problem from a cultural-
materialist point of view.

Consider for example what is involved in a cultural-materialist expla-
nation of the difference between race relations in Brazil and the United
States. The prevailing idealist explanations stress Portuguese national
character and Catholicism versus Anglo-Saxon racism and Protes-
tantism. The materialist explanation starts with the ecological potential
of colonial Brazil as compared with colonial North America, differ-
ences reflected in sugarcane plantations, as opposed to tobacco and
cotton plantations. Next the differences in migratory patterns must
be observed: large numbers of homesteaders and yeomen from over-
populated England, landowners and adventurers from underpopulated

242

'

8. Dialectical Materialism

Portugal. There is a more nearly balanced sex ratio among the English
colonists; a markedly unbalanced one among the Portuguese. It is
noted that miscegenation with African slaves occurs in both cases but
with different treatment of the mulatto offspring. The Brazilians,
lacking homesteaders (“poor whites”), assign the mixed types to
cattle herding, local nonexport agriculture, and other services and
productive tasks essential to the support of the sugar plantations; the
Americans fill the analogous roles with the marginal whites, with
the consequence that the mulatto in the South is either kept in
slavery or expelled northward; in Brazil, the mulatto and freed
slave colonize the interior; moreover, the demographic balance be-
tween the races works for the Negro and mulatto in Brazil, and
against them in the United States: 3 to 1 versus 1 to 3 in 1820. Sugar-
cane, the basis of slavery in Brazil, experienced a long decline in the
world market; cotton, the basis of the nineteenth-century slave system
in the United States, was the world’s most lucrative export crop when
the northern industrial interests challenged the political hegemony of
the southern slavocracy. The United States slaves were declared free
(and only in the enemy slave states!) during the height of the most
ferocious war in history. This was done in order to encourage up-
risings in the South and to gain conscripts for the Union Army.
Brazil's slaves were freed by an Imperial decree at a moment when
the entire slave economy was in its senility and when there were
millions of ex-slaves and racially mixed persons scattered throughout
the interior. In the United States, the freed slaves faced an implacable
Whitc majority, with whom they had to compete for land and jobs
(in a nascent industrial economy). The United States whites invoked a
tule of descent whereby mixed types were jammed into the Negro
category, while Brazil had already evolved a system for establishing ra-
cial identity which did not depend on a descent rule. Hence, the
United States acquired the conflict-ridden two-caste system in contrast
to the continuous color spectrum of Brazilian multiracialism (cf.
HARRIS 1964b).

This sketch, of course, fails to mention many additional variables
which would also have to be considered were we actually to attempt
a fullscale analysis. It should be obvious, however, that there is
n'othing simplistic about the economic, demographic, ecological, poli-
tical, military, and cognitive data which would be necessary to con-
ﬁm? the hypotheses generated by the assumption that the pattern
O_f Inter-racial conflict in the United States is rooted in material con-

_ditions, rather than in Anglo-Saxon national character.

Sy

243

|


===== PAGE 127 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

MARX AND ENGELS WARN AGAINST
OVERSIMPLIFICATION

Some may object that Marx and Engels had no such compli-
cated skein of interrelated phenomena in mind when they sought
to reduce history to the question of the ownership of the means of
production. But such an objection could only be sustained by ig-
norance of Marx’s analyses of specific events, such as the French
Revolution, or the American Civil War. It was no less an economic
determinist than Engels who pointed out that there was a danger in
forgetting the difference between the main principle of a strategy and
its actual application to concrete cases. In a letter to Joseph Bloch,
written in 18go, Engels said:

Marx and [ are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that younger
writers sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due
to it. We had to emphasize this main principle in opposition to
our adversaries, who denied it, and we had not always the time,
the place or the opportunity to allow the other elements involved
in the interaction to come into their rights. But when it was a
case of presenting a section of history, that is, of a practical ap-
plication, the thing was different and there no error was possible.
Unfortunately, however, it happens only too often that people
think they have fully understood a theory and can apply it without
more ado from the moment they have mastered its main principles,
and those even not always correctly. And I cannot exempt many
of the more recent “Marxists” from this reproach, for the most
wonderful rubbish has been produced from this quarter too,
[ENGELS in sELsaM and MARTEL 1963:205-6].

Far from propounding “simplistic” explanations in terms of a single
factor, Marx and Engels repeatedly emphasized the need for con-
sidering the interaction between base and superstructure in account-
ing for any particular historical situation. They made it perfectly clear
that the determinism which they saw extending from base to super-
structure was not an absolute one-to-one effect. Engels used the term
“ultimately” to qualify the selective influence of the mode of pro-
duction on ideology, much as we would today seek to qualify any
deterministic statement in probabilistic terms, given a sufficient num-
ber of cases and in the long run:

According to the materialist conception of history the determining
element in history is ultimately the production and reproduction
in real life. More than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted.

244

el

8. Dialectical Materialism

If therefore somebody twists this into the statement that the
economic element is the only determining one, he transforms it
into a meaningless, abstract and absurd phrase. The economic
situation is the basis, but the various elements of the superstruc-
ture—political forms of the class struggle and its consequences,
constitutions established by the victorious class after a successful
battle, etc.—forms of law—and then even the reflexes of all these
actual struggles in the brains of the combatants: political, legal,
philosophical theories, religious ideas and their further develop-
ment into systems of dogma—also exercise their influence upon
the course of the historical struggles and in many cases prepon-
derate in determining their form [ibid.:204].

DID ANTHROPOLOGY DEVELOP
INDEPENDENTLY OF MARXISM?

In assessing the historical significance of Marx’ and Engels’s
materialist proposals, it will not suffice merely to enumerate and ex-
plicate the merits of the strategy against some absolute set of stan-
dards, such as logical coherence, ability to generate causal hypotheses,
compatibility with scientific canons of intersubjectivity, verifiability,
and operationalism. The merit of a strategy such as Darwin’s principle
of natural sclection resides not merely in its record of more or less
successful applications to specific problems, but rather in its promise
a_nd its performance relative to the promises and performances of
tival strategies. In like manner, we must compare the cultural-material-
ist strategy with its nearest rivals. Such a comparison, while taking
note of the peculiar liabilities of the dialectical version of cultural
materialism, cannot fail to recognize the predicament in which Hegel,
Comte, Bastian, Bachofen, and the other idealists were wallowing.
Sp§n§erism alone appeared a worthy alternative to the cultural-ma-
terialist strategy. But it is unnecessary for the purpose on hand to
pursue the comparison of Spencerism and Marxism. I shall leave it
to t_hle reader to trade the reductionism of the one against the dia-
leCt'lmsm of the other, the tautology of the “survival of the fittest”
against the ambiguities of the “mode of production.” It should require
no further discussion, however, to establish the point that the
strategy which Marx and Engels proposed was one which the emer-
gent science of culture could ill afford to judge inferior or to discard
without first putting to the test of ethnography and the comparative
method. Yet we have seen how Lowie could omit the very name of
Ma'rx from the History of Ethnological Theory, while Alfred Meyer
claims that cultural anthropology developed “entirely independent

245

i


===== PAGE 128 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of Marxism.” Was it possible that the European focus of Marx and
Engels's writing offended or bored the late nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century anthropologists by its failure to discuss primitive
cultures? Was that the reason why anthropology could develop so
gloriously free of Marxist problems? We might almost suppose the
truth lay in this direction were it not for one awkward fact. This fact
is called Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.

MORGAN,S EFFECT ON MARX AND
ENGELS

Marx and Engels read omnivorously over a vast field. Their
attention was drawn to Morgan’s Ancient Society shortly after its
publication, and Marx at once recognized the need of revising his
own description of prehistoric evolution in the light of Morgan’s
superior knowledge of primitive institutions. While making an ex-
tensive abstract of Morgan’s work, Marx expressed the intention of
relating Morgan’s discoveries to the materialist interpretation of his-
tory. He did not live to complete this task, but Engels, working
from Marx’s notes, brought it to completion in 1884.

Ancient Society was a work of supreme importance to Marx and
Engels because it opened their eyes to the complexity of primitive
cultures and to the inadequacies of their own dabbling in this area.
Morgan, with his firsthand experience of American Indian tribes,
was obviously better qualified than any of his FEuropean rivals. Indeed,
Engels (1954a:47) appears, like many other library scholars, to have
been somewhat overawed by anthropological fieldwork, apparently
believing that Morgan “had spent the greater part of his life among
the Iroquois.” Engels’s opening sentence declares: “Morgan was the
first person with expert knowledge to attempt to introduce a definite
order into the prehistory of man.” Well over half of Engels’s
book consists of a summary paraphrase of Ancient Society. Such
new materials as occur are based on Engels’s own well-credentialed
knowledge of Greco-Roman and Furopean history. The important
point here is that as far as primitive culture is concerned, Marx and
Fngels bought Morgan lock, stock, and barrel. Morgan’s scheme, its
tri-part periodization, its evolution from sexual communism to monog:
amy, from gens to state, from matrilineality to patrilineality, became
the standard source of ethnological enlightenment for Marxists and
communists throughout the world—a state of affairs which lasted
well into the second quarter of the present century (cf. ToLsTOY

1952).
246

8. Dialectical Materialism

Morgan’s effect on Engels was perhaps greater than Marx had in-
tended. It appeared much later, to Stalinist theoreticians at least,
that Enygcls had compromised Marxism by the attempt to reconci]tz
Morgan’s prehistoric scheme with the principle that the mode of pro-
guchon_determincs history. For in his “Preface,” Engels declared glat

alccordl_ng to the materialistic conception, the determining factor in
history is the production and reproduction of immediate life,” a two-
fold process consisting of the “production of the means (;f subsis-
tence, o“f food, clothing and shelter and the tools requisite therefore”
and of thQ p‘roduction of human beings themselves, the propagation
of the species” (1954a:8). The reason for this startling innovation is
to be f}ound( in the previously discussed nonconformities between
Mor.gan s main techno-economic sequence and the evolution of the
family al.]d gens. Thus Engels was able to provide a cultural-materialist
explanation of the origin of the nuclear family, incest taboos, and clan
exogamy, only by subscribing to Morgan’s Darwinian hypotiwsis con-
cerning the deleterious effects of inbreeding. On this point Engel
quoted directly from Ancient Society: e

In this cver widening exclusion of blood relatives from marriage,
natural selection also continues to have its effect. In Mor, 1;’;
words, marriage between non-consanguineous gentes "tendcgé to
create a more vigorous stock physically and mentally. When two
advancing tribes are blended into one people . . . the new skull

and brain would widen and lengthen to th ili
e of ot g g o the sum of the capabili-

Even more indicative of Engels’s difficulty in providing a consistent
cultural-materialist version of prehistory is his adoption of Morgan
and_ Bachofen’s explanation of the origfn of monogamy. In a pass%wc
]Vjvhlch proves _th;%t even the world’s number two Marist could ha:c
ourgeois prejudices about sex, Ingels decides that primitive sexual

communism came to an end b i
ecause in effect the women enjoyed i
Iess than the men: menioyed i

Bachofen is again absolutely right when he contends throughout
that theﬂtmnsilion from what he terms “hetacrism” or “Sumpf-
zeugung” to monogamy was brought about essentially by the
women. tTh.c more the old traditional sexual relations lost their
naive, pmmtm_t jungle character, as a result of the development
0£ the economic cun(.htiuns of life, that is, with the undermining
;7_ thc] old Cnmmums.m and the growing density of the popula-
t101:1, tltt morcv degrading and oppressive must they have appcarcd
o the women; the more fervently must they have longed for the
right to chastity, to temporary or permnne;ﬂ marriage with onc

247



===== PAGE 129 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

man only, as a deliverance. This advance could not have originated
from the men, if only for the reason that they have never—not
even to the present day—dreamed of renouncing the pleasures of
actual group marriage. Only after the transition to pairing mar-
riage had been effected by the women could the men introduce
strict monogamy—for the women only, of course [ibid.:87-88].

THE EFFECT OF MARX AND ENGELS
ON THE INTERPRETATION OF MORGAN

But Marx and Engels were determined to find in Morgan
independent corroboration of the materialist interpretation of his-
tory. Engels described Morgan as the man who

rediscovered in America, in his own way, the materialist concep-
tion of history that had been discovered by Marx forty years ago,
and in his comparison of barbarism and civilization was led by
this conception to the same conclusions, in the main points, as
Marx had arrived at [ibid.:7].

The substantial obstacles to such a conclusion have been discussed in
the previous chapter. By omitting all reference to “germ thoughts”
and by skillful editing, Engels succeeded in bringing forth a suitably
materialistic Morgan. But it is Engels and not Morgan who presents
the first clear-cut periodization of prehistory, based on the mode of
production:

Savagery—the period in which the appropriation of natural prod-
ucts, ready for use, predominated; the things produced by man
were, in the main, instruments that facilitated this appropriation.
Barbarism—the period in which knowledge of cattle brecding and
land cultivation was acquired, in which methods of increasing
the productivity of nature through human activity were learnt.
Civilization—the period in which knowledge of the further work-
ing-up of natural products, of industry proper, and of art was
acquired [ibid.:46].

The moral of this part of our story is not that Engels at Marxs insti-
gation distorted Morgan’s view of history. That is probably true, but
it is insignificant. Moreover, the modifications which Engels intro-
duced were on the whole quite sound and imparted to Morgan’s
scheme a logical coherence that it lacked in the original. The signifi-
cant thing is that the cultural-materialist strategy had now, much for
the worse rather than for the better, become wedded to an interpreta- |
tion of primitive culture which was a by-product of a definitely non-

248

8. Dialectical Materialism

__materialist research-strategy. For anthropologists, the viability of that
strategy now became identified with the future of Morgan’s scheme.
With Morgan’s scheme incorporated into Communist doctrine, the
struggling science of anthropology crossed the threshold of the
twentieth century with a clear mandate for its own survival and
well-being: expose Morgan’s scheme and destroy the method on
which it was based. The anthropological attack against Morgan was
to have these consequences: (1) the abandonment of the compara-
tive method; (2) the rejection of the attempt to view history from
a nomothetic standpoint; (3) postponement of actual tests of the
cultural-materialist strategy during a forty-year interlude. Meyers
would have been closer to the truth had he stated that cultural
anthropology developed entirely in reaction to, instead of indepen-
dently of, Marxism.

249



===== PAGE 130 =====

Historical Particu-

larism: Boas

9

. a

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

Q98
0

During the first half of the twentieth century, anthropology in the
United States was characterized by a programmatic avoidance of
theoretical syntheses. The basic research strategy for this period was
formulated by Franz Boas, one of the most influential figures in the
history of the social sciences. Boas was guided by a distinctive sense
of inductive purity, which he transmitted to a generation of followers.
It was a creed, however, which paradoxically denied its own existence.
His students would admit only that Boas had trained them to pursue
their varied interests mindful of the data, free of prejudice, and dis-
trustful of all schemes. They explicitly denied that Boas was the
center of a “school.” His mission had been to rid anthropology of i‘ts
amateurs and armchair specialists by making ethnographic research in
the field the central experience and minimum attribute of profes-
sional status. With the passage of time, however, a definite central
theme suggested in the label historical particularism has come to
be associated with the Boasian period.

The perspective which we enjoy in these matters in no way dimin-
ishes the importance of Boas' contribution to the development of

250

anthropology or of anthropological theory. It is true that the strategy
of historical particularism required an almost total suspension of the
normal dialectic between fact and theory. The causal processes, the
trends, the long-range parallels were buried by an avalanche of nega-
tive cases. It is also true that the attempt to harden the fiber of
ethnographic inquiry- with higher standards of proof met with only
limited success, and we shall have to take into account the notable
instances in which Boas and his students abused the facts as others
before and after have done. But the standards he proposed remain
a permanent legacy.

Those who aver that Boas retarded the progress of anthropology as
a science make improper allowance for the cultural forces that lay
behind the historical particularist reform. There were culturally de-
termined ideological limits within which anthropological theory was
largely constrained. Transgressors left no heritage within anthropology
of which we are today aware. Boas and his first generation of students
were obliged to build professional, university-based anthropology
practically from the ground up. They were remarkably successful de-
spite the many obstacles to be overcome. The culturally prescribed
limits were not so narrow and well-defined that options did not
exist. We have merely to consider the fate of anthropology within
the Soviet Union, Germany, and Italy during the same period to
realize that if historical particularism was essentially negative and
theoretically sterile, it nonetheless avoided the worst pitfalls of its
times.

The list of famous and influential anthropologists who were trained
by Boas testifies to his central importance in the establishment of the
discipline: Alfred Krocber, Robert Lowie, Fay-Cooper Cole, Edward
Sapir, Melville Herskovits, Alexander Goldenweiser, Alexander Lesser,
Paul Radin, Clark Wissler, Leslie Spier, J. Alden Mason, E. Adamson
Hoebel, Ruth Benedict, Margaret Mead, Ruth Bunzel, Jules Henry,
M. F. Ashley Montagu, Frank Speck. These students in turn set
forth the main lines of development of anthropological research and
instruction at crucial installations throughout the country. For ex-
ample, Kroeber and Lowic at Berkeley; Cole and Sapir at Chicago;
and Herskovits at Northwestern. Boas himself maintained a patri-
arch’s control over anthropology at Columbia from 18¢6 to his death
in 1941. In addition, he was at the center of critical formative events,
such as the modemizing of the American Anthropologist in 1898,
the founding of the American Anthropological Association in 1goo, the
revitalization of the American Ethnological Society in the same year,
and the founding of the American Folk-Lore Society in 1888.

251


