===== PAGE 330 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and kept intact by rules of etiquette; the general welfare was
fostered by ethical rules. Division of labor and specialization of
function marked the course of social evolution [WHITE 1959b:275].

If we take White’s separation of the particular from the general at
face value, these statements all reduce to the form: in the history of
hominid culture on planet carth, cultural form x was followed by
cultural form y at unknown times and places. It is of absolutely no
significance in the logico-empirical structure of these statements
whether each stage in the alleged sequence occurred often, some-
times, or only once. These are not, in other words, statements of
covariance.

In order to achieve nomothetic status these summaries of world
history must be rephrased into the form of propositions about co-
variance, from which probabilistic predictions and retrodictions about
specific cultures can be made. Thus: At a certain level of technological
control (to be more precisely defined), we expect to find kinship
extended to the boundaries of the community with a probability
greater than chance. Of course, as soon as we phrase White’s generali-
zation in this form, we sce at once that the disdain for the particular
case cannot be reconciled with the quest for generality. The generality
is nothing but the sum or average of the particular case.

Of greater interest in the context of our discussion concerning
cultural materialism is the task of converting White’s alleged “law” of
evolution to genuine nomothetic status. A statement of covariance of
a sort implicit in White’s techno-economic determinism (“culture
evolves as the energy in the system increases”) might take the form:
When the ratio of technological efficiency in food production (calorie
output per calorie input per total man hours of production) exceeds
20:1, the probability that stratified endogamous descent groups will be
found is greater than chance (cf. HaRRIS 1950a). As we shall see in a
moment, not only does this reformulation oblige us to become con-
cerned with particular measurements of particular culture systems, but
it also obliges us to calculate the effect of specific environments on
technologically mediated productive processes.

CULTURAL MATERIALISM AND THE
EXPLANATION OF SPECIFIC CASES

There is another kind of interpretation of White’s energy
“law” which possesses utility as a kind of meta-generalization rather

than as a statement of covariance. It is this reformulation which ac-
tually deserves our greatest attention, because it amounts to nothing

650

. g

22, Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

less than a statement of the research strategy through which one
proposes to arrive at the formulation of the most productive state-
ments of diachronic and synchronic regularities. This is the strategy
which often reluctantly acknowledges its debt to Marx: The most
powerful generalizations about history are to be found by studying
the relationship between the qualitative and quantitative aspects of
culture energy systems as the independent variables and the quantita-
tive and qualitative aspects of the other domains of sociocultural
phenomena as the dependent ones. It needs to be emphasized in
this context that the meta-generalization embodied in the cultural-
materialist research strategy is fully analogous to and at least as well
vindicated by specific cases as the vaunted “principle of natural se-
lection” in biology.

The implication in White’s proposals concerning nomothetic expla-
nations to which we must take vigorous exception is that cultural
materialism as a general strategy leads only to highly abstract evolu-
tionary sequences. It must be affirmed that this strategy nced not
limit itself to the vapid generalizations with which White has some-
times tried the patience of his colleagues. It leads as well to the
understanding of particular cases in all their detail in so far as such an
understanding can be achieved with reference to nomothetic, as
distinct from strictly historical, relations. We may credit White
therefore with the formulation of this strategy (under the pseudonym
of evolutionism), but we must also note his failure to apply it to
specific cases.

SPECIFIC AND GENERAL EVOLUTION

Recently, an attempt has been made to reconcile Steward’s
and White’s views through the recognition of two different varieties
of evolution, “specific” and “general.” The authors of this proposal,
Marshall Sahlins and Elman Service, have been students and col-
leagues of both White and Steward, a circumstance which accounts in
part for their mission of reconciliation. The failure to keep in mind
the dual character of evolution, a concept well expressed by Tylor
and upheld by the biologist Julian Huxley, is alleged to be “at the
very heart of the confusion and polemical controversy about such
terms as ‘unilinear,” ‘multilinear,’ and ‘universal evolution’ as well as
about the differences between ‘history’ and ‘evolution’ ” (sAHLINS
and SERVICE 1960:12). According to Sahlins and Service:

. evolution moves simultancously in two dircctions. On the
one side, it creates diversity through adaptive modification: new

651



===== PAGE 331 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

forms differentiate from old. On the other side, evolution gener-

ates progress: higher forms arise from, and suppress, lower
[ibid.:12-13].

Specific evolution thus seems to be equated with divergence and
adaptation to local natural and cultural habitats; general evolution,
with stages of progress.

It cannot be said that this formulation achieves the desired rec-
onciliation of Steward'’s cultural ecology with White’s universal evolu-
tionism. Neither specific nor general evolution is readily applicable
to the facts of cultural transformations. By seeming to equate adapta-
tion with divergence, Sahlins and Service appear to overlook a salient
characteristic of both cultural and biological evolution: convergence
and parallelism. That is, adaptation produces both divergence and
convergence.

These impressions are reinforced when they further insist that the
study of specific evolution requires a “phylogenetic” approach to tax-
onomy as opposed to the taxonomy of general evolution which
requires “stages” or “levels” (ibid.). It is a capital error to employ
the concept of phylogeny (even as analogy) in relation to cultural
forms, since (as Sahlins and Service very well know) there is no re-
semblance between the mechanisms responsible for cultural continuity
and those responsible for biological reproduction. Phylogeny is an
expression of the capacity of bioforms to differentiate to the point
where gene exchange no longer takes place. Phylogeny implies specia-
tion, and there is no concept less applicable to cultural evolution
than that of biological “species.” The adaptive significance of culture in
the evolution of the biosphere is precisely its exploitation of a non-
genetic feedback circuit which permits adaptation without speciation.
All sociocultural systems can exchange parts with each other, a situa-
tion whose startling effects in biology would be appreciated were
pigeons and elephants to mate and reproduce whenever they enjoyed
each other’s company for any length of time.

That the difference between Steward and White cannot be com-
posed by equating Steward’s approach with specific evolution is im-
mediately apparent if we consider Steward’s interest in limited parallels.
The taxonomy which results from, or is appropriate to, such a
study can scarcely be called phylogenetic (even after making due
allowances for the inappropriateness of the term for any cultural
process), since it is avowedly concerned with regularities which occur
in widely scattered parts of the world. Yet Steward calls the pro-
cess “adaptation.” Obviously this “adaptation” is concerned not with

652

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

specific cultures in specific environments but with a class of cultures in
a class of environments, mediated by a class of technological invento-
ries. Indeed, it can be argued that in both biological and cultural
evolution, the only practical method for identifying “adaptive” traits
is to employ the comparative method, which, of course, is nothing
but the search for nonphylogenetic regularities under conditions of
controlled comparison. The only way to compose the difference be-
tween Steward and White is to realize that the problem is quantita-
tive, not qualitative. As we have already seen, if Steward’s regularities
occur with sufficient frequency and embrace sufficiently broad cate-

gorics of transformations, White experiences no difficulty in admitting
the process as evolutionary.

PROGRESS AGAIN

Sahlins and Service’s concept of “general evolution” suffers
from an additional grave defect. Insofar as Sahlins and Service
follow White’s lead and emphasize the importance of energy quanta as
a measure of general evolution, their discussion conforms to the
cultural-materialist strategy and is unobjectionable, if highly program-
matic. It is regrettable, however, that these same criteria are offered as
measures not only of successively better adapted sociocultural systems
but also as a measure of evolutionary “progress.”

In the former case, we merely predict that adapted systems tend to
be replaced by other adapted systems, the later ones in the series being
thermodynamically larger and more efficient than the carlier ones.
There is no doubt that this generalization is broadly true of both
biological and cultural evolution. It is quite another matter, however,
to affix the term “progress” to the observed trend. This seems like a
deliberate re-exposure of all the raw nerves associated with nineteenth-
century Euro-American ethnocentrism and with the discredited
attempt to read a moral lesson out of the facts of biological evolu-
tionary processes. It is obvious that no matter how certain it is that
thermodynamically smaller and less efficient cultures will be replaced
by larger and more efficient ones, we are under no obligation to like it
or to believe it to be morally good and proper. Calling negative
entropy “progress” does not enhance our understanding of the condi-

tions under which culture energy systems evolve to higher levels of
productivity and efficiency.

653



===== PAGE 332 =====

Cultural Materialism:

Cultural Ecology 773

23.

Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

S
B3

’]:1:: attempt to reconcile Steward with White does not require
further elaborations of a typology of evolutionism. The central
question is to what extent the strategy employed by Steward cor-
responds to the cultural-materialist formulation which underlies
White’s evolutionary and energetistic pronouncements. It can be
shown that Steward has led his contemporaries in actually applying
cultural-materialist principles to the solution of concrete questions
concerning cultural differences and similarities. Unlike White, Steward
has sought to identify the material condition of sociocultural life in
terms of the articulation between production processes and habitat.
His cultural materialism resides in this pragmatic venture to which he
himself gives the title “the mcthod of cultural ecology.”

It will obviously not be possible to review any significant propor-
tion of the anthropological research which has been undertaken in
conformity with ecological versions of cultural materialism. Even
to give summary treatment to the work carried out by those who have
been directly influenced by Steward—Sidney Mintz (1956), Eric
Wolf (1957; 1966), Morton Fried (1952; 1967), Elman Service

654

(1955; 1962), René Millon (1967), Andrew Vayda (1956; 1961c),
Robert Manners (1956), F. Lehman (1963)—could prove an ex-
hausting task.

The list of anthropologists who have benefited indirectly from
Steward’s treatment of techno-environmental and techno-economic
interactions is proportionally larger and includes, at this date, many
younger figures who take their cultural ecology for granted, and who
acknowledge Steward’s contribution only by means of criticism
aimed at disproving some of his specific ecological explanations on
the basis of new data.

Nothing would be more contrary to the general frame of reference
advocated in this book than to explain the recent prominence of
ecological studies as a result of Steward’s personal influence. The
mounting interest in techno-environmental and techno-economic re-
lationships reflects a broad movement aimed at strengthening the
scientific credentials of cultural anthropology within the prestigious
and well-funded natural sciences. Cultural ecology, precisely because it
links emic phenomena with the etic conditions of “nature,” strengthens
the association between social science and the “harder” disciplines. In
a synchronic mode it thus promotes research involving cooperation
with the general medical sciences, biology, nutrition, demography, and
agronomy, all of which enjoy high levels of economic support. Ap-
plied diachronically, the ecological approach establishes a similar set
of ties between archacology and numerous specialties within geology
and paleontology. The contemporary premium upon scientism thus
makes the expansion of cultural ecological research almost inevitable.
Predictably, however, the movement to take up the cultural-materialist
option in the guise of cultural ecology has failed to link itself with the
historical precedent of Marx’s proposals. Indeed, one of the most
fascinating aspects of Steward’s contribution to the revival of nomo-
thetic inquiry is the slow but unacknowledged rediscovery or reinven-
tion of principles long ago made explicit in Marx’s “Preface” to The
Critique of Political Economy (see p. 229).

MULTILINEAR EVOLUTIONISM NOT A
METHODOLOGY

The link between cultural ecology and cultural materialism
has been obscured by the spurious issue of evolutionism. This has
provided Steward with the impetus to think of cultural ecology as a
kind of evolutionism rather than as a kind of determinism. Indeed, he
would have us believe that “Cultural evolution may be regarded as a

655



===== PAGE 333 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

special type of historical reconstruction or as a particular methodology
or approach” (1955:27). “Multilinear evolution is essentially a meth-
odology based on the assumption that significant regularities in cultural
change occur, and it is concerned with the determination of cultural
laws” (ibid.). Now, the establishment of the lines of cultural evolu-
tion might be an important result of research oriented by the assump-
tion that there are regularities in cultural change. Such regularities
would presumably eventuate in certain lines occurring repeatedly in
separate regions of the world in which similar conditions obtain. But
to call multilinear evolutionism the method by which this assumption
is brought to the research phase is a malapropism which has the un-
fortunate consequence of distracting us from the true nature of
Steward’s methodological contribution. In contrast to that method
and its brilliant concrete results, to which we shall turn in a moment,
Steward’s concept of multilinear evolution is all the more regrettable.

HOW MANY IS MULTI-?

Multilinear evolution, Steward says, “deals only with those
limited parallels of form, function, and sequence which have empirical
reality” (ibid.:19). This is equivalent to the statement that other forms
of evolutionism have not been rigorously empirical and have as a result
discovered too many parallels. Where have we heard it before? Is this

not precisely the message which Boas delivered from Morningside
Heights?

Multilinear evolution, therefore, has no a priori scheme or laws.
It recognizes that the cultural traditions of different areas may
be wholly or partly distinctive, and it simply poses the question
of whether any genuine or meaningful similarities between certain
cultures exist and whether these lend themselves to formulation

[ibid.].
This misnomered “methodology” is scarcely a decisive invention. It is

encumbered by a lingering acceptance of the possibility that endless
diversity may still turn out to be the best model of cultural evolution.

A taxonomic scheme designed to facilitate the determination of
parallels and regularitics in terms of concrete characteristics
and developmental processes will have to distinguish innumerable

culture types, many of which have not as vet been recognized
[ibid.:24].

If the “innumerable” tends toward the infinity side, we have historical
particularism. Moving in the other direction, we have multilinear

656

o

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

evolutionism. But it must be remembered that even in the biological
model of the tree of life, “innumerable” convergences and parallelisms
have their place. Furthermore, the so-called unilinear evolutionists,
despite their emphasis upon parallelism, certainly did not deny “in-
numerable” divergences. Finally, Steward himself questioned the
utility and not the validity of White’s universal sequence.

The question of how much parallelism has existed during the
course of culture history is a logico-empirical matter which cannot be
settled by adhering to one or another brand of evolutionism. The
most important considerations here are the operations by which judg-
ments of similarity or difference are rendered. It should be possible to
demonstrate the similarities of band organization among the Arunta
and Bushmen regardless of the type of evolutionism adhered to by
the community of observers. This of course is not to say that the
identification of parallel sequences is equally possible under all re-
search options. In the case of historical particularism, differences are
deliberately enumerated until they overwhelm similarities, and we
should not expect the discovery of many parallels. I must repeat,
however, that the issue here is not evolutionism, but rather the
triumph of the nomothetic mode over the idiographic. In this respect,
both Steward and White stand opposed to the Boasian school, regard-
less of their differences of opinion concerning the kind of evolutionism
one ought to “practice.” They both believe that causal explanations
of cultural phenomena are within our grasp.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF PARALLEL AND
CONVERGENT CASES

One of the most unfortunate consequences of the subordi-
nation of the question of causality to that of “evolution” is that it
has deflected our attention away from an understanding of the central
importance of parallel cases in the social sciences. To look for and
collect parallel sequences is not a methodology; the methodology
comes in when one looks for parallel cases in order to establish the
causal principles which account for both parallel and divergent evc_lu—
tion. If the evolutionary trajectory consequent upon the introduction
of irrigation agriculture were associated with the development of
“oriental despotism” in Egypt and nowhere else, it would be difficult
to establish any kind of causal relation between the two phenomena.
It is the fact that a similar sequence is repeated in several different
cases that makes it possible for us to talk about nomothetic causal
relationships. The special significance of parallel developmental se-

657

—————ee e ———————————— et ettt


===== PAGE 334 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

quences therefore is that they provide the natural history analogues
to laboratory controls in the experimental sciences. In this respect
they potentially offer a highly satisfactory form of cross-cultural
correlation analysis since actual chronological sequence may be invoked
to determine the direction of causality.

Although Steward has not participated in the development of
statistically oriented cross-cultural theories, his understanding of the
methodological function of parallelisms actually assumes both dia-
chronic and synchronic forms of correlation:

. it is our basic premise that the crucial methodological
feature of evolution is the determination of recurrent causal re-
lationships in independent cultural traditions. . . . Whether it
requires ten, twenty, or scveral hundred years for the relation-
ship to become established, development through time must al-
ways take place. Therefore parallel developments which require
only a few years and involve only a limited number of features
are no less evolutionary from a scientific point of view than
sequences involving whole cultures and covering millennia
[ibid.:27].

Removing the emphasis from the sterile question of whether a
phenomenon is or is not evolution, we may rephrase Steward’s point
to read as follows: cross-culturally valid correlations indicate that
causality is operative. As we shall see in a moment, one of Steward’s
most important contributions, namely the ecological analysis of hunt-
ing and gathering bands, actually follows the ‘paradigm of synchronic
correlation analysis, rather than a diachronic model.

STEWARD AS CULTURAL MATERIALIST

In order to show that cultural ecology is a subcase of cultural
materialism, two points must be established: (1) in the cultural-
ccological strategy, techno-environmental and techno-economic varia-
bles are accorded research priority; (2) this is done in conformity with
the hypothesis that social organization and ideology tend to be the
dependent variables in any large diachronic sample of sociocultural
systems.

It is clear that Steward is the author of many statements which
conform to the definition of cultural materialism. One of the most suc-
cinct is embedded in the discussion which led him to revise the culture
area classification in the Handbook of the South American Indians.
In explaining why a diffusionist interpretation of South American
culture is unsatisfactory, he states that the acceptance or rejection

658

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

of diffused items “was always contingent upon local potentialities.”
These “potentialities” are

. a function of the local ecology, that is, the interaction of
environment, exploitative devices, and socioeconomic habits. In
cach case, the exigencies of making a living in a given environ-
ment with a specific set of devices and methods for obtaining,
transporting, and preparing food and other essential goods set
limits to the dispersal or grouping of the people and to the com-
position of settlements, and it strongly influenced many of their
modes of behavior [STEWARD 1949a, V:674].

There will be critics of this interpretation who will fix upon the
phrase “strongly influenced many of their modes of behavior” to prove
that Steward’s position is not that of “cultural materialism.” But if
provision for “accident,” “historical factors,” and short-run and rela-
tively rare reversals of causality from superstructure to base remove
one from the heritage of cultural-materialist theory, then Marx as
well as Steward must be so removed.

Dogmatic and otherwise degraded versions of historical materialism
may insist on a one-to-one absolute correlation between material base
and the rest of the social system. But our interest does not encompass
such aberrations. Any rejection of cultural materialism on the grounds
that it represents a less empirical, less skeptical, less operational or, in
brief, an inferior scientific method is unworthy of serious considera-
tion./Empiricism, skepticism, operationalism are scarcely the exclusive
property of any particular anthropological school or theoretical orien-
tation. These are the minimum conditions of science in general. If
they are not met, as is fmquently enough the case, it is a disaster
regardless of the theoretical orientation in whose name the lapse has
occurred.

The essence of cultural materialism is that it directs attention to
the interaction between behavior and environment as mediated by
the human organism and its cultural apparatus. It does so as an order
of priority in conformity with the prediction that group structure
and ideology are responsive to these classes of material conditions.
Turning to Steward’s statement of the research strategy of cultural
ecology, we find all of these attributes of cultural materialism clearly

delineated. He states that there are three fundamental procedures of
cultural ecology:

First, the interrclationship of exploitative or productive tech-
nology and cnvironment must be analyzed. . . . Second, the be-
havior patterns involved in the exploitation of a particular area by

659

}
i



===== PAGE 335 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

means of a particular technology must be analyzed. . . . The
third procedure is to ascertain the extent to which the behavior
patterns entailed in exploiting the environment affect other as-
pects of culture [STEWARD 1955:40-41].

This is Steward’s research strategy. It is the procedure actually fol-
lowed in his substantive work to which we turn in a moment.

CORE, BASE, SUPERSTRUCTURE

In connection with his misnomered “method of multilinear
evolution,” Steward attempts to set up a taxonomy of the empirically
identified instances of parallel lines of development. By what con-
geries of traits shall we identify these sequences? Steward’s answer is
that they should be classified in accordance with the kinds of “cultural
cores” which they manifest. Such cores he defines as “the constellation
of features which are most closely related to subsistence activities and
economic arrangements” (ibid.:37). It is inevitable that this definition
of “cultural core” should summon up comparison with Marx’s dis-
tinction between base and superstructure. One thinks immediately
that the core is that part of the sociocultural system which in the long
run determines all the other parts. Steward’s explication, however,
leads to other conclusions:

cultural core—the constellation of features which are most
closely related to subsistence activities and economic arrange-
ments. The core includes such social, political, and religious
patterns as are empirically determined to be closely connected
with these arrangements. Innumerable other features may have
great potential variability because they are less strongly tied to
the core. These latter, or secondary features, are determined to a
greater extent by purely cultural-historical factors—by random
innovations or by diffusion—and they give the appearance of
outward distinctiveness to cultures with similar cores. Cultural
ecology pays primary attention to those features which empirical
analysis shows to be most closely involved in the utilization of
environment in culturally prescribed ways [ibid.].

If we proceed on the assumption that “core” is analogous to “base,”
we shall find on closer inspection that the logic of the above statement
leaves much to be desired.

On this assumption, the core would be essential to the under-
standing of the causality responsible for a type, yet it would not
determine the type’s secondary features. These are determined by

660

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

purely chance cultural-historical factors, that is, by variables which
cannot be put into nomothetic generalizations. What about the sub-
sistence activities, economic arrangements, the social, political, and
religious patterns, all of which are to be included in the core? Is
there any indication that we are to regard some of these factors as
causally more significant than the others? None at all. Why then, we
may very well wonder, should certain types tend to occur frequently
enough to produce the parallel sequences which constitute the sub-
ject matter of multilinear evolution? How can we speak of “causality”
when it appears to be a matter of indifference whether it is one,
several, or all of the respective subsistence, economic, political, or
religious variables which can summon into existence the whole pat-

tern -of the cultural-ecological type? But this quandary has not
exhausted itself.

Obviously, the diagnostic features of any given era—the cultural
core—will depend in part upon particular research interest, upon
what is considered important; and there is still a healthy if some-
what confusing disagreement regarding these matters. Tt should
be noted, however, that functionally interrelated economic, social,
political, religious, and military patterns as well as technological
and esthetic features have become the basis for developmental
taxonomies. These features do not constitute total cultures. They
form culture cores, which are defined according to the empirical
facts of cross-cultural type and level [ibid.:g3].

Not only must we now admit military and aesthetic features into the
culture core, thus rounding out the entire universal pattern, but the
reasons for including some and excluding others may depend upon what
each anthropologist appears to consider important!

THE CORE OF CONFUSION

It is clear that the interests of coherent and systematic theory
cannot be served by the interpretation of Steward’s “cultural core” as
a statement of causal relations. The concept of cultural core makes
sense only in relation to the misguided polemic surrounding the
multilinearity of cultural evolution. It cannot be reconciled with
Steward’s cultural-ecological method. Steward has confused the causal
implications of the cultural-ecological strategy with the typological
requirements of multilinear sequences. The stress on multilinearity,
in turn, is intelligible only as a counterweight to dogmatized versions
of Marxism, as a means of dissociating cultural ecology from the

661



===== PAGE 336 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecologz

political stigma attached to historical materialism. We do not other-
wise require to be told over and over again that cultural ecology
cannot explain everything, that there are exceptions, that not all
cultures conform to the same type, and that there is divergence as
well as convergence and parallelism in human history. What anthro-
pologists can deny these challenges to nomothetic understanding?

But that is not the issue. Rather, the issue is what kinds of results
have been achieved by following historical particularism, culture and
personality, and the other emic and idealist alternatives? Let those who
know how to explain what the cultural-materialist strategy has thus
far failed to explain step forward with their nomothetic alternatives.
We do not demean a theory by its failures to explain everything,
but rather by its failure to explain as much as its nearest rivals. In
this frame of reference, the alternatives to cultural materialism have
failed and have as often obscured as enlightened our understanding of
sociocultural evolution.

EARLY INFLUENCES ON STEWARD

When we turn to the substantive applications of Steward’s
cultural-ecological method, the confusion associated with his concept
of cultural core is somewhat attenuated. In each of his major under-
takings he has stressed the techno-economic and techno-environmental
parameters as the first order of business and has demonstrated the
advantages of such a strategy by rendering intelligible cultural phe-
nomena which are otherwise inscrutable. It will obviously not be
possible to recount all of Steward’s achievements; only those of the
highest theoretical significance can be touched upon.

Steward was trained at Berkeley, where he received his Ph.D. in 1931,
and his earlier work was dominated by particularist influences emanat-
ing from Kroeber and Lowie. One must also reckon with the influence
of Carl Sauer, whose interest in human geography helped to strengthen
Kroeber's awareness of environmental factors (see pp. 339ff.).

Steward’s own interest in environmental factors was first con-
solidated by fieldwork among the FEastern Mono and Paiute of
Owens Valley, California, in 19277 and 1928. Up to the publication of
his “The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands,” however,
Steward’s position corresponded essentially to that of a rather large
number of anthropologists who regarded the natural environment as
a vaguely limiting or enabling factor in culture history. Let us pause
for a moment to consider the background.

662

EARLIER TREATMENTS OF THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CULTURE
AND ENVIRONMENT: WISSLER

The salient feature of the anthropological discussions of the
influence of environment on culture prior to Steward’s essay was that
they were carried out within the particularist frame of culture area
classifications, and hence did not rise to nomothetic status. Both
Kroeber and Clark Wissler for example, basing themselves on the
still earlier formulations of Otis Mason (1895a), were convinced that
there was a correspondence between cultural and natural areas over
the entire New World (sce Chap. 14). Wissler in particular indicated
that some kind of determinist influence had to be operating from
environment to culture. He was especially impressed by the fact that
when a map of North American “ecological” areas was placed over a
map of the cultural areas, not only did the two line up, but the centers
of the respective areas were the same for both the cultural and natural
features. He was baffled, however, as to why this should be so.

‘We have, then, made progress in our search for the environ-
mental factor, since it appears the rule that, wherever in aboriginal
America, a well marked ccological area can be delineated, there
one will find a culture area and that the centers of distribution for
the constituent traits will fall in the heart of the ecological
arca. There must then be some determining condition that pro-
duces this uniformity, some ecological relation here, and no doubt
a mechanism involved, which when laid bare, will give an ade-
quate scientific cxplanation of the phenomenon. This discussion
has at least set us on the trail of this mechanism, for its place of
function is the ecological area, and it is most in evidence at the
center [WISSLER 1926:216-17].

Wissler was further convinced that in so far as the environment in-

fluenced the formation of cultural areas, it was through effects of
food production.

In a large measure the particular economic type followed by the
community shapes the entire mode of life. . . . As we have
stated repeatedly, the most basic of all economic conditions are
those related to food, and the specific food habits of a people
arc among the most resistant to change [wissLEr 1929:79].

But Wissler was also capable of such statements as: “The influence of
the environment thus appears as a passive limiting agency rather

663

|
$



===== PAGE 337 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

than as a causal factor in tribal life” (ibid.:339), and his notion of
determinism becomes utterly befuddled when he tries to explain
the uniformity of subsistence practices within a cultural area. This he
attributed not to the adaptive advantages of a particular mode of
subsistence but rather to the alleged advantage which accrues to the
tribes of a region when they all exploit the same resources:

The environment really holds together the tribes occupying a
region, and develops a community of interest and concentrates
leadership within itself. The tendency for a bison-hunting tribe
is, first, to confine its wanderings to the bison range; secondly,
to observe and to fraternize with other bison-hunting tribes. Under
such circumstances, it seems inevitable that the tribes within a
region should follow much the same round of life [ibid.:338-39].

Wissler was thus unable to formulate the essential ingredients in a
nomothetic approach to the culture-cnvironment relationship. Such
an approach can be stated only in terms of relationships that are
found in different culture areas—indeed, on different continents—as
a result of recurrent ecological exigencies. Furthermore, Wissler
had no idea how, in general, the techno-environmental conditions
could be nomothetically related to social organization and idcology.
All in all, Wissler’s approach represented only a slight advance over
the work of Ratzel, to whom he himself attributed many of his ideas.

CULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT :
C. DARYLL FORDE

One additional approach to the culture-environment prob-
lem must be mentioned, namely that of C. Daryll Forde. Like
Wissler, Forde was convinced that the environment was important,
but he was also incapable of and disinclined toward expressing the
relationship in nomothetic terms. In effect, his main contribution
was to warn geographers that they could not hope to understand
cultures as mere reflexes of environment since each culture had the
power to take out of the environment or to stress those aspects of
it which historical (ie., cultural) events inclined it to take into
consideration:

Physical conditions enter intimatcly into every cultural develop-
ment and pattern, not excluding the most abstract and non-
material; they enter not as determinants, however, but as one
category of the raw material of cultural elaboration. The study of

664

f

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

the relations between cultural patterns and physical conditions
is of the greatest importance for an understanding of human
society, but it cannot be undertaken in terms of simple geo-
graphical controls alleged to be identifiable on sight. It must pro-
ceed inductively from the minute analysis of each actual society.
The culture must in the first place be studied as an entity, and as
an historical development; there can be no other effective ap-
proach to interrelations of such complexity. The most meticulous
knowledge of physical geography, whether of great regions or of
small areas, will not serve to clucidate these problems unless the
nature of cultural development is grasped. The geographer who
is unversed in the culture of the people of the land he studies, or
in the lessons which ethnology as a whole has to teach, will, as
soon as he begins to consider the mainsprings of human ac-
tivity, find himself groping uncertainly for geographical factors
whose significance he cannot truly assess [FORDE 1934:464-65].

What we have here is merely a restatement of the historical-par-
ticularist position with an emphasis upon accumulating techno-en-
vironmental data instead of folktales. The failure to reach a
nomothetic point of view is yet more evident when Forde goes on
to say that even if we could discover determinist principles by
which techno-economic patterns could be related to the environment,
we should still confront an impasse in trying to relate these patterns
to the rest of the culture. One more citation is required at this
point in order that the full measure of Steward’s achievement may be
taken:

But if geographical determinism fails to account for the existence
and distribution of economies, economic determinism is equally
inadequate in accounting for the social and political organizations,
the religious beliefs and the psychological attitudes, which may
be found in cultures based on those economies. . . . The tenure
and transmission of land and other property, the development
and relations of social classes, the nature of government, the re-
ligious and ceremonial life—all these are parts of a social super-
structure, the development of which is conditioned not only by
the foundations of habitat and economy, but by complex interac-
tions within its own fabric and by external contacts, often largely
indiffcrent to both the physical background and to the basic econ-
omy alike [ibid.].

The phrase “complex interactions within its own fabric” is a note-
worthy example of how an admission of ignorance, properly celebrated,
can convey a sense of wisdom.

665



===== PAGE 338 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL BASIS OF
PRIMITIVE BANDS

Against this background, Steward’s “The Economic and Social
Basis of Primitive Bands” must be reckoned among the important
achievements of modern anthropology. It constitutes the first coher-
ent statement of how the interaction between culture and environ-
ment could be studied in causal terms without reverting to a simple
geographical determinism or without lapsing into historical particular-
ism. This achievement has a double focus: first, the identification of
a cross-culturally valid form of social organization, the “primitive
band”; second, its explanation. The band occurs among widely
separated hunting and gathering peoples in many different parts of
the world. It is a type of social organization distinguished in its most
general form by political autonomy and a small population, in that it
consists of several nuclear families whose access to land is controlled
by ownership privileges vested in the larger group. Incidentally, in
defining this unit Steward had to cut through the issue of family
and individual land ownership which Boas™ student Speck (1928)
had succeeded in bringing to a point of almost complete confusion
(see pp. 357ff.) by his failure to separate acculturation effects from
aboriginal patterns. Having established the existence of the major
type by reference to several dozen recorded cases, Steward classi-
fied them into three subtypes: patrilineal, composite, and ma-
trilineal. He then proceeded to supply causal explanations for the
existence of the major type and its threc subtypes. These explana-
tions involve a consideration of the relationship between the pro-
ductive capacity of low-level technologies applied to various types of
habitats. Where Steward triumphed over the earlier expressions of
determinism  linking habitat and social organization going back
as far as Turgot (see p. 28) was in being able to explain how,
despite the diversity of environments and technologies associated
with band-organized societies, there remained underlying ecological
commonalities which gave rise to the general type and other com-
monalities which gave rise to the subtypes. Where the older tradition
of geographical determinism was baffled by the fact that similar
organizations occurred among the desert-dwelling Arunta, the Negritoes
of the Congo rain forest, and the California Miwok, Steward’s analy-
sis focused attention on the structural similarities which resulted
from the interaction of habitats and cultures whose specific content
masked a fundamentally similar ecologic adjustment.

666

Y’

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

The nature of this adjustment may be summed up in reference to
the low productivity of hunting and gathering techniques in adverse
environments with a consequent limitation of population density to
less than one person per square mile. Social aggregates are therefore
necessarily small (averaging thirty to fifty persons per band) yet they
are larger than the nuclear family because of the greater efficiency of
the larger group in “subsistence insurance” and “security in war-
fare and feuds” (STEWARD 1936:332-33). According to Steward, the
patrilineal type results from patrilocal residence which in turn is associ-
ated with the subsistence and defense advantages stemming from or-
ganizing the local group around a core of resident males. Composite
forms of the band result from the intrusion of factors which reduce
the advantages of patrilocality, as when subsistence depends on migra-
tory animals.

Not only did this formulation surpass crude environmental
determinism, which makes no provision for cultural variables, but it
also surpassed that form of human geography known as “possibilism,”
in which the recognition of the cultural factor ends in a morass of
indeterminacy. Steward was not merely saying that a particular
combination of technology and environment made it possible for
man to create a particular type of social organization; the whole
weight of his argument was in the direction of insisting that a similar
techno-environmental relationship regularly caused a similar effect
(ie., made it highly probable) regardless of whether the people
involved were “creatively inclined” or not. Despite subsequent critical
evaluations of certain aspects of Steward’s data (cf. sERvICE 1962;
MEGGITT 1962), the strategy of Steward’s explanation continues to
warrant approval.

SOME SUPERFLUOUS LIMITATIONS

It should not be concluded, however, that Steward had in
one stroke severed his ties to particularism. In the actual listing of
causal factors responsible for the band and its subtypes, Steward in-
cluded a number of fortuitous and quixotic ingredients which, if taken
as integral to the argument, greatly reduce its novelty. Thus in his sum-
mary of the factors responsible for the patrilineal band, Steward noted
that band size is sometimes restricted not by ecological relations but
rather by “some social factor which nevertheless has brought about
occupation of small parcels of territory by correspondingly small
groups” (ibid.: 343). Similarly in the explanation of the conditions re-
sponsible for composite bands he included such intrusive factors as

667

!
|
|



===== PAGE 339 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

“adoption of children between bands” and legitimacy of parallel cousin
marriages; for matrilocal bands he listed: “Desire to securc the assist-
ance of the wife’s mother in child rearing”; and “strength of borrowed
matrilineal institutions” (ibid.). Despite these lapses, there is no doubt
that Steward intended to produce a statement of nomothetic causality
based upon techno-environmental regularities. In his own words:

Underlying this paper is the assumption that cvery cultural
phenomenon is the product of some definite cause or causes. This
is a necessary presupposition if anthropology is considered a sci-
ence. The method of this paper has been first to ascertain the
causes of primitive bands through analysis of the inner func-
tional or organic connection of the components of a culture and
their environmental basis. Next, through comparisons, it cn-
deavored to discover what degree of generalization is possible. It
is not assumed, of course, that generalizations may be made con-
cerning all culture traits. On the contrary, it is entirely possible
that the very multiplicity of antecedents of many traits or com-
plexes will preclude satisfactory generalization and that the con-
clusion with respect to some things will be that “history never
repeats itself.” The extent, however, to which generalizations can
be made may be ascertained by further application of the meth-
ods followed here [ibid.}.

‘What Steward failed to realize is that the idiosyncratic, social, and
ideational factors included among the detcrminants of band organiza-
tion preclude “satisfactory generalization” and thus should have been
removed from the statement of the lawful conditions.

CONSEQUENCES OF NONSTATISTICAL
GENERALIZATION

It is regrettable that Steward operates with a nonstatistical
concept of causality: “The method will be to analyze functional or
necessary relationships. It will not undertake statistics or correlations”
(ibid.:331). Had he approached the statement of ecological causality
in terms of statistical probabilities, then we might have been spared
a long series of curiously self-defeating theoretical forays, each of
which undermines an important substantive nomothetic achieve-
ment by putting back into the ecological formula the indeterminacy
which it was designed to overcome.

The significance of Steward’s analysis of bands is that it showed
how the interaction between tcchnology and environment could
explain most of the important structural and idcological features

668

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

of low-energy hunters and gatherers in most of the known ex-
amples without utilizing historical or other idiographic modes of
explanation. If we do not clearly state that the issue is a matter of
probabilities, then before long we find oursclves retreating to the
cupboard of eclecticism in order to achieve an explanation of all of
the important structural and ideational features in all of the known
cases. But such explanation ceases to be nomothetically viable. We
already know beforchand that if we could be given an account of all
of the events in the history of each of the peoples who have band
organization, we should be able to offer an explanation which would
be more “complete” than that which can be obtained through the
nomothetic option. But such a program is the antithesis of science,
and we do not improve our nomothetic formulations by tacking on
the additional bit of advice that the exceptions to our rules can be
understood by dragging in other factors, unless these additional con-
siderations are couched in nomothetic terms.

ECOLOGY OF THE SOUTHWEST

In his analysis of the development of multi-matrisib villages
among the Pueblos and multi-patrisib villages among the Yuman tribes
of the Colorado River, Steward repeated the performance which
made his treatment of the origin of bands a landmark. Rejecting the
prevailing theories which derived the Yuman sib organization from
the Pueblos, he emphasized instead the effect which the introduction
of agriculture had upon the population density of the Colorado
groups. This combined with pressure of warfare produced the evolu-
tion of the Yuman groups from patrilincal bands to multi-patrisib
villages. Similar processes account for the gradual conversion of the
semisedentary seed gatherers of Basket Maker times into the multi-
matrisib villages of the late Basket Maker and Pueblo times.

It is noteworthy for an assessment of Steward’s total impact upon
anthropological theory during the last three decades that his utilization
of archacological data for the reconstruction of the Pueblo sequence
helped to usher in a new era of archacological interpretations, one
whose influence continues to expand exponentially at the moment
of writing. But I shall return to the interrelationship between
cultural ecology and archaeology in a moment.

First we must record Steward’s reiteration of the importance of
the cultural-ecological approach:

The present analysis of Southwestern socicty assumes that cul-
tural process, and therefore sound historical reconstruction, can be

669



===== PAGE 340 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

understood only if due attention is paid to the economic and
ecological factors that shape society. This requires analysis of the
degree and manner in which economic factors have combined
with kinship, ceremonialism, inheritance, and other factors to pro-
duce observed social patterns [1955:155]

Once again, however, we confront not only the nomothetic factors
but the peculiar idiographic ones which negate the entire cffort if we
accord them their literal significance. In explaining the concentration
of formerly localized and independent units in Pueblo III times, for
example, Steward asserts that the change was “made possible but
not caused by ecological factors” (ibid.:166-67).

Village concentration must, therefore, have been produced by
a factor of a nonecological order. Many causcs are conceivable but
in this instance it does not seem imperative to scek beyond the
need for defense; for, whatever the danger, increasinging pains
taken to choose impregnable dwelling sites attest an important
motive for banding together. This tendency to concentrate in
large villages, aided by the development of multistoried archi-
tecture and probably stimulated by some threat, began to spread.
But at this time the total Pueblo area also began to shrink. The
communal dwelling has persisted to the present, but now that the
motives for constructing it have vanished, the reverse tendency
has set in, houses becoming more widely scattered. The unilat-
eral organization presumed to have been created during the
original concentration of the Pucblo population continues in ef-
fect to the present day [ibid.:167].

A slight amount of reflection should suffice for establishing the point
that an increase in warfare in the Pueblo area could easily have re-
sulted from factors consistent with Steward’s notion of ecology,
namely from population increase. Once again, it should be empha-
sized that the peculiarly hesitant formulation would be rendered
redundant by rephrasing the determinism to accord with statistical
notions of causality. What Steward was really saying in this paper on
the formation of multisib communities is that given a certain set of
environmental and technological conditions, the transition from band
to sib is highly predictable in a sufficicntly large sample. But this is all
we can ask of nomothetic statements in any realm of science.

CULTURAL LAW AND CAUSALITY

We turn now to an historically decisive paper, Steward’s “Cul-
tural Causality and Law; A Trial Formulation of Farly Civilization.”
This article elaborated on Steward’s contribution to the 1947 Viking

670

hdl

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

Fund Conference on Peruvian Archaeology at which the first strati-
graphically based syntheses of the independent evolution of civilization
in the New World had been set forth (see p. 337). Juxtaposing the New
World sequences as known from northern Peru and central Mexico with
available summaries of events in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and North China,
Steward demonstrated a degree of developmental parallelism which
dwarfed all of the “stupendous” phenomena referred to by Sapir (sce p-
605). In all five regions Steward identified a sequence which involved a
roughly parallel development through the following stages: Hunting
and Gathering; Incipient Agriculture; Formative; Regional Flores-
cent; Cyclical Conquests. The importance of this synthesis will
emerge from the following discussion of the background of Steward’s
theory. We shall have to consider first the relationship of Steward’s
formulation to the “hydraulic hypothesis” as proposed by the com-
parative historian and sinologist Karl Wittfogel. Second, the relation-
ship between Wittfogel, Steward, and Marxist theory must also be
considered. And finally we shall have to assess the relationship between
archaeological research and the rise of cultural-materialist theorics.

WITTFOGEL AND THE HYDRAULIC
THEORY

Steward’s trial formulation of the developmental sequence
in the five centers of ancient civilization was not intended to exhaust
all of the possible routes which cultures have followed toward com-
plex state-organizations. Rather, the trajectories he outlined were
those assumed to be the characteristic sequences of one particular
type, namely, irrigation, or “hydraulic civilizations.”

The formulation here offered excludes all areas except the arid
and semiarid centers of ancient civilizations. In the irrigation
areas, environment, production, and social patterns had similar
functional and developmental interrelationships [STEWARD 1949b:

17].

Steward’s ideas at this point converged with the theories of Karl
Wittfogel.

As early as 1926 Wittfogel had begun to apply a cultural-ecological
approach to the explanation of the peculiarities of Chinese and other
“Asiatic” socicties. In Wittfogel's carly formulation these systems
were characterized as “mighty hydraulic bureaucracies” whose despotic
control over the densely populated ancient states in China, India, and
Egypt arose from the techno-environmental exigencies of large-scale

671



===== PAGE 341 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

irrigation and other forms of water control in regions of scant rain-
fall. Although inspired by Max Weber, this analysis owed its central
thrust, its clarity, and its success to Marx. The realization that the
evolution of Oriental socicties had followed a path substantially dif-
ferent from those of Europe was quite common among the scholars of
the Enlightenment. Marx accepted this difference and postulated an
Oriental mode of production.

As Wittfogel tells us, he employed “Marx’s concept,” in conformity
with what he understood to be Marx’s own conclusions (WITTFOGEL
1957:5-6). Wittfogel’s analysis of the functional interdependence of
the main features of the social organization and techno-economic
patterns of irrigation civilization led him to stress the general im-
portance of environmental parameters in the application of historical
materialism to the understanding of social systems. His proposal to
emphasize the interplay between economics and environment to ac-
count for phenomena which had baffled Marx was published in the
Marxist journal Unter dem Banner der Marxismus (1929), and was
clearly conceived as an expansion of the scope and effectiveness of the
historical-materialist strategy.

WITTFOGEL ABANDONS CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

Wittfogel's views on hydraulic society clashed with several
cardinal items of dogma in the Stalinist version of world history.
Marx’s notion of an Asiatic mode of production indicated a degree
of divergence in sociopolitical evolution which the international
Communist parties were unwilling to accept. The Asiatic mode
of production with its despotic centralized bureaucratic state was
the very opposite of European feudal society. If there could be no
feudalism in the evolutionary careers of the hydraulic civilizations,
how could they develop capitalism? And without capitalism, how
could they develop communism? As a result of the communist ex-
puigation of Marx’s ideas on the multilinearity of sociocultural evolu-
tion, Wittfogel's research and writing gradually took on the coloration
of a crusade against communism and totalitarianism in general.
Initially this crusade was closely linked with a defense of the cultural-
materialist strategy and was inspired by “Marx’s insistence on an
unbiased pursuit of truth” (1957:6). Gradually, however, Wittfogel
came to see the phenomena of Oriental despotism as capable of
surviving in, and diffusing to, societies whose techno-economic relation-

672

R

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

ships bore little resemblance to the conditions underlying the pristine
state. Oriental society, he has recently declared, “cannot be explained
in purely ecological or economic terms; and the spread of Oriental
despotism to areas lacking a hydraulic agriculture underlines the
limitations of such an explanation” (WITTFOGEL 1964:46).

Disturbed by a vision of the Soviet Union and Communist China
as new installments in an age-old pattern, Wittfogel permitted himself
to serve as a government witness in the McCarran committee’s
investigation of the Institute of Pacific Studies. Tragedies resulting
from this episode have illserved the cause of scholarship and have
contributed to the suppression of the cultural-materialist strategy
in American social science. Wittfogel's crusade to prove the multi-
linearity of evolution has centered more and more on the alleged
moral implications of closed and open models of history:

Marx and Engels’ acceptance of Asiatic society as a separate and
stationary conformation shows the doctrinal insincerity of those
who, in the name of Marx, peddle the unilinear construct. And
the comparative study of societal conformations demonstrates the
empirical untenability of their position. Such a study brings to
light a complex sociohistorical pattern, which includes stagnation
as well as progress. By revealing the opportunities, and the pit-
falls, of open historical situations, this concept assigns to man a
profound moral responsibility, for which the unilinear scheme,
with its ultimate fatalism, has no place [1957:7-8].

THE POLITICS OF HYDRAULICS

Although Wittfogel's model of history is more correct than
anything proposed in the name of Stalinist orthodoxy, it is regrettable
that the issue of moral responsibility should be employed in support
of multilinear evolutionism. One could arguc that there is not the
slichtest evidence that a world view in which human behavior is
determined by material processes leads to any greater or lesser amount
of “fatalism” than is to be found among peoples who believe in the
determinism of an omnipotent God. Under cither alternative mature
individuals learn to accept responsibility for their actions. But T shall
not elaborate on this aspect of the issue, because we have before us
not a question of morality but one of scientific fact and theory. If we
want to know to what extent human history is determined along
parallel and convergent lines, we must turn to our measuring instru-
ments and to our evidence and not to the moral premises of theolo-
gians, philosophers, and politicians.

673



===== PAGE 342 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Wittfogel's concern with the need to defeat the Stalinist world
view has led him away from the cultural-materialist strategy—the
strategy which was responsible for the formulation of his original
theory of Oriental despotism. The irony of this situation is that in
the meantime the evidence in favor of his theory has accumulated far
beyond that which was available in the 1920’s. Wittfogel’s emigra-
tion to the United States corresponded to the period during which
the revival of interest in large-scale nomothetic formulations was
just getting under way. And by the end of the 1930’s, this interest
could for the first time in history avail itself of an abundance of
archaceological facts adequate to the scientific solution of some of
the most formidable riddles of human life.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL CONTRIBUTIONS
TO THE STRATEGY OF CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

As we shall see, the central hypothesis in Steward’s “Cultural
Causality and Law” was taken over bodily from Wittfogel. It would
appear that knowingly or unknowingly, Steward had thus succeeded
in wedding anthropology to the materialist strategy of which Marx
had been the pioncer. But “Cultural Causality and Law” also repre-
sents the coming together of a number of distinctively anthropological
achievements, whose substance and nature must now be set forth.

There was first of all the heritage of research carried out among
non-European and precivilized groups with all its advantages in
terms of the relative simplicity of the techno-environmental and
techno-economic feedbacks. Field techniques applied to living people
in their natural habitat gave anthropologists an advantage over the
scholars who like Marx and his orthodox followers depended upon
documents and historiography as their principal source of information
about the structure and dynamics of sociocultural systems. Steward
himself was an important contributor to this heritage, having carried
out additional field studies in 1934-36 among the Great Basin
Shoshone seed gatherers.

Secondly, anthropology was rapidly expanding the scope of its
ethnographic studies over areas which provided maximum contrast
with the cases most familiar to the European historians and even to
scholars such as Wittfogel, whose great knowledge of Chincse
history freed him from the typical Eurocentric parochialism of West-
ern historiography.

674

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

logical perspective as editor of the six-volume Handbook of the South
American Indians (1946-30). This monumental collection immersed
him in ethnographic material covering an entire continent with an
extraordinary varicty of environments and sociopolitical types.

In his struggle to organize the contributions of some ninety col-
laborators from a dozen different countries, Steward had at first
accepted the historical-particularist trait-inventory frame of culture
areas. In the fifth volume, however, he expressed his dissatisfaction
with the definition of the four culture areas which provided the
typological basis for one of each of the preceding volumes: Marginal,
Tropical Forest, Circum-Caribbean/Sub-Andean, and Andean. In
retrospect, he announced, “it is evident that many tribes were
improperly classified” (1949a:670-71), and he called for and carried
out a reclassification in accordance with patterns “which integrate
the institutions of the sociopolitical unit” (ibid.:672).

The resulting reclassification corresponded roughly to the levels
of sociocultural development which Elman Service (1962) later came
to designate as band, tribe, chiefdom, and state. Steward himself was
obliged to continue to speak of the culture types in question in
terms of the continental-specific rubrics in the titles of the first four
volumes, Within the Handbook, Steward (1949a:674) refrained from
pressing “the developmental implications” of his classification, pre-
ferring instead, in a work so clearly a product of many different
collaborators, to offer a more conventional historical reconstruction of
diffusionist routes within South America. “Cultural Causality and
Law,” however, was a direct outgrowth of this revised classification
since it answers the question of the origin of the Andean civilization
in nomothetic rather than historical terms.

Steward, for example, enjoyed an especially advantageous ethno-

THE LINK WITH ARCHAEOLOGY

The third great anthropological contribution to the cultural-
materialist approach was perhaps the most important. It was largely
through cultural-ecological reconstructions, first of the Southwest and
then in regard to the hydraulic hypothesis, that a link was established
between cultural materialism and the discoveries of New World
archaeologists. This relationship was beneficial in two directions;
that is, it played a key role both in bringing the results of archaeology
to bear upon nomothetic issues as well as in bringing the benefits of

cultural-materialist strategy to the conduct and interpretation of
archaeological rescarch.

675



===== PAGE 343 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

To appreciate the scope of this contribution and to Endcrstand
the strategic significance of “Cultural Causality ar}d Law,' we must
digress for a moment and consider the condition into which archae-
ology had lapsed during the Boasian period.

ARCHAEOLOGY DURING THE REIGN OF
PARTICULARISM

If the hand of historical particularism rested heavily upon
the study of cultural regularities among ethnologists, its weight was
even more deadening among the archacologists. If each ethnolog}st
had his tribe, each archaeologist had his “site.” If the ethnologist
described his tribe in terms peculiar to and literally borrowed from
the lexicon of the people he was studying, the archaeologist concen-
trated upon the pattern of rim sherd incisions found at his site and
possibly at one or two adjacent localities. If culture was a thing .Of
shreds and patches to Lowie, te the majority of his contemporaries
working in archaeology it was a thing of sherds and scrapers and
little else. )

Speaking of the period from 1910 to 1936, the archaeologist Alfred
Kidder lamented the particularism into which archaeology had
lapsed as a result of what he called “pre-1910 speculations about the
vast antiquity of the American Indians” with its consequent lossvof
“historical perspective” and its “taboo” on questions concerning
origins:

Archaeology accordingly became preponderantly descriptive; ef-

fort was directed toward identification of ancient sites with mod-

ern tribes; research upon American prehistory, striking forward
rather than back, upward rather than downward, was left without
foundations . . . many of us merely dodged the issue of origins
and comforted ourselves by working in the satisfactorily clear
atmosphere of the late periods [KIDDER 1936:146].

THE PROBLEM OF NEW WORLD
ORIGINS

What kind of attitude prevailed concerning the \miversallly
accepted belief (ushered in with the defeat of the Morgan-Bandelier
reconstruction of Aztec “democracy”) that highly elaborate state-
organized societics existed in the New World as well as thg Old?
We have already scen that the Boasians tended to adopt an ambivalent

676

I

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

position on this question. On the one hand almost all of the Boasians
were convinced that the attempts by the diffusionists to explain
the native American civilizations exclusively by migrations and con-
tact processes across either the Atlantic or Pacific were without foun-
dation in fact. On the other hand, the Boasians were willing to admit
that it was by no means unlikely that transoceanic influences had
occurred. The task of separating the diffused from the independently
invented items was regarded as an empirical question, the unraveling
of which might require many years of research for each item in the
list of parallels. There was certainly slight expectation that when the
final balance was reckoned, any of the major tenets of the Boasian
position would require restatement.

In the reiterated assurance that no one doubted that certain
technological events would have to precede others and that civiliza-
tion could result only from an increasingly more stable food supply
and enlarged population, the Boasians thought that they had already
exhausted the entire inventory of generalizations which the further
study of the origin of New World civilizations could make possible.
From their eclectic and particularist viewpoint they were willing to
concede that states and empires had to have a basis in “surplus”
production and “leisure time” made available by intensive agri-
culture. But since cultural evolution was conceived of as a hodge-
podge of independent inventions and capricious diffusions, it was of
no special importance that similar traits such as supreme god-priest
rulers, monumental architecture, standing armies, state corvee, urbani-
zation, astronomical and mathematical specialists, writing and calen-
dars, and hundreds of other traits and institutions should appear in
a number of different places throughout the world.

Kroeber, it will be recalled, explicitly warned against any expectation
that any but the vaguest resemblance of sequence could be expected.
The discussion of the theoretical significance of the New World
civilizations thus remained in a state of suspended animation (sce

P- 336).

NEW TECHNIQUES, NEW DATA

The foundation of this murky mixture of diffusion and inven-
tion, however, rested upon a precarious situation in the archaeological
realm. Here vast uncertainties of chronology and seriation fed the
prevailing fashions of particularism. In this connection, it must be
recalled that techniques of excavation adequate to an understanding

677



===== PAGE 344 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

of nongeologically stratified sites were not perfected and certainly were
not widely used until the mid-twentics. The new techniques and their
consequences have been outlined by the archacologist Gordon Willey:

The method was applicable to refuse deposits which had grown
by occupational accretion. Marked physical stratification of de-
posits was not necessary. The technique consisted of removing
detritus and artifacts from arbitrary depth levels. In studying
artifact change by levels, percentage fluctuations of types were
noted from level to level, so that rising or declining percentage
frequencies of types were correlated with time. Deriving in large
part from the mechanical nature of the operation, “continuous
stratigraphy” of this kind had important theoretical repercussions
on the nature of culture continuity and change. With the con-
tinuous depositional record of a site occupation before his eyes,
the archaeologist could not help being impressed with the evi-
dence for culture dynamics [WILLEY 1953:365].

During the twenties and early thirties, the impact of the numerous
but farflung applications of these new techniques on both simple
and complex societies was obscured by an inability to establish a
coordinated chronology for the entrance of man into the New World
and his subsequent dispersal to the southernmost limits of the
hemisphere. Although, as J. A. Mason (1966) has pointed out,
many archaeologists accepted a Pleistocene date for the migration
from Siberia, providing for some 10,000 years of cvolution, diffusion,
and migration, it was not until 1926, with the discovery of a point
embedded between the ribs of an extinct form of bison at Folsom,
New Mexico, that really convincing evidence could be brought forth
to buttress the logical arguments for the time span in question.

TIME AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
NEW WORLD CIVILIZATIONS

Few archaeologists appreciated the theorctical significance
of the possibility of an independent origin for New World civiliza-
tions. An cxception was Herbert Spinden, who, during the course
of his arguments with the doctrinaire diffusionists, remained alert to
the theoretical import of the independent inventionist position. If
America “was the home of a family of civilizations independent of
the family of civilizations in the Old World,” observed Spinden, this
fact would “. . . have a tremendous bearing on the innate potcn-
tialitics of mankind, and thus, in turn, on the future course of political
and social cvolution” (SPINDEN 1927:60-61). In very general terms,

678

Spinden’s view of evolution in the New World appears to have antici-
pated Steward’s treatment of the subject:

The American record indicates in very complete fashion the nat-
ural history of civilizations, from the family hunting band type
of association up through the farmer’s and fisherman’s villages to
nationalitics, including all the members of a language group and
even to empires based on conquest and tribute [ibid.:62].

Spinden, however, was far from having achieved a clear under-
standing of the scope and pattern of the evolution of New World
culture. This is shown by his curious change of heart about the
antiquity of the Palco-Indian migration. In his 1936 presidential
address to the American Anthropological Association he insisted that
the Amerindian migration from the Old to the New World could
not have occurred before 2500 B.c. Few anthropologists were willing
to compress the entire sequence from the first appearance of
Folsom-type hunters, their dispersal over the hemisphere, and the
appearance of the first civilizations into such a short time period.
Spinden’s theory nonetheless reveals how doubtful the whole chro-
nology of the New World continued to be as late as the mid-thirties.
Clark Wissler, writing in 1933, summed up the situation in the
following words:

While it is true that the great number of living tribal units and
their various cultures suggest a fair lapse of time, no satisfactory
way has been found to express this interval in years or even in the
relative terms of Old World chronology [wisSLER 1933:216].

The picture was especially unclear precisely in those areas such as
the Valley of Mexico and the Central Andean highlands in which
the best known of the New World civilizations had flourished at the
time of conquest. Thus, the archacologist Alfred Kidder observed in
1936 that “Kroeber and Vaillant believe that the oldest remains so far
discovered in Peru and Mexico are not older than the time of Christ”
(1936:146). Indeed, even in 1949, the entire Incipient Agricultural
phase in Steward’s chart was supported by nothing more than a
question mark.

DISCOVERY OF THF ENERGY BASIS OF
THE NEW WORLD CIVILIZATIONS

The turning point in the relationship between archaeological
data and cultural materialism came in the late thirties and ecarly
forties with the excavations in Peru carried out by W. D. Strong,

679



===== PAGE 345 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Steward’s classmate at Berkeley, and Gordon Willey, one of Strong’s
students at Columbia. In the Viru Valley, a complex of domesticated
beans, squash, and cotton was identified at the base of a large
mound with an estimated date of 2500 B.c. A continuous evolutionary
sequence was obtained in the mound and in adjacent sites leading
from Incipient Agriculture through several stages of village life up
to the lowland irrigation states which were ultimately absorbed by
the Inca Empire. Of special interest in this sequence was the phase
identified by Steward as the Formative, when maize was introduced
and irrigation techniques took over the main subsistence load. The
entire sequence is wholly intelligible as a product of endogenous
forces; increasing productivity, increasing population density, multi-
plication of village sites, warfare, intervillage and later intervalley
coordination of productive processes, increasing social stratification
and bureaucratic control of production and distribution, centralization
of power, feedback to greater productivity, and population density.
If contacts with the Old World had occurred during the 2500 to
3000 years which were required for the shift from autonomous village
to state organization, nothing vital to the dynamic of the process
seems to have resulted therefrom.

The only possible exception was maize, which obviously had not
been domesticated on the Peruvian coast. At the time of Steward’s
analysis of the New World irrigation sequence the wild ancestors of the
plant had yet to be identified. A few die-hard diffusionists continued
to insist that it was not a native American cultigen, despite the fact
that it was grown nowhere outside of the New World prior to the
European conquest. In recent years not only have the wild ancestors
of corn been identified in highland Mexico, but radiocarbon 14 dates
have confirmed a period of gradual experimentation with domesti-
cated varieties extending back to 7000 B.c. in the Tehuacdn Valley
of Central Mexico and in southern Tamaulipas (MANGELSDORF, MAC-
NEISH, and GALINAT 1964; MAC NEISH 1964a; 1964b)! Proof that the
Amerindians domesticated corn is tantamount to proof that they were
capable of achieving every other technological innovation associated
with the New World sequence independently of diffusion from the
Old. Given the combination Homo sapiens, a nutritive and hardy
grain, semiarid valleys, ample sources of water, terrain adaptable
to irrigation, it was highly probable that irrigation civilizations would
evolve, not once, but again and again.

Steward’s provisional comparison of the main evolutionary se-
quences in the Old and New World was thus an epochal event be-
cause it marked the beginning of the use of the New World

680

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

archaeological evidence to support a cultural-materialist interpreta-
tion of the origin of civilization. Hitherto, few archaeologists had
accepted cultural materialism as a valid strategy. There were, of
course, a number of exceptions, one of whom, V. Gordon Childe,
must now be considered.

V. GORDON CHILDE AND THE STRATEGY
OF CULTURAL MATERIALISM

A key figure in English archaeology, Childe was a Marxist
who, like Leslie White, staunchly supported the validity of Morgan’s
stages of Savagery, Barbarism, and Civilization. But when it came to
the specific sequences of the Middle Fast and of Europe, Childe
actually seems closer to historical particularism than to historical
materialism. As previously discussed (p. 644), Childe’s working
model of evolution was that of the divergent Darwinian tree of life.
Despite his explicit Marxist leanings, Childe was unsuccessful in
achieving a reconciliation between the abstract overall transition from
savagery to civilization and his superb knowledge of the specific
developmental sequences in the Middle East and Europe. He did of
course recognize certain parallels in the end product, but he saw
these as resulting more from diffusion than from parallel evolution.
“The intervening steps in development did not exhibit even abstract
parallelism” (1951a:161).

So the observed developments in rural economy do not run paral-
lel; they cannot therefore be used to define stages common to all
the sequences examined. . . . In fine, the development of bar-
barians’ rural economies in the regions surveyed exhibits not
parallelism but divergence and convergence [ibid.:162].

CHILDE'S POSITION ON THE
IRRIGATION QUESTION

Childe was not unfamiliar with the importance of irrigation
in Mesopotamia and Egypt both from the perspective of productivity
and organizational exigencies and controls:

Conditions of life in a river valley or other oasis place in the
hands of society an exceptional power for coercing its members;
the community can refuse a recalcitrant access to water and can
close the channels that irrigate his ficlds. Rain falleth upon the

681



===== PAGE 346 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

just and the unjust alike, but irrigating waters reach the fields by
channels that the community has constructed. And what society
has provided, society can also withdraw from the unjust and con-
fine to the just alonc. The social solidarity needed by irrigators
can thus be imposed owing to the very circumstances that de-
mand it. And young men cannot escapc the restraint of their
elders by founding fresh villages when all beyond the oasis is
waterless desert. So when the social will comes to be expressed
through a chief or a king, he is invested not merely with moral
authority, but with coercive force too; he can apply sanctions
against the disobedient [cHILDE 1946:90].

Childe’s views on irrigation were transmitted by Pedro Armillas
(1948) to the Conference on Peruvian Archaeology sponsored by
the Viking Fund. It was at the same conference that Steward
read a paper entitled “A Functional-Developmental Classification of
American High Cultures” (1948), which provided an outline of the
sequence that was incorporated, one year later, in “Cultural Causality
and Law.” However, Steward at this point made no mention of the
hydraulic hypothesis. Armillas, on the other hand, citing Childe,
gave extensive attention to the possible role of irrigation in the
Formative and Regional Florescent, but he rather tended to postpone
and limit its influence to the later Classic and post-Classic periods.
That he was far from postulating a hydraulic base for the Formative
as Steward was to do after adapting Wittfogel's theories to the Meso-
American sequence may be seen from the following passage:

In considering the role which irrigation works may have played
in the social development of Meso-America it is necessary to note
that water for irrigation was obtained from many local sources
—various rivers and arroyos, springs and also wells—making un-
necessary the constitution of large political entities. In fact, irri-
gation in Meso-America may have favored cantonalism, making
each valley selfsufficient in nearly all of its basic economic prod-
ucts [ARMILLAS 1948:107].

We shall turn to the question of irrigation in Mcso-America in just a
moment.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF
EARTH

THE SECOND

Childe’s most scrious shortcoming was his lack of interest in
the civilizational sequences outside of the Middle East and Europe.
Having concluded correctly at an early point in his career that there

682

Y’

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

was little rescmblance between the specific steps involved in the
development of civilization in Europe, on the one hand, and in

Mesopotamia and Igypt on the other, he was unprepared to look
for parallels in Mexico or Peru.

Childc’s views are extremely instructive with respect to our under-
standing of Steward’s relationship to Marxism and historical ma-
terialism. Obscrve the irony: Both Steward and Wittfogel appear
embarrassed by the relationship between Marxism and cultural ma-
terialism. Childe, on the other hand, openly pleads for the importance
of a cultural-materialist strategy. Yet it is Childe who argues that
environmental differences are too great in the earliest centers of
civilization to expect parallel sequences, while it is Steward and
Wittfogel—the cultural ecologists and doctrinaire multilinear evolu-
tionists—who propose that hydraulic types, wherever they occur, tend
to evolve through a similar series of stages.

Thus it was in Steward’s trial formulation that for the first time
archaeological evidence from the New World was harnessed to the
task of providing a cultural-materialist interpretation of cultural
evolution on a global scale. At last, it could be seen through ar-
chaeological data that American Indian populations, starting with
palcolithic tool kits and restricted to a life of hunting and gathering,
had slowly advanced through various degrees of complexity in a
direction fundamentally similar to that taken by racially and culturally
separate populations in the Old World. There was no longer any
possibility that either areca had depended on the other for any of
the vital steps in the sequence. The New World in other words had
finally emerged as the equivalent of a second earth; and on that
second earth, due to the fact that in the psychocultural realm, as in
all others, similar causes under similar conditions lead to similar
results, hominid cultures tended to evolve along essentially similar

paths when they were confronted with similar techno-cnvironmental
situations.

THE NEW ARCHAEOLOGY

We have alrcady seen that the analysis of the devclopment of the
sibs in the Southwest and California integrated a knowledge of both
ethnographic and archaeological facts. We also should note in this
connection that Steward himself had been trained in seriational
stratigraphy by Kroeber and that he had worked with William Duncan
Strong in a project at The Dalles on the Columbia River in 1926
(sTRONG, sciENCK, and STEWARD 1930). Firsthand familiarity with the

683

|
i


===== PAGE 347 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

techniques of modern archaeological research gave Steward both the
authority and the motivation for criticizing the failure of his colleagues
to articulate their findings with significant nomothetic issues:

When complexes have been identified and history in the nar-
row sensc reconstructed, what task remains for archacology? Some-
day world culture history will be known as far as archacological
materials and human intelligence permit. Every possible element
of culture will be placed in time and space. . . . When tax-
onomy and history are thus complete, shall we cease our labors
and hope that the future Darwin of anthropology will interpret
the great historical scheme that will have been erected? There
has been a marked tendency to avoid these questions on the as-
sumption that they are unimportant at present. It is held that the
urgent need of the moment is to record data which are rapidly

vanishing. . . . We believe that it is unfortunate that attempts
to state broad objectives which are basic to all cultural anthro-
pology . . . should be relegated to a future time of greater

leisure and fullness of data.

One wonders whether the frequent limitations of interest to
measurements and tabulations of data and refinement of tech-
nique is an unwillingness to grapple with the problem of objec-
tives. And it is by no means improbable that in spite of our
refined techniques of excavation, ceramic studies, and classifica-
tion, we are actually overlooking important data, even when do-
ing field work.

Often ten pages are devoted to the minutiae of pottery types

. while one page or less describes subsistence and the rela-
tionship of the culture to the geographical environment. . . .
Even less space is usually accorded data concerning social groups
and population distribution and concentration which are indi-
cated by such clements as house remains and village locations

[sTEWARD and SELTZER 1938:5-7].

To a marked degree, Steward’s image of what archaeology should
have been doing in the 1930’s has become true in the fifties and sixties.
The dominant orientation in contemporary American anthropological
archaeology now conforms to Steward’s understanding of cultural
ecology. Whether it be shell middens on Long Island, ancient burial
grounds in Peru, or pyramids in Mexico, the questions now being
asked and the theories being framed to answer them reflect a growing
convergence toward the strategy of cultural materialism.

Mere dating and classification have ceased to guarantee respectability
in archaeological circles. The demands of the moment are to be met
by data on population size, density, minima and maxima in short-

684

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

and long-time runs; seasonal and climatic cycles; response of settle-
ment pattern; rate of population increase; food production tech-
niques; total exploited habitat; short- and long-run changes in natural
biota; techno-environmental effects; size of food producing and non-
food producing groups; incidence of warfare; contribution of disease
vectors to mortality; nature of social organization defined in terms
of house groups, village or town units; and intercommunity organi-
zation (BINFORD 1962; 1967; STEWARD 1967). These interests link
archaeology to ethnology in a powerful new symbiosis, providing the
two disciplines with a common set of assumptions emphasizing ctic
events and a joint stratcgy which has already begun to yield a better
understanding of evolutionary processes.

TESTING OF THE HYDRAULIC
HYPOTHESIS

One of the most interesting manifestations of the new strat-
egy of archacological rescarch is the attempt to test the hydraulic
hypothesis. Research has centered on the role of irrigation in the
evolution of Classic period Meso-American urban civilizations. The
case of the Valley of Teotihuacan, a short distance to the north of the
Valley of Mexico, is a good example of recent efforts along these lines.
It was in this valley that one of the largest man-made structures in
the world, the great Pyramid of the Sun, was erccted a thousand years
before Columbus’ voyage. In 1948, when Steward formulated his de-
velopmental typology, very little was known about the circumstances
which had led to the construction of this great pyramid, or of any of
the other monuments which were part of the total Teotihuacin
complex. Very little was known, either, about the role of irrigation in
the formation of Meso-American civilizations. Although there was no
doubt that the Aztecs had carried out extensive hydraulic projects in
connection with chinampa cultivation (misnomered “floating gar-
fiCns”) and the drainage of Lake Texcoco, the date at which these
installations were introduced and their causal significance remained
uncertain.

I_n the case of Teotihuacin, nothing at all was known about the
agricultural practices which had provided the energy for building the
great monuments. Excavations carried out under the direction of
René Millon (1967) of the University of Rochester have now es-
tablished the fact that Teotihuacdn was the site of one of the New
World’s largest aboriginal cities. Its estimated population of 70,000 to
100,000 people could only have been surpassed, if at all, by Tenochtitlan,

685

|
%
|


===== PAGE 348 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

capital of the Aztecs. Like Tenochtitlin, Teotihuacdn was the center
of an empire that covered a large part of Central Mexico. The
question of whether it was based on hydraulic modes of production
appears now to have been settled. Studies carried out by William
Sanders of Pennsylvania State University show that the change from
rainfall farming to irrigation was correlated with rapid population
growth, nucleation, monument construction, intense social stratifica-
tion, and expansionist warfare. “The water for the permanent irriga-
tion systems derives from 8o springs, all located within a single very
small area (20 hectares). This was the most significant single ecologi-
cal resource” (SANDERS 1965:201). Sanders and Price (1968) have
gone on to interpret the difference between Maya civilizations and
the Highland Mexican hydraulic empires. The former were based
not on irrigation agriculture but on slash-and-burn (swidden) farm-
ing. These were true civilizations, but they lacked the nucleated set-
tlements of urban civilization. The hierarchical divisions within the
lowland Maya states appear to have been much less severe than those
in Teotihuacan.

MEXICO AND MESOPOTAMIA

It would be unreasonable to suppose that substantial criti-
cisms of the details of Steward’s irrigation sequence would not have
been forthcoming from archaeologists and historians with specialized
knowledge of the arcas in question. Nor should the impression be
conveyed that Wittfogel's hydraulic hypothesis has everywhere re-
ceived support from our rapidly expanding knowledge of prehistory.
It is not possible to review all the negative and positive bits of
information and favorable and unfavorable interpretations which are
accumulating around this vital question. I shall mention only the
most recent attempt by Robert Adams (1966) to compare the
evolution of Meso-American and Mesopotamian urban civilizations.

Although Adams acknowledges the existence of irrigation agricul-
ture in Early Dynastic times in Mesopotamia, he does not believe
that its scale was large enough to account for the concentration of
political power which is characteristic of the later or Classic phases.
He is also skeptical of the organizational role of irrigation in Meso-
America although his argument is based more on the Aztec than on
the Teotihuacén situation. A major difficulty appears to be the lack
of coordinating measures of the irrigation works and size of polity in
the two regions through successive periods of growth and expan-
sion. Adams’ position is weakened when we consider that there is, in
the long run, a step-by-step increase in the size of the Mesopotamian

686

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

waterworks and the size and power of the ruling bureaucracy.
Thus, even if Adams is correct in maintaining that the first consoli-
dation of political power was achieved independently of the organiza-
tional requisites of the hydraulic system, the achievement of Witt-
fogel’s Oricntal despotic type remains closely associated with maxi-
mum hydraulic dependency.

But the most interesting aspect of Adams’ critique lies elsewhere.
Despite his rejection of the hydraulic theory, his entire perspective
on the Mesopotamian data bears the imprint of the nomothetic
revival, and everywhere implicitly acknowledges the inspiration of
the search for law and causality. Indeed, in the final reckoning, Adams
reaches conclusions that vindicate Steward’s method to a remarkable
extent if we reflect how fragmentary were the data upon which Steward
was obliged to base his “trial formulation”:

What seems overwhelmingly most important about these dif-
ferences is how small they bulk even in aggregate, when consid-
ered against the mass of similarities in form and process. In short,
the parallels in the Mesopotamian and Mexican “carcers to
statehood,” in the forms that institutions ultimately assumed as
well as in the processes leading to them, suggest that both in-
stances are most significantly characterized by a common core of
regularly occurring features. We discover anew that social behavior
conforms not merely to laws but to a limited number of such laws,
which perhaps has always been taken for granted in the case of
cultural subsystems (e.g., kinship) and among “primitives” (e.g.,
hunting bands). Not merely as an abstract article of faith but as
a valid starting point for detailed, empirical analysis, it applies
equally well to some of the most complex and creative of human
societies [apAMS 1966:174-75].

We may note that Adams, who deals with time scales on the order of
millennia, appears to have misunderstood recent anthropological his-
tory in suggesting that elements of the nomothetic revival were always
“taken for granted.” It has been a long hard struggle all the way. In
concluding our review of this centuries-old struggle to achieve a science
of history, it cannot be overemphasized that the vindication of the
strategy of cultural materialism does not depend on the verification
of the hydraulic hypothesis or of any other particular techno-environ-
mental, techno-economic theory. Rather, it lies in the capacity of the
approach to generate major explanatory hypotheses which can be sub-
jected to the tests of ethnographic and archacological research, modi-
fied if necessary, and made part of a corpus of theory equally capable’
of explaining the most generalized features of universal history and
the most exotic specialties of particular cultures.

687



===== PAGE 349 =====

Bibliography

Bibliography

s
53

Original dates of publication are given only when they are important
to the historical discussion in text.

ABERLE, D. o 4
1961a “Matrilineal Descent in Cross-cultural Perspective.” D. Schgcx er
and K. Gough, eds., Matrilineal Kinship. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 655-727. )
1961b “Culture and Socialization.” F. Hsu, ed., P;ychologzcal Anthro-
pology: Approaches to Culture and Personality. Homewood, IIl.:
Dorsey Press, 381-99.
ACHELIS, T. ) ] )
1889 Die Entwicklung der modernen Ethnologie. Berlin: E. S. Mittler
und Sohn.
ACKERKNECHT, E. H. .
1954 “On the Comparative Method in Anthropology.” R. F. Spencef,
ed., Method and Perspective in Anthropology. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 117-25.
ACKERMAN, C. . ) !
1964 “Structure and Statistics: The Purum Case.” American Anthro
pologist, 66:53-65.

688

1965 “Structure and Process: The Purum Case. American Anthropolo-
gist, 67:83-91.
ADAMS, R. MC C.

1966 The Evolution of Urban Society. Chicago: Aldine.
ADELUNG, J. C.

1782 Versuch einer Geschichte der Cultur des menschlichen Ge-
schlechts. Leipzig: C. G. Hertel.
ACASSI, J.
1960 “Methodological Individualism.” British Journal of Sociology,
11:244-70.
ALIOTTA, A.
1914 The Idedlistic Reaction against Science. Agnes McCaskill, trans.
London: Macmillan and Co.
ANKERMANN, B.
1905 “Kulturkreise und Kulturschichten in Ozeanien und Afrika.” Zeit-
schrift fiir Ethnologie, 37:54-84.
ARBUTHNOT, J.
1751 (orig. 1733) An Essay Concerning the FEffects of the Air on
Human Bodies. London: J. and R. Tonson, and S. Drap.
ARGYLE, M.

1957 The Scientific Study of Social Behavior. London: Methuen.
ARMILLAS, P.
1948 “A Sequence of Cultural Development in Meso-America.”” W. J.
Bennett, ed., A Reappraisal of Peruvian Archaeology. Memoirs of
the Society for American Archaeology, 4:105-11.
BACHMAN, J.
1850 The Doctrine of the Unity of the Human Race Examined on the
Principles of Science. Charleston: C. Canning.
BACHOFEN, J. J.
1861 Das Mutterrecht. Basel: Benno Schwabe.

1966 (orig. 1880) “Antiquarische Briefe.” J. Dormam, W. Strasser, and
H. Lommel, eds., Johann Jacob Bachofen's gesammelte Werke,
VIIL. Basel: Schwabe and Co.

BACK, K.

1960 “The Well-informed Informant.” R. Adams and J. J. Priss, eds.,
Human Organization Research. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press,
179-88.

BAGBY, P.

1953 “Culture and the Causes of Culture.” American Anthropologist,

55:535-54-
BAGEHOT, W.
1872 Physics and Politics, or Thoughts on the Application of the Prin-

ciple of Natural Selection and Inheritance to Political Society.
New York: D. Applcton.

689

|
|
!
i
E
?

IO e - eoeee s oo ee e e st £ e e SE—* A ——ce et


===== PAGE 350 =====

Bibliography

BANCROFT, H. H. )

1883 The Early American Chronicles. San Francisco: A. L. Bancroft.

BANDELIER, A.

1879 On the Social Organization and Mode of Government of the
Ancient Mexicans. Reports of the Peabody Museum, 12:;7z—699.

1885 The Romantic School in American Archaeology. New York: Trow
and Co.

BARKER, R. and L. BARKER ) .

1961 “Behavior Units for the Comparative Study of Culture.” B. Kap-
lan, ed., Studying Persondlity Cross-Culturdlly. Evanston: Row,
Peterson, 456-76.

BARKER, R. C. - .

1963 “The Stream of Behavior as an Empirical Problem.” R. G. Barker,
ed., The Stream of Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts,
1-21. . .

1965 “Explorations in Ecological Psychology.” American Psychologist,
20!1-14.

BARNES, H. E.

1948 Historical Sociology: Its Origins and Development. New York:
Philosophical Library. . .

1960 “Foreword.” G. Dole and R. Carneiro, eds., Essayzs in the Science of
Culture. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, xi-xlvi.

1965 An Intellectual and Cultural History of the Western World.
New York: Dover.

BARNES, J. A. o

1954 Politics in a Changing Society. Cape Town: Oxford University
Press. . .

1960 “Anthropology in Britain before and after Darwin.” Mankind,

:369-85. . .

1961 “I%hysical and Social Kinship.” Philosophy of Science, 28:196-98.

1963 “Introduction.” B. Malinowski, The Family among the Australian
Aborigines. New York: Schocken, xi-xxx.

BARNOUW, V. . o

1949 “Ruth Benedict: Apollonian and Dionysian.” University of To-
ronto Quarterly, 3:241-53. . )

1957 “The Amiable Style of Patterns of Culture.” American Anthro-
pologist, 59:532-36.

1963 Culture and Personality. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press.

BARRY, H. ) ! ) .

1957 “Relationships between Child Training and the Pictorial Arts.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 54:380-83.

BARRY, H., M. K. BACON, and I. L. CHILD ) o

1957 “A Cross-Cultural Survey of Some Sex Differences in Socialization.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 55:327-32.

690

Bibliography

1959 “Relation of Child Training to Subsistence Fconomy.” American
Anthropologist, 61:51-63.
BARTLET, F.C. et al. (eds.)

1939 The Study of Society. New York: Macmillan.
BARZUN, J.

1937 Race: A Study in Modern Superstition. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
BASTIAN, A.

1860 Der Mensch in der Geschichte. Leipzig: O. Wigand.
1895 Ethnische Flementargedanken in der Lehre vom Menschen. Ber-
lin: Weidmann’sche Buchhandlung.
BATESON, G.
1949 “Bali: The Value System of a Steady State.” M. Fortes, ed., Social
Structure: Essays Presented to A. R. Radcliffe-Brown. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

1958 (orig. 1936) Naven. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
BATESON, G. and M. MEAD
1942 Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis. Special Publications
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 2. New York: New York
Academy of Sciences.
BAUMHOFF, M.

1963 “Ecological Determinant of Aboriginal California Population.”
University of California Publications in American Archaeology
and Ethnology, 49:155-236.
BEALS, R.
1960 “Current Trends in the Development of American Anthropology.”
A. Wallace, ed., Selected Papers of the Fifth International Con-
gress of Anthropological and Ethnological Science, 11-18.
BEATTIE, J. H. M.
1955 “Contemporary Trends in British Social Anthropology.” Sociologus,
531'1 .
1964a Othe:f Cultures: Aims, Methods and Achievements in Social An-
thropology. New York: Free Press.
1964b “Kinship and Social Anthropology.” Man, 64:101-3.
1965 “Reply to Schneider.” Man, 108:123.
BECKER, H. and H. BARNES

1961 Social Thought from Lore to Science. New York: Dover.
BENDER, D.

1965 “The Development of French Anthropology.” Journal of the History
of the Behaviorial Sciences, 1:1 39-51.
BENDYSHE, T.

1865 “The History of Anthropology.” Memoirs Kead before the

Anthropological Society of London, 1 :335-60.
BENEDICT, R.

1922 “The Vision in Plains Culture.” American Anthropologist, 24:1-25.

691



===== PAGE 351 =====

Bibliography

1923 The Concept of the Guardian Spirit in North America. Memoirs
of the American Anthropological Association, 29. . .
1928 “Psychological Types in the Cultures of the Southwest. P.roce'e -
? ings of the Twenty-Third International Congress of Americanists,
95
2-81. . . !
1932 “é;onﬁgumtions of Culture in North America.” American Anthro
ologist, 34:1-27. -
1934 Ieatterns of Culture. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
1943 “Obituary of F'ranz Boas.” Science, 97:60«_6.2.
1945 Race: Science and Politics. New York: Viking Press. .
1946 The Chrysanthemum and the Sword. Bostoq: Houghton Mlﬂl_m.
1948 “Anthropology and the Humanists.” American Anthropologist,
0:585-93. ) )
1959 ?orfg. 51(;;4) Patterns of Culture. New York: New American Li-
brary, Mentor Books.

BENNETT, W. J. ) )
1943 “i{sccllt Developments in the Functional Interpretations of Archae-

ological Data.” American Antiquity, 9:208-19.

ENNETT, W. J. and M. NAGAL L
? 1953 “The Japanese Critique of the Methodology of Bcnc_dlct s Chrysan-
themum and the Sword.” American Anthropologist, 55:404-11.

BERGER, P. . i -
1963 " Invitation to Sociology: A Humanistic Perspective. Garden City,

N. Y.: Doubleday.

BERGMANN, C. ) . ‘ ‘
1848 “Uber die Verhiltnisse der Wirmedkonomie der Thiere zu ihrer

Grosse.” Gaottingen Studien, No. 8.

BERNARD, J. o ) .
1945 “Observation and ~ Gencralization  in Cultural Anthropology.

American Journal of Sociology, 50:284-91.

BERNDT, R. M. . ) ,
1952 “A Cargo Movement in the Eastern Central Highlands of New

Guinea.” Oceania, 23:40-05; 137-58; 202-34.
BERREMAN, G. » . .
1966 “Anemic and Emetic Analysis in Social Anthropology.” American
Anthropologist, 68:346-54.

BIDNEY, D. ) . ) )
1044 y“C()ncept of Culture and Some Cultural Fallacies.” American An

thropologist, 46:30-44. ) y
J(H()“'I']w’J Concept of Cultural Crisis.” American Anthropologist,
8:534-51. . ) !
1963 “%hc> )\i;\n'ctics of Human TFreedom.” D. Bidney, ed., The Con:
’ cept of Freedom in Anthropology. The Hague: Mouton, 11-34.

BIGO, P. ) o e,
1953 Marxisme et Humanisme. Paris: Presses Universitaires de I'raj

692

*’

Bibliography

BINFORD, L. R.

1962 “Archacology as Anthropology.” American Antiquity, 28:217-235.
1967 “Comment on K. C. Chang, ‘Major Aspects of the Interrelation-
ship of Archaeology and Ethnology.” ” Current Anthropology,
8:234-35.
BIRDWHISTELL, R.
1952 Introduction to Kinesics. Louisville: University of Louisville Press.
BIRNBAUM, N.
1953 “Conflicting Interpretations of the Rise of Capitalism: Marx and
Weber.” British Journal of Sociology, 4:125-41.
BLACK, M.
1949 Language and Philosophy: Studies in Method. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.
BLALOCK, H.

1961 Causal Inferences in Non-Ixperimental Research. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
BLUMENBACH, J. F.

1865 (orig. 1775) The Anthropological Treatises of Johann Friedrich
Blumenbach. Thomas Bendyshe, trans. and ed. London: Long-
man, Green, Longman, Roberts and Green.

BOAS, F.

1884 “A Journcy in Cumberland Sound and on the West Shore of
Davis Strait in 1883 and 1884.” Journal of the American Geo-
graphical Society, 16:242-72.

1885 “Baffin-Land: Geographische Frgebnisse einer in den Jahren 1883
und 1884 ausgefiihrten Forschungsreise.” Erginzungsheft No. 8o
zu Petermanns Mitteilungen, Gotha: Justus Perthes.

1887a “The Study of Geography.” Race, Language and Culture. New
York: Macmillan, 639-47.

1887b “Museums  of Ethnology and Their Classification.” Science,
9:587-89.

1888 The Central Eskimo. Report of the Burcau of Ethnology 1884-

1885. Washington: Smithsonian Institution, 399-669.
1891a “The Indians of British Columbia.” Sixth Report of the Com-
mittee on the North-Western Tribes of Canada. Report of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science 1890, 801-93.
1891b “The Dissemination of Tales among the Natives of North Amer-
ica.” Race, Language and Culture. New York: Macmillan, 437-45.
1894 “Human Faculty as Determined by Race.” Proceedings of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 43:301-27.
1896a “The Growth of Indian Mythologies.” Race, Language and Cul-
ture. New York: Macmilian, 425-36.
1896b “The Limitations of the Comparative Method of Anthropology.”
Race, Language and Culture. New York: Macmillan, 271-304.
1897 The Social Organization and the Secret Socicties of the Kwakiutl

693



