===== PAGE 59 =====

Spencerism
P 5

S
5053

T(: propose that Herbert Spencer’s and Charles Darwin’s theories were
an inevitable product of a certain phase of Western history is not to
deny the contribution of cumulative scientific advances to the perfec-
tion of biological and sociocultural evolutionism. The very same forces
that brought the themes of progress, race, and struggle to the forefront
of Spencer’s and Darwin’s attention were also responsible for strength-
ening the authority and prestige of science. Laissez-faire individualism
was related by positive feedback to the development of science. Eco-
nomic and political liberalism, themselves a product of technological
and scientific advance, exerted an immensely stimulating effect on all
forms of scientific inquiry. The technological pay-off resulting from
this inquiry was essential to the maintenance of capitalism. Although
theological dogmas continued to be useful in the control and discipline
of the masses, a veritable cornucopia of technological miracles forced
the theological establishment into an essentially rear-guard action.
Finally, in 1859, Darwin’s materialist explanation of the origin of
species broke the authority of the theologians in the domain of the
life sciences.

108

Dol

5. Spencerism

Why did Charles Darwin succeed where Jean Baptiste Lamarck
had failed? It seems unlikely that it was merely the more advanced
phase of capitalism in which Darwin was privileged to operate. We
must not discount the fact that in the interval between Lamarck and
Darwin a great strengthening of the secular world view had been
quietly going on under the stimulus of continuing scientific advance.
Driven partly underground by the political counterrevolution, it
awaited the first possible opportunity to burst forth and resume the
task that Galileo had begun. J. C. Nott and G. R. Gliddon’s passion for
“parson skinning” is an indication of how far this trend had been able
to progress even under the most adverse conditions. In addition to the
erosion of theological authority as a general consequence of scientific
advance, the way had been prepared for Darwin by a confrontation
between theology and science on an issue of the greatest importance
for the theory of bio-evolution. This issue was the age of the earth. It
was here that Darwin’s main advantage over Lamarck resided. For
Lamarck had to contend with the theologians not only on the ques-
tion of organic evolution, but on the question of geological evolution as
well. Let us pause for a moment, therefore, to consider the new
understanding of the earth’s history.

GEOLOGY SHOWS THE WAY

During most of the cighteenth century, the nascent discipline
of geology languished under the tutelage of scriptural authority. Except
for modifications introduced by the flood, the earth was regarded as
having preserved the form imparted to it at the beginning of the world.
A considerable amount of research effort was dedicated to proving that
Genesis and the earth’s strata both told the same story. Alpine deposits
bearing the remains of marine life were hailed as confirmation of the
former presence of water deep enough to submerge the highest peaks.
Fossils of extinct animals simply proved that not all of the antediluvian
creatures had managed to reach the safety of the ark.

When the history of the earth began to be considered geologi-
cally, it was simply assumed that a universal deluge must have
wrought vast changes and that it had been a primary agent in
forming the present surface of the globe. Its occurrence was
evidence that the Lord was a governor as well as a creator [GILLISPIE

1951:42].

Among geologists, James Hutton’s Theory of the Earth (1788), the
foundation of the so-called Vulcanist school, marked the first sus-

109


===== PAGE 60 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tained refutation of this view. Hutton’s theories challenged the ex-
planation of the earth’s strata given by the Neptunist school. The lat-
ter was represented in Great Britain by Robert Jameson, who was in
turn a student of the founder of Neptunism, Abraham Gottlob Wer-
ner, professor of mineralogy at Freiburg in Saxony. Inspired by the Bib-
lical account, Werner and Jameson argued that all the earth’s rocks had
precipitated out of a briny solution in several well-defined stages, cor-
responding to the stages of creation, and had remained in place ever
since in the form of the geological strata. Hutton on the other hand
avoided the issue of creation altogether and attempted to interpret
geomorphological features in terms of the cumulative effect of na-
tural physical and chemical processes such as heat, pressure, and var-
ious forms of physical and chemical weathering. The implications of
Hutton’s interpretation for the age of the earth were heretical since
relatively minute forces working over long periods of time now were
responsible for the effects hitherto attributed to instantaneous cata-
clysms.

EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY PRECEDENTS

It is interesting to note that Hutton’s ideas had been pre-
ceded in the eighteenth century by a number of more outspoken, but
geologically less well-informed, proposals. Georges Buffon, stimulated
by Gottfried Leibniz, had even carried out a series of experiments
with heated iron balls in an attempt to date the earth. Assuming that
the earth had originally been in a molten condition, Buffon sought
to estimate the time that would have had to elapse for it to have
cooled to its present temperature. In Epochs of Nature (1778) Buffon
concluded that a minimum of 75,000 years had passed, but he delib-
erately restrained himself from longer estimates in deference to the
scriptural account. Immanuel Kant was the proponent of a more auda-
cious view. In the Universal Natural History and Theory of the
Heavens he postulated an infinite universe where “millions and whole
myriads of millions of centuries will flow on during which always new
worlds and systems of worlds will be formed” (xANT, quoted in
HABER 1959:153). There were many other stirrings of a similar sort,
especially among philosophes like D’Holbach and Diderot. Indeed,
Haber presents the Wernerian Neptunists as the counterattack against
the anti-Mosaic trends of the mid-eighteenth century. But by the
time Lamarck wrote his Hydrogeology (1802) there was no re-
maining effective challenge to the short chronology. Lamarck’s pro-
posal that the earth had existed for several billion years was greeted

110

ool

5. Spencerism

with even more contempt than his idea that men were descended
from fish. He himself regarded the resistance to the chronology of
billions of years as the main obstacle to the acceptance of his idea on
organic evolution. He despaired of convincing his contemporaries of
the errors in their Wernerian empiricism and their slavish adherence to
the Mosaic account:

These considerations, I know, having never been presented else-
where than in my Hydrogeology, and not having obtained the
serious examination that I believe they deserve, can only appear
extraordinary even to the most enlightened persons.

Indeed, man, who judges the greatness of duration only relative
to himself and not to nature, will undoubtedly never actually find
the slow mutations which I have just presented and consequently
he will believe it necessary to reject without examination my
opinion on these great subjects [LAMARCK, quoted in HABER 1959:

179].

The defenders of the Biblical chronology held the upper hand
through the first two decades of the nineteenth century. Under
Georges Cuvier (1812) and William Buckland (1823), as evidence of
not one “flood” but of dozens accumulated, the doctrine of “catastro-
phism”—a series of miraculous destructions and creations—was
brought in to salvage the Biblical story. It was not until 1820 that
the Vulcanists’ requirements for an expanded chronology became a
respectable position among geologists. Even then, however, geology
continued to maintain an extraordinarily conservative outiook with
tespect to the Mosaic version of the origin of man:

The main positions of providential natural history were still
secure. . . . No one denied the importance of the flood, nor its
intimate connections with the history of the human species. No
one had impugned the recentness of the creation of man. Mu-
tability of other species was seldom if ever mentioned, and the
Creator had still to be immediately responsible for the appear-
ance of new forms of life. . . . Nearly everyone implicitly ac-
cepted . . . the distinction between the present order of causes
and some former, more powerful ones [CILLISPIE 1951:96].

THE CONTRIBUTION OF CHARLES
LYELL

The turning point, marked by the publication of Charles
Lyell's Principles of Geology, did not occur until 1830. Building on
Hutton’s work, Lyell insisted that the processes observable in the

111


===== PAGE 61 =====

Rl

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

present suffice to account for all geomorphological phenomena. It was
Lyell's uncompromising “uniformitarianism” and the consequent
lengthening out of time that converted Darwin from a middle-of-the-
road respecter of scriptural authority to a resolutely independent
scientist.

Lyell’s book went with Darwin on the voyage of the Beagle. It gave
Darwin that liberty with time that had been denied Lamarck. As
Haber (1959:268) writes, “There can be little doubt that it was
through Lyell’s Principles that Darwin’s mind was emancipated from
the shackles of Biblical chronology. . . .” Darwin himself confided:

I always feel as if my books came half out of Lyell’s brain, and
that I never acknowledged this sufficiently; nor do I know how I
can without saying so in so many words—for I have always
thought that the great merit of the Principles was that it altered
the whole tone of one’s mind [ibid.].

Despite Lyell’s advanced ideas about geology, he remained highly
conservative in the matter of biological evolution. Indeed, Lyell de-
voted a whole chapter of the Principles of Geology to a critical review
of Lamarck’s theory of bio-evolution. This chapter, as we shall see,
was to have a profound effect on Herbert Spencer, but Lyell, himself,
had no use for Lamarck’s ideas. In discussing the origin of bio-
forms, Lyell adopted the very position that his uniformitarianism
had destroyed in geology. He accounted for the observed distribution
of bioforms in time and space by postulating a series of continuous
creations by which new species were introduced to replace those
that were continually becoming extinct. According to Lyell, each new
species was pre-adapted by the Creator to endure within a particular
range of environmental conditions associated with a particular time
and region of the world. When environmental change destroyed these
conditions, the species underwent extinction.

Thus despite his dependence on special creationism, Lyell’s bio-
logical theories reflect the main trends leading up to Spencer and
Darwin in more than just the new chronology. Among the changes
that produce extinction Lyell stressed the modifications in the biotic
community as having primary importance. That is, the introduction
of new species was itself the prime cause of the extinction of old
ones. Old and new species engaged in a struggle for survival. Indeed,
it was Lyell's firm belief in the ubiquity of the struggle for survival
that prevented him from accepting Lamarck’s evolutionism. For he
could not understand how a less fit species could survive in the pres-

112

ence of a better fit species long enough to accumulate the modifica-
tions that would have guaranteed its survival.

Thus Lyell, like Spencer and Darwin, was groping toward a synthe-
sis of the themes of struggle and progress. And like both Spencer and
Darwin, Lyell’s model of struggle was derived mainly from the human
condition. Here is a uniformitarianism (sociocultural) of which Lyell
never dreamed: his preferred example of how the struggle for existence
leads to extinction of less-favored types is none other than the conflict
between Europeans and savages!

It is idle to dispute about the abstract possibility of the con-
version of one species into another, where there are known causes
so much more active in their nature, which must always intervene
and prevent the actual accomplishment of such conversions. A
faint image of the certain doom of a species less fitted to struggle
with some new condition in a region which it previously inhab-
ited, and where it has to contend with a more vigorous species, is
presented by the extirpation of savage tribes of men by the ad-
vancing colony of some civilized nation. In this case the contest is
merely between two different races. . . . Yet few future events
are more certain than the speedy extermination of the Indians of
North America and the savages of New Holland in the course of a
few centuries, when these tribes will be remembered only in
poetry and tradition [LYELL 1850:678].

LYELL'S INFLUENCE ON SPENCER

One of the most extraordinary indications of the inevitability
of Darwin’s and Spencer’s evolutionary synthesis is the fact that Lyell's
book loomed as large in Spencer’s formative years as in Darwin’s. As
Spencer wrote in his autobiography (1926:359), it was the reading of
Lyell which convinced him that species evolved and which set him
on the road toward the discovery that evolution was the great law
of nature. Although he had previously given some thought to the
idea that “the human racc had been developed from some lower
race,” reading Lyell’s criticism of Lamarck convinced him that La-
marck was right. Spencer’s belief in bio-evolution “never afterwards
‘(!{;erid, much as I was, in after years, ridiculed for entertaining it”

d. ).

Thus, Lyell's rejection of Lamarck made confirmed evolutionists
out ?f both Darwin and Spencer! Pondering the question of “why
Lyell's arguments produced the opposite effect to that intended,”
Spencer mentions his aversion to “supernaturalism, in whatever

113


===== PAGE 62 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

form” (ibid.). One must also suppose that Lyell’s success in explaining
the history of the earth without calling upon miracles brought
home to both Darwin and Spencer the imminence of a similar tri-
umph in biology.

But there was something else in Lyell’s rejection of Lamarck, to
which Spencer does not allude, but which returns our attention at once
to the major ideological trends leading toward the biocultural evolu-
\tionary synthesis of progress and struggle. In rejecting Lamarck, Lyell
was rejecting the ultimate expression of the eighteenth century’s faith
in the perfectibility of mankind. Nature, according to Lamarck, was
constrained by immutable law to bring forth ever more perfect crea-
tures. As Lyell put it, Lamarck’s

. speculations know no definite bounds; he gives the rein to
conjecture, and fancies that the outward form, internal structure,
instinctive faculties, nay, that reason itself, may have been gradu-
ally developed from some of the simplest states of existence,—
that all animals, that man himself, and the irrational beings, may
have had one common origin; that all may be parts of one con-
tinuous and progressive scheme of development from the most
imperfect to the more complex; in fine, he renounces his belief in
the high genealogy of his species, and looks forward, as if in com-
pensation, to the future perfectibility of man in his physical,
intellectual, and moral attributes [LYELL 1830, quoted in GREENE

1959:251].
What thus seemed most absurd to Lyell was about to appear as the
central theme in Spencer’s lifework: the demonstration that the uni-

verse exhibited “one continuous and progressive scheme of develop-
ment” embracing all inorganic, organic, and superorganic phenomena.

THE CONTRIBUTION OF MALTHUS

It should be stressed that Lyell’s rejection of Lamarck was
consistent with Lyell’s acceptance of the pessimistic theories of the
greatest of all enemies of the doctrines of progress, Thomas Malthus.
It was Malthus who was responsible for the concept of the struggle
for survival, upon which the theories of Lyell, Darwin, Spencer, and
Alfred Wallace depended. But Lyell alone in this group accepted Mal-
thus’s negative conclusions concerning the perfectibility of man,
namely, that a large portion of mankind was forever doomed to misery
by the imbalance between productive and reproductive capacities.

Malthus’s role in the development of Darwin and Spencer’s syn-
thesis may even have been more important than that of Lyell.

114

g B

5. Spencerism

Indeed, it is Malthus’s negative attitude toward progress and perfecti-
bility that explains why both Darwin and Spencer reacted so power-
fully to Lyell's antievolutionism. Both Darwin and Spencer, each in
his own way, were committed to proving that one part of Malthus’s
theory was correct, and the other part wrong. In the familiar history
of the case, Malthus’s contributions to Darwin’s theories are pre-
sented in their positive form, while Malthus’s contributions to
Spencer’s theories are usually neglected altogether. In both cases, how-
ever, the reaction against Malthus was decisive. Let us turn first to
the relationship between Malthus and Darwin.

It is by now well known that Darwin attributed the “discovery”
of the principle of natural selection to his reading of Malthus’s An
Essay on the Principle of Population (1798). “I came to the conclu-
sion,” wrote Darwin (1903, I:118), “that selection was the principle
of change from the study of domesticated productions; and then,
reading Malthus, I saw at once how to apply this principle.” The
reading in question was said by Darwin to have taken place in October,
1838. Now, Malthus’s Essay was emphatically conceived as a ref-
utation of the Enlightenment’s faith in progress. Although it is
today rightly regarded as the foundation of the science of demog-
raphy, it achieved this eminence only as a by-product of Malthus’s
main intent. “My object,” he wrote in the Preface to the enlarged
1803 edition, “was to apply it [the Essay] to the truth of those
speculations on the perfectibility of man and society, which at that
time excited a considerable portion of publick [sic] attention”
(MALTHUS 1803: iii). Addressing himself directly to Marquis de Con-
dorcet’s Outline of the Intellectual Progress of Mankind (see p. 35),
Malthus laid bare the influence of the French Revolution in bringing
about his own disillusionment with the doctrine of perfectibility. To
think of Condorcet writing about perfectibility while in jail “is a
singular instance of the attachment of a man to principles which every
day’s experience was, so fatally for himself, contradicting” (ibid.:354).
Malthus expressed his feelings on the French Revolution in rather
strong terms:

To see the human mind, in one of the most enlightened nations
of the world, debased by such a fermentation of disgusting pas-
sions, of fear, cruelty, malice, revenge, ambition, madness and
folly, as would have disgraced the most savage nations in the most
barbarous age, must have been such a tremendous shock to his
ideas of the nccessary and inevitable progress of the human
mind, that nothing but the firmest conviction of the truth of his
principles, in spite of all appearances, could have withstood [ibid.].

115


===== PAGE 63 =====

e

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

[ S—

It will be recalled that Condorcet’s historical sketch had concluded
with speculation concerning the possibility that cultural improve-
ments might eventually result in changing man’s physical nature.
Malthus ridiculed this idea, basing his arguments on the fixed nature
of species. Although it was true, he admitted, that proper breeding
could change plants, animals, and men to an indefinable extent, it
was nonsense to suppose that these changes were potentially un-
limited. Sheep may be bred for small legs and small heads, but “the
heads and legs of these sheep would never be so small as the head
and legs of a rat” (ibid.:361). Ironically, Darwin’s theories were to
make such hypothetical sheep the least of evolutionary wonders.

In reading Malthus and deriving from him the principle of natural
selection, Darwin could not have been unaware that once again, as
in the case of Lyell, he was attributing part of his theory to a man
with whom he was in considerable disagreement. But the remarkable
appeal of Darwin’s ideas lay precisely in the union of what had
hitherto been regarded as opposites. By applying the struggle for exis-
tence to the explanation of the origin of species, the positions repre-
sented by Condorcet and Malthus could be brought into harmony!
All kinds of additional irreconcilables were reconciled. Following Dar-
win, one could be both a racist, believing in the hereditary limits of a
race or species, and at the same time, one could be an environmental-
ist, secure in the knowledge that there was no limit to the perfecti-
bility of any species, including man. Where Malthus could see only
perpetual misery resulting from the struggle for survival, Darwin
could see perpetual progress. Where Lyell saw extinction, Darwin
saw creation. On the other hand, while Condorcet attributed progress
to the effect of a beneficent environment, Darwin attributed it to
unremitting struggle; and while Lamarck explained progress as the
accumulation of a benign striving for improvement, Darwin saw it
as the product of “nature, red in fang and claw.”

DARWIN'S CONTRIBUTION

Let us not forget that Darwin, standing on the shoulders of
Lyell, Lamarck, and a host of other scholars, put together an argu-
ment for the evolution of species that was unprecedented in detail,
accuracy, and scope. The Origin of Species abided by standards of
evidence and logic that before 1859 had seldom been equaled and
never surpassed. Yet these features would guarantee the book’s
success only within a small technically minded circle capable of ap-

116

preciating the virtue of a monographic tour de force. They do not by
themselves account for the passion with which such prestigious leaders
of the scientific community as Sir Joseph Hooker, Thomas Huxley,
and Charles Lyell rallied to Darwin’s defense, nor for the enthusiasm
of whole cohorts of younger scientists and intellectuals. Origin was
much more than a scientific treatise; it was a great book precisely
because of the diverse cultural themes it consolidated and expressed.
It dramatized and legitimatized what many people from scientists to

politicians had obscurely felt to be true without themselves being
able to put it into words.

I should like to take note here of historian Gertrude Himmelfarb'’s
(1959:373) assertion that Darwin was especially well suited to this
task because he was “without the taint of ulterior ideology” (ibid.).
One may readily admit that Darwin was without the “taint” but not
that he was lacking in ulterior ideology. Having attributed the inspira-
tion for his greatest idea to Malthus, he could not have been unaware
of the larger implications of a “struggle for survival.” Darwin’s great\
book had a rather sharply focused philosophical message, namely the
reaffirmation of the lawfulness of nature, the inevitability of progress,

and the justice of the system of struggle without which progress can-

not be achieved. According to Darwin, nature’s laws are both benefi-

cent and beautiful. Although we cannot control nature, we have
nothing to fear from her.

All that we can do, is to keep steadily in mind that each organic
being is striving to increase in a geometrical ratio; that each at
some period of its life, during some season of the year, during
each generation or at intervals, has to struggle for life and to suf-
fer great destruction. When we reflect on this struggle, we may
console ourselves with the full belief that the war of nature is not
incessant, that no fear is felt, that death is generally prompt, and

that the vigorous, the healthy, and the happy survive and mul-
tiply [DARWIN 1958:86].

In the penultimate paragraph of the Origin of Species, Darwin elabo-
rated on the same theme, implying that his theory supported the

doctrine of perfectibility and that it was opposed to the imi
y v essimism of
both Malthus and Lyell: * '

As all the living forms of life are the lineal descendants of those
which lived long before the Cambrian epoch, we may feel certain
that the ordinary succession by generation has never once been
broken, and that no cataclysm has desolated the whole world.
Hence we may look with some confidence to a secure future of

117


===== PAGE 64 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

great length. And as natural selection works solely by and for the
good of each being, all corporeal and mental endowments will
tend to progress towards perfection [ibid.:449]-

In the last lines of the book, the conversion of Malthus’s nightmare
into Divine. Comedy summons forth the image of a “tangled bank”
filled with tarvelously complex arrangements of plants and animals,
all products of the same natural law. The book ends with an up-beat
that reverberated throughout the remainder of the century:

Thus from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most
exalted object of which we are capable of conceiving, namely the
production of the higher animals, directly follows. There is
grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having
been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into
one; and that whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to
the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms
most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being

evolved [ibid:449]

It can be argued, of course, that Darwin was concerned here only
with organic evolution and that his idea of perfection through struggle
was neither embedded in nor directed toward a theory of sociocultural
evolution. But in Darwin’s first unpublished sketch of the theory of
natural selection written in 1842, he was already convinced that this
theory included all mammals without exception. As Gertrude Him-
melfarb (1959:290) admits, Darwin did not take up the issue of
human evolution in the Origin of Species “because he thought it
would prevent his book from getting a fair hearing.”

Twelve years were to elapse between the Origin of Species and the
appearance of the Descent of Man, the book in which Darwin ad-
dresses himself specifically to the question of the relationship be-
tween natural selection and human evolution. But by 1871, the
blending of sociocultural evolution with biological theory under
Spencer’s version of the “survival of the fittest” had already swept the
field.

DARWIN 'S RACISM

Was Darwin a racial determinist? Did he think of racial
differences in terms of the “survival of the fittest”? It would be most
extraordinary if Darwin, practically alone among his contemporaries,
had been able to escape the thralldom of biologized history. Yet the
issue is raised (cf. HIMMELFARB 1959:298) because in the Descent of
Man, Darwin opposed the long-established belief going back to Blu-

118

5. Spencerism

menbach and Buffon that such traits as skin color and hair form were
useful for survival. Thus he explicitly denied that such racial features
could have been established primarily by natural selection. The

principle he advanced to explain human racial differences was not
natural selection but sexual selection:

For my own part, I conclude that of all the causes which have
led to the differences in external appearance between the races of
man and to a certain extent between man and the lower animals,
sexual selection has been by far the most efficient [pARWIN 1871,

11:367].

It should be made clear, however, that Darwin did not conceive
of sexual selection as being opposed to natural selection any more
than he believed that natural selection ruled out the possibility of
evolution through Lamarckian use and disuse. By introducing the
principle of sexual selection, Darwin hoped to explain those features
of organisms that seemed not to be useful in the struggle for survival.
The stag’s antlers and the peacock’s feathers are the classic examples
with which he concerned himself on the infrahuman level. Such
features could elaborate themselves along diverse pathways as long
as they did not tip the balance against survival, if they conferred an
advantage in mating. The equivalent features in man, Darwin urged,
were those aspects of racial differences—skin color, hair form, eye
color, nose and lip shape—which everyone had for so long assumed
must be connected with something vital in the functioning of the
%mman organisms in different regions of the world. The stated ob-
jective of the Descent of Man, served by a multichapter digression
into examples drawn from lower organisms, was to prove that sexual
selec_tion better accounted for the externdl racial differences among
h_ommids than natural selection. This was a perfectly reputable posi-
tion and one which continues to be supported by many physical
anthropologists and biologists. But Darwin never for a moment
doubted that there were important internal differences between the
races and that these were established by natural selection. Noting
that “not one of the external differences between the races of man
are of any direct service to him,” and that therefore they could not be
acquxred through natural selection, he specifically exempts all those
racial features that are significant for the question of differential
rate?s of progress toward civilization: “The intellectual and moral or
social faculties must of course be excepted from this remark; but
differences in these faculties can have had little or no influence on
external characters” (DARWIN 1871, II:239).

119


===== PAGE 65 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

DARWIN'S VERSION OF PROGRESS
THROUGH STRUGGLE

The ideology of progress through struggle, of which Darwin
was an exponent, received emphasis even when he resorted to the
principle of sexual selection. The most efficacious form of sexual
selection was that of struggle between males for a chance at mating
with the most desirable females. But the other form of struggle—
struggle for survival—is by no means neglected in deference to the
struggle for sex. It is impossible to read the Descent of Man without
being struck by its almost total advocacy of the struggle for survival
as the means of understanding sociocultural evolution. It is a struggle
for survival, moreover, that involves not so much man against nature,
as man against man, in the most direct, Spencerian paradigm. Al-
though Darwin frequently qualifies the importance of this struggle, as
for example in accounting for altruism, he returns always to the under-
lying sanction of survival:

It must not be forgotten that, although a high standard of mo-
rality gives but a slight or no advantage to each individual man
and his children over the other men of the same tribe, yet that
an advancement in the standard of morality and an increase in the
number of well-endowed men will certainly give an immense
advantage to one tribe over another. There can be no doubt that
a tribe including many members who, from possessing in a high
degree the spirit of patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, and
sympathy, were always ready to give aid to each other and to sac-
rifice themselves for the common good, would be victorious over
most other tribes; and this would be natural selection [ibid.:159-60].

This qualification must be understood to apply as well to the passage
in which Darwin flatly asserts that factors other than natural selec-
tion account for “the highest part of man’s nature”:

. important as the struggle for existence has been and even
still is, yet as far as the highest part of man’s nature is concerned
there are other agencies more important. For the moral qualities
are advanced, cither directly or indirectly, much more through
the cffects of habit, the reasoning powers, instruction, religion,
etc., than through natural selection; though to this latter agency
the social instincts, which afforded the basis for the development
of the moral sense, may be safely attributed [pARwWIN 1871, 11:386].

Darwin’s murky reference to habits, reasoning powers, instruction,
and religion as opposed to natural selection is perhaps an expression
of uneasiness about too blatant an advocacy of struggle both within

120

and between societies. It does not cancel out the main point of the
first half of this same paragraph in which there is an appeal for
maintenance of “open competition”:

Man, like every other animal, has no doubt advanced to his pres-
ent high condition through a struggle for existence consequent on
his rapid multiplication; and if he is to advance still higher he
must remain subject to a severe struggle. Otherwise he would soon
sink into indolence, and the more highly-gifted men would not be
more successful in the battle of life than the less gifted. Hence
our natural rate of increase, though leading to many and obvious
evils, must not be greatly diminished by any means. There
should be open competition for all men; and the most able should
not be prevented by laws or customs from succceding best and
rearing the largest number of offspring [ibid.:385-86].

It also should be pointed out that Darwin separated the evolution
of “moral qualities” from the evolution of what he called the “mental
faculties.” It is to the latter that “man mainly owes . . . his preemi-
nent position in the world”; and it is the struggle for survival in
which the faculty of intelligence is perfected in the individual, made
hereditary, and passed on to succeeding generations:

All that we know about savages, or may infer from their tradi-
tions and from old monuments, the history of which is quite for-
gotten by the present inhabitants, shows that from the remotest
times successful tribes have supplanted other tribes. Relics of
extinct or forgotten tribes have been discovered throughout the
civilized regions of the carth, on the wild plains of America, and
on the isolated islands in the Pacific Ocean. At the present day
civilized nations are everywhere supplanting barbarous nations,
excepting where the climate opposes a deadly barrier; and they
succeed mainly, though not exclusively, through their arts, which
are the products of the intellect. It is, therefore, highly probable
that with mankind the intellectual faculties have been gradually
perfected through natural selection [ibid.:154].

Like all of his contemporaries, Darwin was utterly incapable of sepa-
rating changes in a group’s learned repertory from hereditary modifi-
cations. The idea that contemporary savages might be as intelligent
as civilized people was simply inconceivable. Taking the case of a
newly invented snare weapon, he admits that mere imitation could
induce others to accept it. But cach technical innovation necessarily
also contributes to the perfection of the intellect:

The habitual practice of each new art must likewise in some slight
degree strengthen the intellect. If the new invention were an im-
portant one, the tribe would increase in number, spread, and sup-

121


===== PAGE 66 =====

B . onngll

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

plant other tribes. In a tribe thus rendered more numerous there
would always be a rather better chance of the birth of other su-
perior and inventive members. If each man left children to inherit
their mental superiority, the chance of the birth of still more
ingenious members would be somewhat better, and in a very
small tribe decidedly better. Even if they left no children, the
tribe would still include their blood-relations; and it has been
ascertained by agriculturalists that by preserving and breeding
from the family of an animal, which when slaughtered was found
to be valuable, the desired character has been obtained [ibid.:155].

It would be idle to expect a logical resolution of all the conflicting
statements in the Descent of Man. Darwin’s position was hopelessly
compromised by the prevailing confusion between inherited and
learned traits. It can be said with certainty that he was a racial
determinist; that he believed the preservation of the fit and the
elimination of the unfit produced biocultural progress, and that he
had a deep ideological commitment to laissez-faire. Ashley Montagu’s
estimate of Darwin’s position in the Descent of Man thus appears to
be preferable to that given by Gertrude Himmelfarb. Says Montagu
(1952:46):
The few passages in which Darwin mentions altruism, and co-oper-
ation come exclusively from The Descent of Man, where in a
book of a thousand pages they are virtually crowded out by nu-
merous statements that appear to stand in direct and unequivocal
contradiction to them. Darwin was going to have the cake of
natural selection, which he had baked, and eat it, too. The flavor-
ing was mostly “struggle for existence,” but here and there, there
was a sprinkling of the thinnest kind of co-operation. . . . It was,
however, far too thin to make any more than a fleeting impression
upon the intellectual taste-buds of those who concentrated their
attention upon the consumption of the main body of the cake.
Darwin was, in fact, a struggle-for-survivor. . . .

THE MISNOMER OF SOCIAL DARWINISM

One of the obstacles to a proper understanding of the rela-
tionship between Darwin and the social sciences is that the doctrine
of progress through struggle goes by the name of Social Darwinism.
This phrase both expresses and reinforces the erroneous notion that
after 1859 social scientists, led by Herbert Spencer, “applied the
concepts developed by Darwin to the interpretation of the nature
and functioning of society” (MONTAGU 1952:32-33). The fact that
needs to be established here is that Darwin’s principles were an ap-

122

plication of social-science concepts to biology. The discussion of
sociocultural progress and evolution among such social theorists as
Monboddo, Turgot, Condorcet, Millar, Ferguson, Helvétius, and
D’Holbach provided the matrix for the discussion of biological evolu-
tion by Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, Erasmus Darwin (Charles’s grandfather),
and Lamarck. On Darwin’s own authority we may accept Malthus’s
discussion of the struggle for survival as the inspiration for natural
selection. As Darwin put it, “This is the doctrine of Malthus, applied
to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms” (DARWIN 1958:29).

If there are any lingering doubts about the importance of this
debt (cf. GREENE 1959:258), there is also the testimony of Alfred
Wallace, joint author of the memoir presented to the members of
the Linnaean Society in 1858, at which the discovery of the principle of
natural selection was first announced. It was Wallace who inadver-
tently forced Darwin into publishing the Origin of Species by sending
him a manuscript outlining the very theory on which Darwin had
already been working for some twenty years. Wallace’s theory was so
close to Darwin’s that the latter was moved to exclaim “Even his
terms now stand as heads of my chapters” (quoted in HIMMELFARB
1959:200). It is less well known that the parallelism between Wallace
and Darwin, a striking example of the “principle of the simultaneity
of invention” (see p. 327), extended as well to the reading of Mal-
thus. In 1855, while recuperating from an illness on the island of
Ternate, near New Guinea, Wallace fell to thinking about the checks
on population increase described in Malthus’s Essay on Population.
In his own words:

Then it suddenly flashed upon me that this self-acting process
would necessarily improve the race, because in every generation
the inferior would inevitably be killed off and the superior would
remain—that is the fittest would survive. . . . The more I
thought over it the more I became convinced that I had at length
found the long-sought-for law of nature that solved the problem
of the origin of species [WALLACE 1905:362-63].

THE PRIORITY OF SPENCER

The phrase “Social Darwinism” not only obscures our under-
standing of the functional matrix that inspired Darwin but it also
distorts the actual order of precedence between Spencer’s and Dar-
win's specific contributions to evolutionary theory. In 1842, the
very year in which Darwin completed his first unpublished sketch of
the theory of natural selection, Spencer began to publish a series of

123


===== PAGE 67 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

formative essays entitled “The Proper Sphere of Government.”
Spencer’s first book, Social Statics (1850), consolidated these es-
says and included most of the ideas he is supposed to have taken
from Darwin. By 1850 Spencer was already well embarked upon his
life work of describing the universal laws of development. Moreover,
where Darwin had dealt with the question of human perfectibility as
an extrapolation from his main theme, Spencer deliberately set out to
settle that issue.

He consciously attempted to prove that human nature, like every-
thing else in the universe, was an evolutionary product. The question
of the mutability of “human nature” is, of course, merely another
way of looking at the question of speciation. By arguing for the
mutability of human nature, Spencer was in cffect arguing for bio-
evolution. In Social Statics he insisted not only that human nature
is modifiable, but that it has undergone and will continue to undergo
drastic changes in conformity with a universal law of development:

Nature in its infinite complexity is ever growing to a new de-
velopment. Each successive result becomes the parent of an ad-
ditional influence, destined in some degree to modify all future
results. . . . As we turn over the leaves of the earth’s primeval
history—as we interpret the hieroglyphics in which are recorded
the events of the unknown past, we find this same ever-beginning,
never-ceasing change. We see it alike in the organic and the in-
organic—in the decompositions and recombinations of matter,
and in the constantly-varying forms of animal and vegetable
life. . . . With an altering atmosphere, and a decreasing tem-
perature, land and sea perpetually bring forth fresh races of insects,
plants, and animals. All things are metamorphosed. . . .

Strange indeed would it be, if, in the midst of this universal
mutation, man alone were constant, unchangeable. But it is not
so. He also obeys the law of indefinite variation. His circumstances
are ever changing; and he is ever adapting himself to them [sPENCER
1883:45—46; orig. 1850].

Imperfection, said Spencer, in the same work, is “unfitness to the
conditions of existence” (ibid.: 79). Man achieves a higher degree of
fitness through the process of “adaptation.” These changes constitute
the definition of “progress,” and “the belief in human perfectibility
merely amounts to the belief, that in virtue of this process, man will
eventually become completely suited to his mode of life” (ibid.: 78).

Progress, therefore, is not an accident, but a necessity. Instead
of civilization being artifact, it is part of nature; all of a piece with
the development of the embryo or the unfolding of a flower. The

124

B __anull

5 Spencerism

modifications mankind have undergone, and are still undergoing,
result from a law underlying the whole organic creation; and pro-
vided the human race continues, and the constitution of things
remains the same, those modifications must end in complete-
ness. . . . So surely must the things we call evil and immorality
disappear; so surely must man become perfect [ibid.:80].

While the phrase “struggle for existence” occurs in Social Statics
(ibid.: 252), the context is not relevant to the explanation of human
progress. Nonetheless, Spencer argues at length concerning the need
for a savage stage of human nature as a prelude to the stage of civili-
zation. The idiom is pregnant with struggle-for-survivalism:

. Evidently the aboriginal man must have a constitution adapted
to the work he has to perform, joined with a dormant capability
of developing into the ultimate man when the conditions of ex-
istence permit. To the end that he may prepare the earth for its
future inhabitants—his descendants, he must possess a character
fitting him to clear it of races endangering his life, and races
occupying the space required by mankind. Hence he must have a
desire to kill. . . . He must further be devoid of sympathy, or
must have but the germ of it, for he would otherwise be in-
capacitated for his destructive office. In other words, he must be
what we call a savage, and must be left to acquire fitness for
social life as fast as the conquest of the earth renders social life
possible [ibid.:448-49].

SPENCER'S POLITICAL BELIEFS

In Spencer's earliest as well as in his most mature works,
the discussion of evolution, struggle, and perfectibility takes place
within an avowedly political framework. His open defense of eco-
nomic liberalism and his condemnation of cooperativism, socialism, and
communism again illustrate the futility of isolating the development
of theories of culture from their sociocultural context. To appreciate
Spencer’s contribution, we must see him as the most effective scien-
tific spokesman of early industrial capitalism, just as, to appreciate
Marx’s contribution, we must see him as the most effective scientific
spokesman of revolutionary socialism. In both cases we must guard
against letting the respective political involvements of these men
interfere with our recognition and utilization of the scientifically valid
aspects of their thought. Spencer’s and Marx’s politicization of theory
need not be ours, however much, for both of them, social science
and politics were inseparable.

Social Statics is overtly dedicated to the defense of private property

125


===== PAGE 68 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and free enterprise, warning of the biocultural disasters that will befall
mankind if government is permitted to intercede on behalf of the
poor. There were exceedingly few areas of life in which Spencer was
willing to grant the state legitimate authority. He was opposed to
free public schools, libraries, and hospitals; compulsory sanitation; the
licensing of doctors and nurses; compulsory smallpox vaccination;
“poor laws” and public welfare systems of all sorts. He deemed such
manifestations of state planning to be against the laws of nature
and predicted that they would increase the suffering of the weak and
the underprivileged. The insistence that socialism and communism
were opposed to natural law was, of course, not original with Spencer.
There was an established tradition leading back to Adam Smith
which contended that the role of government must be restricted
virtually to the protection of private property, enforcement of con-
tracts, and defense of the state. Under the leadership of Thomas
Malthus, Edward West, David Ricardo, and James Mill, the prevailing
doctrines also embraced a definite prognosis on the question of
poverty and human suffering. The “iron law of wages,” the “law of
diminishing returns,” and Malthus’s laws of population increase pro-
vided the basis for a pessimistic creed, a “dismal science,” the well-
known features of which were summed up by economist Joseph
Schumpeter (1954:570) as follows:

. . . pressure of population, present already but still more to be
expected; nature’s decreasing response to human effort to increase
the supply of food; hence falling net returns to industry, more or
less constant real wages, and ever-increasing (absolutely and rela-
tively) rents of land.

SPENCER'S ANSWER TO THE DISMAL
SCIENCE

Spencer’s outlook, however, as we have just seen, was any-
thing but dismal. By trusting social life to the laws of nature,
Spencer held that human suffering would eventually be eliminated.
In 1852, Spencer directly confronted the disparity between his own
and Malthus’s views on the perfectibility of man. Out of this con-
frontation, in the essay entitled “A Theory of Population,” Spencer
(1852a) achieved essentially the same sort of resolution that Darwin
had arrived at in 1838, but kept to himsclf until 1858, and which
Wallace was not to arrive at until 1855. Malthus, in other words,
was the basis not for two, but for three, independent “discoveries”
of the idea of progressive evolution resulting from the struggle for

126

- W

5. Spencerism

survival. To be sure, Spencer’s “A Theory of Population” contained a
number of highly original observations concerning the factors govern-
ing population increase, and was, moreover, concerned only with
sociocultural and hominid evolution. But the issue before us is pre-
cisely that of the sources of “Social Darwinism” as it was applied to
human society.

Spencer’s exit from the Malthusian dilemma was the idea that
intelligence and fertility were inversely related. Characteristically, he
gave this relationship a physiological rather than a sociocultural in-
terpretation: Mind cells and sex cells compete for the same materials.
Excess of fertility stimulates greater mental activity because the more
people there are, the more ingenuity is required to stay alive. The
least intelligent individuals and races die off, and the level of intelli-
gence gradually rises. But this increase in intelligence is achieved only
by intensifying the competition between mind cells and sex cells.
Consequently there is a progressive diminution in fertility. By this
means, “in the end, pressure of population and its accompanying evils
will entirely disappear . . .” (1852a:500). Although this is counter to
Malthus and is optimistic far beyond Darwin’s formulation, its uto-
pian climax is reserved for an indefinitely remote future toward
which humanity is making a steady and slow advance. In the mean-
time, the exigencies of the struggle for life produce progress through
the diminution of the unfit and the preservation of the fit, just as
Darwin was to describe it, six years later. According to Spencer:

Those to whom this increasing difficulty of getting a living which
excess of fertility entails, does not stimulate improvements in
production—that is, to greater mental activity—are on the high
road to extinction; and must ultimately be supplanted by those
whom the pressure does so stimulate. . . . And here, indeed,
without further illustration, it will be seen that premature death
under all its forms, and from all its causes, cannot fail to work in
the same direction. For as those prematurely carried off must,
in the average of cases, be those in whom the power of self-pres-
ervation is the least, it unavoidably follows that those left behind
to continue the race are those in whom the power of self-preser-
vation is the greatest—are the select of their generation. So that,
whether the dangers to existence be of the kind produced by ex-
cess of fertility, or of any other kind, it is clear, that by the cease-
less exercise of the faculties needed to contend with them, and
by the death of all men who fail to contend with them success-
fully, there is ensured a constant progress towards a higher degree
of skill, intelligence, and self-regulation—a better coordination of
actions—a more complete life [1852a:459-60].

127


===== PAGE 69 =====

r_’

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

In all essentials this passage corresponds to a statement of the prin-
ciple of the “survival of the fittest.” In the same year, 1852, Spencer
published an article in The Leader entitled “The Development Hy-
pothesis” in which he attacked special creationism and set forth a
Lamarckian view of the transformation of species. Oddly enough,
Spencer did not apply the principle of the survival of the fittest to the
origin of species. As he explained in his autobiography (1926, I:390),
his failure to connect the two ideas arose from “the belief that the
inheritance of functionally produced modifications suffices to explain
the facts. Recognizing them as a sufficient cause for many orders of
change in organisms, I concluded that it was a sufficient cause for all
orders of changes.” When the Origin of Species was published, Spen-
cer accepted natural selection as one of the most important sources
of bio-evolutionary change. He continued to place greater emphasis
upon Lamarck’s principle of use and disuse, but it should be remem-
bered that Darwin also regarded the inheritance of acquired charac-
teristics as a valid evolutionary principle. Thus, despite Spencer’s
failure to connect the concept of progress-through-struggle with spe-
ciation, it is clear that he had independently achieved the essential
ingredients of Social Darwinism without Darwin’s assistance.

SPENCER AND EVOLUTIONISM

Let us also take due note of the fact that it was Spencer and
not Darwin who popularized the term “evolution,” using it for the
first time in an article entitled “The Ultimate Laws of Physiology”
in 1857. It was also Spencer and not Darwin who introduced the
phrase “survival of the fittest” (in his Principles of Biology, 1866:444;
orig. 1864), a contribution which Darwin acknowledged by changing
the title of the chapter on natural selection in the fifth edition of the
Origin of Species to read “Natural Selection; or The Survival of the
Fittest,” giving the following explanation:

I have called this principle, by which each slight variation, if
useful, is preserved by the term Natural Selection, in order to
mark its relation to man’s power of selection. But the expression
often used by Mr. Herbert Spencer of the Survival of the Fittest
is more accurate, and is sometimes equally convenient [PARWIN

1958:74)-

Furthermore, as Robert Carneiro (1967) has pointed out, from 1852
onward Spencer was a friend of Thomas Huxley’s, Darwin’s most
effective champion, whose formidable polemical style earned him the

128

sobriquet “Darwin’s Bulldog.” In his autobiography, Spencer de-
scribes the animated discussions during which he tried to convince
Huxley of the truth of “progressive development.” Finally, there is
the esteem in which Darwin himself held Spencer, calling him “about
a dozen times my superior” and insisting that “he will be looked at as
by far the greatest living philosopher in England; perhaps equal to
any that have lived” (parRwiN, quoted in carnEIRO: ix). Taking all
of these factors into consideration, it seems evident not only that
the word “Spencerism” suffices for naming the biocultural theories
that have come to be known as Social Darwinism, but that the term
“Biological Spencerism” would be an appropriate label for that period
of the history of biological theory in which Darwin’s ideas gained
their ascendancy.

SPENCER’S DUBIOUS DISTINCTION

I would not dwell on this point if it merely involved a
matter of convenience of labels. But the issue is worthy of serious
consideration in view of the subordinate role that is today habitually
assigned to the social sciences whenever there is a question of one
discipline having exerted an influence on another. It certainly is not
unimportant to have it clearly understood that in the nineteenth
century the trend toward biologization had nothing to do with the
greater prestige of the biological disciplines. (Indeed, it may very
well have been the other way around.) It was not a matter of one
discipline aping another, but rather a parallel response by both disci-
plines to similar ideological needs. The biologization of sociocultural
theory arose from the need for countering the politically subversive
environmentalism of the eighteenth century. The conversion of bio-
logical theory to evolutionism was an outgrowth of the social scien-
tists’ interest in progress and perfectability, while the concept of
natural selection itself arose from an interest in racial, national, and
class forms of war and conflict. From the point of view of the history
of theories of culture, it is Spencer and not Darwin who bears the
greatest share of the onus of having crippled the explanatory power
of cultural evolutionary theory by merging and mixing it with racial
determinism. This is not to say that Spencer descrves the oblivion
into which he has fallen. As we shall see in the following chapter,
his contribution to the development of anthropological theory and
method clearly equals, if it does not surpass, the contributions of the
more highly regarded figures of Edward Tylor and Lewis Henry
Morgan. Nor, as we shall see in a moment, do Tylor and Morgan

129


===== PAGE 70 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

avoid the worst effects of the racial determinist outlook. Indeed, no
major figure in the social sciences between 1860 and 18go escaped
the influence of evolutionary racism. Within anthropology this thrall-
dom was not broken until the advent of the Boasian movement; in
adjacent disciplines, the struggle to achieve a correct statement of the
relationship between the hereditary and learned components in
sociocultural repertories has by no means been resolved.

THE FALLACY OF SPENCERISM

Spencer’s fundamental error was that he drastically over-
emphasized the importance of hereditary factors as causal elements in
the explanation of the behavioral specialties exhibited by Homo sa-
piens populations. In his Principles of Sociology (1876), Spencer
divided the causes of what he called superorganic phenomena into
“original extrinsic” and “original intrinsic” factors. The latter consist
of the physical, emotional, and intellectual traits characteristic of the
individual members of a given group. Taken together, these intrinsic
traits defined what Spencer frequently called “the nature of the social
units,” that is, the hereditary disposition of the individuals in the
group. The intrinsic factors interacted with the extrinsic factors—
organic and inorganic conditions—to bring about sociocultural evolu-
tion. Each stage of sociocultural evolution thus tended to have its
appropriate version of human nature, and in feedback fashion, the
one could not change without affecting the other:

Inevitably, with [the] forms of social organization and social
action, there go the appropriate ideas and sentiments. To be
stable, the arrangements of a community must be congruous with
the natures of its members. If a fundamental change of circum-
stances produces change in the structure of the community or in
the natures of its members, then the natures of its members or
the structure of the community must presently undergo a cor-
responding change [sPENCER 1896, I1:593; orig. 1876].

This concept of human nature combines and confounds two radi-
cally different aspects of human behavior; namely, on the one hand,
biologically transmitted responses, drives, and capacities for reinforce-
ment; and on the other, socially transmitted responses, drives, and
capacities for reinforcement. The question of social determinism
hinges on the extent of the relationship between the hereditary and
socially transmitted components in human behavior. Spencer, Dar-
win, and every other scientist of consequence among their contempo-
raries who was interested in human behavior correctly concluded that

130

Regll

5. Spencerism

bio-evolution and cultural evolution were intimately connected. That
is, all the weight of modern anthropological opinion supports Spen-
cer's belief that in the transition from hominoid to hominid status
mutually reinforcing biological and sociocultural changes took place.
Such distinctively hominid traits as upright posture, enlarged cranial
capacity, and the capacity for learning elaborate symbol systems
were undoubtedly developed in mutual association with an ever-increas-
ing dependence upon learned cultural repertories as the basis for repro-
ductive success. But the weight of modern opinion supports the
conclusions, totally unrecognized by Spencer and his contemporaries,
that this relationship between hereditary and learned repertory has it-
self undergone an evolution in which the modification of cultural forms
has become less and less dependent upon concomitant genetic changes.

RACISM IN MODERN PERSPECTIVE

In the interest of avoiding any possible confusion concerning
the significance of Spencer’s racial determinism, let us pause to
state the post-Boasian formulations of the race-culture paradigm. At
the present stage of biological and cultural development, the fol-
lowing statement holds true for all known Homo sapiens popula-
tions: the acquisition of the bulk of one group’s learned repertory by
another need not require a single genetic innovation. Furthermore
the modemn consensus concerning the relationship between race and
culture is that the rate and direction of culture change among the
various infraspecies groupings of Homo sapiens are not at present signif-
icantly affected by genetic specialties. Both archaeological and paleon-
tological evidence, none of which was available to Spencer, indicate
that man has evolved through three grades—australopithecine, Homo
erectus, and Homo sapiens. During the passage from one such
grade to another, it may very well be the case that man’s learning
ability, his symbolizing skills, and his culture-bearing capacity were
strengthened and expanded in conformity with the principle of nat-
ural selection. But the total chronology of this process extends back
at least 1,750,000 years. The order of difference in human nature that
Spencer had in mind when he contrasted “savages” with Englishmen
might be relevant when we contrast contemporary Homo sapiens
populations with a group of australopithecoids or sinanthropoids. But
the specialties of human nature that have made it possible to achieve
the dubious blessings of industrial society undoubtedly became the
general property of the species Homo sapiens at least fifty thousand
years ago. On this issue, Helvétius and Monboddo have been thor-

131


===== PAGE 71 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

oughly vindicated, Darwin and Spencer discredited. If all other fac-
tors are held constant except race, similar enculturation processes
will result in similar sociocultural repertories. Indeed, it cannot be
doubted that if perfect control over the enculturative process could
be maintained, only one generation would suffice to equip any
number of different Homo sapiens groups with essentially similar
repertories, regardless of their respective racial phylogenies. Thus if
Hottentot babies were to be substituted at birth for English babies,
their average cultural performance would not differ in any significant
fashion from a control group, except in features that respond to en-
culturation processes. The evidence for this point of view cannot be
reviewed here. Suffice it to say that it is overwhelming. Social groups
and individuals drawn from every Homo sapiens race have shown
themselves in countless instances to be susceptible to acculturation
influences bearing upon every aspect of sociocultural behavior. Amer-
ican Indians brought up in Brazil show no hereditary resistance to
learning African dance rhythms; Englishmen reared in China can
learn to speak flawless Chinese; American Negroes who attend con-
servatories write symphonies in the classical European tradition; the
Japanese display not the slightest hereditary disability in acquiring a
knowledge of Western electronics; Jews brought up in Germany have
German food preferences, while those brought up in Yemen acquire
Yemenite tastes; under the influence of Western missionaries, the
South Sea islanders learned to govern their sexual affairs in conformity
with strict Protestant codes; everywhere the children of illiterate per-
sons, exposed to the proper set of enculturative conditions, acquire
within one lifetime the learning and lore contributed by hundreds of
generations of men from all the races of the world. Although it is not
possible to prove that all large divisions of Homo sapiens have equal
learning ability for all kinds of responses, it is beyond dispute that
the overwhelming bulk of the response repertory of any human popu-
lation can be learned by any other human population. Moreover, if
average differences in learning ability exist, they are demonstrably
insufficient to account for the major cultural and subcultural contrasts
that occupy the attention of the social sciences.

No one familiar with modern ethnography can doubt the prepon-
derant role of enculturative conditioning in the establishment of the
behavioral specialties. No plausible connection has ever even been
proposed between specific human genes and such specialties as cross-
cousin marriage, bilateral descent, polyandry, divine kinship, mono-
theism, brideprice, private property in land, or thousands of other
small and large chains of less than universal human behavior. On the

132

At

5. Spencerism

other hand, the inadequacy of racist explanations of sociocultural dif-
ferences and similarities is further underscored by the growing suc-
cess achieved by strictly cultural or cultural-ecological explanations of
these phenomena. For other than a handful of hereditary pathological
disabilities, there does not exist a single instance of apparent aver-
age differential hereditary learning ability for which numerous counter-
hypotheses involving differential conditioning experiences are mnot
readily available. Certainly this is the case wherever differential scores
on so-called intelligence tests have been correlated with races. Such
scores have been demonstrated over and over again to respond rapidly
to number of years of schooling, quality of academic exposure, specific
training for test situation, nuclear and extended family milieu, and an
abundance of other nongenetic conditioning parameters (KLINEBERG
1935, 1951, 1963; COMAS 1961; 1. C. BROWN 1960; DREGER and MILLER
1960).

THE USES OF SPENCERISM

The peculiar appeal of Spencerism was that it safeguarded
Christian charity by combining Malthusian pessimism about the
immediate present with Helvetian optimism about the distant future.
Human nature was modifiable, but not immediately. Institutions were
modifiable but not immediately. Evolution must run its course. The
survival of the fittest would modify both, but not one without the
other. There was little if anything that could be done to speed up the
process; the best that could be hoped for was that obstacles would
not be thrown in nature’s path by wellintentioned but stupid re-
formess. In Spencer’s own words:

No adequate change of character can be produced in a year, or in
a generation or in a century. All which teaching can do—all which
may, perhaps, be done by a wider diffusion of principles of soci-
ology, is the checking of retrograde action [puNcan 1908, I11:77].

One of the most frequently heard criticisms of Spencer and his
contemporaries was that, believing themselves to represent the ad-
vanced wave of civilization, they judged other peoples by their own
standards. Yet in Spencer’s case, this criticism is contrary to fact.
From the existence of differences in human nature, it followed that
each group had to be judged on its own terms and treated in a
manner that was appropriate to its own stage of development. What
was good for civilized men was not good for the “natives.” Spencer, in
other words, was an advocate of an carly version of cultural relativism,

133


===== PAGE 72 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

an outlook usually associated only with the post-Boasian critique of
evolutionism and unquestionably accepted as the only attitude be-
fitting the modemn fieldworker. In Principles of Sociology, Spencer
wrote:

Though it has become a common-place that the institutions
under which one race prospers will not answer for another, the
recognition of this truth is by no means adequate. Men who have
lost faith in “paper constitutions,” mnevertheless advocate such
conduct towards inferior races, as implies the belief that civilized
social forms can with advantage be imposed on uncivilized peo-
ples; that the arrangements which seem to us vicious are vicious
for them; and that they would benefit by institutions—domestic,
industrial, or political—akin to those which we find beneficial.
But acceptance of the truth that the type of a society is deter-
mined by the natures of its units, forces on us the corollary that a
regime intrinsically of the lowest, may yet be the best possible
under primitive conditions [SPENCER 1896, 1:232-33].

Since other people are so different from us, we must avoid thrusting
our standards of conduct upon them. Our ethical ideas cannot be
meaningful to them. Modern cultural relativists, especially those of us
who are concerned with the preservation of the cultural integrity of
so-called tribal peoples, will ind an ominous note in Spencer’s line
of reasoning:

And since preservation of the society takes precedence of in-
dividual preservation, as being a condition to it, we must, in con-
sidering social phenomena, interpret good and bad rather in their
carlier senses than in their later senses; and so must regard as
relatively good that which furthers survival of the society, great
as may be the suffering inflicted on its members [ibid.:233].

SPENCERISM AND IMPERIALISM

The utility of this position for an empire or a corporation on
which the sun never sets needs no special emphasis. Adumbrated in
colonial policy, it was a perfect rationalization of the status quo of
conquest. Missionaries, merchants, industrialists, and administrators,
each in their own way, used the imagined biocultural specialties of
the “inferior” races as the justification for inferior treatment. Some
of the classic refrains, familiar to anyone who has ever experienced
the reality of a colonial system, go as follows: the natives are lazy;
they do not respond like civilized men to the offer of wages; they
need to be taught the virtues of civilized forms of labor by means

134

B oo

5. Spencerism

other than those appropriate to civilized man. They must be forced
to work by limiting their tribal lands, by imposing head taxes, and
by compulsory contracts. Unlike civilized man, the “inferior” races
suffer moral and spiritual ills if they are educated beyond the primary
level. They therefore should receive advanced training only in manual
skills. Being more childlike than Furopeans, it is dangerous for the
natives to have free access to alcoholic drinks. Such people, if given
a chance, prefer to walk rather than to ride; they like to sleep on the
cold ground rather than on warm beds; they work in the rain without
feeling wet, work in the sun without feeling hot, and carry loads on
their heads without getting tired. Life is not so dear to these people
as to Europeans; when their children die, they are not so deeply
disturbed, and when they themselves suffer injury, it does not hurt as
much as it does in the civilized man:

According to Lichtenstein, the Bushmen do not “appear to have
any fecling of even the most striking changes in the temperature
of the atmosphere.” Gardiner says the Zulus “are perfect sala-
manders”—arranging the burning faggots with their feet and dip-
ping their hands into the boiling contents of the cooking-vessels.
The Abipones, again, are “extremely tolerant of the inclemencies
of the sky.” So it is with the feelings caused by bodily injuries.
Many travellers express surprise at the calmness with which men
of inferior types undergo serious operations. Evidently the suffer-
ings produced are much less than would be produced in men of
higher types [sPENCER 1896, I:51].

Spencer certainly shared in the responsibilities for propagating
these stereotypes of pre-industrial populations. It should not be con-
cluded, however, that he was unable to identify the underlying moti-
vation in the use of evolutionary racism by persons directly involved
in late-nineteenth-century imperialism. He himself believed that with
the advance of “industrial” types of society, a new kind of human
nature, adapted to industrial rather than military competition, would
emerge. It was the lingering on of the military types that was re-
sponsible for corrupting European contact with the “inferior” races
and which led to the exploitation of helpless peoples in the name of a
false civilization. The widely accepted picture of Spencer as a smug
Victorian for whom the benevolence of Furopean colonial dispensa-
tion went unquestioned does not measure his true stature. Spencer’s
sympathies were with the peaceable industrial types; he thought of
himself, despite his opposition to government charities, as a true
friend of the poor; he abhorred the wars and preparations for wars
by the nations of Europe; and he was disgusted by the callousness

135


===== PAGE 73 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and hypocrisy exhibited by the Europeans in their bloody quest for
cheap labor and raw materials. From the following lengthy, but
rewarding, commentary on events associated with the late-nineteenth-
century scramble for Africa, it is clear that Spencer cannot be dis-
missed as a mere propagandist of industrial capitalism:

‘What the social man, even of advanced race, is capable of, has
been again shown while these lines are standing in type. To jus-
tify the destruction of two African towns in Batanga, we are told
that their king, wishing to have a trading factory established, and
disappointed with the promise of a sub-factory, boarded an En-
glish schooner, carried off Mr. Grovier, the mate, and refusing to
release him when asked, “threatened to cut the man’s head off”:
a strange mode, if true, of getting a trading factory established.
Mr. Grovier afterwards escaped; not having been ill-treated dur-
ing his detention. Anchoring the Boadicea and two gunboats off
Kribby’s Town (“King Jack’s” residence) Commodore Richards
demanded of the king that he should come on board and explain:
promising him safety, and threatening serious consequences in
case of refusal. Not trusting the promise, the king failed to come.
Without ascertaining from the natives whether they had any rea-
son for laying hands on Mr. Grovier, save this most improbable
one alleged by our people, Commodore Richards proceeded, after
some hours’ notice, to clear the beach with shells, to burn the
town of 300 houses, to cut down the natives’ crops, and to destroy
their canoes; and then, not satisfied with burning “King Jack’s”
town, went further south and bumnt “King Long-Long’s” town.
These facts are published in the Times of September 10, 1880.
In an article on them, this organ of English respectability regrets
that “the punishment must seem, to the childish mind of the
savage, wholly disproportionate to the offence:” implying that
to the adult mind of the civilized it will not seem disproportion-
ate. Further, this leading journal of ruling classes who hold that,
in the absence of established theological dogmas, there would be
no distinction between right and wrong, remarks that “if it were
not for the dark shadow cast over it by the loss of life” [of two
of our men], “the whole episode would be somewhat humorous.”
Doubtless, after the “childish mind of the savage” has accepted
the “glad tidings” brought by missionaries of “the religion of
love,” there is humour, somewhat of the grimmest, perhaps, in
showing him the practice of this religion by burning his house.
Comments on Christian virtue, uttered by exploding shells, may
fitly be accompanied by a Mephistophelian smile. Possibly the
king, in declining to trust himself on board an English ship, was
swayed by the common Negro belief that the devil is white
[sPENCER 1896, II:239—40].

136

)

5. Spencerism

SPENCERISM AND THE DOCTRINE OF
PSYCHIC UNITY

One of the least understood aspects of late-nincteenth-
century racism is the relationship between the doctrine of psychic
unity and the belief in inferior racial types. Psychic unity was the
belief, extremely common among monogenists, that the human mind
was everywhere essentially similar. In the formulation of Adolf
Bastian, psychic unity was freely invoked to explain similarities of
culture wherever they occurred. Since Bastian was the proponent of
an especially pronounced version of cultural idealism, the fact that
an idea was potentially common to all mankind was sufficient explana-
tion for its occurrence in one or more places. Some form of psychic
unity is also implied whenever there is an emphasis upon parallel
evolution, for if the different peoples of the world advanced through
similar sequences, it must be assumed that they all began with
essentially similar psychological potentials. But this assumption bears
no necessary relationship to the post-Boasian concept of racial equality.
Indeed, the nineteenth century’s ideas on psychic unity have little in
common with either the eighteenth or twenticth century’s under-
standing of the race-language-culture equation.

LEWIS HENRY MORGAN, RACIST

The nature of the confusion surrounding this issue is well
illustrated by the famous passage in Lewis Henry Morgan’s Ancient
Society, which describes the uniformity of human experience:

It may be remarked finally that the experience of mankind has
run in nearly uniform channels; that human necessities in similar
condition have been substantially the same; and that the opera-
tions of the mental principle have been uniform in virtue of the
specific identity of the brain of all the races of mankind
[MORGAN 1963:7].

On the basis of this and similar passages, Eleanor Leacock has sought
to exempt Morgan from the prevailing racism of his time. Writes
Leacock (1963:ix):

Morgan was clearly at odds with the view that inequalities in
technological development among different peoples were due to
differences in innate ability. Perhaps because of his familiarity
with and respect for American Indians, Morgan was beyond crude

137


===== PAGE 74 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

assumptions of white supremacy. White colonial policies of the
time were being buttressed with adjurations of racial inequality
and the superiority of northwestern Europeans. Morgan, like
‘Waitz before him, maintained the unity of the human race.

Yet Leacock herself is obliged to note on the very next page, “In the
light of Morgan’s views, it is surprising to find him referring occa-
sionally to the ‘inferior’ brain of various peoples” (ibid.:x). Neither
this, nor any of the other numerous passages in Morgan’s books that
assert the innate mental and physical variability of different human
groups, should cause surprise since Morgan was every bit as much a
racial determinist as Spencer. Morgan believed firmly that race and
culture were interdependent and that specific cultural traits including
kinship terminologies and habits of dress were carried in the “blood.”

There are some customs of such a strikingly personal character
that they may in a pre-eminent degree, be regarded as customs of
the blood. When prevalent over wide areas and persistently main-
tained from generation to generation, they seem to possess some
significance upon the question of the probable genetic connection
of the peoples by whom they are practised. There are three dis-
tinct customs or usages of this character, apparently transmitted
with the blood, which I have taken some pains to trace, and have
found them to be substantially universal in the Ganowanian fam-
ily. They may possess some value as corroborative evidence of the
unity of origin of these nations. These are, first, the custom of
saluting by kin; second, the usage of wearing the breech-cloth;
and third, the usage of sleeping at night in a state of nudity,
each person being wrapped in a scparate covering [MORGAN 1870:

274]-
Morgan, his respect for the virtues of barbarism notwithstanding,
did not consider the American Indian the equal of the European.

In his League of the Iroquois he indicates that the Indians lacked an
essential passion, namely the desire for economic gain:

This great passion of civilized man, in its use and abuse, his bless-
ing and his curse, never roused the Indian mind. It was doubtless
the great reason for his continuance in the hunter state, for the
desire of gain is one of the earliest manifestations of progressive
mind, and one of the most powerful passions of which the mind is
susceptible. It clears the forests, rears the city, builds the mer-
chantmen . . . in a word, it has civilized our race [1851:139].

Morgan’s ideas concerning the effects of race mixture on temperament
and behavior are the standard thoughts of the period, parallel in
all respects with Spencer’s views:

138

5. Spencerism

The Indian and European are at opposite poles in their physi-
ological conditions. In the former there is very little animal pas-
sion, while with the latter it is super-abundant. A pure-blooded
Indian has very little animal passion, but in the half-blood it is
sensibly augmented; and when the second generation is reached
with a cross giving three-fourths white blood, it becomes exces-
sive, and tends to indiscriminate licentiousness. If this be true in
fact, it is a potent adverse element leading to demoralization and
decay, which it will be extremely difficult to overmaster and
finally escape. In his native state, the Indian is below the passion
of love. It is entirely unknown among them, with the exception,
to a limited extent, of the Village Indians. This fact is suffi-
ciently proved by the universal prevalence of the custom of dis-
posing of the females in marriage without their knowledge or
participation in the arrangement [MORGAN 1870:207n].

Like a long line of Indianophiles stretching back to Bartolomé de las
Casas, Morgan’s life-long appreciation and defense of the American
Indian was coupled with a strong prejudice against Negroes (cf. HARRIS
1964b). In the 1850’s, as the historian Carl Resek (1960:63) tells us,
Morgan espoused the cause of abolition in the hope that unprotected
by slavery, the Negro race would disappear:

During the debate in Congress over the Compromise of 1850,
Morgan expressed the not uncommon sentiment of Negrophobia,
based partially on the belief that the Negro was a separate species.
He urged Seward to limit the expansion of slavery because “it is
time to fix some limits to the reproduction of this black race
among us. It is limited in the north by the traits of the whites.
The black population has no independent vitality among us. In
the south while the blacks are property, there can be no assign-
able limit to their reproduction. It is too thin a race intellectually
to be fit to propagate and I am perfectly satisfied from reflection
that the feeling towards this race is one of hostility throughout the
north. We have no respect for them whatever.”

What then is the meaning of the phrase the “specific identity of the
brain of all the races of mankind”’? Merely that in later years, as Resek
points out, Morgan rejected the notion of polygenesis and became a
firmly convinced monogenist. This position, however, was not, as
we have seen, incompatible with racial determinism. Like all mono-
genists, Morgan had to be something of an evolutionist even before
he began to feel the influence of Darwin and Spencer. As the races
evolve, they pass through similar biocultural stages. At any particular
stage, the innate mental condition of the descendants of any branch

139


===== PAGE 75 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of the human species tends to be essentially similar. They thus tend
to react to similar conditions in similar ways and to move in parallel
fashion from savagery to civilization. However, they certainly do not
move in tandem, all at the same time. Hence, at the present moment
in history, there are men who are bioculturally representative of all
phases of evolution; there are, in other words, “superior” and “inferior”
races.

EDWARD BURNETT TYLOR, RACIST

Precisely the same interpretation must be rendered of Ed-
ward Tylor’s position. In Primitive Culture (1958; I:7; orig. 1871)
Tylor seems to be taking an extremely advanced view when he proposes
to “eliminate considerations of hereditary varieties or races of man,
and to treat mankind as homogeneous in nature, though placed in
different grades of civilization. . . .” Yet in his Anthropology (18q9),
the first textbook in the field, Tylor displays little understanding of
the difference between racial and cultural capacities. Noting the “un-
likeness between the melancholy Russian peasant and the vivacious
Italian,” he insists that the difference “can hardly depend altogether
on climate and food and government.” Similarly, civilization can
hardly be explained by such extrinsic factors.

There seems to be in mankind inbred temperament and inbred
capacity of mind. History points the great lesson that some races
have marched on in civilization while others have stood still or
fallen back, and we should partly look for an explanation of this
in differences of intellectual and moral powers between such
tribes as the native Americans and Africans, and the Old World
nations who overmatch and subdue them [TYLOR 1899:74].

Although Tylor is certainly more restrained than many of his con-
temporaries, rarely invoking racial determinants, he appears in this to
be influenced by a sense of politeness as well as by scientific acumen.
Nonetheless, the chapter “Races of Mankind” concludes with an at-
tempt to explain why the white race is the best endowed for
leading a civilized existence. Assuming that man’s first appearance
was in the tropics, the more primitive forms of man were least in
need of civilized arts. Spreading to cooler climates, man then
evolved the specialties better suited to civilized life:

It may perhaps be reasonable to imagine as last formed the
white race of the temperate region, least able to bear extreme heat
or live without the appliances of culture, but gifted with the

powers of knowing and ruling which gave them sway over the
world [ibid.:113].

140

5. Spencerism

In this fashion, the greatest figures of late-nineteenth-century an-
thropology fell under the spell of racial determinism. Even when
the racial factor simply hovered over a discussion without actually
coming to roost, it crippled the attempt to apply scientific methods to
sociocultural phenomena. Aside from its own inherent errors, it gave
the theorists of this period a false sense of accomplishment with
respect to the nonracial aspects of their ideas about sociocultural pro-
cesses. When a sociocultural theory, such as Morgan’s, left huge
chunks of unexplained debris strewn about, one could always count on
the racial broom to sweep them out of sight. Despite their panoramic
grandeur, the theories of Spencer, Morgan, and Tylor lack the overall
coherence which one might suppose would have been insisted upon
by men so deeply convinced of the dominion of natural law. As we
shall see in the next chapter, Spencerism in practice meant eclecticism.
Despite their biological reductionism, and hence their materialism,
neither Spencer, Tylor, nor Morgan experienced the need to explore a
consistent cultural-materialist strategy. They were greatly to advance
our picture of the evolution of sociocultural phenomena in terms of
typical sequences; but their understanding of sociocultural causality
was blinded by the sands of racism.

141


===== PAGE 76 =====

Evolutionism:

D ol

S
553

It has been said of the period between 1860 and 18qo that in these
thirty years cultural anthropology had “grown from nothing to ma-
turity” (Tax 1955b:466). While agreeing with Sol Tax’s estimate of
the great formative influences of Tylor, Morgan, Spencer, and their
lesser contemporaries, we must resist the cliché that anthropology was
“nothing” before 1860. We have seen how evolutionism and racial
determinism flourished among Darwin’s predecessors and how the
Origin of Species arose from this general matrix. The burst of activity
in “cultural” anthropology after 1860 was not triggered by Darwin’s
book, but rather accompanied it, as a product of the same generative
influences. Tax himself draws attention to Prichard, Waitz, and a
number of amateur ethnologists reaching back to Lafitau whose work
provided the foundation for the period under discussion. But Tax, in
company with Lowie, Kroeber, and Kluckhohn, underestimates the
degree of continuity between the favorite anthropological fathers and
the earlier formulators of the principles of sociocultural evolution.
The “historical evolutionary school,” which according to Tax ‘“had
tun its course” in thirty years, was an integral part of a tradition

142

6. Evolutionism: Methods

that had its roots firmly and widely planted in the eighteenth century.
As we have seen, the continuity between the biocultural evolutionism
of the 1860’s and the belief in progress and perfectability of the
1760’s was unbroken. This continuity appears more pronounced if we
reject the self-constituted disciplinary boundaries which propound
the novelty of anthropological evolutionism in the 1860’s while ig-
noring the existence of Saint-Simon, Comte, and Hegel in the 1820s
and 1830’s. What the period commencing with 1860 produced was
simply a large number of better-documented and more specialized
versions of Turgot’s “universal history of mankind.”

That Darwin’s theories were not the trigger for the surge in evolu-
tionary formulations commencing shortly after the publication of
Origin is clear from the first two classic products of the period, both
published in 1861: Johann J. Bachofen’s Das Mutterrecht (Mother
Right) and Henry Maine’s Ancient Law. Concerned with the evolution
of the family, political organization, and law, neither of these treatises
suggests the nced for any acknowledgment of Darwin’s influence.
Bachofen’s Mother Right was first presented as a series of lectures
in Stuttgart in 1856, three years before Darwin’s book was published
(1AYs 1958:35), and was based almost entirely on Greek and Roman
sources, while Maine’s Ancient Law was a lawyer’s attempt to explain
the origins of different legal concepts in the tradition of Adam Fergu-
son and Montesquicu. It was also based on ancient Roman sources,
supplemented by a personal knowledge of India’s traditional com-
munities and legal systems. Both Maine and Bachofen prgduced
evidence to show that the modem European family was the résultant
of evolutionary modifications wrought on ancient kinship forms.
These were matriarchy and matrilineal descent in Bachofen’s theories,
and patriarchy and patrilineal descent in Maine’s theories. It should
be noted that Maine hedged on the question of the universality of
the patriarchal “stage,” regarding the transition from the Roman to
modern English family as a characteristic of “progressive” societies.
Bachofen, on the other hand, was convinced of the prior exis-
tence of a matrilineal stage everywhere on earth. But we shall return
to a comparison of the principal features of these and other evolu-
tionary sequences in the next chapter.

CONTINUITY IN ETHNOGRAPHY

There is also continuity between the 1860’s and the earlier
decades of the nineteenth century in the matter of ethnographic
sources. Turgot, Meiners, Klemm, Prichard, Waitz, Spencer, Morgan,

143


===== PAGE 77 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and Tylor represent so many points along a continuum of gradually
rising ethnographic standards. At the same time there occurred a steady
expansion in the number of different societies, knowledge of which
could be utilized in systematic comparisons. Although these materials
were for the most part contributed by poorly qualified travelers or
missionaries, there was some accumulation of data based on the work
of trained and skilled observers, among whom were illustrious figures
like Henry Schoolcraft, Alexander von Humboldt, Johann von Spix
and Karl von Martius, and Lewis and Clark.

It seems essential for a proper understanding of the rise of anthro-
pological theory not to posit at any point between 1750 and the present
a sharp break in the quality and quantity of ethnographic knowledge.
In subsequent chapters we shall examine the claim that the Boasians
and the British social anthropologists abruptly introduced radically
improved ethnographic standards. And we shall have occasion to re-
mark on the manifest shortcomings that still remain despite the
expansion of systematic fieldwork by anthropologically trained ethnog-
raphers. This is not to deny the great advance in quantity and quality of
cthnographic information available to the twentieth-century theore-
tician. Rather, it is to affirm the fact that such improvements accumu-
lated all during the nineteenth century and that the past and present
centuries belong on the same curve of rising standards. This point is
important because it may help to disabuse certain critics of social
science of the notion that the progressive accumulation and refine-
ment of data and theory are somechow an exclusive property of the
biological and physical sciences.

To estimate the quantity and quality of ethnographic materials
available at the beginning of the period 1860—qo, a brief analysis of
the sources in one of the era’s evolutionary monographs may prove
instructive. Edward Tylor’s Researches into the Early History of Man-
kind (1865) can be taken as representative of the higher scholarly
standards of these times. Concerned with the question of general
evolutionary directions and the origin of language, writing, naming,
tools, marriage, fire, and myths, Researches contains in embryonic
form most of the themes developed in Tylor's more mature writings.
One notes first of all extensive utilization of the ethnographic
compilations of Gustav Klemm (1843). References to smaller com-
pendia such as those of J. G. Wood (1874-80), W. Cooke Taylor
(1840), and R. G. Latham (1859) are also conspicuous. Next in
prominence are the sources that were used extensively by Tylor'’s
Enlightenment predecessors but which still yielded (then as well as
today) valuable and otherwise unobtainable information about exotic

144

Ragll

6. Evolutionism: Methods

peoples in early stages of contact: (1) the ancients, such as Herodo-
tus, Strabo, and Lucretius; (2) the Spanish Chroniclers, such as
Oviedo, Garcilaso de la Vega, and Sarmiento; (3) the early Jesuit
“relations” and missionary reports, such as those of Charlevoix,
Colden, Lafitau, and Dobrizhoffer; and (4) the narratives of great
explorers, such as those of Columbus, Cook, and many others
available in the publications of the Hakluyt Society. In addi-
tion to pre-nineteenth-century sources of this nature, Tylor used the
writings of many nineteenth-century travelers, missionaries, and scien-
tists. Thus for the ethnography of Oceania he had the United States
Government-commissioned reports of the explorations of Hale and
Wilkes. There was Mariner on Tonga; St. John on the Dyaks; T. H.
Williams on Fiji; G. Grey and W. Ellis on Polynesia; R. Taylor
and J. S. Polack on the Maori; and G. Grey, J. E. Eyre, and J. Back-
house on Australia. For his African ethnography Tylor drew on Adolf
Bastian, D. Livingstone, W. H. I. Bleek, Sir Richard F. Burton, J. S.
Moffat, Du Chaillu, E. W. Lane, J. I. Krapf, and A. Casalis. For Asia
there was Sir John Bowring on Siam; Mouat on the Andamanese;
and Sir James E. Tennent, F. Ward, and Logan on India. The richest
materials were those pertaining to the New World. For South Amer-
ica, Tylor drew on Darwin, Alexander von Humboldt, Spix and Mar-
tius, and Alfred Wallace. For Central America and Mexico, he had his
own travels to fall back on as published in his Anahuac (1861),
while for North America he used the rich firsthand accounts of Lewis
and Clark, H. R. Schoolcraft, and George Catlin. (Unaccountably
Morgan’s study of the Iroquois is not cited.) All of these sources
predate 1860.

THE IMPORTANCE OF ARCHAEOLOGY

The burst of anthropological theorizing after 1860 is not to
be understood only in relationship to the accumulation of ethno-
graphic knowledge. Perhaps even more important was the steady
increase in data derived from archaeological research. The first half of
the nineteenth century was a period of great archacological discover-
ies. These discoveries essentially confirmed the stages of history that
the eighteenth-century social philosophers had argued must have
existed on the basis of logic and their meager knowledge of con-
temporary primitive peoples. By 1860, the speculation that Europeans
must formerly have been savages had already been confirmed by unim-
peachable evidence brought out of the earth. Without keeping this
triumphant vindication in mind, we cannot appreciate the strength

145


===== PAGE 78 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of the conviction among the evolutionists of the period 1860—go
that contemporary primitives could provide valid information about
the ancient condition of humanity.

STONE, BRONZE, IRON

One of the most significant accomplishments of nineteenth-
century archaeology was the demonstration that the first Europeans
had lacked a knowledge of metallurgy. During the previous century,
the absence of metals among many contemporary primitive groups
was widely noted, and many scholars assumed that such a condition
must also have been generally characteristic of ancient times. Antoine
Goguet (1758), for example, had remarked that “the savages set before
us a striking picture of the ignorance of the ancient world, and the
practices of primitive times. They have no idea of metals and supply
the want of them by [stones and flints]” (quoted in HEIZER, 1962:
263). Many other eighteenth-century writers, basing themselves
mainly on ancient Greek and Roman sources, believed in the “three-
age system,” a stone-bronze-iron sequence of technology. It was not
until the beginning of the nineteenth century, however, that syste-
matic evidence for this view began to be produced. In 1806, extensive
government-sponsored excavations of Denmark’s shell middens and
dolmens were begun. These excavations, under the supervision of R.
Nyerup, brought to light stone implements that predated the earliest
cultures referred to in the Danish sagas. The collections from these
sites were placed in the Museum of Northern Antiquities in Copen-
hagen where C. J. Thomsen (1848; orig. 1836) used them to establish
the first archaeologically validated sequences of the Stone, Bronze,
and Iron ages (PENNIMAN 1965:55-56). The sequence was confirmed
in the 1850’s by stratigraphic techniques applied by Thomsen’s stu-
dent J. J. A. Worsaae, to Danish peat-moss sites. In the meantime,
under the influence of the Danish historian Vedel-Simonsen, the three-
age formulation had been taken up in Sweden by M. Bruzelius in 1816
and Sven Nilsson in 1838.

THE DISCOVERY OF THE NEOLITHIC
AND PALEOLITHIC

Another set of influential archaeological discoveries involved
neolithic lake sites. The Irish bogs were reported on first by W.

Wilde in 1840, followed by F. Keller’s studies of pile dwellings near
Zurich in the mid 1850’s. Further corroboration of the evolutionist

146

r’

&

6. Evolutionism: Methods

position came from the discovery of flint- implements recognized as
even older than the Danish stone age. Grappling with the problem
of the Mosaic chronology, John Fiere (1800) had already suggested
that certain buried implements dated from a time “even more re-
mote than the present world.” In France in the late 1820’s, Mme.
de Chistol, Marcel du Serres, and M. Tournal (1833) presented
evidence of the contemporaneity of man and extinct Pleistocene
fauna. This was followed in 1836 by Boucher de Perthes’ studies of
paleolithic tools and fauna at Abbeville. One of Boucher de Perthes’
principal antagonists, Dr. Rigollot, was converted to the new chronol-
ogy by his own discoveries at St. Acheul in 1855. By 1860, additional
work by Falconer, Prestwick, Lartet, and Lyell placed man’s earliest
beginnings well back into the Pleistocene. Nonetheless, the belief
that man’s antiquity did not exceed 6,000 years remained a respectable
opinion until the beginning of the Darwinian period. This belief
somewhat diluted the archaeological evidence of progressive evolution,
since it remained possible within the compressed chronology that the
earliest stone-age periods of Europe were merely degraded epilogues
to a higher “golden age” represented by the Egyptian and Babylonian
civilizations.

LYELL'S INTERPRETATION OF THE
PALEOLITHIC

The most decisive event in the defeat of this objection was
the publication of Charles Lyell's Antiquity of Man (1863), a book
whose contributions to the foundation of modern anthropological
theory cannot be overestimated. Lyell, confronting the issues that
Darwin had assiduously avoided, put together the available geological,
archaeological, linguistic, and ethnological evidence in proof of the
contemporaneity of artifacts and extinct animals, whose evolution
into modern types, on the hypothesis of transformism, would have
required tens of thousands of years. The men who made these arti-
facts, Lyell concluded, must have been drastically inferior in mental
constitution to modern man. Otherwise, so great was the time repre-
sented at the St. Acheul gravel pits and the Liege caves that we should
expect to find the earth full of the remains of all sorts of civilized
achievements, long antedating our own. If the carliest men had been
as intelligent as modern Englishmen, we should now be finding:

- . . lines of buried railways or electric telegraphs, from which the
best engineers of our day might gain invaluable hints; astronomi-
cal instruments and microscopes of more advanced construction

147


===== PAGE 79 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

than any known in Europe, and other indications of perfec-
tion in the arts and sciences, such as the nineteenth century has
not yet witnessed. . . . Vainly should we be straining our imagi-
nations to guess the possible uses and meaning of such relics,—
machines, perhaps, for navigating the air or exploring the depths
of the ocean, or for calculating arithmetical problems, beyond the
wants or even the conception of living mathematicians [LYELL 1863:

379]-

Thus, in Lyell’s new perspective on man’s place in geological time,
there was little room for the claim that the ancient civilizations in
Egypt and Mesopotamia marked a high point from which the
stone-age peoples and contemporary primitives had degenerated.
Compared to the Abbevillian hand axes and the extinct animal species
with which they were associated, the age of the Egyptian monuments
faded into insignificance:

Nevertheless, geologically speaking, and in reference to the
date of the first age of stone, these records of the valley of the
Nile may be called extremely modern. Wherever excavations have
been made into the Nile mud underlying the foundations of
Egyptian cities, as, for example, sixty feet below the peristyle
of the obelisk of Heliopolis, and generally in the alluvial plains of
the Nile, the bones met with belong to living species of quad-
rupeds, such as the camel, dromedary, dog, ox, and pig, without,
as yet, the association in any single instance of the tecth or bone
of a lost species [ibid.:383].

For an understanding of the continuity between the evolutionary
formulations of the second and first halves of the century, we must
note the fact that Lyell himself had visited the pits at St. Acheul in
1859. Witnessing the excavation of a flint tool, he returned at once
to express his opinion in favor of the antiquity of the Acheulian arti-
facts at the meeting of the British Association at Aberdeen (ibid.:104).

TYLOR'S DEPENDENCE ON
ARCHAEOLOGICAL DATA

Edward Tylor’s Researches into the Early History of Mankind
may once again serve to demonstrate the importance of pre-Darwinian
archaeological achievements for the theories of the period 1860—go.
It may be said without exaggeration that archaeological evidence is at
least as important as ethnographic evidence for Tylor's conclusions
concerning the overall uniformity of evolutionary change. The “three-
age” classification is employed throughout the book, as well as a

148

6. Evolutionism: Methods

modification that had recently been introduced whereby the “Stone
Age” was divided into “Ground” and “Unground” phases. In addition
to the ethnographic sources previously discussed, Tylor cites Lyell,
Christie, Lartet, Prestwick, Wilde, Wilson, and Goguet. The scope
and importance of archaeological evidence in Tylor’s evolutionism is
set forth in the following passage:

These combined characters of rudeness and the absence of grind-
ing give the remains of the Unground Stone Age an extremely
important bearing on the history of Civilization, from the way
in which they bring together evidence of great rudeness and great
antiquity. The antiquity of the Drift implements is, as has been
said, proved by direct geological evidence. The Cave implements,
even of the reindeer period, are proved by their fauna to be carlier,
as they are seen at a glance to be ruder, than those of the crom-
lech period and of the earliest lake-dwellings of Switzerland, both
belonging to the Ground Stone Age. To the student who views
Human Civilization as in the main an upward development, a
more fitting starting point could scarcely be offered than this wide
and well-marked progress from an carlier and lower, to a later and
higher, stage of the history of human art [1871:198].

Later, in his article on “Anthropology” in the ninth edition of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Tylor (1878) again acknowledged the debt
that the evolutionists owed to archaeological discoveries:

It has been especially the evidence of prehistoric archaeology
which, within the last few years, has given to the natural develop-
ment theory of civilisation a predominance hardly disputed on
anthropological grounds. . . . The finding of ancient stone im-
plements buried in the ground in almost every habitable district
of the world, including the seats of the great ancient civilisations,
such as Egypt, Assyria, India, China, Greece, etc., may be ad-
duced to show that the inhabitants of these regions had at some
time belonged to the stone age [TYLOR quoted in OPLER 1964a:132].

THE LIMITATIONS OF ARCHAEOLOGY

To a substantial degree, the contributions of Tylor and his
evolutionistic contemporaries were an attempt to flesh out the
archacologically revealed seriation of artifacts with the stages of social
and ideational growth, especially of kinship, political, and religious in-
stitutions. It was recognized that archaeology had relatively little to
contribute on its own in these matters. It was impossible from

archaeological evidence to decide whether the Ground Stone Age peo-

149


===== PAGE 80 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 6. Evolutionism: Methods

ples practiced monogamy, were patrilineal or matrilineal, or believed
in one god or many.

The intent of supplementing archaeological evidence by utilizing
ethnographic and historical data is quite explicit throughout the pe-
riod. Morgan (1877:8), for example, established his definition of
“ethnical periods” in terms of savagery, barbarism, and civilization,
only after duly noting the usefulness of the Danish archaeologists’
terms “Age of Stone, of Bronze and of Iron” for the “classification of
objects of ancient art.” Morgan’s testy adversary, John McLennan,
spelled out the limitations of archaeological materials in the following
terms:

The geological record, of course, exhibits races as rude as any now
living, some perhaps even more so, but then it goes no farther
than to inform us what food they ate, what weapons they used,
and what was the character of their ornaments. More than this
was not to be expected from that record, for it was not in its nature
to preserve any memorials of those aspects of human life in which
the philosopher is chiefly interested—of the family or tribal group-
ings, the domestic and political organisation [Mc LENNAN 1865:6].

THE COMPARATIVE METHOD

All theorists of the latter half of the nineteenth century pro-
posed to fill the gaps in the available knowledge of universal history
largely by means of a special and much-debated procedure known as
the “comparative method.” The basis for this method was the belief
that sociocultural systems observable in the present bear differential
degrees of resemblance to extinct cultures. The life of certain con-
temporary socicties closely resembles what life must have been like
during the paleolithic; other groups resemble typical neolithic culture;
and others resemble the earliest state-organized societies. Morgan’s
(1870:7) view of this prolongation of the past into the present is
characteristic:

. . the domestic institutions of the barbarous, and even of the
savage ancestors of mankind, are still exemplified in portions of
the human family with such completeness that, with the excep-
tion of the strictly primitive period, the several stages of this
progress are tolerably well preserved. They are seen in the organi-
zation of socicty upon the basis of sex, then upon the basis of kin,
and finally upon the basis of territory; through the successive
forms of marriage and of the family, with the systems of consan-
guinity thereby created; through house life and architecture;
and through progress in usages with respect to the ownership and
inheritance of property.

150

A similar viewpoint on the relevance of contemporary primitives to
the interpretation of prehistory formed the essential premise of A.
Lane-Fox Pitt-Rivers, founder of the Pitt-Rivers Museum at Oxford:

. . . the existing races, in their respective stages of progression,
may be taken as the bona fide representatives of the races of an-
tiquity. . . . They thus afford us living illustrations of the social
customs, the forms of government, laws, and warlike practices,
which belong to the ancient races from which they remotely
sprang, whose implements, resembling with but little difference,
their own, are now found low down in the soil . . . [PITT-RIVERS

1906:53].

To apply the comparative method, the varieties of contemporary
institutions are arranged in a sequence of increasing antiquity. This
is achieved through an essentially logical, deductive operation. The
implicit assumption is that the older forms are the simpler ones, but
in practice many different kinds of logical assumptions are involved, a
matter to which we turn in a later section.

THE ORIGIN OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

What justification existed for this extrapolation from con-
temporary primitives to ancient society? It has commonly been as-
sumed on Lowie’s (1937:19-29) authority that the main stimulus for
this practice came out of biology where zoological and botanical
knowledge of extant organisms was routinely applied to the interpre-
tation of the structure and function of extinct fossil forms. No doubt
there were several late-nincteenth-century anthropological applications
of this principle which explicitly referred to biological precedent. In
the 1860’s, however, it was the paleontology of Lyell, rather than of
Darwin, that was involved. Thus, the greatest of the British prehis-
torians, John Lubbock (1865), justified his attempt to “illustrate”
the life of prehistoric times in terms of an explicit analogy with
geological practices:

. . . the archacologist is free to follow the methods which have
been so successfully pursued in geology—the rude bone and stone
implements of bygone ages being to the one what the remains of
extinct animals are to the other. The analogy may be pursued
even further than this. Many mammalia which are extinct in
Europe have representatives still living in other countries. Our
fossil pachyderms, for instance, would be almost unintelligible
but for the species which still inhabit some parts of Asia and
Africa; the secondary marsupials are illustrated by their existing

151


===== PAGE 81 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

representatives in Australia and South America; and in the same
manner, if we wish clearly to understand the antiquities of Eu-
rope, we must compare them with the rude implements and
weapons still, or until lately, used by the savage races in other
parts of the world. In fact, the Van Diemaner and South Ameri-
can are to the antiquary what the opossum and the sloth are to
the geologist [LusBoCK 1865:416].

But Lubbock was here simply employing a stylish rationale for a socio-
cultural method that antedated both Darwin and Lyell. The roots
of the comparative method go back into the eighteenth century.
Indeed, the Cambridge historian ]. W. Burrow has attempted to iso-
late the origin of the practice among the “philosophic historians of the
Scottish Enlightenment.” Thus he points out that Adam Ferguson
(1767) believed that in the present conditions of the American In-
dian, “we behold, as in a mirror, the features of our own progenitors.”
Sir James Mackintosh (1799) referred specifically to the preservation
of barbarous phases of culture side by side with civilization: “We can
[now] examine almost every variety of character, manners, opinions
and feclings and prejudices of mankind into which they can be thrown
either by rudeness of barbarism or by the capricious corruption of
refinement” (quoted in BURROW 1966:11-12). There is no reason,
however, to confine the roots of the comparative method to the Scots.
The idea is actually an integral part of the Enlightenment’s notion
of “progress” and was shared in embryonic form at least by every
eighteenth-century social philosopher who believed that European
civilization represented an advance over an earlier and “ruder” condi-
tion. For how could one speak of such progress if there were not some
base line for comparison? Almost simultaneously with the introduc-
tion of the concept of the “state of nature,” “savages” viewed alter-
natively as miserable, innocent, or noble were used to “illustrate” the
condition out of which European socicty was presumed to have arisen.

It is true that zoologists were making use of the comparative
method as early as the eightcenth century. Indeed, as soon as the
extinct fossil forms of life came to the attention of geologists and biol-
ogists, the comparative method was applied in an attempt to under-
stand what kinds of organisms they had been and to assign them
a place in the Linnaean taxonomy. It is important to remember, how-
ever, that these early manifestations of the comparative method in
paleontology were not part of a theory of bio-evolution. In biology the
method was first applied to guide the assignment of fossil missing
links to positions in the “great chain of being.”

Another eighteenth-century manifestation of the comparative

152

6. Evolutionism: Methods

method is associated with the establishment of linguistic science.
When William Jones in 1786 first proposed that Greek, Latin, Gothic,
Celtic, and Sanskrit had a common origin, he was in effect asserting
that the comparison of contemporary languages could yield reliable
information concerning the nature of languages spoken by chronolog-
ically remote peoples. Jones’s suggestions were systematically pursued
by Friedrich von Schlegel (1808) and Franz Bopp (1816). In 1822
Jacob Grimm’s formulations of the regularities of vowel changes in the
Indo-European languages provided a fresh confirmation of the validity
of the comparative method applied to linguistic phenomena. By the
1860’s the triumphs of “philology” in outlining the steps in the evo-
lution of Indo-European phonology, grammar, and semantics served
along with paleontology and archaeology to remind anthropologists
of the validity of the comparative approach.

Although not named as such, we might also note here that the in-
troduction of the principle of uniformitarianism by Hutton and Lyell
into geology was actually another example of the same general
method: it was this principle which made it possible to connect va-
rieties of contemporary and ancient geomorphological phenomena in a
logical sequence based upon processes demonstrable for the present,
but only inferential for the past.

Finally we may note that it is merely another version of thf} com-
parative method which permits astronomers to inspect populations of
recent (close) and “fossil” (distant) stars and galaxies, and to arrange
them in probable evolutionary sequences, without ever hoping to be
able to observe any of the postulated transformations. It is Flear,
therefore, that the comparative method is closely related to the rise of
scientific theory in many different disciplines.

THE VALUE OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

Placing the origin of the comparative method in the Enlight-
enment prepares us to evaluate the evolutionists of 1860-go from a
more generous perspective than has hitherto been fashionable. We see
that when a great prehistorian like Lubbock made an attempt to
illustrate the life of the “paleolithic” and “neolithic” peoples (Lub-
bock’s terms) by reference to contemporary primitives, it was at the
end of a period of archaeological discoveries that had vindicated thle
use to which the comparative method had been put by the social phi-
losophers of the preceding century. This point is grudgingly conceded
by Lowie (1937:22) who notes that

153


===== PAGE 82 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

prehistory proved evolution by the rigorous techniques of geolog-
ical stratigraphy at a time when ethnographers were still groping
for proper methods of investigating living aborigines. No wonder
that ethnographers leaned heavily on the staff of archacology.

But for Lowie, as for all of the Boasians, the use of the comparative
method was the cardinal error of the evolutionist school. Accord-
ing to Lowie, the evolutionists as a class failed to see “the limited
range of cultural facts for which progress could be directly demon-
strated. . . . Prehistory,” he continued, “had nothing whatsoever to
offer on the growth of supernaturalism and social organization”
(ibid.:23). “A fatal fallacy of all this reasoning lay in its naive equa-
tion of modemn primitive groups with the primeval savage. .. ”

(ibid.:24).

The resemblance of modern savages to a primeval ape-man is
so important a tenet that we must explicitly expose the error. Tt
lies in failing to understand that even the simplest recent group
has a prolonged past, during which it has progressed very far in-
deed from the hypothetical stage [ibid.:25].

These abuses of the comparative method must be dissociated from
the general principle at issue. Some of them, as Lowie himself points
out, were avoided by the “greatest of the evolutionists.” Morgan, for
example, was perfectly well aware that none of the contemporary
groups of primitives could be equated with “primeval ape-man.” His
“Lower Status of Savagery” which “commenced with the infancy of
the human race” was a purely deductive condition not represented
by any contemporary primitive group: “No exemplification of tribes
by mankind in this condition remained to the historic period”
(Morgan 1877:10). As for an awareness of the particular historical ca-
reers of primitive cultures, all the great evolutionists conceded the
necessity of accounting for specialties of each group in terms of the
natural and cultural features of local environments.

‘What we must consider in Lowie’s criticism is not the abuse of the
comparative method, but the question of its general validity as a
means of understanding the evolution of culture. The issue to be con-
fronted is whether the cultures of contemporary primitive groups can
be used to orient our understanding of chronologically earlier socio-
cultural arrangements. Are there such things as surviving stone-age
cultures? The answer, as undeniable today as it was in 1860, is yes.
This does not mean, of course, that each and every marginal band-
organized society may be taken as equally representative of a particular
stage of sociocultural evolution. Throughout prehistory, as through-

154

6. Evolutionism: Methods

out the contemporary primitive world, many different varieties of cul-
ture flourished in adaptation to varieties of specific cultural and
ecological conditions. The late-nineteenth-century evolutionists, as we
shall see in a moment, tended to underestimate the amount of diver-
sity characteristic of both contemporary and paleolithic groups. Lu-
dicrous errors were committed, for example, on the assumption that
peoples who lacked metallurgy necessarily also lacked social stratifica-
tion or that there must have been a universal stage of matrilineality
preceding patrilineality. On the other hand, equally ludicrous errors
were committed by the Boasians in their attempt to discredit the com-
parative method. For example, many “historical particularists” argued
that sociocultural evolution had taken so many diverse paths that the
simplest sorts of technologies could be found in association with the
most “complex” forms of social organization. The Australian “section”
system was a favorite example of this alleged disparity between tech-
no-economic and social-organizational levels. Similarly, the Boasian
critics of the comparative method attempted to show that such insti-
tutions as slavery, private property, and state government were ca-
priciously associated with a great variety of additional sociocultural
features. Several of these examples of apparently quixotic and fortui-
tous associations will be examined at length in the chapters devoted
to Boas and his pupils. For the moment it must suffice to state that
there is no specific abuse of the comparative method which could
justify the denial of the relevance of our ethnographic knowledge of
contemporary pre-state societies to the task of unraveling the course
of sociocultural evolution. It is unquestionable that contemporary
primitives exhibit techno-environmental, techno-economic, social-or-
ganizational, and ideological adaptations which are both structurally
and chronologically distinctive of preliterate and pre-state societies. A
list of primitive features would include: egalitarian unilineal descent
groups, age grades, classificatory kinship terminologies, men’s cults,
low-density séttlements, erratic labor schedules, communal ownership
of strategic resources, absence of internal political sanctions, egalitarian
redistribution systems, and relative impermanence of settlements, to
mention only a few. These features can be given a causal nomothetic
explanation only to the extent that we assume similar institutional
complexes existed during the paleolithic and were and are everywhere
displaced by the evolution of state-organized societies.

In principle, that is, ignoring abuses which can arise from the overly
mechanical application of any good idea, there is no less justification
for the comparative method in anthropology than in biology. Indeed,
it could very well be argued that there is a much firmer basis for the

155


===== PAGE 83 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

extrapolation from contemporary primitives to paleolithic societies
than from contemporary bioforms to extinct species. This contention
rests on the fact that cultural evolution may be said to involve fewer
major types of adaptations at any single instant than is true of biology.
Such a judgment is rendered plausible because of the absence of any
process among cultural forms analogous to that of speciation among
bioforms. Since cultural innovations diffuse, even between radically
different sociocultural systems, rapid rates of evolution do not even-
tuate in a multiplicity of new types (see pp. 173ff.).

THE LIMITATIONS OF THE
COMPARATIVE METHOD

Of course, in practice, the comparative method can yield re-
sults which are only as good as the archaeology and the ethnography
from which its data derives. If the ethnography itself presents a false
picture of contemporary primitive life, it is scarcely worth transferring
to temporally remote cultures. In order for ethnography to be applied
to the interpretation of prehistory, systematic comparisons of many
different cultures of a similar basic techno-environmental and techno-
economic type are needed. From such a comparison, it is possible to
identify which clements in any given case are the result of contact
with more complex societies, which are a result of local environmen-
tal circumstances, and which are statistically associated with the type
itself. It is a serious error, for example, to suppose that contemporary
band-organized hunting and gathering societies are representative of
the great bulk of paleolithic hunting and gathering groups. Almost all
of the ethnographically classic cases of band-organized hunters and
gatherers are marginal or refugee peoples driven into, or confined to,
unfavorable environments by surrounding groups of more advanced
societies. Many evolutionary anomalies in social organization are trace-
able to contacts between low density band- or village-organized groups
and complex state societies resulting in special colonial or minority
status.

There is no denying that the late-nineteenth-century applications of
the comparative method were based on grossly inadequate ethnographic
data. But many of the evolutionists, especially Morgan, Tylor, and
Spencer, attempted to overcome these deficiencies by a strategy which
has numerous votaries among the statistical schools of modemn an-
thropology. Unable to vouch for the accuracy of any given instance,
each of these evolutionists turned to the amassment of large numbers

156

Dol

6. Evolutionism: Methods

of cases. As we shall see in Chapter 21, there is much to be said in
favor of the claim that ethnographic errors can be balanced out when
large samples are employed. Of course, in the nineteenth century the
basis of selection of cases tended to be rather crude, exposing the
evolutionists to the charge of selecting only the cases which confirmed
a particular hypothesis. Nonetheless, the practice of amassing large
numbers of cases must be considered in relation to the stereotyped
version of ethnographic irresponsibility that was imposed upon the
evolutionists during the Boasian critique of the comparative method.

TYLOR'S USE OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

Tylor’s (1958, I:9-10) account of this aspect of the compara-
tive method is especially noteworthy. He was asked by an historian to
explain how a “statement as to customs, myths, beliefs, etc., of a
savage tribe” could “be treated as evidence where it depends on the
testimony of some traveler or missionary, who may be a superficial ob-
server, more or less ignorant of the native language, a careless retailer of
unsifted talk, a man prejudiced or even willfully deceitful” (ibid.)?

This question is, indeed, one which every ethnographer ought to
keep clearly and constantly before his mind. Of course he is bound
to use his best judgment as to the trustworthiness of all authors
he quotes, and if possible to obtain several accounts to certify each
point in each locality. But it is over and above these measures of
precaution that the test of recurrence comes in. If two indepen-
dent visitors to different countries, say a medieval Mohammedan
in Tartary and a modern Englishman in Dahome, or a Jesuit
missionary in Brazil and a Wesleyan in the Fiji Islands, agree in
describing some analogous art or rite or myth among the people
they have visited, it becomes difficult or impossible to sct down
such correspondence to accident or wilful fraud. A story by a
bushranger in Australia may, perhaps, be objected to as a mistake
or an invention, but did a Methodist minister in Guinea conspire
with him to cheat the public by telling the same story there? The
possibility of intentional or unintentional mystification is often
barred by such a state of things as that a similar statement is
made in two remote lands, by two witnesses, of whom A lived a
century before B, and B appears never to have heard of A. How
distant are the countries, how wide apart the dates, how different
the creeds and characters of the observers, in the catalogue of
facts of civilization needs no farther showing to any one who will

157


===== PAGE 84 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

even glance at the footnotes of the present work. And the more
odd the statement, the less likely that several people in several
places should have made it wrongly. This being so, it seems rea-
sonable to judge that the statements are in the main truly given,
and that their close and regular coincidence is due to the crop-
ping up of similar facts in various districts of culture. Now the
most important facts of ethnography are vouched for in this way
[ibid.:g-10].

MORGAN’S STRATEGY

The same basic strategy may be found in the approach which
Lewis Henry Morgan developed in his comparative study of kinship
structures. Having discovered in 1858 that the Ojibwa in Wisconsin had
essentially the same kinship terminology as the Iroquois, Morgan at
once prepared a questionnaire to secure information from Indian
agents and missionaries all over the country. Encouraged by the re-
sponses, he himself went on expeditions between 1859 and 1862
through Kansas and Nebraska, up the Missouri, to Hudson’s Bay and
to the Rocky Mountains. In 1859, he discovered that the same ter-
minology occurred in India and obtained the support of the Smithso-
nian Institution to mail out hundreds of his questionnaires to United
States consular officials and representatives throughout the world.
Forty-eight completed schedules formed the factual basis for Systems
of Consanguinity and Affinity (1870).

THE ORIGIN OF THE STATISTICAL
COMPARATIVE METHOD

Perhaps the greatest anthropological paper of the nineteenth
century was Edward Tylor’s “On a Method of Investigating the Devel-
opment of Institutions, Applied to Laws of Marriage and Descent”
(1889). Using a sample of between 300 and 400 societies, Tylor placed
the comparative method on a statistical basis. He calculated percent-
ages of probabilities of association (“adhesions” is his word) between
postmarital residence, descent, teknonymy, and couvade and thereby
advanced toward an understanding of exogamy, endogamy, and the
origin of cross-cousin marriage and incest prohibitions. With this con-
tribution, Tylor may be considered to have founded the modern
statistical cross-cultural approach as represented in the work of George
P. Murdock and the Human Relations Area Files (see Chap. 21).
Characteristically, Tylor’s article ends with a plea for better cthno-
graphic data.

158

Datll

6. Evolutionism: Methods

|
|
|
L

SPENCER’'S STRATEGY

Herbert Spencer must also be credited with an ambitious at-
tempt to improve the ethnographic basis of the comparative method.
This took the form of a multivolume series of tables and citations
published in huge folios under the title Descriptive Sociology (1873-
1934). Each volume had two main parts. First the tables, consisting of
condensed statements arranged in a uniform manner and intending, in
Spencer’s words, to give a summary view of each society’s “morphol-
ogy, its physiology and (if a society having a known history) its devel-
opment.” Second, each volume contained the relevant extracts from
cited works that provided the basis for the tabular summaries. Spencer
projected a third part of Descriptive Sociology, in which the extracts
under one heading, such as Political, Ecclesiastical, or Ceremonial in-
stitutions, would be brought together; but this aspect of the work was
never completed. The entire project was conceived by Spencer to be a
necessary prelude to the writing of his Principles of Sociology (1876),
which was in turn conceived as the capstone to his lifework as em-
bodied in the various volumes of his “synthetic philosophy”. The plan
for Descriptive Sociology was laid down as early as 1859 in an article in
the Westminster Review, entitled “What Knowledge Is of Most
Worth?” In this article, Spencer urged that the biographical approach
to history be superseded by the collection of information bearing upon
“the natural history of society.” It is clear that in Spencer’s view the
amassment of sociocultural data was inseparable from the task of de-
scribing the stages of sociocultural evolution, or in other words, that the
comparative method was an integral part of social science. I shall quote
at length from this original conception since, as a guide to the collection
of ethnographic information, it foreshadows the instructions embodied
in the Royal Anthropological Institute’s Notes and Queries as well as
those in George P. Murdock’s list of cultural universals—the organizing
frame for the Cross Cultural Survey and Human Relations Area Files

(see p. 613).

The thing it really concerns us to know is, the natural history of
society. We want all facts which help us to understand how a na-
tion has grown and organized itself. Among these, let us of course
have an account of its government; with as little as may be of
gossip about the men who officered it, and as much as possible
about the structure, principles, methods, prejudices, corruptions,
etc., which it exhibited; and let this account include not only the
nature and actions of the central government, but also those of

159


===== PAGE 85 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

local governments, down to their minutest ramifications. Let us
of course also have a parallel description of the ecclesiastical gov-
ernment—its organization, its conduct, its power, its relations to
the state; and accompanying this, the ceremonial, creed, and reli-
gious ideas—not only those nominally believed, but those really
believed and acted upon. Let us at the same time be informed of
the control exercised by class over class, as displayed in social ob-
servances—in titles, salutations, and forms of address. Let us
know, too, what were all the other customs which regulated the
popular life out-of-doors and in-doors, including those concerning
the relations of the sexes, and the relations of parents to children.
The superstitions, also, from the more important myths down to
the charms in common use, should be indicated. Next should
come a delincation of the industrial system: showing to what ex-
tent the division of labor was carried; how tribes were regulated,
whether by caste, guilds, or otherwise; what was the connection
between employers and employed; what were the agencies for dis-
tributing commodities; what were the means of communication;
what was the circulating medium. Accompanying all of which
should be given an account of the industrial arts technically con-
sidered; stating the processes in use, and the quality of the prod-
ucts. Further, the intellectual condition of the nation in its
various grades should be depicted; not only with respect to the
kind and amount of education, but with respect to the progress
made in science, and the prevailing manner of thinking. The de-
gree of aesthetic culture, as displayed in architecture, sculpture,
painting, dress, music, poetry, and fiction, should be described.
Nor should there be omitted a sketch of the daily lives of the
people—their food, their homes, and their amusements. And,
lastly, to connect the whole, should be exhibited the morals,
theoretical and practical, of all classes, as indicated in their laws,
habits, proverbs, deeds. These facts, given with as much brevity
as consistent with clearness and accuracy, should be so grouped
and arranged that they may be comprehended in their ensemble,
and contemplated as mutually-dependent parts of one great
whole. . . the highest office which the historian can discharge is
that of so narrating the lives of nations as to furnish materials for
a Comparative Sociology, and for the subsequent determination
of the ultimate laws to which social phenomena conform [SPENCER
1859, quoted in SPENCER 1875:iv-vi].

In 1870 Spencer hired three assistants to begin the work of compil-
ing the materials for Descriptive Sociology. The first volume appeared
in 1873, and additional installments continued to be issued after
Spencer’s death, until 1934, under the provisions of his will. They are

160

T

6. Evolutionism: Methods

as follows: 1. English (1873); II. Ancient Mexicans, Central Ameri-
cans, Chibchans, Ancient Peruvians (1874); III. Types of Lowest
Races, Negritto, and Malayo-Polynesian Races (1874); IV. African
Races (1875); V. Asiatic Races (1876); VI. North and South American
Races (1878); VII. Hebrews and Phoenicians (1880); VIII. French
(1881); IX. Chinese (1910); X. Hellenic Greeks (1910); XI. Ancient
Egyptians (1925); XII. Hellenistic Greeks (1928); XIII. Mesopota-
r(ma (;929); XIV. African Races (1930); and XV. Ancient Romans
1934)-

Spencer’s intense concern with ethnographic data casts a curious
shadow over Lowic’s History of Ethnological Theory, from whose in-
dex Spencer’s name is absent. Evidently Spencer’s use of the term
“sociology” in his titles reassures many anthropologists that Spencer
can safely be ignored by a discipline that emphasizes primitive and
peasant sociocultural systems as opposed to modern Euro-American
societies. What then are we to make of the complaint by J. Rumney
(1934:22), Spencer’s scientific executor, that Principles of Sociology
was too much involved with primitive ethnography to qualify as
sociology?

Spencer stressed too much what is now called cultural anthro-
pology, which is only a division of general sociology, . . .
Spencer was far too interested in the origin of institutions, prim-
itive habits and the survival of ancient customs. . . .

THE ABUSE OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

Despite the great labor expended by the late-nineteenth-
century anthropologists on behalf of improving ethnographic compe-
te'nce, it cannot be denied that the evolutionists were perpetrators and
victims of massive ethnographic errors which, far from being canceled
out by appeal to a large number of cases, became that much more en-
trenched by reiteration. We shall have occasion to discuss some of the
worst of these in connection with the evolutionary schemes of Mor-
gan and McLennan. The errors of the ethnographically less well-in-
formed theoreticians are highly offensive to the modern reader. John
L}.\bbock, despite his fine grasp of the evidence for the European pre-
historic sequences, is the classic example. His Pre-Historic Times is
replete with tables, charts, and diagrams setting forth in minutest de-
tail the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the major European
archaeological sites and museum collections. Lubbock, himself, system-

161


===== PAGE 86 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

atically combed Europe for traces of prehistoric cultures, visiting a
half-dozen lake sites in Switzerland, shell mounds in Denmark and
Scotland, and the bone caves of the Dordogne. He claimed to have per-
sonally examined “almost every gravel pit and section from Amiens
down to the sea” (1865:vii). But when Lubbock turned in his final
chapter to the evidence from ethnography, he exhibited an atro-
cious indifference to the reliability of his sources; and Lowie justly up-
braids him for certain extravagances:

The Andamanese have “no sense of shame”; “many of their habits
are like those of beasts.” The Greenlanders have no religion, no
worship, no ceremonies. The Iroquois have no religion, no word
for God, Fuegians not the least spark of religion. “. . . there
can be no doubt that, as an almost universal rule, savages are
cruel” [LOWIE 1937:24].

But Lowie permits his indignation over these errors to carry over into
a critique of the principle of the comparative method. He blames the
“naive equation of modern primitive groups with the primeval savage”
for leading “serious writers” like Lubbock “into absurd underestimation
of recent tribes and uncritical acceptance of tourists’ tales” (ibid.). It
should be apparent that this line of disparagement of the comparative
method is a non sequitur. Lubbock’s low level of ethnographic under-
standing was not induced by the comparative method; rather his use of
the comparative method was rendered unsatisfactory by his meager
understanding of contemporary primitive societies. The origin of Lub-
bock’s mistakes rested in the thralldom of racial determinism which
lay over Lubbock and all his contemporaries. Since they believed that
primitive peoples represented biologically inferior grades of humanity,
or even different species, they were prone to accept reports exaggerat-
ing the difference between European and primitive bio-psychological
dispositions and capacities. This leads us to the next step in Lowie’s
critique of the comparative method—what he calls “the complete
abandonment of objective criteria”:

Sir John’s writings teem with subjective judgments, mnaively
passed on the basis of resemblance to or deviation from Furopean
standards. The Hottentots are “disgusting,” the Australians “mis-
erable” savages . . . he is himself constantly mortified, shocked,
horrified, by the savage scene [ibid.].

Once again it is obvious that the peculiarly obnoxious character of
Lubbock’s judgments results not from the comparative method but
from the prevailing conviction that Europeans are racially superior and
that their institutions are justified by that superiority.

162

ot

6. Evolutionism: Methods

THE RELATIVIST CRITIQUE

Lowie goes on to say that, in contrast to Lubbock’s ethnocen-
trism, “the modern scientific procedure is to refrain from all subjec-
tive judgments” (ibid.:25, Lowie’s italics). This certainly was the
self-image developed by the Boasians and others who insisted that
ethnography be founded upon complete moral and ethical relativism
But we shall examine evidence in subsequent chapters which indicates
that the relativists were unable to achieve the semblance of political
neutrality with respect to the destinies of primitive peoples. Modern
anthropologists can criticize Lubbock for his ethnocentric judgments
only at the risk of hypocrisy if the objection be that he had strong
convictions concerning the relative values of primitive and civilized in-
stitutions. During the period of reaction to the nineteenth-century
evolutionists, it was considered the worst of anthropological manners
to evaluate the relative merits of different cultural practices, especially
if primitive patterns were compared unfavorably to Euro-American
ones. But contributions to the political expression of particular value
positions consist of both action and inaction. Merely to refrain from
opinion is not therefore to avoid the expression of opinion. Thus, as we
shall see, the sclection of subjects about which one will not carry on
research, teach, or publish represents as much of a commitment as !
the reverse. This being the case, then cultural relativism, at its best,“
would represent a state of moral and ethical confusion characterized
by contradictory, weak, unconscious, or disguised value judgments. In
ethnography, it is not at all clear that a cryptic or confused moral and
ethical stance is preferable to an openly avowed one. According to
Lowie, while “an anthropologist as an individual cannot but respond
to alien manifestations in accordance with his national and individual
norms,” no carry-over of these reactions can be tolerated in his ethno-
graphic work: “. . . as a scientist, however, he merely registers
cannibalism or infanticide, understands, and if possible explains such
customs” (ibid.:25). The preposterous assumption here is that reliable
descriptions of cannibalism and infanticide cannot be achieved by
ethnographers who openly oppose these practices. But the two func-
tions are not at all necessarily incompatible. We must presume at
least that reliable descriptions have been submitted by ethnographers
who openly expressed their distaste for cannibalism. Moreover, in an
age where so much anthropological teaching and research is supported
by organizations with definite value commitments—such as the Na-
tional Institutes of Health, the Ford Foundation, and the United

163


===== PAGE 87 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

States Agency for International Development—it will become in-
creasingly difficult to convince anyone that descriptions of poverty,
exploitation, disease, and malnutrition are admissible only to the
extent that they lack “subjective pronouncements.” Thus to return
to Lubbock and his ethnocentric contemporaries, we condemn them
not because they expressed value judgments, but because their judg-
ments were based on false facts and theories. Their arrogance with re-
spect to contemporary primitives and preliterate societies is intolerable
first because they assumed that had they themselves been brought up
among London’s poor or among the Hottentots they would nonethe-
less have behaved like Victorian gentlemen; and second, because in
expressing shock over cannibalism, infanticide, and head-hunting, they
naively assumed that comparable practices had already been, or were
shortly about to be, extirpated from the repertories of their own civi-
lized communities.

SURVIVALS AND THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

Another aspect of the comparative method which became the
object of intense but unmerited criticism during the twentieth cen-
tury was the concept of “‘survivals.” Once again, we must guard against
an overemphasis of the precedent of biological models. The essence of
the concept of survivals is that phenomena originating under a set of
causal conditions of a former era perpetuate themselves into a period
during which the original conditions no longer exist.

The term itself was first employed by Tylor in Primitive Culture,
where he emphasized the value of survivals for the reconstruction of
history by means of the comparative method.

These are processes, customs, opinions, and so forth which have
been carried on by force of habit into a new state of society dif-
ferent from that in which they had their original home, and
they thus remain as proofs and examples of an older condition of
culture out of which a newer has been evolved [TYLOR 1958:16; orig.

1871].

The historian Margaret Hodgen (1936:89-go) has expended a whole
volume on the attempt to prove that Tylor’s concept of survival was
restricted to “irrational customs maintained by civilized peoples and
remarked for their non-conformity with the existing pattern of ad-
vanced culture.” Hodgen’s principal interest seems to have been to de-
grade the earlier attempts by Morgan, Maine, and McLennan to use

164

o

6. Evolutionism: Methods

survivals to reconstruct antecedent institutions among primitives. I
shall take it as requiring no extended justification that the idea of sur-
vivals was an integral part of the comparative method, and that in one
form or another it came into use more or less simultaneously in the
writings of the great evolutionists. Maine (1873:304; orig. 1861), for
example, was clearly dealing with survivals when he attempted to ex-
plain anomalous features of both Roman and Modern English juris-
prudence as remnants of earlier systems:

The old general conception is not obliterated, but it has ceased to
cover more than one or a few of the notions which it first in-
cluded. So too the old technical name remains, but it discharges
only one of the functions which it once performed.

Similarly, Morgan’s use of Hawaiian terminology in Systems of Con-
sanguinity and Affinity to prove the existence of a prior stage of group
marriage and his use of “relics,” “traces,” “outcrops,” and “remains”
to prove the existence of matrilineal descent among the Barbarian
forebears of the ancient Greeks and Romans constitute typical applica-
tions of the doctrine of survivals. Finally, we may note the similarity
between survivals and what McLennan called “symbols.” The latter,
said to reflect an earlier actuality, provided the main source of evidence
in Primitive Marriage (1865). It was through the widespread occur-
rence of symbolic nuptials involving mock battles, pretended flight,
and chase that McLennan arrived at his theory of marriage-by-capture
as a stage in the evolution of domestic institutions (see p. 193).

USEFUL AND USELESS SURVIVALS

Emphasis upon “survivals” or equivalent concepts early
in the 1860’s once again impresses upon us the gratuitous nature of
the attempt to regard biology as the source of evolutionary doctrines
in the social sciences. Lowie’s (1937:25) equation of “survivals” with
“rudimentary organs of social groups” or with “useless organs” (ibid.:
26) ill prepares us for an understanding of the historical significance
of this concept. It may be true, as Hodgen insists, that for Tylor
the bulk of survivals were relatively useless items. But it is clear that for
others who employed the concept or its equivalents, survivals might
very well have had a use, however impaired or transmuted. Indeed, the
first example of a survival given by Tylor is that of an old woman op-
erating a loom by throwing the shuttle from one hand to the other—
clearly not an entirely useless activity. Moreover, Maine certainly did
not hold that legal fiction was useless, nor did Morgan imply that kin-

165


===== PAGE 88 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ship terminologies that reflected past rather than present marriage
forms were not therefore useful for designating classes of relatives. The
fact is that in both biological and sociocultural survivals, there is a
spectrum of utility rather than a dichotomy of useful and useless.

At one extreme, consider the wing of a bat, the result of modifica-
tion of a primitive mammalian pentadactyl forelimb, which is emi-
nently functional in all of its aspects. The pentadactyl pattern,
however, cannot be explained by reference to the conditions of con-
temporary bat existence and hence is a “survival” in the previously
defined sense. At the other extreme there is the true vestigial organ,
like the human appendix, which lacks positive functions altogether.
Similarly, there are a small number of sociocultural “survivals” which
appear to be almost devoid of utility. The buttons on a man’s coat
sleeves or the bow on the band inside of a man’s hat are frequently
cited examples. Most sociocultural survivals, however, involve some
degree of continuing utility. Tylor's numerous cases of survivals in
sports, games, and popular sayings clearly fall into this latter category.

THE FUNCTIONALIST CRITIQUE OF
SURVIVALS

This point is essential in view of the twentieth-century British
functionalists’ attack on survivals, which was in turn, a part of the reac-
tion to evolutionary formulation in general. Examination of Bronislaw
Malinowski’s famous tirades against survivals reveals that the concept
he attacked was itself lifted bodily from the functional context in
which it had first been proposed. He employs a definition of survival
offered by Alexander Goldenweiser rather than Tylor whereby, “A sur-
vival is ‘a cultural feature which does not fit in with its cultural me-
dium. It persists rather than functions, or its function somehow does
not harmonize with the surrounding culture’” (MALINOWSKI 1944b:
28). With this definition to go on, it becomes child’s play to show that
survivals are nonexistent. Does a horse-drawn hansom cab in automo-
bile-age New York fail to “fit” in with its cultural medium? “Obviously
not. Such an antiquated means of locomotion is used for retrospective
sentiment . . . it moves where the fare is slightly intoxicated or else
romantically inclined” (ibid.:28-29). But the implication that Tylor or
Morgan would deny such an interpretation is wholly gratuitous. Ty-
lor’s works are filled with examples of items which in surviving to the
present have had their utility transformed to recreational or to aes-
thetic functions. When he explains the relationship of Victorian eve-
ning dress to older “practical coats in which a man rode and worked”

166

6. Evolutionism: Methods

(TYLOR 1899:15; orig. 1881), it is not to assert that a Victorian gentle-
man has no use for evening wear! When he shows that the widespread
custom of invoking supernatural assistance when a man sneezes (God
bless you!) derives from an earlier fear that the soul was in danger of
being expelled from the body, it is not to deny the importance of dis-
playing solicitude to a potential or actual victim of a cold (TyLor
1958, I:97ff.). When he notes that the bow and arrow of archery con-
tests and children’s games is “a mere sportive survival” of a “formerly
serious practice,” it is not to deny the pleasure that human beings
derive from sports and games (ibid.:73). Malinowski’s concept of sur-
vivals is thus as much filled with straw as his concept of economic man
(see p. 564). Tylor and Morgan were not interested in denying utility to
this trait and lack of utility to that one. They were concerned rather
with the task of reconstructing the general history of institutions.

THE IMPORTANCE OF HISTORY

Tylor and Morgan believed present-day institutions could not
be understood without reconstructing evolutionary antecedents. Sur-
vivals were “traces” which helped in the task of reconstruction, and
they were at the same time conspicuous warnings that a synchronic
method (which the British functionalists actually later adopted) could
never suffice to explain sociocultural differences and similarities. In
pointing to hansom cabs in New York, the evolutionists were demon-
strating that the present cannot be explained solely in terms of the
present. Given only Malinowski’s factors of nostalgia, inebriation, and
courtship, it would be impossible to predict the existence of hansoms,
present, past, or future. The context out of which Malinowski
wrenched the concept of survivals was that which insisted that the re-
construction of the earlier forms is essential for an understanding of
later ones. Tylor makes this context abundantly clear by citing Auguste

Comte’s strictures concerning the necessity for evolutionary perspec-
tive (see p. 62).

They who wish to understand their own lives ought to know the
stages through which their opinions and habits have become what
they are. Auguste Comte scarcely overstated the necessity of this
study of development when he declared at the beginning of his
“Positive Philosophy” that “no conception can be understood ex-
cept through its history,” and his phrase will bear extension to
culture at large. To expect to look modern life in the face and
comprehend it by mere inspection, is a philosophy whose weak-

167


===== PAGE 89 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ness can easily be tested. Imagine any one explaining the trivial
saying, “a little bird told me,” without knowing of the old belief
in the language of birds and beasts. . . . It is always unsafe to de-
tach a custom from its hold on past events, treating it as an
isolated fact to be simply disposed of by some plausible explana-
tion [TYLOR 1958:19—20].

In this broader context, it is clear that the question of the impor-
tance of diachronic data takes precedence over that of useful and
useless “survivals.” In a sense, every historical explanation is an explana-
tion which makes use of “survivals,” regardless of whether the survivals
are useful or useless.

STUPID CUSTOMS

It cannot be denied that Tylor derived a special delight in
ridiculing what he regarded to be silly and irrational customs which
had survived extensive formal and functional modification. Explaining
why he devoted so much of Primitive Culture to traits that are “worn
out, worthless, or even bad with downright harmful folly” (ibid.:156),
he rejoices that “in such inquiries we have continual reason to be
thankful to fools.” That is, “ethnographers, not without a certain grim
satisfaction, may at times find means to make stupid and evil supersti-
tions bear witness against themselves” by revealing their origins in bar-
baric and savage stages of culture (ibid.:156-57).

It is quite wonderful, even if we hardly go below the surface of
the subject, to sce how large a share stupidity and unpractical
conservatism and dogged superstition have had in preserving for
us traces of the history of our race, which practical utilitarianism
would have remorselessly swept away [ibid.:156].

Under the combined influence of cultural relativism, historical par-
ticularism, and synchronic functionalism, it has become bad form for
anthropologists to make public judgments concerning the relative
“stupidity” of various primitive and civilized customs. Once we take
care to emend Tylor’s maxim to embrace traits which Tylor ascribed
to “practical utilitarianism,” there is no reason why future generations
of anthropologists should deny themselves that “grim satisfaction”
with which the history of human folly has always repaid its serious
students. When Tylor’s “practical utilitarianism” gave birth to a war in
which practical machines enabled 30 million people to be killed, it
seems that many anthropologists suffered a loss of critical verve. In-
stead of declaring these machines and the social arrangements that

168

6. Evolutionism: Methods

dictated their use “stupid,” they went about adding witchcraft and
circumcision to the list of man’s great achievements (see p. 534). It
has yet to be demonstrated, however, that our understanding of cul-
tural evolution is enhanced by an attitude of equal respect for all of its
products.

FIELDWORK

Malinowski (1944b:30-31) blamed the doctrine of survivals
for one additional failing of the evolutionists:

The real harm done by this concept was to retard effective field-
work. Instead of searching for the present-day function of any cul-
tural fact, the observer was merely satisfied in reaching a rigid,
self-contained entity.

It is perfectly true that the evolutionists did not carry out ethnographic
research which could be likened to Malinowski’s own experience.
Moreover, neither Morgan, Tylor, nor Spencer initiated programs of
intensive fieldwork. Of these three, only Morgan achieved a firsthand
knowledge of the cultures of primitive groups. But even Morgan’s
work with the Iroquois would not be considered a bona fide field ex-
perience by modern standards, since it did not involve continuous or
prolonged contact with the daily routine of a given local community.
Tylor, while an avid traveler and keen observer, lacked research which
could even be compared with fieldwork in the modern sense, while
Spencer was not even a good traveler. It is questionable, however, that
the concept of survivals per se had anything to do with this aspect of
the evolutionists’ program. At the heart of the matter there lies a much
more general situation. Anthropology achieved its professional identity
under the guiding influence of eighteenth-century proposals for a sci-
ence of universal history. Morgan, Tylor, and Spencer were universal
historians who made use of the comparative method in order to
achieve a more detailed and, on the whole, more accurate rendering of
the sequence of cultural change which had led from the paleolithic
hunters to industrial civilization. They were convinced that evolution-
ary changes had been regular enough to permit the recovery of missing
historical data through comparison and the logical construction of in-
termediate and transitional types. Although they were aware of the in-
adequacy of much of the ethnographic literature, they expected that
the regularities of evolutionary change would be identified when a
sufficiently large number of cases were assembled. Two general con-
siderations inclined the evolutionists to this optimistic view of the re-

169


===== PAGE 90 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

constructive powers of the comparative method. As previously stressed,
in assessing their contributions to the rise of anthropological theory,
we must bear in mind that the basic principles of the comparative
method had already been vindicated by the findings of archaeology and
that a similar strategy had achieved great success in philology. In addi-
tion, it must also be remembered that all of the mid-nineteenth-cen-
tury sciences were dominated by a euphoria, arising from the
widespread belief that the mechanical model in physics was on the
verge of achieving a perfect description of the laws of matter and en-
ergy. Anthropologists were not the only scientists who grossly underes-
timated the complexity of the lawful relations governing the unfolding
of phenomena in their field of inquiry. And to that extent, there is a
certain amount of parallelism between the reactions in physics and
cultural anthropology to the discovery that Newtonian-type regularities
did not pertain on all levels of physical and sociocultural phenomena.
There is much to be said therefore on behalf of the view that the evo-
lutionists, in attending to the comparative method and to the data of
unreliable but abundant ethnographic reports, rather than to intensive
fieldwork with individual groups, were, for the times, following an es-
sentially correct strategy. Given the new evidential basis for the pre-
dicted stages of progress from a “state of nature” through savagery,
barbarism, and civilization, it was the strategically correct next step to
seck for greater precision in the definition of the relevant institutional
transformations without assuming that such refinements could be ob-
tained only by abandoning the rotion of universally valid stages. That
this assumption ultimately proved necessary was a theoretical advance
which could not have been achieved without the formulation and test-
ing of the nineteenth-century evolutionary schemes. Indeed, it is a
matter of historical record that the turn to intensive fieldwork did not
by itself automatically result in a more sophisticated application of
the comparative method. On the contrary, what happened was that the
comparative method was virtually abandoned. Instead of refining the
evolutionary sequences, the concentration on fieldwork even resulted
in the abandonment of all diachronic interests. Instead of perfecting
the science of universal history, the “cult” of fieldwork temporarily
effaced the heritage of Enlightenment scientism and gave rise to
frankly idiographic or humanistic varieties of anthropological descrip-
tions. Noting that Boas failed to produce a description of Kwakiutl
social organization adequate for modern applications of the compara-
tive method (see p. 314), one may reasonably doubt that much was
to be gained from similar performances by Morgan and Tylor. One or

170

ot

6. Evolutionism: Methods

two cases were not going to settle any of the issues of sequence in
which the evolutionists were interested; they were concerned not with
exceptions, but with general trends.

THE MYTH OF UNILINEAR
EVOLUTIONISM

This brings us to another of the important issues on which
the evolutionists have been systematically misrepresented. It is com-
monly believed that the evolutionary stages revealed by the compara-
tive method were regarded as fixed sequences, every step of which had
to be gone through by all cultures. This misunderstanding has been
consolidated by the label “unilinear evolutionism,” which Julian
Steward (1955:14) has assigned to the “classical evolutionary formu-
lation” which “dealt with particular cultures, placing them in stages of
a universal sequence” (cf. LOWIE 1937:19o). There is no support for
the contention, however, that the “classical evolutionary formulation”
denied that specific cultures could skip certain steps in a sequence or
evolve in a divergent fashion. It was Morgan’s (1877:8) view that “the
experience of mankind has run in nearly uniform channels; that hu-
man necessities in similar conditions have been substantially the same”
(italics added). These qualifiers deserve to be emphasized because it
is quite obvious that Morgan remained uncertain concerning just how
much uniformity there had been. He was aware that “differences in
the culture of the same period in the Eastern and Western hemisphere
undoubtedly existed . . . and he attributed these differences to “the
unequal endowments of the continents” (ibid.). On the one hand we
find him asserting:

So essentially identical are the arts, institutions and mode of life
in the same status upon all the continents, that the archaic form
of the principal domestic institutions of the Greeks and Romans
might even now be sought in the corresponding institutions of
the American aborigines . . . [ibid.].

But on the other hand he warns us that his “ethnical periods” cannot
be regarded as absolute in their application and that there are excep-
tions. What we must bear in mind is that to Morgan and his con-
temporaries the most interesting features of history were the
similarities rather than the differences. For it was upon the similarities
that a science of universal history depended. A modicum of sympathy
for the attempt to found such a science will suffice to justify Morgan’s
strategy. The first step in the development of any science must be the

171


===== PAGE 91 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

6. Evolutionism: Methods

assumption that the phenomena to be studied are related in an or-
derly fashion. It does less harm to begin with a picture of maximum
than with minimum order, for the exceptions will soon enough make
their claim to attention. Surely, neither a science of universal history
nor of anything else could begin with the exceptions! Morgan readily
acknowledged the existence of such exceptions, but in the context of
his task, he could scarcely be expected to make them his central
concern:

It is difficult, if not impossible, to find such tests of progress
to mark the commencement of these several periods as will be
found absolute in their application, and without exceptions
upon all the continents. Neither is it necessary, for the purpose in
hand, that exceptions should not exist. It will be sufficient if the
principal tribes of mankind can be classified, according to the de-
gree of their relative progress, into conditions which can be recog-
nized as distinct [ibid.].

A further discussion of Morgan’s position will be given below in
conjunction with the issue of parallel versus convergent evolution. But
if Morgan is exempt from the charge of unilinear evolutionism, it is
obvious that Tylor’s evolutionism must also be exempted. In his great
article on the statistical interpretation of marriage and locality rules,
Tylor (1889:269) argues for historical uniformities in terms that are
indistinguishable from Morgan’s:

The institutions of men are as distinctly stratified as the earth on
which he lives. They succeed each other in series substantially
uniform over the globe, independent of what seem the compar-
atively superficial differences of race and language, but shaped by
similar human nature acting through successively changed condi-
tions in savage, barbaric, and civilized life.

Yet, what is the meaning of the statistical version of the comparative
method, if not precisely that “substantially uniform” is not equivalent
to “unilinear”? In Primitive Culture, Tylor declares that few “would
dispute that the following races are arranged rightly in order of cul-
ture: Australian, Tahitian, Aztec, Chinese, Italian” (1958, 1:27). He
promptly follows this up, however, with the warning that “even those
students who hold most strongly that the general course of civilization,
as measured along the scale of races from savages to ourselves, is prog-
tess toward the benefit of mankind [must] admit many and manifold
exceptions. Industrial and intellectual culture by no means advances
uniformly in all of its branches . . .” (ibid.).

When we turn to Spencer, there is not the remotest resemblance

172

between his view of evolution and the unilinear stereotype. Indeed,
despite Spencer’s strong conviction concerning the lawfulness of socio-
cultural change, he was actually more “multilinear” than either Julian
Steward or Karl Wittfogel (see Chap. 23).

As with organic evolution, so with super-organic evolution.
Though, taking the entire assemblage of societies, evolution may
be held inevitable . . . yet it cannot be held inevitable in each
particular society, or even probable [sPENCER 1896, 1:96].

While the current degradation theory is untenable, the theory of
progression, in its ordinary form, seems to me untenable
also. . . . It is possible, and, I believe, probable, that retrogres-
sion has been as frequent as progression [ibid.:95].

. social progress is not linear but divergent and re-divergent.
Each differentiated product gives origin to a new set of differen-
tiated products. While spreading over the Earth mankind have
found environments of various characters, and in each case the
social life fallen into, partly determined by the social life previ-
ously led, has been partly determined by the influences of the new
environment; so that the multiplying groups have tended ever to
acquire differences, now major, and now minor: there have arisen
genera and species of societies [ibid., IT:331].

As Robert Carneiro (1967:43) concludes: “Thus Spencer was not
only not a unilinear evolutionist, he was not even a linear evolutionist
. .. he saw evolution as a process of successive branchings in which
increased heterogeneity goes hand in hand with increased complexity.”

THE MYTH OF THE DENIAL OF
DIFFUSION

Closely related to the misconception surrounding the evo-
lutionists’ commitment to unilinear models is the equally misunder-
stood issue of diffusion versus independent invention. Under the
influence of the historical particularists and the German and British
diffusionist schools, the myth has grown up that the nineteenth-
century evolutionists denied the importance of diffusion. The diffu-
sionists identified themselves with the point of view that man was
essentially “uninventive,” while the evolutionists were portrayed as
believing the direct opposite. The diffusionists not only set up the
dichotomy between “borrowing” and “invention,” but they dogmat-
ically denied that similar invention could account for worldwide sim-
ilarities. The historical particularists, on the other hand, followed a

173


===== PAGE 92 =====

_——'——__—_——T-'“
|

The Rise of Anthropological Theory M

middle course, rejecting both the “overinventiveness” of Adolf
Bastian and the “underinventiveness” of Wilhelm Schmidt and Fritz
Graebner (see Chap. 14). But they subscribed to, and helped to per-
petuate, the false dichotomy between independent invention and
diffusion.

This dichotomy is false in two senses. First, it does not accurately
reflect the position of the evolutionists, none of whom proposed, as a
matter of principle, that similarities had developed more frequently
from independent invention than from diffusion. And the dichotomy
is also logically and empirically false, because it rests on the unsup-
portable notion that independent invention and diffusion are funda-
mentally different processes.

Lowie’s entanglement in both of these fallacies impeded his ability
to interpret the respective contribution of the evolutionists and dif-
fusionists. He was perfectly aware, of course, that Tylor maintained
a lively interest in tracing diffused traits side by side with a deep con-
viction that there had been a general uniformity in evolutionary
stages. Indeed, Lowie’s highest accolades are reserved for Tylor’s
“serene willingness to weigh evidence” for and against diffusion in the
following cases: Pan-European paleolithic tools; the piston bellows of
Madagascar and Indonesia; North American and Old World pottery;
the Old and New World bow and arrow; the Australian, African, and
American theory that disease is caused by an intrusive stone or bone;
the game of parcheesi as played in Mexico and India; and various myths
found in both the Old and New Worlds. Tylor, according to Lowie
(1937:74), was the “very antithesis of a strict parallelist . . . he was
thoroughly convinced of the force of borrowing in human history and
expressed this faith both abstractly and with respect to special cases.”
And Lowie quotes Tylor's own words to the effect (1958, I:53):
“Civilization is a plant much more often propagated than developed.”
But Lowie (1937:60) was also of the opinion that “diffusion plays
havoc with any universal law of sequence.” How, then, could Tylor’s
evolutionism be combined with so large a dose of diffusion? One
gathers from Lowie’s stress on the association between evolutionism
and independent invention on the one hand and historicism and dif-
fusion on the other, that Tylor was simply confused. But the con-
fusion rests with Lowie, since it is evident that Tylor did not accept
the diffusionist dogma that “diffusion plays havoc with any universal
law of sequence.” Tylor evidently did not even feel that the fact of
diffusion obliged one in the slightest to alter his conception of evo-
lutionary sequences. Indeed, independent inventions were of interest
to Tylor for reasons that eluded Lowie.

174

To most of the evolutionists, independent inventions were of in-
terest not for demonstrating parallel evolution, but for demonstrating
psychic unity. From Tylor's point of view, the demonstration that
similar stages of culture had succeeded each other in substantially
uniform fashion did not require the separation of independently in-
vented traits from borrowed ones. Whether the uniformity of a par-
ticular stage had resulted from borrowing or independent invention
was unimportant for proving that there was a general movement to
history. The demonstration of evolutionary uniformity resided in the
worldwide, almost monotonous sameness of institutions which could
be arranged in a single chronological and structural sequence.

That Tylor regarded independent inventions as a strong argument
for psychic unity does not mean that he regarded diffusion as a strong
argument against psychic unity. It will be recalled that one of the main
points raised by the monogenists was the fact that Christianity was
apparently capable of being leamed by all human groups. Diffusion
may very well be regarded therefore as providing additional evidence of
the essential similarity of the human mind, although the evidence
from independent invention would seem to be somewhat stronger
and more direct. It was in precisely this frame of reference that Tylor
(1865:378-79) summed up his discussion of diffusion and indepen-
dent invention in his Researches into the Early History of Mankind:

In the first place, the facts collected secem to favour the view
that the wide differences in the civilization and mental state of
the various races of mankind are rather differences of development
than of origin, rather of degree than of kind . . . wherever the
occurrence of any art or knowledge in two places can be confi-
dently ascribed to independent invention, as, for instance, when
we find the dwellers in the ancient lake-habitations of Switzer-
land, and the Modern New Zealanders, adopting a like
construction in their curious fabrics of tied bundles of fibre, the
similar step thus made in different times and places tends to
prove the similarity of the minds that made it. Moreover, to take
a somewhat weaker line of argument, the uniformity with which
like stages in the development of art and science are found
among the most unlike races, may be adduced as evidence on the
same side, in spite of the constant difficulty in deciding whether
any particular development is due to independent invention, or
to transmission from some other people to those among whom it
is found. For if the similar thing has been produced in two
places by independent invention, then, as has just been said, it is
direct evidence of similarity of mind. And on the other hand, if it
was carried from the one place to the other, or from a third to

175


===== PAGE 93 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

both, by mere transmission from people to people, thgn tl?e
smallness of the change it has suffered in t;ar}splantmg is still
evidence of the like nature of the soil wherever it is found.

It is interesting to note the similarity between Tylor’g comments on
the compatability of diffusion and independent invention in terms of
psychic unity and the critique which was eventually advanced deny-
ing that independent invention and diffusion represented fundamen-
tally different evolutionary processes (see pp. 615—16).‘

Lowic’s (1937:77) insistence that diffusion explains resemblances
more satisfactorily than independent invention is totally unsubstanti-
able. Neither the one nor the other explains anything; both are mere
labels for a single process of change. The lawful conditions Aof this
process remain unstated in Lowie’s formulation as much as in Bas-
tian’s. What have we achieved when we tell ourselves that two
cultures are similar because they are or have been in contact? Since
all cultures are in contact directly or indirectly with all others, all cul-
tures should be the same. Since they are not, similarity is obviously
not a simple function of contact. Nor is it a matter of freq'uency or
intensity of contact measured in terms of distance or interaction, since
adjacent cultures in continuous contact frequently manifest sharp
cultural differences (e.g., Ituri pygmies and Bantu villagers; Southwest
Pueblos and Navajos; Vedda and Ceylonese). But we must postpone
further discussion of this issue to a later chapter (see p. 377).

PARALLEL AND CONVERGENT
CONTRIBUTIONS TO EVOLUTIONARY

UNIFORMITY

The unilinear-multilinear and the independent invention-dif-
fusion dichotomies should be seen in relationship to a third mislead-
ing distinction: that between parallel and convergent evo.h}tiou. In
parallel evolution, cultures evolve from and to similar conditions step
by step in tandem. In convergent evolution, cultures evolve toward a
similar condition through dissimilar steps. The Boasians made much
of this distinction because they were obliged to accept convergent
evolution as a common phenomenon. The reason for this is that every
case of diffusion is a case of convergence. Parallel evolution, however,
was regarded as extremely rare and exclusively identified with the al-
leged unilinear evolutionism of Tylor, Morgan, and Spepcer: The
demonstration of convergent evolution brought about by diffusion or

176

6. Evolutionism: Methods

by any other series of different steps was regarded by the Boasians as
constituting a disproof of the entire evolutionist position. As we shall
see (p. 258), both Boas and Lowie attacked the evolutionists through
repeated demonstrations that in the sociocultural realm “like effects”
could be produced by “unlike causes.” But, once again, we are dealing
with a distinction that was not essential to the evolutionists; their
main concern was with the general uniformity created by both con-
vergent and parallel processes and not with a step by step concatena-
tion of “identical” causes (cf. Lowie). As Tylor (1865:373) made
clear: “The state of things which is found is not indeed that one race
does or knows exactly what another race does or knows, but that sim-
ilar stages of development recur in different times and places.”

Indifference to the questions of independent invention versus
diffusion and to parallel as distinguished from convergent evolution is
also characteristic of Morgan’s approach. Morgan (1877:39) explicitly
includes diffusion as one of the mechanisms by which the substantial
uniformity of sociocultural evolution was made possible:

LEWIS HENRY MORGAN, DIFFUSIONIST

The most advanced portion of the human race were halted,
S0 to express it, at certain stages of progress, until some great in-
vention or discovery, such as the domestication of animals or the
smelting of iron ore, gave a new and powerful impulse forward.
While thus restrained, the ruder tribes, continually advancing,
approached in different degrees of nearness to the same status;
for wherever a continental connection existed, all the tribes must
have shared in some measure in each other'’s progress. All great
inventions and discoveries propagate themselves; but the inferior
tribes must have appreciated their value before they could ap-
propriate them. In the continental areas certain tribes would lead;
but the leadership would be apt to shift a number of times in the
course of an ethnical period [italics added].

In discussing the transition from the lower to middle status of bar-
barism, Morgan again makes explicit provision for borrowing without
acknowledging any serious challenge to his overall scheme:

Some of these inventions were borrowed, not unlikely, from tribes
in the Middle Status; for it was by this process constantly repeated
that the more advanced tribes lifted up those below them, as fast

as the latter were able to appreciate and to appropriate the means
of progress [ibid.:540].

177


===== PAGE 94 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

As Lowie (1937:59) himself points out, “Morgan was not unduly
disturbed by cultural loans, though he freely admits them.” And
Lowie (ibid.:60) was also perfectly aware that Morgan had explicitly
rejected the possibility that the major types of kinship system had
arisen independently and evolved in a parallel fashion. Indeed, Mor-
gan’s opinion of the Boasian stereotype of parallel evolution was that
it would require “miracles” to occur:

If it is assumed then that the Turanian and the Ganowanian
[terminologies] . . . were created independently in Asia and
America, would each by imperative necessity have passed through
the same experience, have developed the same sequence of cus-
toms and institutions, and, as a final result, have produced the
same identical system of relationship? The statement of the pro-
position seems to work its refutation on the grounds of its exces-
sive improbability. . . . If the two families commenced on
separate continents in a state of promiscuous intercourse, . . . it
would be little less than a miracle if both should develop the
same ultimate system of relationship. Upon the doctrine of
chances it is not supposable that each would pass through the
same experience, develop the same series of customs and institu-
tions and finally produce for themselves the same system of con-
sanguinity, which would be found, on comparison, to be identical
in radical characteristics as well as coincident in minute de-
tails . . . [MORGAN 1870:504—5].

As we have already seen, it was at this point that Morgan’s racism in-
truded and he was led to the absurd conclusion that Iroquois termi-
nology was “carried in the blood,” thereby proving that the American
Indians were descended from Asian progenitors. The irony of this as-
pect of Morgan’s denial of strict parallel evolution is that on this issue
Lowie later came to champion precisely the point of view which
Morgan had rejected, namely that in the presence of exogamous uni-
linear descent groups, Iroquois kinship terminology had been invented
over and over again! The respective positions of Morgan and Lowie on
the origin of unilinear descent groups constitute an equally spectac-
ular reversal of stereotypes. Morgan, as Lowie well knew, argued at great
length against the possibility of the independent invention of the
gens (matriclan). According to Morgan (1877:388-89), the establish-
ment of exogamic prescriptions along unilineal lines

. was too remarkable and too improbable . . . to be repeated
many different times, and in widely different areas. . . . Instead
of a natural and obvious conception, the gens was essentially
abstruse . . . a product of high intelligence for the times in

178

f

6. Evolutionism: Methods

which. it originated. . . . Its propagation is more easily explained
than its institution. These considerations tend to show the im-
probability of its repeated reproduction in disconnected areas.

Yet Lowie later came to argue that the clan had been independently
re-invented four times in North America alone (see P- 349)!

] It is clear that the classic image of the nineteenth-century evolution-
ist as a remorseless parallelist who insisted on identical evolutionary
stages for all cultures is nothing but a convenient substitute for an
embarrassing reality. In insisting upon the orderliness of sociocultural
evolution, neither Tylor nor Morgan asserted that the history of all
cultures consisted of an identical series of transformations. Divergent
paths of evolution were also recognized, but both Morgan and Tylor
believed that in the Jong run, parallelism and convergence acted to
insure a substantial degrec of global uniformity. On the other hand,
Lowie (1937:59), identifying himself with “historians of culture,”
protested that culture “is far too complex to be reduced to chron-
ological formulae; its development is mainly divergent, not parallel.”
But the opposite of “parallel” can be “mainly divergent” only when
“convergent” and “divergent” evolution are lumped together to form
an historically meaningless dichotomy over and against parallel evolu-
tion. The only historically applicable dichotomy is that which sep-
arates science from nonscience, namely one in which convergence and
parallelism act frequently enough to produce substantial uniformities.
:I‘heA evolutionists, in brief, simply denied that history had been
“mamly divergent”; the equation of that position with one which in-
sists that evolution had consisted mainly of parallel development is an
artifact of a highly biased understanding of the history of anthropo-
IQgica] theory. In ringing up the balance between the historical par-
ticularists and the evolutionists, we must reckon therefore with an
exaggeration by the historical particularists of the amount of disorder
in history, which is as least as much in error as the exaggerated order-
liness discerned by some but not all of the evolutionists. The errors of
the evolutionists were committed on behalf of pushing a science of
culture to (and beyond) its evidential limits; the errors of the his-
torical particularists—with which we deal in later chapters—were com-

mittgd out of a spirit of scientific nihilism, which denied that a science
of history was possible.

179


===== PAGE 95 =====

The Evolutionists:

Results 7

’—[: affirm the strategy of the comparative met}lod as practiced l?y
Morgan, Tylor, Spencer, and their contemporaries is not necessarily
to endorse any of the evolutionary schemes which they advanced_ for
consideration. The important thing is that these schemes contamled
hypotheses which even today can fruitfully orieutArcsearch f‘“d which
can be corrected in the light of new evidence, without being utterly
destroyed in the process. It so happens, however, that many of the
evolutionists’ sequences actually have endured the test of ?ddlt'lonfll
research and stand today as indestructible memorials to their faith in
the scientific method. But both the successes and the failures must be
considered if we are properly to evaluate either the evolutionists or
their twentieth-century critics.

MORGAN'S SCHEME

Since Lewis Henry Morgan’s developmental scheme is'the
most elaborate, embracing the widest spectrum of instftutlops in a
single frame, we may profitably employ it as a focus of discussion and

180

|

7. The Evolutionists: Results

of comparison with competitive theorics. Morgan envisioned human
history as consisting of three major “ethnical periods”—Savagery, Bar-
barism, and Civilization—of which the first two were divided into
subperiods denoted Lower, Middle, and Upper. These ethnical periods
and their subdivisions were defined by the following sequence of
technological innovations:

fruit and nut subsistence

MIDDLE SAVAGERY fish subsistence and fire

UPPER SAVAGERY bow and arrow

LOWER BARBARISM pottery

MIDDLE BARBARISM domestication of animals (Old
World), cultivation of maize,
irrigation, adobe and stone archi-
tecture (New World)

UPPER BARBARISM iron tools

CIVILIZATION phonetic alphabet and writing

LOWER SAVAGERY

In the domain of the family Morgan recognized five successive forms:
(1) The consanguine, based on group marriage within the same gen-
eration (marriage of “brothers and sisters”); (2) the punaluan, based
on a form of group marriage in which brothers were forbidden to
marry sisters; (3) the syndyasmian, or pairing, family, a transitional
form between group marriage and monogamy, in which husband or
wife could end the marriage at will as often as he or she wished; (4)
the patriarchical, a short-lived variety, mainly associated with the He-
brews and early Romans, in which supreme authority was vested in
the male head (polygyny was a secondary feature, present among
Hebrews, absent among Romans); and (5) the monogamian, based
on monogamy and female equality, and progressively resembling the
modern nuclear unit.

Morgan recognized the following sequence of kinship terminologies:
(1) Malayan; (2) Turanian-Ganowanian; and (3) Aryan-Semitic-
Uralian. In modern classifications these correspond  respectively to
the Hawaiian, Iroquois, and Eskimo types.

In the realm of sociopolitical organization, the sequence begins with
the first two stages of the family: a promiscuous horde, succeeded by
one organized into several intermarrying sets of male siblings and fe-
male siblings, corresponding to the punaluan phase of the family and
exemplified for Morgan in the so-called Australian marriage classes
(section and subsections in modern terms). The next phase is dom-
inated by the matrisib. Matrisibs combine to form phratries; phratries
combine to form tribes; tribes combine to form confederacies. All of

181


===== PAGE 96 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

these organizations, from the promiscuous horde to the confederacy,
were founded upon what Morgan called “personal relations,” i.e., upon
sex and kinship. All such arrangements were to be distinguished from
true political organization, which followed next, and which was based
upon the reckoning of rights and obligations in terms of territorial
identity and property relations. The true political units were the town-
ship, the county, and the state.

Morgan’s approach to these sequences involved him in a remarkable
attempt to coordinate and link the stages of each with all the rest. The
overall effect therefore is of a diachronic and synchronic system of un-
precedented structural and chronological scope. The overall movement
from systems based on sex and kinship to those based on territoriality
and property was connected by a series of negative and positive feed-
backs to family form, kinship terminology, and the technological cri-
teria of the ethnical periods.

To begin with the institutions of Lowest Savagery: Morgan’s ex-
planation for the Malayan terminology was that under group marriage
it would be impossible to discover which male on the first ascending
generation was one’s father, hence all potential fathers were called by
the same term. Similarly, since all women on the first ascending gen-
eration were either actual mother or potential “stepmothers,” they
were also designated by a single term. The connection with the tech-
nological criteria was more vague, being based on the assumption that
only a stunted form of mentality could sanction such brutish arrange-
ments as promiscuity and brothersister incest. This low form of sav-
agery was in turn reflected in, and reinforced by, the rudimentary
technological level characteristic of a period in which the use of fire
was unknown. With the introduction of the prohibition on brother-
sister marriage—rtesulting in Morgan’s “punaluan” form of group
marriage—the kinship terminology underwent its first major transfor-
mation. Since brothers and sisters were no longer actual, or potential,
mates, the children of brothers and sisters could no longer be “broth-
ers” and “sisters.” On the other hand, since brothers belonged to a
single marriage group and since sisters all belonged to another mar-
riage group, children of brothers continued to be “brother” and
“sister,” as did children of sisters. This then was the origin of the
cross-sex and parallel-sex uncle and cousin terms of Iroquois termi-
nology. At this point the whole organization of society is thus based
on “sexual” distinctions. At the same time, improvements in tech-
nology are brought about by an increased intellectual capacity, one of
the benefits of climinating brothersister incest. Indeed, Morgan

182

D aul

7. The Evolutionists: Results

(1877:434) described this process as “a good illustration of the op-
cration of the principles of natural selection.” Heightened intelligence
now prepares the way for the invention of the matrisib, a device that
consolidates the gain of the punaluan system and further widens the
scope of incest prohibitions to include all persons with common an-
cestry through females. The clan would be matrilineal at first because
W}'ICU it came into existence the family had not yet reached syndyas-
mian, or pairing, form. Since paternity was uncertain, descent could
not be traced through males. One’s mother, however, is never in
doubt; hence, descent was traced exclusively through females. Arising
in Savagery, the matriclan gradually became the central feature of
primitive social organization. It lasts all through Barbarism until the
beginning of political socicty and into the early stages of Civilization.
Its undoing is brought about by the same force that brings in the
monogamian family, patrilineality, and political society, namely the
growth of property. The latter, in turn, is a result of the gradual im-
provement in the “arts of subsistence.” The clan and the monogamian
family are opposed in principle. One stands for the merging of the
nuclear family in the clan collective, the other for independent family
units. Similarly, the organization on the basis of territory is opposed
to organization on the basis of kin. Large populations in dense aggre-
gates cannot be organized on a kin basis. Propertied classes put an
end to the democracy of clan life. But the inheritance of property
promotes the stability of the male within the family (he “wants”
heirs); thus in its last phases the descent rule of the clan shifts from
matrilineality to patrilineality. But this is a shortlived form because
the increase in property-mediated relations at the same time acts to
destroy the clan and to usher in the era of political society. Finally,
with the establishment of the monogamian family, the Iroquois ter-
n'fmology, last of the classificatory systems, gives way to the more
highly descriptive categories of the Aryan system.

WEAKNESSES OF MORGAN'S SCHEME

It should be pointed out at once that the interconnectedness
of the several sequences is far from perfect. The scheme outlined
above permits several major institutional transformations to occur
without corresponding modifications in related domains. Thus, for
Morgan, neither the syndyasmian family nor the patrisib have an effect
on the kinship terminology, yet it is now generally agreed that there is
an important correlation between patrilineality and Omaha systems

183


===== PAGE 97 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and between matrilineality and Crow systems.! According to Mor-
gan, Iroquois terminology was introduced before clans came on the
scene, and it continued unmodified during the long period of the
clan’s ascendancy. The most important lapses to which attention
should be drawn, however, are those involving Morgan’s evident fail-
ure to discover a systematic relationship between techno-economic and
social structural parameters. All of the prepolitical structural arrange-
ments of family, terminology, and clan relate to subsistence only
through the vague intermediation of a biocultural principle of natural
selection. That is, none of the specific differences and similarities of
primitive social structure are related to specific innovations in the
techno-environmental or techno-economic variables. It is only at the
point of transition from kinship-organized to politically organized so-
ciety that Morgan’s scheme achieves anything resembling full internal
coherence. This circumstance will be recalled when we turn to the
question of whether Morgan can be credited, as Marx and Engels
claimed, with an independent discovery of the materialist interpreta-
tion of history. For the moment let it suffice to say that it is doubtful
that such an interpretation can be sustained even with respect to
Morgan’s transition from social to political organization. One may be
certain, however, that it does not apply to the changes that precede
the emergence of the state, since, as we have just seen, the several
domains of the primitive sociocultural system are not closely inter-
determined.

In the light of almost a century of additional research and theory,
most of Morgan’s sequences must be discarded as either false or in-
adequate. Even his technological sequence contains drastic errors. To
begin with the “nuts and fruits” of Lower Savagery, it is now known
that man has been a hunter for a million years or more. “Fish sub-
sistence” is pre-eminently a matter of local adaptation and cannot be
assigned a definite chronological position with respect to hunting. The
introduction of the bow and arrow did not necessarily entail decisive
shifts in the “ratio of technological efficiency”: food calories output/
food calories input. Paleolithic groups which depended on spearing,
bola-throwing, surrounds, and simple gathering were probably already

1 Crow and Omaha terminologies tend to reflect a sociological emphasis upon
membership in unilineal descent groups. The classifying principle of lineality
overrides that of generation. Thus in Crow, a woman and all of her descendants
through females are referred to by a single term, while in Omaha, a man and
all of his descendants through males are referred to by a single term, regardless
of how many generations are involved. For example, in Crow, father’s sister, father’s
sister’s daughter and father’s sister’s daughter’s daughter, etc., are classed together.

184

7. The Evolutionists: Results

capable of reaching a population size which was determined largely by
the rate of reproduction of the natural biota rather than by a particular
hunting and gathering technology. One of Morgan’s worst ethno-
graphic errors was the assignment of the proto-state agricultural Hawai-
ians to Middle Savagery because they lacked the bow and arrow.
Pottery also turned out to be a poor choice as the diagnostic of the
transition between Savagery and Barbarism. By emphasizing pottery,
Morgan failed to give sufficient credit to the revolutionary significance
of the introduction of agriculture—control over the rate of reproduc-
tion of the natural biota—and its consequent new possibilities for hu-
man life. The use of the domestication of animals as the criterion of
Middle Barbarism was also ill-fated. It is simply contrary to archaeolog-
ical evidence to posit a significant time interval between the domestica-
tion of plants and the domestication of animals—both occur in the
earliest levels of the Near and Middle Eastern Neolithic. The emphasis
upon iron tools for Upper Barbarism was responsible for another of
Morgan’s great disasters: the assignment of the Aztec to the same
“ethnical period” as the Iroquois. In addition, Civilizations were at-
tained in both the Old and New Worlds long before the introduction
of iron. And the same may be said of Morgan’s last criterion—the
phonetic alphabet. The Incas managed an empire without using any
kind of writing system.

Despite these inadequacies, it cannot be said that Morgan’s tech-
nological series is today without rescarch significance. Certainly, its
historical contribution cannot be challenged, since it served to stimu-
late the search for better ways of identifying and conceptualizing the
innovations responsible for major increments in food production, pop-
ulation density, and population size. Morgan’s emphasis upon techno-
economic factors for demarcating major evolutionary trends remains
viable as a strategy. His “ethnical periods,” shorn of their biological
significance and equipped with nonpejorative labels, are probably ac-
cepted by the majority of contemporary American anthropologists as
a valid, if overgeneralized, taxonomy of cultural types. As Eleanor Lea-
cock (1963:1xi) has noted:

In spite of the disfavor into which Morgan’s work fell, his general
sequence of stages has been written into our understanding of pre-
history and interpretation of archaeological remains, as a glance at
any introductory anthropology text will indicate.

Thus Morgan’s Savagery is roughly equivalent to what are frequently
called hunting and gathering societies, while Barbarism is more or less
what most anthropologists have in mind when they discuss horticul-

185


===== PAGE 98 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theor The Evolutionists: Results
polog y 7-

tural, “tribal,” and pre- or proto-state societics. Finally, Civilization as
defined by a stratified, state-level organization is very much in current
use. Of course, it is another question, not faced by Leacock and other
Morganists, whether in this attenuated form, Morgan’s scheme was
notably more advanced than its cighteenth-century antecedents.

The least satisfactory of Morgan’s institutional sequences is that
which is concerned with the family and kinship terminology. Specula-
tions concerning a period of promiscuity have been deprived of all the
inferential bits of evidence to which Morgan was able to appeal. No
one today, despite numerous field studies of monkey and great ape
mating patterns would seriously venture to suggest what kind of mat-
ing preferences were characteristic of the transitional hominids. Mor-
gan’s reconstruction of a stage of promiscuity rested on what he took
to be evidence of forms of group marriage among the Hawaiians and
the Australian aborigines. This evidence was spurious, and all other
ethnographic cases in support of group marriage or the consanguine
family have been conclusively disproved. In its place, the universality
of pairing arrangements accompanied by incest prohibitions within the
nuclear family—cohabiting adult male and female and adult female’s
children—have been established. Morgan’s explanation for Hawaiian
terminology as an adaptation to the consanguine family is thus totally
devoid of evidential substance. The rout suffered by this explanation
was all the more humiliating because of Morgan’s assignment of the
highly stratified Hawaiians to the status of Middle Savagery, far below
the egalitarian Iroquois. The picture of monogamy as a condition
reached only after numberless generations of the struggle to perfect
the balance between the sexes is contradicted by the (serial) mono-
gamic bliss enjoyed by the majority of the members of every known
human society. Morgan’s explanation of Iroquois terminology was also
adversely affected by the rout of the consanguine family since the pro-
hibition on brother-sister marriage obviously long antedated the de-
velopment of the cross-parallel distinction. The repercussions extend
still further to take in the explanation of the matriclan, whose inven-
tion and spread were linked by Morgan to alleged biological advantages
of exogamy. Here, even if we grant the highly dubious hypothesis that
local exogamy conferred direct biological advantages, it still remains
difficult to see how clan exogamy, which affects parallel cousins but
not cross-cousins, would be much of an improvement over the earlier
nuclear family taboos.

The most bedeviled part of Morgan’s kinship sequences was his in-
sistence that the matriclan was chronologically prior to the patriclan.
Here Morgan was a participant in one of the most heated and uscless

186

discussions in the history of the social sciences. He and his supporters
were opposed by an equally numerous group, who argued for the re-
verse priority. Both groups were wrong, constituting one of those rare
cases of diametrically opposed positions about which it is impossible
to say that either contained a grain of truth. Descent rules, as they
have come to be understood, reflect residence patterns; and residence
patterns are primarily a matter of local techno-environmental and
techno-economic conditions. Groups with similar ratios of technolog-
ical efficiency and similar overall quanta of production may thus very
well exhibit contrasting descent rules. The occurrence of matrilineal
descent has no bearing on the status of women, since mother’s brother
rather than mother is generally the head of the descent group. Fur-
thermore, the idea that matrilineality is a result of confusion concern-
ing paternity is wholly confounded by the numerous cases of primitive
peoples who deny that the male is necessary for conception but who
regard themselves as descended from a line of males, and by the uni-
versal recognition of some degree of kinship with both maternal and
paternal relatives, regardless of the nature of the unilineal rule.

ENDURING ASPECTS OF MORGAN'S
SCHEME

Despite this profusion of errors, there remain several valuable
suggestions in Morgan’s approach to the evolution of the family, kin-
ship terminology, and kinship groups. As we shall see, Morgan’s basic
and original contention that kinship terminology was produced by
different forms of the family and of group organization has been vin-
dicated and constitutes to this day the basic premise of innumerable
books and articles. Furthermore, Morgan’s description of the egali-
tarian clan marks the beginning of the serious study of unilinear
descent groups.

A much more valuable contribution is to be found in Morgan’s
treatment of the emergence of stratified and state-organized societies.
T}}C pervasiveness of kinship statuses on the pre-state level; the with-
ering away of egalitarian unilinear groups and the rise of endogamous
castes, classes, and minorities; and the role of property in the develop-
ment of stratified groups are all foreshadowed in Morgan’s scheme.
Once again, however, there were numerous deficiencies brought about
by faulty data and by an overly mechanical pursuit of the contrast
Pﬂtween social and political principles. It is clear that kinship as an
ideology of identity is not incompatible with the formation of the
State. It is rather to be said that with the development of marked in-

187



===== PAGE 99 =====

Rl

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 7. The Evolutionists: Results

equalities of access to strategic resources, the ancient principles of
kinship (affinity through marriage and descent) are pressed into serv-
ing functions which hitherto were inimical to sociocultural survival.
In other words, stratified forms of kinship groupings take the place of
egalitarian ones. In a similar vein, it should be noted that the principle
of territoriality is also present on both state and pre-state levels, but its
functions are transfigured in the change from one to the other. Citizen-
ship in the modern nation state, for example, depends on a mixture
of territorial and kinship principles. It is true that children of New
Yorkers living in California are not entitled to special privileges when
they visit New York. Yet the child of a United States citizen is a
United States citizen wherever he is born. And of course kinship still
determines the basic pattern of the inheritance of property.

Much fruitful historical research was stimulated by Morgan’s sugges-
tion that unilinear descent groups had existed among the Greek and
Roman proto-states. While Morgan’s Greek and Roman evidence is
probably best regarded as indicating some form of nonunilinear group-
ing, the fact that scholars began to think of the predecessors of the
Greceks as being something like the Iroquois had an immensely salutary
effect upon culture-bound Euro-American historiography.

It will not be possible here to review all the schemes of universal
history produced during the period 1860-go. The kinds of errors upon
which they were based are well illustrated in Morgan’s case, and little
beyond an antiquarian curiousity would be served by providing their
details. A brief exposition of some additional sequences, however,
will be found useful as a preliminary to the next matter to be consid-
ered, namely the nature of the causal processes to which the evolu-
tionists attributed their developmental panoramas.

BACHOFEN'S SCHEME

One of the wildest schemes from the point of view of causal-
ity is that of J. J. Bachofen. Social life begins with a period of sexual
promiscuity identified by Bachofen as “hetairism.” This was the time
when the lawless materialist principle governed mankind. Only ma-
terial motherhood can be ascertained, and women are exposed to the
lust and sexual tyranny of men. The women now struggle to liberate
themselves. By virtue of their religiosity, the weaker sex is able to
subdue the stronger one, for Bachofen believed: “Religion is the only
efficient lever of all civilization. Each elevation and depression of hu-
man life has its origin in a movement which begins in this supreme
department” (BACHOFEN 1861:xiv, quoted in HOWARD 1904:42).

188

Mother-right or gynocracy now reigns. Female deities preside, the left
is favored over the right, the earth over the sky, moon over sun, the
youngest over the oldest. Women establish the family, oblige men to
marry, and progressively take on more Amazonian qualities. But the
reign of the gynocrats is founded on an inferior religious principle—
the material tie between mother and child symbolized in the Earth-
Mother deity. The men now seck to reverse the balance. At first they
merely seek to assert themselves by pretending they are mothers.
Hence, the origin of the couvade. Soon they rise to a new and higher
principle of religion, ushering in the third epoch, that of spirit. This
highest principle of life is based upon fatherhood as opposed to
motherhood.

It was the assertion of fatherhood which delivered the mind from
natural appearances, and when this was successfully achieved, hu-
man existence was raised above the laws of material life. The
principle of motherhood is common to all species of animal life,
but man goes beyond this tie in giving the pre-eminence to the
power of procreation, and thus becomes conscious of his higher
vocation. . . . In the paternal and spiritual principle he breaks
through the bonds of tellurism and looks upward to the higher
regions of the cosmos. Victorious fatherhood thus becomes as dis-
tinctly connected with the heavenly light as prolific motherhood
is with the teeming earth [BAcHOFEN 1861 :xxvii, quoted in HOWARD
1904:43]-
Morgan and Bachofen exerted a reciprocal influence on each other.
Bachofen’s ideas concerning the priority of matilineal descent and
gynocracy are incorporated in Ancient Society. Bachofen benefited
from the comparison of the classical matriclan with the Iroquois, and
he expressed his gratitude by dedicating a book of essays (Bachofen
1966; orig. 1880) to Morgan.

MAINE'S SCHEME

It was symptomatic of the whole motherright, father-right
controversy that in the very year that Bachofen’s Mother Right was
published, Sir Henry Maine’s Ancient Law also appeared, sctting forth
the proposal that in its original form, the family was patrilineal and
Patriarchical. Lowie (1937:51-52) has championed the view that
Maine’s evolutionary sequences, unlike those of Bachofen, Morgan,
and McLennan and Lubbock, were not intended to embrace a uni-
versally valid scheme, and that his words of homage “to continuous
Sequence, inflexible order, and eternal law in history” were nothing

189



===== PAGE 100 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

but a “sop to regnant fashion.” While it is true that Maine explicitly
rejected the idea “that human society went everywhere through the
same series of changes,” similar explicit denials have already been
demonstrated for the other so-called unilinear evolutionists. On this
issue J. W. Burrow’s (1966:164) analysis is to be preferred:

Because Maine was not a systematic thinker, and because he
never fully recognized the conflict between the historical and sci-
entific elements in his intellectual equipment, it would be pos-
sible, by selective quotation, to make out a convincing case for
either view of him—that he was a legal historian with perhaps too
great a fondness for cross-comparison and “brilliant” generaliza-
tion, or that he was a rigid evolutionary determinist. The only way
to give a picture of his work that approaches accuracy is to try to
give due weight to both aspects without pretending that they are
wholly compatible.

Part of the confusion arises from Maine’s original lack of interest in
what he regarded as the backward races of mankind. While he was
no less interested in the overall direction of history than was Morgan,
he resembled Hegel, Comte, and Condorcet in believing that a
knowledge of the history of the “progressive” nations would suffice to
discern the “laws of history.” Maine’s (1883:284) interest focused on
“the communities which were destined to civilization.” In Ancient
Law (1861:23) he says, “I confine myself in what follows to the pro-
gressive societies.” These societies consisted exclusively of “Aryan”
peoples, for “civilization is nothing more than a name for the old order
of the Aryan world, . . .” (MAINE 1887:231). At the time of his
original formulation of the patriarchal theory, Maine simply took it
for granted that there was no need to discuss the origin of institutions
in a framework larger than that of the Aryans; he could thus propound
a theory manifestly restricted to Europe and India and at the same
time make it sound as if he were referring to all of humanity. How
else explain the statement also found in Ancient Law: “The effect
of the evidence derived from comparative jurisprudence is to establish
the view of the primeval condition of the human race which is known
as the Patriarchal Theory” (ibid.: 118). Regardless of whether Maine
initially intended to restrict this patriarchal theory to the “Aryans,”
his contemporaries certainly reacted as if that was not the case. Mc-
Lennan (1865:115), for example, attacked Maine as one who “has
been unable to conceive how human beings could be grouped on any
principle more primitive than that of the patriarchal system. . ..”
Maine’s response to this was not to say that his work dealt only with
a restricted portion of mankind and that he was unable to conceive of

190

7. The Evolutionists: Results

matrilineality in the history of the “Aryan” peoples. Instead, he chose
to counterattack by casting doubt upon the matriarchal theory, sug-
gesting that the institutions which McLennan and Lubbock had at-
tributed to ancient man were cither falsely described or the result of
recent changes.

Sir John Lubbock and Mr. McLennan conceive themselves to
have shown that the first steps of mankind towards civilisation
were taken from a condition in which assemblages of men fol-
lowed practices which are not found to occur universally even in
animal nature. Here I have only to observe that many of the
phenomena of barbarism adverted to by these writers are found in
India. The usages appealed to are the usages of . . . wild tribes

. now for many years . . . under British observation, . . .
The evidence, therefore, [from India] . . . is very superior in-
deed to the slippery testimony concerning savages which is gath-
ered from travellers’ tales. . . . Much which I have personally
heard in India bears out the caution which I gave as to the reserve
with which all speculations on the antiquity of human usage
should be received. Practices represented as of immemorial antig-
uity, and universally characteristic of the infancy of mankind,
have been described to me as having been for the first time re-
sorted to in our own days through the mere pressure of external
circumstances or novel temptations [MAINE 1887:16-17].

It seems literally to have been the case that Maine was unable to
conceive how matriclans could constitute a viable form of social or-
ganization. Thus in a letter to Morgan, commenting on Ancient So-
ciety, Maine laments that he has been unable to find a copy of
Morgan’s The League of Iroquois and takes the opportunity to ask a
number of questions centering on his “difficulty in conceiving
[‘female’ gentes] as localized or combattant bodies” (MAINE, quoted
in STERN 1931:141—42). There is good reason to suspect, therefore, that
the sophisticated historical approach with which Lowie credits Maine
is more a result of ethnographic naiveté than of methodological rigor.

Maine’s most important contribution lies in his suggestion that kin-
ship had provided the basic principle of organization of primitive so-
ciety. The primeval groups are families such as Homer attributed to
the Cyclops in which a despotic father exercises absolute power over
his wives and children. These families aggregated through legal fic-
tions to form larger groups without surrendering their autonomy.
Hence, “the unit of an ancient society was the Family, of a modern
society the Individual” (1861:121). Thenceforth, “the movement of
the progressive socicties has been uniform” with respect “to the grad-

191



===== PAGE 101 =====

. oo

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

7. The Evolutionists: Results

ual dissolution of family dependency and the growth of individual
obligation in its place” (ibid.:163). This movement is examined by
Maine with respect to a number of related transitions expressed in
terms of useful dichotomies: Family-organized society is fixed-status
society; individualized society is free-contract society. The movement
is from status to contract. Family-organized society owns property in
common; individual-organized society embodies the growth of private
ownership. In the most primitive stage of law, all injuries may be
compensated by agreement of the families involved, and civil and
criminal law are confounded; later, certain injuries involve only in-
dividuals while others are crimes against the whole society.

CONVERGENCE TOWARD THE FOLK-
URBAN CONTINUUM

Maine’s emphasis on the progressive individualization of so-
ciety preceded Morgan’s treatment of the rise of the state in terms of
the contrast between relations through persons and relations through
territory; and there probably was some influence which flowed from
the former to the latter. But judging from the almost simultaneous
appearance of several similar formulations, the idea must have been
very much “in the air.” Thus in 1887, Ferdinand Ténnies published
his Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft, in which the transition from
feudal to capitalist society was described in terms of the following
kinds of contrasts: confident, intimate personal relations versus rela-
tions between strangers; moral, collective, cooperative, joint bonds
versus independent, depersonalized bonds; reciprocities, barter, and
exchange versus purchase and contract; and divine sanction versus
secular sanctions. In the next decade, essentially the same theme was
elaborated by Emile Durkheim under the rubrics “mechanical” ver-
sus “organic” solidarity (see p. 466).

During the Boasian period, when the terms “primitive” and “civi-
lized” were regarded as offensive to the principle of cultural relativism,
interest in the gemeinschaft-gesellschaft distinction waned among
anthropologists. Among sociologists influenced by Durkheim and Max
Weber, however, this dichotomy was kept alive, at least as far as
synchronic comparisons were concerned. In the 1940’s the idea finally
circled back into anthropology in the form of Robert Redfield’s
(1947) folk-urban dichotomy, the vaguely evolutionistic contrast be-
tween preliterate, homogencous, religious, familial, personalized prim-
itive and peasant communities and the literate, heterogeneous, secular,
individualized, depersonalized urban society. It is interesting to note

192

that Redfield, while acknowledging his debt to Maine, Tonnies, and
Durkheim, makes no reference to Morgan. Yet Morgan’s treatment of
the transition from the personal to impersonal, kinship to political
organization is not inferior to those which are acknowledged. Herbert
Spencer’s conception of the transition from the military to industrial
types of society, with the increase in heterogeneity that for Spencer
marked all evolutionary processes, probably also belongs in this same
set of proposals. Finally, it should be noted that none of the afore-
mentioned folk-urban theorists seem to have been aware of the fact
that Marx had anticipated their formulations as early as the 1848
Communist Manifesto (see p. 226).

MC LENNAN’S SCHEME

The scheme that most rivaled Morgan’s was that proposed by
the Edinburgh lawyer John McLennan. McLennan’s sequences, like
Morgan’s, began with a horde living, if not in strict promiscuity, at
least in a state of indifference concerning marriage rules. The mem-
bers of the horde, speculating on their origin, decided that they were
all descended from an animal ancestor. This was the origin of “to-
temism.”

The primal human population lived under harsh conditions and
were subjected to an intense struggle for existence both within and
between groups. In McLennan’s (1865:165) scheme, the foremost ef-

fect of this “struggle for food and security” was an alleged prevalence
of female infanticide:

As braves and hunters were required and valued, it would be the
interest of every horde to rear, when possible, its healthy male
children. It would be less its interest to rear females, as they
would be less capable of self-support, and of contributing, by their
exertions to the common good. In this lies the only explanation
which can be accepted of the origin of those systems of female
infanticide still existing, the discovery of which from time to time,
in out of the way places, so shocks our humanity.

The shortage of women within the group now led to the sharing of
one female among several males (the origin of polyandry). At the
same time an effort was made to compensate for the paucity of adult
women by capturing those who remained in neighboring hordes. This
Practice was, so to speak, habit-forming; it eventually was regarded as
a necessity that women be taken from other groups: “In time it came
to be considered improper, because it was unusual, for a man to marry
3 woman of his own group” (ibid.:289). This was the origin of “exog-

193



===== PAGE 102 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

amy,” a term first coined by McLennan, as was its opposite “endog-
amy.” Among the wife-sharing group of men, paternity could not be
determined. Hence, when descent first came to be reckoned, it was
necessarily in the female line.

In later versions, McLennan (1876:57ff.) shifted his ground and
postulated that female descent originated before wife-capture and
exogamy. He saw endogamous groups crystallizing around “primitive
mothers.” These broke up into separate “bands,” which maintained
their totem identity even while dispersed. Now began the period of
infanticide and wife-stealing. But the bands with the same totem re-
garded it as a sacred obligation to refrain from stealing each other’s
women. They were thus “obliged to obtain them by capture from
groups of a stock different from their own.” McLennan recognized that
there was something wrong with jumping immediately to exogamy
because marrying out became a habit. But his attempt to improve the
causal linkage added to the overburdened hypotheses. As the capture
of women became more and more prevalent, the concept of marriage
took on the meaning of cohabitation with a captured woman. This
happened because cohabitation with a woman of one’s own group
came to be regarded as something other than marriage, namely, as a sin,
equivalent to the theft and capture of one of the females who, while
of another local group, was descended from the same totem:

If, then, we conceive that . . . the name of “wife” came to be
synonymous with a subject and enslaved woman in the power of
her captor or captors, and the name of marriage to be applied to a
man’s relation to such a woman as possessor of her, the origin of
exogamy becomes apparent. Since a subject and enslaved wife
would, in the circumstances of the time, be attainable only by
capture, marriage would be possible only through capture, and the
prohibition which, as we have seen, would apply to capture, would
apply to marriage. Marriage with a woman of the same stock
would be a crime and a sin. It would be incest [ibid.:65].

Wife-capture now led to a transition from polyandry to polygyny, since
men who were successful in their raiding activity started to accumu-
late harems. At first the captured wives were shared with one’s broth-
ers. Later the only sharing tolerated was after death; hence the origin
of the levirate. The local bands now began to fill up with marriageable
female descendants of “foreign” women. This permitted exogamic
marriages to be arranged within the group by purchase and mock
capture. At the same time the end of polyandry meant that paternity
could be reckoned. Thus, with the growth of property, patrilineal de-
scent replaced matrilineal descent. This once again made all the women

194

7. The Evolutionists: Results

and men in the group members of the same descent line. Some groups
now proceeded to a patrilineal phase of exogamy—of marriage by
capture all over again—while others became endogamous. McLennan’s
scheme also briefly encompassed the origin of the state. Like Maine
and Morgan, he held that the continued growth of the importance of
private property brought about a reduction of kinship relations out-
side of the nuclear family. Hence, the rise of the state was accom-
panied by the decay of the tribe and other kinship groupings.

THE MORGAN-MC LENNAN
CONTROVERSY

Despite their agreement, reached independently, on the stage
of promiscuity and the priority of matrilineal over patrilineal descent,
McLennan and Morgan became embroiled in a bitter controversy.
McLennan sought to destroy Morgan's scheme by belittling the
significance of kin terminological systems. He denied their sociological
significance, much as Kroeber was to do years later, asserting that they
were mere modes of addressing persons that had no bearing on family
or descent. McLennan displayed remarkable “cool” for a man who had
never seen an Indian. Morgan responded with a long note in Ancient
Society dedicated to a critique of McLennan’s entire scheme. He
successfully exposed McLennan’s confusion concerning the nature of
the exogamous groupings which were supposed to have taken wives
from each other. Exogamy and endogamy, Morgan pointed out, could
very well exist side by side. The clan was exogamous, but the tribe as
a whole could be endogamous. Although Morgan sought to obliterate
the two terms, his critique helped to assure their survival.

One of the most interesting points made by Morgan was that Mc-
Lennan had erroneously construed matrilineal descent, a mode of
reckoning clan affiliation, as the entire realm of kinship. Morgan cor-
rectly insisted that his systems of consanguinity and affinity proved
the existence of bilateral reckoning of kinship regardless of the nature
of the descent rule employed.

The great heyday of evolutionary schemes was like that; many val-
uable suggestions mixed indiscriminately with an equally large num-
ber of worthless ones. The materials of criticism were easy to come
by; everyone could see logical and empirical flaws in his rival’s argu-
ments. The ingenious reformulations poured out in endless torrents. It
was an inefficient method; but the procedure was not hopeless. The
most absurd sequences were gradually eliminated as the issues subject
to continuous controversy came into sharper focus.

195



===== PAGE 103 =====

Ralll

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 7. The Evolutionists: Results

MATRIARCHY, POLYANDRY, TOTEMISM

Consider, for example, the advances made with respect to the
concept of matriarchy. Bachofen’s formulations of mother-right had
assumed that matrilineal descent was merely a concomitant of the
more fundamental fact of gynocracy. Thus, Bachofen and his fol-
lower J. Lippert (1884) accepted the myth of the Amazons as a literal
truth. But many writers who accepted a strengthened role for women
within the family under matrilineal descent rejected the idea of a po-
litical and military gynocracy. Tylor (188g), Charles Letourncau
(1888), and Ernst Grosse (1896) all made this point. It was also, of
course, implied in Morgan’s treatment of the Iroquois clan. L. Dargun
(1883), Carl Starcke (1889), and Edward Westermarck (1891) went
further and insisted that male domination of the family as well as of
political life was compatible with matrilineal descent. According to
Dargun, the distinction between power and kinship was an indispens-
able key to the evolution of the family. Thus, G. E. Howard
(1904:46), without assistance from the Boasians, could conclude:

In short, if among many peoples at some stage of progress re-
search has clearly demonstrated the existence of mother-right, it
has just as clearly shown that the notion of gynocracy, of a period
of female supremacy, is without historical foundation.

None of Bachofen’s critics, with the exception perhaps of Morgan,
understood that the locus of authority under matrilineal descent was
vested in mother’s brother rather than in father. This understanding
was not definitively achieved until Malinowski’s Trobriand studies. Yet,
it cannot be said that the evolutionists had made no headway as a
result of their armchair deliberations.

To take another example, McLennan’s fanciful notions concerning
polyandry had also receded almost to oblivion by the end of the cen-
tury. Both Spencer (1896, I) and Morgan (1877) adduced empirical
evidence indicating that polyandry was a rare form of marriage, asso-
ciated with highly localized conditions. Later, these objections were
elaborated by Starcke and Westermarck.

McLennan’s most cffective disciple was the Cambridge orientalist
W. Robertson Smith, who employed McLennan’s scheme to interpret
the sociological history of kinship and marriage among the Arabs and
Hebrews. With their strong patriarchal, monotheistic, and polygamist
traditions, no cultures would have seemed, on the face of things, less
propitious for a theory that emphasized matrilineality, polyandry, and
totemism. Yet Smith (1903, orig. 1885) managed to find circum-

196

stantial evidence to show that all of these unlikely institutions had
actually existed among the “Semites.” Regardless of the value of
Smith’s reconstruction of the primordial phases of Semitic history, his
description of the social structure of classical Islam benefited greatly
from McLennan’s sociological arguments and concepts. Smith’s great-
est achievements, however, lay in the realm of comparative religious
institutions (see p. 207). Thus, even McLennan’s explanation of
exogamy as a remnant of wife-capture had its positive aspects. Indeed,
Napoleon Chagnon’s (1966) recent study of the relationship between
exogamy, marriage, and warfare among the Indians of the Brazil-
Venezuela border promises to lend new dignity to McLennan’s more
lurid speculations.

THE ORIGIN OF INCEST TABOOS

Tt should be remembered that McLennan’s analysis of exogamy
and endogamy initiated the discussion of the origin of the universal
incest prohibitions within the nuclear family. This problem quite
legitimately continues to occupy the attention of modern anthropo-
logy, and no amount of doctrinal particularism will suffice to quiet our
urge to understand why these taboos are so powerful and ubiquitous.

Despite the support of McLennan’s theory of wife-capture by Rob-
ertson Smith, Lubbock, and Spencer, rival explanations of exogamic
taboos had won the field by the end of the century. Morgan’s approach
was more influential. It was premised on the alleged biologically de-
leterious results of close inbreeding. According to Morgan, the
brother-sister taboo arose from a realization that inbreeding was bio-
logically unsound. The exogamy of the clan arose shortly afterward and
represented a continuation of the same “reformatory movement.” Clan
exogamy and the brother-sister taboo then spread as a result of migra-
tion and natural selection. The trouble with this view is that clan
exogamy is correlated with preferential cross-cousin marriage, a rule
that promotes rather than hinders in-breeding within a small group.
Another difficulty with Morgan’s explanation is how to account for
the taboos separating father from daughter and mother from son.
Nonetheless, Morgan’s focus upon the biological consequences of in-
breeding remains a respectable minority position. It is not inconceiv-
able that the nuclear family taboos arose from a combination of
biological and cultural advantages consequent upon the introduction
of incest prohibitions within the nuclear family, while descent group
€xogamy arose from separate and primarily cultural advantages
(which in turn had biological consequences).

197

i
i


===== PAGE 104 =====

.l

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 7. The Evolutionists: Results

It was Tylor who pointed the way toward an understanding of these
additional cultural advantages. For Tylor (1889:267-68) exogamy is
the primitive mode of “alliance” and of “political self-preservation.”
“Among tribes of low culture there is but one means known of keep-
ing up permanent alliance, and that means is inter-marriage.” In this
form, Tylor's theory underlies, or is convergent with, the vast field of
kinship studies which stress marriage alliances between groups as the
key to primitive social structure. Thus, great weight has been placed
upon the alliance function of marriage by Lévi-Strauss and his follow-
ers (see pp. 499ff.). Unlike the latter, however, Tylor stressed the sur-
vival value of the exchange of women. The alternative has been be-
tween “marrying-out” or “being killed out”:

Exogamy . . . enabling a growing tribe to keep itself compact
by constant union between its spreading clans, enables it to over-
match any number of small, intermarrying groups, isolated and
helpless. Again and again in the world’s history, savage tribes
must have had plainly before their minds the simple practical al-
ternative between marrying-out and being killed out [ibid.:267].

Leslie White (1949a:316ff.) has made Tylor’s ideas the basis of his
own theory of incest prohibition by applying Tylor’s formula to the
family as a basic unit, independent of, and prior to, the clan. “A way
[exogamy] was found to unite families with one another, and social
evolution as a human affair was launched upon its career” (ibid.).

Another important line of inquiry bearing on the explanation of ex-
ogamy and the incest taboos started with the nuclear family as a pri-
mordial given and went on to stress the disruptive effect of endogamy.
This line was explored first by Carl N. Starcke (19o1; orig. 1889), who
contended that marriage between son and mother or brother and sister
would endanger the father’s authority. This suggestion figures in the
modern incest theories of Malinowski and Murdock. New and impor-
tant psychological dimensions to the problem were contributed by
Edward Westermarck (1891), foremost opponent of the Morgan-Mc-
Lennan-Tylor-Lubbock theory of original promiscuity. Westermarck fol-
lowed Darwin, Charles S. Wake, and Starcke in arguing that some
form of pairing must have been primordial in the human species since
it occurs among the primates and even among lower organisms. Accord-
ing to Westermarck, there is a universal dread of incest based upon an
instinctual human disgust for sexual relations with individuals who
have been reared together at close quarters. This instinctual repulsion
in turn was established within the species as a result of natural selec-
tion conferring adaptive advantages on outbreeding families.

198

Through natural selection an instinct must have been developed,
powerful enough, as a rule, to prevent injurious unions. This in-
stinct displays itself simply as an aversion on the part of individu-
als to union with others with whom they have lived, but as these
are for the most part blood-relations the result is the survival of
the fittest [WESTERMARCK 1894:546].

Westermarck’s espousal of natural selection greatly narrows the gap
between him and Morgan. Although Morgan does not refer to an in-
stinctual dread of incest, the advantages of the punaluan family are
“carried in the blood” like all of man’s other great innovations. For
both Westermarck and Morgan, the incest regulations in the clan
and community are outward extensions of the brothersister pro-
hibition. Westermarck’s suggestion that there is a biopsychological
component in the nuclear-family taboos cannot be dismissed. Some
form of imprinting may be involved or, as Arthur Wolf (1966) has
suggested, there may be something in the socialization process itself
which supports Westermarck’s view of the inability of persons reared
together to enjoy sexual communion.

THE EVOLUTION OF RELIGION

Morgan’s grand scheme of institutional evolution, so pro-
foundly optimistic with respect to the potency of the comparative
method, systematically avoided the reconstruction of the sequences
connected with the evolution of religion. Morgan’s reasons for not
treating magico-religious phenomena are highly instructive with re-
gard to the nature of his overall concept of sociocultural causality, to
which we turn in a moment. Religion, said Morgan, is just too irra-
tional to be understood by scientific means:

The growth of religious ideas is environed with such intrinsic dif-
ficulties that it may never receive a perfectly satisfactory exposition.
Religion deals so largely with the imaginative and emotional
nature, and consequently with such uncertain elements of knowl-
edge, that all primitive religions are grotesque and to some extent
unintelligible. This subject also falls without the plan of this work
excepting as it may prompt incidental suggestions [MORGAN 1877:5].

The attempt to describe evolutionary sequences for religion, far
from being avoided, was actually given priority by most of the other
evolutionists. There was ample precedent for this attempt in the En-
lightenment doctrine that man’s systems of belief were steadily mov-
ing toward higher forms of rationality which implicd agnosticism if not

199

|
i
i


===== PAGE 105 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

atheism as an end state. Comte’s theological, metaphysical, and scien-
tific stages of thought continued this tradition into the nineteenth
century. The theory that religious belief and institutions had under-
gone a natural evolution might be thought subversive with respect to
revealed religion. Yet many of the late-nineteenth-century theorists
not only clung to their childhood faiths but derived from them the
added satisfaction that came from being convinced that their beliefs
were demonstrably the highest form of religion. It was only among the
Marxists that the evolution of religion was once again taken unambigu-
ously to the end point postulated by D'Holbach, Helvetius, and
Diderot.

Bachofen’s scheme, it will be recalled, included not only the evolu-
tion of social organization, but also a parallel and functionally related
evolution of religious ideas. Indeed for Bachofen it was a series of re-
ligious reforms that set the direction of history. Turning to McLennan,
we may note that his treatment of religion was quite thin, despite the
fact that his use of the concept of totemism led to an extraordinary
outpouring of anthropological treatises. McLennan, it will be recalled,
regarded the invention of totemism as an essential part of the explana-
tion of the origin of exogamy. This is the aspect of McLennan’s
scheme that best exhibits the muddled views of sociocultural causality
with which he and the other evolutionists were content to operate.

After Bachofen, a sustained treatment of the evolution of religion
was first undertaken by a most unlikely member of the evolutionary
school, John Lubbock. Two thirds of The Origin of Civilization (1870)
is dedicated to a sketch of the stages of religious belief. Reaffirming his
carlier view that the most primitive savages lack anything which could
be called religion, Lubbock displays an infuriating certainty concerning
the doctrinal superiority of his own brand of superstition. It is impor-
tant to realize that men like Lubbock were under constant pressure to
disclaim any proclivity toward atheism. We understand therefore why
Lubbock insists that the savages lacked religion. Atheism and material-
ism are inferior conditions of belief; man only gradually acquires
higher spiritual concepts. If there is “one fact more certain than an-
other,” he proclaims, it is “the gradual diffusion of religious light, and
of nobler conceptions as to the nature of God” (1870:349). Lubbock
even went so far as to call the first stage of religion “Atheism”! His
scheme follows verbatim:

Atheism; understanding by this term not a denial of the exis-
tence of a Deity, but an absence of any definite ideas on the sub-
ject.

200

I o

7. The Evolutionists: Results

Fetichism; the stage in which man supposes he can force the
Deity to comply with his desires.

Nature-worship, or Totemism; in which natural objects, trees,
lakes, stones, animals, &c. are worshipped.

Shamanism; in which the superior deities are far more power-
ful than man, and of a different nature. Their place of abode also
is far away, and accessible only to Shamans.

Idolatry, or Anthropomorphism; in which the gods take still
more completely the nature of men, being, however, more power-
ful. They are still amenable to persuasion; they are a part of na-
ture, and not creators. They are represented by images or idols.

In the next stage the Deity is regarded as the author, not
merely a part, of nature. He becomes for the first time a really
supernatural being.

The last stage to which I will refer is that in which morality is
associated with religion [ibid.:119].

Lubbock had equally definite ideas about the evolution of social struc-
ture. He believed for example that the primitive stage of promiscuity
was followed by a period in which descent is first uniformly within
the tribe, then through the mother, then through the father, and
“lastly and lastly only,” through both (ibid.: 113). But the coordina-
tion of the religion sequence with the evolution of the family and
state is scarcely attempted. The casual nexus with which Lubbock
operates is a tangle of evolving ideas, pushing themselves on to perfec-
tion: “the human mind, in its onward progress, everywhere passes
through the same or very similar phases” (ibid.:192). Underlying the
whole process is the perfection of man’s physical nature. Advanced
ideas are “entirely beyond the mental range of the lower savages,
whose extreme mental inferiority we have much difficulty in realizing”
(ibid.:5). The only functional connection between religion and social
structure noted by Lubbock is that between the “increasing power of
chiefs and priests” and the stage of Idolatry “with its sacrifices, tem-

ples, and priests etc.” This analysis, however, he attributes to Solomon
(Wisd. of Sol. 14:17).

TYLOR AND THE EVOLUTION OF
RELIGION

Against Lubbock’s dreary performance, Tylor’s Primitive Cul-
ture (1871) stands out as a respectable contribution to anthropological
theory. This work at once demonstrates that the comparative method,
applied to dubious but abundant ethnographic material under the
guidance of a sufficiently critical intelligence, was capable of producing

201



===== PAGE 106 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

enduring results. The central theme in Primitive Culture is the evolu-
tion of the concept of Animism, Tylor's minimum definition of re-
ligion. Animism exists wherever there is a belief in souls, ghosts,
demons, devils, gods, or similar categories of phenomena. The root
of all these concepts is traced by Tylor to the belief in the human
soul. This belief, which is found in almost every culture, results from
the universal subjective experience of dreams and visions. In dreams
and visions one sees phantom people, doubles, who detach themselves
from their bodies and move about independently of material condi-
tions: one sees “a thin unsubstantial human image, in its nature a sort
of vapour, film or shadow” (1958 II:12; orig. 1871). The immense
utility of this concept lies in its power to account for another series of
universal experiences of the greatest significance to man: the difference
between life and death, health and sickness, wakefulness and sleep,
trance and ordinary consciousness. It is the evolution of this belief in
the human personal soul through vast extrapolations and embroideries
which forms the subject matter of Tylor’s great work:

.. . the conception of human soul once attained to by man,
served as a type or model on which he framed not only his ideas
of other souls of lower grade, but also his ideas of spiritual beings
in general, from the tiniest elf that sports in the long grass up to
the heavenly Creator and Ruler of the world, the Great Spirit
[ibid.:196)].

Tylor refrained from attempting to set forth a rigid sequence; many
different kinds of animistic beings come into existence at approxi-
mately the same stage, and they endure over long periods as survivals
among peasant and illiterate members of modern societies. In general,
however, there is a gradual movement toward monotheism and the re-
moval of the pantheon of high gods from direct human appeal.
“Lower animism” tends to be amoral; the soul is continued after death
in a condition which does not depend on its deeds during life. “Higher
animism” takes on the “retribution doctrine”—there are rewards and
punishments for the soul, depending on its lifetime performance.

THE LIMITATIONS OF TYLOR'S
APPROACH

Despite its vast erudition, its high standards of evidence, and
its lordly pace, Primitive Culture is a curiously one-sided book. If

Ancient Society suffers from a neglect of ideology, Primitive Culture
suffers even more from its neglect of social organization and economics.

202

7. The Evolutionists: Results

Once we have grown accustomed to the proposition that the doctrines
of contemporary Christianity had their origins in the lower animism of
savagery, there is little else of theoretical significance to be gained from
the piling of additional case upon case. Even as a treatment of religion,
Primitive Culture had its glaring limitations, since it is devoted almost
exclusively to the cognitive as distinct from the institutional compo-
nents of religion. As for the causal explanation of the evolution of ani-
mistic beliefs, the basic point of Primitive Culture seems to be that
the human mind has the ability to perfect itself by thinking more
clearly. The explanation by which Tylor connects ideology with social
structure corresponds exactly to Lubbock’s (and Solomon’s): Men
model their spirit pantheons after their own governments:

Among nation after nation it is still clear how, man being the type
of deity, human society and government became the model on
which divine society and government were shaped. As chiefs and
kings are among men, so are the great gods among the lesser
spirits. They differ from the souls and minor spiritual beings
which we have as vet chiefly considered, but the difference is
rather of rank than of nature. They are personal spirits, reigning
over personal spirits. Above the disembodied souls and manes, the
local genii of rocks and fountains and trees, the host of good and
evil demons, and the rest of the spiritual commonality, stand
these mightier deities, whose influence is less confined to local or
individual interests, and who, as it pleases them, can act directly
within their vast domain, or control and operate through the
lower beings of their kind, their servants, agents, or mediators

[ibid.:334].

The issue of why such correspondences should exist between political
structure and “projective systems” seems almost entirely to have es-
caped Tylor's comprehension. We find only the barest hint of the
possibility that religion might have functions more complex and subtle
than that of providing explanations for puzzling and distressing phe-
nomena. “In the course of history,” Tylor remarks in passing, “religion
has in various ways attached to itself matters small and great outside
its central scheme, such as prohibition of special meats, observance of
special days, regulation of marriage or kinship, division of society into
castes, ordinance of social law and civil government” (ibid.: 447).
From this juxtaposition of such very small and very great matters, we
derive some measure of Tylor’s preoccupation with narrow, rather
disembodied cognitive issues.

An emphasis on the relative parochialism of Primitive Culture seems
justified in relation to Tylor’s famous claim in his conclusion that “the

203



===== PAGE 107 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

science of culture is essentially a reformer’s science” (ibid.:539)
which will contribute to the “advancement of civilization.” Tt is in this
context painfully obvious that Tylor’s “science of culture” could not
be a “reformer’s science” as long as it propagated the view that social
change emanates from the “exposure of crude old culture” to the light
of intellect. It is true of course that Tylor’s interests did extend to
social organization and that his contribution to the study of kinship in
“On a Method of Investigating the Development of Institutions”
surpasses Morgan’s best sociological effort. Yet Tylor was unable to
bring the religion sequence and the analysis of social organization into
mutual conformity. In other words, he failed to achieve an under-
standing of sociocultural phenomena as a functional-causal system.
Hence his sought-after “laws of evolution” merely described the un-
folding of separate developmental sequences, each of which indepen-
dently derived its main motive power from the force of reason.

Tylor’s emphasis on the ideological content of religion stimulated a
distinguished but monotonously idealist series of cultural studies. Under
James Frazer, the preoccupation with the evolution of religious ideas
lapsed into a frankly literary endeavor. Under Andrew Lang, it denied
its natural science heritage and returned to mysticism.

FRAZER AND THE EVOLUTION OF
RELIGION

Sir James Frazer's writings have been assigned by Edmund
Leach (1966:562) to six categories: (1) translations and editions of
the classics; (2) writings about primitive concepts of the soul; (3)
writings about totemism; (4) writings about folklore in the Old
Testament; (5) passages of the Bible; and (6) The Golden Bough.
As Leach points out, Frazer was thus wholly occupied with “mental
anthropology,” while the “more sociological emphasis” lay quite
outside his range of interest (ibid.:564). According to Leach (ibid.:
561), Frazer explicitly thought of himself “as making a contribution
to literature rather than to science. . . .”

Frazer's application of the comparative method in The Golden
Bough, which by 1914 required an edition consisting of twelve vol-
umes, is the most grandiose ever undertaken by a single author. The
theoretical product of Frazer's monumental effort, however, is quite
feeble and certainly out of all proportion to the size of the undertak-
ing. Chiefly, it consists in a further confirmation of the Tylorian view
of modern religion as a natural growth from primitive antecedents. One
theme is concerned with the relationships between the sacrifices of di-

204

gl

7. The Evolutionists: Results

vine kings; the preservation of fertility; and by implication, the story of
the Crucifixion. Another deals with the prevalence of survivals. Perhaps
the most influential contribution is the distinction between religion
and magic, a subject that Tylor had neglected. Thus Frazer sees magic
as an early expression of science based on a false notion of the regularity
of cause and effect processes. Religion is a higher achievement, substi-
tuting uncertainty and prayerful conciliation for misguided notions of
causality. Science arises next, returning mankind to the principles of
cause and effect, but on a basis of true correlations. Frazer’s scheme,
however, remains wholly alien to a science of society. The whole proc-
ess of the alleged transition from magic through religion to science de-
pends on nothing but an inherent tendency of thought to perfect
itself: “In the last analysis magic, religion, and science are nothing but
theories of thought” (ibid.:826) . . . thoughts of thought, . . . ideas
about ideas.

With the publication of the 1922 abridgment of The Golden
Bough and the flood of public honors that accompanied it, Frazer
emerged as the anthropologist, whose books every educated man was
supposed to have read. I shall not join Edmund Leach in begrudging
Frazer his great success as an emissary to the educated masses. As litera-
ture, The Golden Bough does have its charms. The problem seems
rather to have been that too many anthropologists, including Leach
himself (see p. 544), never quite managed to throw off the habit of
regarding culture as nothing more than a pack of ideas swarming
around inside of people’s heads.

MORE MENTALISM

The mentalistic emphasis in Tylor’s treatment of religion was
also furthered by Robert R. Marett, Tylor’s successor at Oxford.
Marett (19og) attempted to correct for the overintellectualized ap-
proach of Tylor and Frazer by insisting (without benefit of fieldwork)
that primitives distinguished emotionally between supernatural and or-
dinary phenomena. Thus magic and religion should not be separated,
since their cognitive essence lies in a sense of mystery. “Supernatural-
ism,” Marett insisted, should embrace both magic and religion. Marett
also criticized Tylor’s concept of religion as failing to make provision
for the personification of inanimate objects that did not involve a soul
concept. To denote this kind of religious belief, Marett introduced the
term “animatism.” Like Frazer, Marett stands on the boundary be-
tween the scientist and man of letters. Indeed, Lowie (1937:111) calls
him “a philosophical humanist.”

205

|
|
}
[
i
;
]

|


===== PAGE 108 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

RETURN TO MYSTICISM: ANDREW LANG

The culmination of the line of Tylor’s philosophical hu-
manist students lies with Andrew Lang. Unfortunately Lang and
Lang’s relationship to Tylor have been misinterpreted to the present
generation of anthropologists through an error in Lowie’s account (cf.
WALLACE 1966:7; PENNIMAN 1965:140). According to Lowie (1937:82)
“Tylor’s Primitive Culture . . . denied high gods to the simpler peo-
ples,” and “on the subject Tylor was challenged by Andrew Lang.”
Tylor, however, never denied high gods to simpler peoples, and Lang
never held that Tylor had made such a denial. Tylor’s view is quite
clear:

Thus, then, it appears that the theology of the lower races al-
ready reaches its climax in conceptions of a highest of the gods,
and that these conceptions in the savage and barbaric world are no
copies stamped from one common type, but outlines widely varying
among mankind. The degeneration-theory, in some instances no
doubt with justice, may claim such beliefs as mutilated and per-
verted remnants of higher religions. Yet for the most part, the
development-theory is competent to account for them without seek-
ing their origin in grades of culture higher than those in which they
are found existing. Looked upon as products of natural religion,
such doctrines of divine supremacy seem in no way to transcend the
powers of the low-cultured mind to reason out, nor the low-cul-
tured imagination to deck with mythic fancy. There have existed
in times past, and do still exist, savage or barbaric peoples who
hold such views of a highest god as they may have attained to of
themselves, without the aid of more cultured nations. Among
these races, Animism has its distinct and consistent outcome, and
Polytheism its distinct and consistent completion, in the doctrine
of a Supreme Deity [TYLOR 1958, II:422].

It is true that Tylor was vigorously attacked by Lang, but Lang’s
stated motivation is not mentioned by Lowie. What Lang came to
resent, after an initial period of enthusiasm for the genre of naturalistic
evolutionary studies of religious thought, was first, the premise that
animism has been based on an essentially false set of ideas. In his
The Making of Religion (1898), Lang criticized Tylor for supposing
that primitive man did not actually possess many of the powers
which he attributed to souls and that all such manifestations of
souls among contemporary Englishmen were necessarily “survivals.”

206

I

7. The Evolutionists: Results

We hold that very probably there exist human faculties of un-
known scope; that these conceivably were more powerful and
prevalent among our very remote ancestors who founded religion;
that they may still exist in savage as in civilized races, and that
they may have conformed, if they did not originate, the doctrine
of separable souls. If they do exist, the circumstance is important,
in view of the fact that modern ideas rest on a denial of their
existence [ibid.:66-67].

Second, Lang insisted that Tylor's animism could not explain the
high gods in whom the simpler peoples believed. Tylor had under-
estimated the extent to which these high gods exercised a moral in-
fluence over primitive peoples. “The moral, heart-reading, friendly,
creative being of low savage faith, whence was he evolved?” inquires
Lang. His answer: “It is as easy, almost, for me to believe that they
‘were not left without a witness,” as to believe that this God of theirs
was evolved out of the maleficent ghost of a dirty mischievous med-
icineman” (ibid.:185). In other words, Lang toyed with a return to
the degeneration theory and to the doctrine that monotheism was the
gift of God to man.

STRUCTURAL APPROACHES TO
RELIGION

The analysis of religion as part of a larger social system was
initiated by evolutionists outside of Tylor’s orbit. Two figures require
our attention, W. Robertson Smith and Herbert Spencer.

Smith was a disciple of McLennan’s, who found McLennan’s de-
velopmental sequences applicable to the history of the Semitic peo-
ples. His Religion of the Semites (1889) stands out among all
of the contemporary evolutionist treatments of religion because of
its focus on what is essentially a single cultural tradition and by its
extraordinarily detailed treatment of certain relationships between
social organization, ritual, and belief. Smith cannot be said to have
systematically explored the entire range of structural relationships be-
tween social organization and religion, nor did he manage always to
rise above the kind of projective or imitative view that was current
among the Tylorians. Yet the relatively restricted ethnographic com-
pass within which he confined himself guaranteed a result that
was closer to modern structural-functionalist standards than anything
produced up to that time. His treatment of the social functions of
feasting, ritual communion, and sacrifice with its emphasis upon the
maintenance of a sense of social solidarity constitutes an important if

207



===== PAGE 109 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

imperfectly acknowledged influence on British social anthropology.
Smith’s (1956:21) cardinal hypothesis was that religious and politi-
cal institutions are “parts of one whole of social custom.” Myth and
doctrine—the essence of religion for Frazer—were thus something of
an epiphenomenon. Not that Smith relished ideological details less
keenly than Frazer, but he regarded the institutional matrix as the
source of religious ideas.

When we study the political structures of early society, we do not
begin by asking what is recorded of the first legislators, or what
theory man advanced as to the reason of their institutions; we try
to understand what the institutions were, and how they shaped
men’s lives. In like manner, in the study of Semitic religion, we
must not begin by asking what was told about the gods, but what
the working religious institutions were, and how they shaped the
lives of the worshippers [ibid.].

SPENCER'S SCHEME

It is quite likely that Smith here reflected the influence of
Spencer. For of all the evolutionists, it was Spencer who approached
most closely to the understanding of sociocultural phenomena in
terms of evolving systems, each of whose parts contributed to each
other and to the continuity and change of the whole. Unfortunately,
the value and historical effectiveness of Spencer’s synthesizing genius
was not matched by his ability to handle ethnographic data. He seems
to have lacked the critical flair which came so easily to Tylor. The
result is an embarrassing mixture of a highly sophisticated method-
ology based on abundant but inappropriate or fanciful examples that
give rise to improbable or overly mechanical evolutionary sequences.
In his Principles of Sociology Spencer undertook to sketch develop-
mental sequences for all the major branches of culture. His guiding
principle was the “law of evolution”; namely, that in all spheres of
the universe, there is

an integration of matter and concomitant dissipation of motion;
during which the matter passes from an indefinite incoherent
homogeneity to a definite coherent heterogeneity; and during
which the retained motion undergoes a parallel transformation
[1912:367; orig. 1864].

Thus, in the evolution of the family, the “incoherent homogeneity” of
promiscuity yields the progressively greater “definiteness” of matrilin-
eal and then patrilineal descent; marriage moves to higher levels of

208

el

7. The Evolutionists: Results

order through polyandry, polygamy, and monogamy; the social system
as a whole moves from the military type to the industrial type in-
volving increasing degrees of individuation and the multiplication of
specialized parts.

It is to the domain of religion, however, that I must now limit my
remarks. Here we find Spencer dealing first of all with a sequence of
beliefs which are markedly parallel to Tylor’s. Indeed, both Tylor
and Spencer virtually accused each other of plagiarism in deciding
who had been the first to trace the concept of a monotheistic god
back to the ghosts and dreams of primitive men (cf. HAYS 1958:80).
Spencer’s sequence is typically more rigid and mechanical than Ty-
lor’s. In compensation, however, Spencer addresses himself to more
stimulating and historically important questions. He proceeds to his
analysis only after observing that “there can be no true conception
of a structure without a true conception of its function” (SPENCER
1896, 11:671). The functions of various stages of religions are then
viewed in relationship to political control, social cohesion, military
activities, and ecclesiastical bureaucracies. His conclusions have a
distinctly modern ring to them in their emphasis upon “cohesion”
and “social continuity”:

Thus, looking at it generally, we may say that ecclesiasticism
stands for the principle of social continuity. Above all other
agencies it is that which conduced to cohesion; not only between
the coexisting parts of a nation, but also between its present gen-
eration and its past generations. In both ways it helps to main-
tain the individuality of the society. Or, changing somewhat the
point of view, we may say that ccclesiasticism, embodying in its
primitive form the rule of the dead over the living and sanctifying
in its more advanced forms the authority of the past over the
present, has for its function to preserve in force the organized
product of earlier experiences versus the modifying effects of more
recent expericnces. Evidently this organized product of past ex-
periences is not without credentials. The life of the society has,
up to the time being, been maintained under it; and hence a
perennial reason for resistance to deviation [ibid.:773].

Again:

As furnishing a principle of cohesion by maintaining a com-
mon propitiation of a deceased ruler’s spirit, and by implication
checking the tendencies to internal warfare, priesthoods have
furthered social growth and development. They have simultane-
ously done this in sundry other ways: by fostering that spirit of
conservatism which maintains continuity in social arrangements;

209



===== PAGE 110 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

by forming a supplementary regulative system which cooperates
with the political one; by insisting on obedience, primarily to gods
and secondarily to kings, by countenancing the coercion under
which has been cultivated the power of application; and by
strengthening the habit of self-restraint [ibid.:817].

EVOLUTIONISM, A SCIENTIFIC
ADVANCE

Enough has now been said to demonstrate the powerful for-
ward motion generated during the period 1860—qo as far as the main
task of the comparative method was concerned. It cannot be denied
that a better knowledge of the most general directions of sociocultural
evolution was achieved. Nor can it be denied that in the very pro-
cess of reproducing the possible lines of development, false hypotheses
came to enjoy an orthodoxy which diminished the luster of the
equally numerous correct and productive ones. In balance, however,
this period must be reckoned as one of the great epochs in the en-
largement of Western man’s comprehension of his place in nature.
Under the impact of relativism, we are much too prone to emphasize
the snobbery of the Victorian anthropologists and their irritating
conviction that all men would ultimately aspire to live and look like
middle-class Englishmen. We must not forget that there is an as-
pect to the evolutionism of the period which stands opposed to the
ethnocentric naiveté of men like Lubbock and McLennan. In their
culture, evolutionism was a daring admission that the sacred institu-
tions of family, church, property, and state had an ancestry, as Lang
put it, of maleficent ghosts and dirty mischievous medicinemen.
Admittedly it was a source of comfort to know that nature had
equipped modern Euro-America with the best institutions which
“the survival of the fittest” could provide. But this rationalization of
contemporary mores, institutions, and beliefs involved tumning away
from the much more convincing and satisfying rationales of divine
revelation and divine commandments. The enduring significance of
the late-nineteenth-century use of the comparative method was that
it completed the demonstration, begun in the previous century, that
Western man’s institutions from Christianity to motherhood had a
natural and not a divine origin. This achievement may not impress a
generation whose theologians, driven to despair by the crimes of
man, hint that “God is dead.” But educated opinion in the Victorian
era found it hard to believe that conjugal fidelity, filial respect, and
love of God were nothing more than human artifices, slowly evolved

210

7. The Evolutionists: Results

by trial and error, and destined to be replaced by as yet unknown
but equally mundane arrangements. What the evolutionists faced
were learned men, like the Archbishop of Dublin, Richard Whately:

‘We have no reason to believe that any community ever did, or
ever can emerge, unassisted by external helps, from a state of utter
barbarism unto anything that can be called civilisation. Man has
not emerged from the savage state; the progress of any community
in civilisation by its own internal means, must always have begun
from a condition rcmoved from that of complete barbarism, out
of which it does not appear that men ever did or can raise them-
selves [WHATELY quoted in L.UuBBOCK 1870:326].

In this context, when Lubbock insists that primeval man was an
atheist (thereby protecting himself from being called the same), we
must not conclude that his main interest lay in maligning the Tas-
manians and Fuegians in order to praise Englishmen. It rather
seems to have been his intent to emphasize the “utter barbarism” of
the earliest men in order to confound Whately and other “degener-
ationists” who refused to surrender the comforting illusion that it
was God who had made Englishmen monogamists and monotheists.

If T seem to lay insufficient stress on the absurdly false sequences
for which Morgan, Spencer, Lubbock, McLennan, and even Robert-
son Smith were responsible, it is not because the distortions of history
in the name of science are ever to be taken lightly. Rather, it seems
that in condemning the method responsible for these aberrations,
many contemporary anthropologists have lost their own sense of his-
torical perspective.

THE ABSENCE OF CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

While the historical errors and sequential flim-flammery of
the evolutionists have been the subject of abundant critical appraisal,
there is another aspect of their work which has gone virtually without
serious discussion. The aspect in question is the nature of the causal
process which the evolutionists substituted for the “hand of God”—
the processes which had brought about that degree of parallelism
and convergence without which the comparative method could not
have been utilized. It should be apparent that without exception,
none of the evolutionists were cultural materialists. By thus saying at
once what they were not, we shall spare ourselves the confusion
which results if we attempt to say precisely what they were in posi-

211

i
|

——— e e


===== PAGE 111 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tive terms. Thus Opler (1964a:123) attempts to refute White’s
(1949b:364) assertion that Tylor expressed “the materialist interpre-
tation of culture.” Stocking (1965¢c:136), on the other hand, attempts
to prove that Opler’s label “philosophical idealist” is equally inap-
propriate. The truth is that Tylor was a philosophical and cultural
eclectic. He had no consistent theory of cultural causation. On the
one hand, like all of his contemporaries, he belicved that the direction
of history was governed by a process of natural selection in which the
survival of the fittest men and institutions was assured: “institutions
which can best hold their own in the world gradually supersede the
less fit ones, their incessant conflict determines the general re-
sultant course of culture” (TyLOR 1958, 1:69). On the other hand,
again, like all of his contemporaries, Tylor also fervently embraced
the culturalidealist heritage of the Enlightenment. While Tylor
emphasized the importance of material culture in the evolutionary
process, the ultimate pre-eminence of mind in shaping the direction
of material progress remains unquestioned. Our previous discussion
of the independent nature of Tylor's religion sequence should have
made this sufficiently clear. Opler’s remarks on the subject may none-
theless be cited to remove any lingering doubt:

Of man’s “brain-organization” and his ability to use symbols he
[Tylor] says: “Man’s power of using a word, or even a gesture, as
the symbol of a thought and the means of conversing about it, is
one of the points where we most plainly see him parting company
with all lower species, and starting on his career of conquest
through higher intellectual regions”. . . . In another place he
[Tylor] declares: “Man’s power of accommodating himself to the
world he lives in, and even of controlling it, is largely due to his
faculty of gaining new knowledge”. . . . “History,” he [Tylor]
tells us, “is an agent powerful and becoming more powerful, in
shaping men’s minds, and through their minds their actions in
the world . . . .” The key to man’s achievements, as Tylor saw
it, lay in his “power of coordinating the impression of his senses,
which enables him to understand the world he lives in, and by
understanding to use, resist, and even in a measure rule
it” ... [oPLER 1964a:138-39].

It is interesting to note that while Opler himself argues at length
(in order to refute White) that Tylor was a Social Darwinist, he
nonetheless flatly concludes, “The central place of the evolution of
the mind in Tylor's theory stamps him as a philosophical idealist
and invalidates any attempt to select passages to prove him a ma-
terialist” (ibid.:143). But to be a Social Darwinist, as we have seen,

212

7. The Evolutionists: Results

is to be a racial determinist, a biological reductionist. Indeed, Opler
even quotes at length from Tylor’s racist statements. But how could a
philosophical idealist propose that mind is determined by the material
conditions of the struggle for existence? After all, what was the fuss
about, if Darwin’s theory was not viewed as the very essence (so to
speak) of the incarnation of materialism? Thus if Tylor is to be
called a “philosophical idealist,” it can only be with the proviso
that he was more confused than philosophical.

MORGAN NOT A CULTURAL
MATERIALIST

Exactly the same observation is required in the case of
Morgan. The precedent for regarding Morgan as a materialist was, of
course, set by Marx and Engels; and in the next chapter, we shall
inquire into the reasons for this unfortunate error. In the meantime
attention should be drawn to the extraordinary exchange between
Opler, Harding, and Leacock (in opLER 1964b), in which one side
demonstrates conclusively that Morgan was a materialist, while the
other demonstrates equally well that Morgan was not a materialist.
On the materialist side, Harding quotes the following chapter and
verse from Morgan’s Ancient Society (1877:9):

It is probable that the successive arts of subsistence which arose
at long intervals will ultimately, from the great influence they must
have exercised upon the condition of mankind, afford the most
satisfactory bases for these divisions [the “ecthical periods” and
subdivisions of Savagery, Barbarism, and Civilization].

On the same side, Leacock’s favorite passages are as follows:

The most advanced portion of the human race were halted, so
to express it, at certain stages of progress, until some great inven-
tion or discovery, such as the domestication of animals or the
smelting of iron ore, gave a new and powerful impulse forward
... [MORGAN 1963:39].

. improvement in subsistence, which followed the cultiva-
tion of maize and plants among the American aborigines, must
have favored the general advancement of the family. It led to lo-
calization, to the use of additional arts, to an improved house
architecture, and to a more intelligent life. . . . The great ad-
vancement of socicty indicated by the transition from savagery

213



===== PAGE 112 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

into the Lower Status of barbarism, would carry with it a corres-
ponding improvement in the condition of the family . . .
[ibid.:469].

Cities . . . imply the existence of a stable and developed ficld
agriculture, the possession of domestic animals in flocks and
herds, of merchandise in masses and of property in houses and
lands. The city brought with it new demands in the art of govern-
ment by creating a changed condition of society [ibid.:264].

Convincing as this might seem, Opler has citations to prove that
Ancient Society was actually a study of cultural evolution from the
point of view of the mental and moral development of certain funda-
mental “germ” ideas. Opler’s favorite chapter and verse appears to be
the following:

Out of a few germs of thought, conceived in the early ages, have
been evolved all the principal institutions of mankind. Beginning
their growth in the period of savagery, fermenting through the
period of barbarism, they have continued their advancement
through the period of civilization. The evolution of these germs of
thought has been guided by a natural logic which formed an es-
sential attribute of the brain itself. So unerringly has this principle
performed its functions in all conditions of experience and in all
periods of time, that its results are uniform, coherent and trace-
able in their courses. These results alone will in time yield con-
vincing proofs of the unity of origin of mankind. The mental
history of the human race, which is revealed in institutions, in-
ventions and discoveries, is presumptively the history of a single
species, perpetuated through individuals, and developed through
experience. Among the original germs of thought, which have ex-
ercised the most powerful influence upon the human mind, and
upon human destiny, are these which relate to government, to
the family, to language, to religion, and to property. They had a
definite beginning far back in savagery, and a logical progress, but
can have no final consummation, because they are still progressing,
and must ever continue to progress [MORGAN 1877:59-60].

Opler again weakens his own case by drawing attention to Morgan’s
“Cultural Darwinism” (ibid.:112). But the “materialists” on the other
side fail to exploit this lapse since that kind of materialism with its
racist taint, is as embarrassing to their image of Morgan as is the
notion of philosophical idealism. For Opler, howevet, the implica-
tion of biological reductionism is not quite as devastating as in
the case of Tylor, since his point is to prove not that Morgan was a
“philosophical idealist” but that he was a “dualist”: materialist for
material culture and idealist for everything else. Thus the point

214

.

7. The Evolutionists: Results

here under consideration—the confused eclecticism of the evolu-
tionist—is actually conceded by Opler.

SPENCER NOT A CULTURAL
MATERIALIST

The best case for philosophical materialism (not cultural
materialism) is furnished by Herbert Spencer. As the staunchest
and most consistent of the biological reductionists, Spencer’s material-
ism seems unquestionable. Moreover as Carneiro (1967:xxxv) has
pointed out, for Spencer the universe was composed exclusively of
matter and energy, and the entire course of evolution was at bottom
a physical process. Furthermore, in cultural matters, Spencer fre-
quently stressed the importance of subsistence, energy systems, war-
fare, and impersonal social forces. According to Carneiro (ibid.:xxvi):
“He denied that recognition of ‘advantages or disadvantages of this or
that arrangement furnished motives for establishing or maintaining’
a form of government, and argued instead that ‘conditions and not
intentions determine.” Correspondingly, he saw the values and at-
titudes of a society, not as shaping, but as reflecting the society:
‘.. . for every society, and for each stage in its evolution, there is
an appropriate mode of feeling and thinking . . . [which] is a function
of the social structure. . . . Fortunately we need not concern our-
selves with the philosophical significance of the fact that, despite all
this, Spencer himself frequently denied that he was a materialist. The
question is, whether he was a cultural materialist, that is, whether he
systematically elaborated a theory which accounted for cultural differ-
ences and similarities in terms of techno-cconomic and techno-en-
vironmental conditions. Although Spencer came closer than Morgan
to such a viewpoint, he failed ultimately to achieve it because at each
approach, the principle of biological reductionism interceded, pro-
viding a direct feedback between social structure and ideology and
the stage reached in the progress of man’s biological and psychologi-
cal nature. Thus, while Spencer held that each successive stage in the
sequence of the family or in the ideology of ghosts is a result of a
materialist process of selection, the selective factors do not necessarily
or preponderantly act through the techno-economic, techno-environ-
mental parameters. To take one example, we may note how in
explaining the functional relationship between ecclesiastical and politi-
cal hierarchies, Spencer so readily lapses into the familiar cultural-

idealist frame, lured by the seductive gossamers of the state of
“human nature”:

215



===== PAGE 113 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Examination discloses a relation between ecclesiastical and po-
litical governments in respect of degree. Where there is but little
of the one there is but little of the other; and in societies which
have developed a highly coercive secular rule there habitually ex-
ists a highly coercive religious rule.

It has been shown that growing from a common root, and
having their structurcs slightly differentiated in early societies, the
political and ecclesiastical organizations long continue to be dis-
tinguished very imperfectly.

This intimate relationship between the two forms of regulation,
alike in their instrumentalities and in their extents, has a moral
origin. Extreme submissiveness of nature fosters an extreme de-
velopment of both the political and religious controls. Contrari-
wise the growth of the agencies effecting such controls, is kept in
check by the sentiment of independence; which while it resists
the despotism of living rulers is unfavourable to extreme self-
abasement in propitiation of deities [sPENCER 1896, IT:671].

The confusion among evolutionists on the question of philosophi-
cal idealism versus philosophical materialism has been discussed
at length by the historian George Stocking. From the fact that this
muddle existed and from the manifest emphasis which the evolu-
tionists place upon the task of reconstructing the stages of history,
Stocking reaches the conclusion that the philosophical categories, ideal-
ism and materialism, do not provide the proper frame for a discus-
sion of nincteenth-century anthropology. Anthropologists who seek
to understand the history of their discipline are warned by Stocking
that “the present day polemical point obfuscates historical under-
standing” (1965c:142). To this we must at once reply, on the con-
trary, present-day polemical point alone makes historical understand-
ing possible. The fact that none of the classical evolutionists proposed
a cultural-materialist explanation of sociocultural evolution was indeed
of no significance to Morgan, Tylor, or Spencer. In retrospect,
however, there is no fact of greater significance for the present-day
anthropologist who secks a knowledge of the foundations of con-
temporary theory.

216

T

Dialectical

Materialism

U5
5053

As Darwin discovered the law of evolution in organic nature so
Marx discovered the law of evolution in human history. . . .”
Thus spoke Friedrich Engels (quoted in MEHRING 1935:555) at the
grave of his lifetime friend and collaborator. Needless to say, few
non-Marxist social scientists have subscribed to Engels’s estimate. On
the other hand, the attempt on the part of a minority of Western
social scientists to diminish Karl Marx’s stature in relation to his
contemporaries—to Comte, Spencer, or J. S. Mill—has met with little
success. One may reasonably object to regarding Marx as the historical
equal of Darwin. Marx’s theories are surrounded by a polemic which in
Darwin’s case no longer exists. But the continuation of this polemic
itself testifies to the power of Marx’s ideas as compared with those of
other nineteenth-century social scientists.

This polemic has produced a vast critical literature, especially in eco-
nomics, political science, and sociology. It also has produced a sus-
tained critique of even greater magnitude, in which the author’s point
cannot be understood except as an implicit rejection of Marxist princi-
ples. Frequently enough, the reaffirmation of non-Marxist positions

217



