===== PAGE 292 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

part of a communication system, and that when our research program
calls for “cracking” the code which the native communicators em-
ploy, then that program incorporates the strategy of emic studies. In
this enterprise it is of no epistemological importance that the native
users of the system know how to formulate the rules of the code.
Humans share with other organisms the ability to communicate
information without being able to say just how the communication
task gets done. This is a most interesting psychological fact, but it does
not alter the emic nature of the phenomena under consideration.

INNER PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES

The second great domain of emic studies is concerned with
the analysis of the behavior stream in terms of the intentions,
purposes, motives, goals, attitudes, thoughts, and feelings of the
culture carriers. Benjamin Colby (1966:3) has explicitly linked these
phenomena with formal semantics by making them the object of
“ethnographic semantics.” “The ultimate goal is the understanding
of the evaluations, emotions, and beliefs that lie behind word usage.”
Although not touched upon by Colby—he specifically rejects the
suggestion that Morris Opler and Ruth Benedict are relevant (ibid.:
28)—this is a universe regularly studied by psychologists as well as
by social scientists.

Two traditions within psychology diverge with respect to the treat-
ment of these phenomena. The division corresponds roughly to
the emic/etic distinction in the social sciences. On the one hand
there is the approach which emphasizes the validity of introspective
descriptions and verbal reports of inner psychological states. On the
other, there is the approach, represented by the major neobehaviorist
learning theory schools, which systematically avoids dependence upon
states or dispositions which cannot be defined by means of opera-
tions performed on the external parts and conditions of the be-
having organism.

In ethnography, an emic approach to purposes, goals, motivations,
attitudes, etc., is premised on the assumption that between the
actor and the observer, it is the actor who is better able to know his
own inner state. Furthermore, it is assumed that access to informa-
tion concerning the actor’s inner state is essential for an under-
standing of his behavior and for a proper description of the behavior-
stream events in which he participates. In most cases, this assumption
is quite overt, and the postulation of the existence of inner states
is carried out on such a lavish scale that there is no danger of mis-

574

Y—‘

20. Emics, Ftics, and the New Ethnography

taking the emic nature of the research. This is certainly true whenever
the ethnographer takes the familiar Boasian position that if only he
had been brought up as a member of X tribe then his descriptions of
purposes, goals, motives, etc., would be so much richer by virtue of
being able to think and feel like a member of that tribe.

CONFOUNDING THE EMIC/ETIC
DISTINCTION

There are certain options which in their most subtle form
defeat the emic/etic distinction. Thus it is a commonplace of
psychoanalytical research and practice that the actor is regarded as
a poor observer of his own inner state. The analyst’s task is to pene-
trate behind the facades, symbols, and other defenses to the uncon-
scious feelings and thoughts of which the actor is unaware. This much
is etic: the analyst’s statements are not falsified even if it is shown
that the contrasts which he draws are not significant, meaningful,
real, or appropriate from the point of view of the actor. On the
other hand, there also secems to be an assumption that if the actor
accepts the analyst’s description as corresponding to his own “true”
inner state, then verification has occurred. To that extent, psycho-
analytic descriptions are emic. But it should be noted that this
apparent defeat of the emic/ctic distinction suffers a penalty in the
form of a low standard of verifiability and a dubious empirical status.
This penalty is always suffered by those who indiscriminately shift
back and forth from emic to etic strategies.

DEFINITION OF ETICS

Let us now turn to a provisional definition of etics. Etic
statements depend upon phenomenal distinctions judged appropriate
by the community of scientific observers. Etic statements cannot
be falsified if they do not conform to the actor’s notion of what is
significant, rcal, meaningful, or appropriate. Ftic statements are veri-
fied when independent observers using similar operations agree that
a given event has occurred. An ethnography carried out according
to etic principles is thus a corpus of predictions about the behavior
of classes of people. Predictive failures in that corpus require the
reformulation of the probabilities or the description as a whole.

The definitions set forth here will be best clarified by viewing them
in the context of some of the major misconceptions which have at-
tached themselves to the emic/etic distinction.

575



===== PAGE 293 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

EMICS NOT NECESSARILY LESS
EMPIRICAL THAN ETICS

In theory, an emic ethnography need be neither more nor
less empirical, scientific, or intersubjective than an etic ethnography.
Historically, of course, emic imponderables have been more prevalent
than etic ones, if for no other reason than that almost all traditional
ethnography is heavily biased in favor of an emic approach. There is
no reason, however, why emic statements cannot be operationalized
to the point of achieving high standards of intersubjectivity, verifia-
bility, and predictability. Presumably, it is the upgrading of such
standards which animates the current concern with rigorous paradig-
matic treatments of emic phenomena.

INFORMANTS MAY SUPPLY EMIC OR
ETIC INFORMATION

The relationship between an etic perspective and the tradi-
tional dependency upon native informants for ethnographic infor-
mation deserves special comment. An ethnography of etic statements
is not incompatible with operations involving recourse to the informa-
tion to which an informant has access by means of verbal exchanges
with him. The critical issue here is whether the information in
question is etic or emic information. It is emic if the informant’s
native distinctions, significances, and meanings provide the semantic
ground for communication between him and the ethnographer. An
example of the use of an informant to maximize the emic content of
ethnography is Duane Metzger and Gerald Williams™ (1963a; 1963b)
“eliciting heuristic.” This method involves a prolonged educational
exposure during which the ethnographer teaches the informant how
to teach the ethnographer to think in appropriate emic terms. An
equivalent amount of effort can be (and often is) devoted to teach-
ing the informant to think in the ethnographer’s terms, as for
example, when native assistants learn to measure fields, weigh har-
vests, take censuses, and describe past and present events in con-
formity with the categories of significance which the ethnographer
has brought to the task. When an informant is used etically, he joins
the community of observers. He becomes the ethnographer’s as-
sistant, part of a team which can produce more information in less
time than one man working alone. If the behavior-stream events
which he reports are scenes in which he himself is involved, then it

576

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

is expected that his report of his own behavior will be as close as
possible to that which would have been obtained had the scene been
recorded on film and tape.

EMICS CANNOT BE TRANSMUTED INTO
ETICS

One of the categories of etic, “nonstructural” classifications
foreseen by Pike allows for a mixture of emic and etic operations:

The units of behavior, though classified without reference as such
to the individual systems from which they were abstracted, may
nevertheless be classified in reference to the fact that they were in
fact abstracted from purposive human behavior, so that elements
of meaning or purpose constitute one of the sets of criteria for
such etic classification [1954:9].

This type of etic description is an anomaly for which there can be
no epistemological justification. By admitting units which are simul-
taneously emic and etic, we reduce the distinction to the “anemic”
status assigned to it by Gerald Berreman (1966).

It is this misconception which led Sturtevant (1964) to make
the historically misleading claim that Kroeber's 1gog treatment of
the semantic dimensions of kinship was “the basic paper on the etics
of kinship.” But as we have seen, (p. 321ff.), the whole point of Kroe-
ber’s famous article was to replace Morgan’s sociological treatment
of kinship with a linguistic treatment. The eight “principles or
categories of relationship” proposed by Kroeber are categories alleged
to underly “the hundreds or thousands of slightly varying relation-
ships that are or can be expressed by the various languages of man”
(KROEBER 1952:176). If a semantic distinction is found in more than
one culture this does not mean that such distinctions cease to be
semantic in nature. Concepts such as filiation, agnation, territoriality,
9wnership, affinity, religion, unilineal descent group, etc., are applied
in a wide variety of cross-cultural contexts. The test of whether these
are ctic or emic concepts resides in their logico-empirical relationship
to cognitive processes. If the verifiability of an ethnographic state-
ment involves a confrontation with cognitive adequacy or appropri-
ateness, then we are dealing with emic categories, no matter how
many cultures contribute to that confrontation. Identification of
similar emic categories merely establishes such categories as cross-
culturally valid logico-empirical abstractions; it does not transform
them into etically derived phenomena. As we have seen, the data

577



===== PAGE 294 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

language of cultural and social anthropologists derives from a melange
of emic and etic operations which it will undoubtedly take several
generations to unscramble.

KINSHIP AS A MIXED DOMAIN

The domain of kinship has not escaped this confusion be-
tween emic and etic phenomena. Floyd Lounsbury’s (1965:191)
assertion that “kin types” are a composite of the semantic discrimina-
tions made in many societies (cf. HAMMEL 1965:67-68) is historically
inaccurate. Genealogical reckoning was mnot invented by anthro-
pology. The apparent success of a mating, reproduction, and genealogy
frame for eliciting categorizations which arc amenable to contrastive
analysis has an etic basis: mating, reproduction, and genealogical
relationships have a rather precise biological meaning. The ethno-
graphic mating, reproduction, and genealogy frame, however, is a
lethal mixture of emic and etic categories. For a biologist, all fertile
matings are equally relevant for tracing genealogical connections;
for the ethnosemantics of kinship, only those matings and genealogi-
cal connections which occur in and through “marriage” are relevant.
In order to elicit questions about kinship, the ethnographer must
first discover an intercultural gloss for the particular kind of mating
which in English goes by the name of “marriage.” Incidentally, in
the search for the native equivalent, it must be remembered that
the informant, if he has not already fallen victim to a standardized
equivalence, is also straining to find the proper gloss for the ethnog-
rapher’s concept. Murdock (1949:1) defines the family in such a
way as to commit us to a consideration of whether there is a “socially
approved scxual relationship between mated pair.” Having children
and feeding and housing them is an etic phenomenon, but doing it in a
socially approved manner puts the whole matter in an eminently
emic frame.

Lounsbury’s “kin types” are thus etic and emic composites, and
Goodenough’s (1964b:10-11) claim that the analogue of phonetic
notation has already been developed for kinship studies is true only
for the biological frame. It does not apply to the emic aspects of
kinship. How else do we explain the seemingly endless quest for
the meaning of marriage and descent? A recent exchange between
David Schneider (1964; 1965b) and John Beattie (1964b; 1965) rests
on the conviction that there must be a cross-culturally valid emic
definition of kinship distinct from a biological genealogy; but they
are unable to agree on what it might be. Beattic solves the problem in
a highly instructive fashion:

578

e

20.

Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

What kinship as an anthropological concern is all about are those
social relationships, whatever their social and cultural content,
which the people who have them think about and talk about in
the idiom of kinship [1965:123].

Aside from the biological reproduction frame, the content of kin-
types is emic and must always remain emic until the observers decide
what bits of behavior (analogous to phones) will constitute the
minimum etic definition of marriage and descent. It is an error of
capital importance to supposc that the scrambling of the etic and
emic components in the study of kinship will convert one into the
other. Indeed, as far as American cultural anthropology is concerned,
there is a strong presumption of cause and effect between this
misconception and the fact that no consistent etic treatment of
marriage and kinship has been attempted.

CAN EMICS BE STUDIED ETICALLY?

An etic approach, by definition, avoids the premises of the
emic approach. From an etic point of view, the universe of meaning,
purposes, goals, motivations, etc., is thus unapproachable. But to
insist upon the separateness of emic and etic phenomena and research
strategies is not to affirm a greater or lesser “reality” or a higher or
lower scientific status for either of them.

BOTH EMIC AND ETIC DATA CAN BE
STUDIED CROSS-CULTURALLY

It should be obvious that emic phenomena can be studied
cross-culturally. The question of whether patrilineal descent rules or
Omaha kinship terminology recurs in different societies has nothing
to do with the emic/ctic distinction per se. Rather what is involved
is the setting of intersubjective standards of similarity and difference.
Both emic and etic phenomena may be defined with an abundance of
detail sufficient to confound an attempt to find replicative instances
anywhere in the behavior stream. The previous chapters demonstrate,
however, that a conscious and overt commitment to the study of
inner meaning and psychic complexities has usually been associated
with a considerable amount of indifference toward the quest for the
scientific explanation of sociocultural differences and similarities. In the
case of the new cthnography, the prevailing research strategy frequently
seems to be unconcerned with whether new insights into diachronic
and synchronic regularities will result from the higher standards of
emic descriptions that are being developed at heavy costs in research

579



===== PAGE 295 =====

v—ﬁ

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and publication resources. Harold Conklin (1964:26), for example,
has listed (1) appropriateness of anticipation, (2z) replicability or
testability, and (3) economy as the criteria by which ethnographic
statements must be evaluated. A number of other ethnosemanticists
have concerned themselves at length with the question of whether
their models represent as closely as possible the way in which the na-
tives actually think (A. F. c. WALLACE 1965; BURLING 1964; HYMES 1964a;
ROMNEY and D'ANDRADE 1964). But few if any of the ethnosemanti-
cists have considered the question of how to distinguish important
from unimportant ethnographic descriptions. With all due regard to
the need for the widest latitude of interests in a common scientific
endeavor, it cannot be said that an important ethnographic descrip-
tion is one which is merely accurate, elegant, and economical. Scientific
ethnographic models pay their way to the extent that they link up
with theories which explain diachronic and synchronic differences
and similarities. Admittedly it is not always possible to know in
advance when and how such a link-up will be achieved; but in the case
of ethnosemantic studies there are a number of historically demon-
strated adverse considerations, of which the practitioners seem un-
aware.

EMICS/ETICS VERSUS IDEAL/ACTUAL

On superficial inspection the contrastive research strategies
suggested by the well-worn phrases “ideal versus actual behavior” or
“ideal versus actual culture” would scem to be aimed at the same
distinction as that which is involved in emics versus etics. But the
two sets of strategies do not share much in common; indeed they
derive from very different epistemological positions. The ideal/
actual distinction is not grounded in the consideration of how one
can know that cultural things are what they are said to be by the
ethnographer. Instead it merely assumes that there is ome set of
patterned regularities consisting of what people say or believe about
what they do or should do and another set of patterned regularities
concerned with what they “actually” do. In the ideal/actual con-
trast, the problem of specifying the operations by which one gets to
know what people “actually do” is not even broached, whereas in the
emic/etic frame this problem is fundamental. The entire weight of
the latter dichotomy rests upon the epistemological significance of
describing cultural things through categories and relations which are
necessarily isomorphic with those appropriate or meaningful to
the actors, as opposed to categories and relations which arise inde-
pendently in the cthnographer’s data language. Thus, actual behavior

580

can be treated in both an emic and an etic fashion. An informant’s
description of what is actually happening at a festival, during a work
scene, or inside a household need not correspond to what the ethnog-
rapher sees or would see in the same situations.

Let us take as an example the ideal behavior by which captains of
certain Bahian fishing boats are said to locate the ocean spots over
which their boats anchor and the fishing lines are dropped. Identifi-
cation of the proper spot, as small as a room, seven or eight miles
out at sea, is supposed to depend upon the lining up of two or
more pairs of landmarks. The memorization and sighting of these
landmarks is the special responsibility of the captain, whose reputa-
tion can be measured by the size of the catch, ability to attract and
hold good crews, and keenness of memory and eyesight. Now it is
quite possible to describe this whole complex as actual behavior in
terms of the emically significant categories of spots, landmarks, eye-
sight, and memory. Indeed, one can actually see and hear the captain
look for the landmarks, mancuver the boat into position, order the
sails down and the anchor dropped; and one can actually watch the
fishing commence over the “spot.” Actual culture here corresponds
to a large degree to ideal accounts of it. But both accounts are emic.
There is another way to look at the performance in question. The
clue to this additional perspective resides in the fact that when the
captain locates the spot and the men start to fish, they not infre-
quently fail to catch a single fish. On such occasions the captain
explains that the fish are not home, that they have gone visiting else-
where, and he orders the boat off to another spot. The etics of the
matter do not commit us to a description of this behavior in terms
of the captain’s emically appreciated skills. One also observes the
constant use of a plumb linc, and there is a widespread knowledge of
the relationship between type of bottom, water depth, and type of
fish likely to be found in broad zones as opposed to “spots.” An etic
account of the fishing complex includes a description of the patterns
of behavior by which the captain maneuvers his craft, but the
activity involved in his peering at the horizon does not carry the
meaning it has in an emic account of actual behavior. Instead of
accepting the emic version of actual culture as an adequate descrip-
tion of what it takes to be a successful captain of a fishing boat, the
ctic categorizations open quitc a different cthnographic trail. An
analysis of the relationship between age of captain, size of catch, and
stability of crew reveals that younger, more active and vigorous
men who do not drink, who work hard, and who manifest a “protes-
tant” kind of behavior (an eminently etic category since they are all
“Catholics”) are the ones who are likely to be successful captains

581



===== PAGE 296 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

around whom the reputation for keen landmark sighting and
good “spot memory” will develop (xorTAK 1966:210 ff.).

Cultural anthropology will not easily overcome its heritage of
ethnographies of actual behavior carried out in a manner which per-
mits slipping back and forth from an emic to an etic frame in an
unconscious and unpredictable fashion. The effect of the lack of at-
tention to the emic/etic distinction has been especially deleterious in
the ethnography of primitive and peasant economic systems where
descriptions of essential economic processes have been obscured and
distorted by emic descriptions of actual behavior. Malinowski’s de-
scription of the Kula (p. 563) is a classic instance, to which we have
already referred.

SHOULD ETICS REPLACE EMICS?

One no sooner suggests that an etic research option de-
serves special emphasis than he is represented as proposing that all
studies of semantic domains, goals, and purposes should cease at
once. Even if some advantage accrued to such a proposal, it is
difficult to imagine a more unlikely development in the context of
the research establishment’s vested interests in emic matters. But no
advantage would accrue to a research strategy concerned exclusively
with etic phenomena. The whole point of insisting upon etic studies
is that one wishes to explain the emic universe to which as actors
in our own culture we are ineluctably bound. Actually, the shoe is on
the other foot. If there is danger of intradisciplinary imperialism
whereby one strategy deliberately denies the validity of alternative
rescarch options, it is the etic approach which has suffered the effects
of sweeping programmatic manifestos. Let it be recalled that Sapir
declared that it was “impossible” to describe behavior-stream events
in an etic data language. The declarations of Frake (1964b) and
Sturtevant (1964), which are discussed below, are simply the latest
in a long series of strategically extreme proposals directing the
attention of cultural anthropologists away from the etic substance of
human behavior. Comparably exclusionist proposals have never been
made against emic studies.

AMBIGUITY AND THE LINGUISTIC
MODEL

The fundamental error of the new cthnography is that it is
based upon a patently false analogy between vernacular codes on
the levels of phoneme, morpheme, and syntax on the one hand,

582

e

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

and on the other, the higher-order codes which are in some way
related to the semantics of everyday speech behavior and the his-
torical unfolding of nonverbal behavior-stream events. In linguistic
analysis, it is assumed in theory and followed in practice that the
phonemic, morphemic, and syntactic descriptions of a language can
be achieved by working with a very small group of informants. This
procedure is justified by the empirically established fact of the uni-
formity of the sound discriminations which constitute the basis for
verbal communication. Whatever clsc a speaker must accomplish, he
must be able to convince his fellows that he has something to say
that they could understand if they wanted to. The actor who speaks
gibberish, who mumbles or garbles his words, who uses deviant
pronunciations or otherwise fails to demonstrate that he is in a
condition to deliver an intelligible message, is seldom accorded a
serious audience (except for ceremonial or ritual performances in
which paralinguistic codes bear the burden of the message). The
lack of tolerance for such deviations emanates from the most pri-
mordial functional conditions underlying the evolution of language,
whereby viable ratios of signal to noise have become established.
These linguistic features evidently enjoy a selective advantage of
the highest magnitude.

The theory and fact of vernacular communication on the level of
pragmatics, however, point to another and opposite set of conditions.
To be sure, many complex messages derive their functional signifi-
cance from their high signal to noise ratio; however, there are also
powerful psychological and sociocultural functions which are fulfilled
by complex messages which are perfectly communicative on the
phonemic, morphemic, and syntactic levels, but ambiguous or quite
unintelligible in other respects. Such messages are demonstrably
characteristic of whole cognitive domains. The semantic ambiguity
characteristic of such activities as poetry, art and literary criticism,
eschatology, traditional philosophy, and theology in our own cultural
experience cannot be dismissed as epiphenomenal or as subcultural
variations. There is no reason to suppose that uniformity of under-
standing in such domains has a functional significance which out-
weighs the obvious benefits of ambiguity, obfuscation, and individual
variation. What our ethnoscientists scem to be unprepared for is
the contingency that in human cultural repertoires there may ac-
tually be more domains which derive their salient semantic order
from ambiguity and variation than there are domains whose orderli-
ness reflects consensus and uniformity.

Brazilian racial categories, of which several hundred have been
discovered, constitute an example of an eminently ambiguous and

583



===== PAGE 297 =====

v‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

highly idiosyncratic semantic domain (HARRIS and XOTTAK 1963;
HARRIS 1967). Precision and clarity in this domain would conflict with
the main etic features of Brazilian social structure. A similar func-
tional utility is associated with the emic definition of class in con-
temporary United States stratification hierarchies (cf. vipicH and
BENSMAN 1958). The functional nature of the ambiguity in caste
and kindred in Ceylon has been impressively demonstrated by S. J.
Tambiah (1965). Stanley Freed (1963) has measured the degree of con-
sensus concerning caste ranking in Uttar Pradesh without considering
the possible functional significance of the demonstrated lack of agree-
ment. Yet such an interpretation is clearly warranted by Bernard
Cohn’s (1955) description of caste mobility through litigation and
violence. The structural significance of cognitive ambiguity is also
implicit in Leach’s analysis of the “gumsa” ideology of Kachin social
structure. As Leach (1965b:10) points out, “The ethically correct ac-
tion for a Christian businessman is often equally ambiguous.” Leach’s
conceptualization of matrilateral prescripticn involves a rigid dichoto-
mization of wife-giving and wife-taking groups. According to William
Wilder (1964:1370): “Granted the uniqueness and permanence of the
mayu-dama relationship (the alliance set up by cross-cousin marriage),
the whole kinship terminology falls into place as a consistent whole
.. .; without that assumption the classifications are chaotic. It can be
said with equal emphasis however that without the observed ambiguity
in the mayu-dama ideology, Kachin social structure would be reduced
to chaos.

The vast and acrimonious debate which has centered on the
attempt to distinguish prescriptive from preferential marriage rules
(see Chap. 18) derives its monumental futility from the same error.
Given the fact that 30 percent of the recorded Purum alliances are
contrary to the rule of matrilateral prescription, it seems likely
that the mental state of some of the Purum is not compatible with
Rodney Needham’s splendid certainty regarding how they should
behave.

It is interesting to note that Pike’s (1954:80) advice on how to
handle emic ambiguity has been largely ignored:

A theory of the structure of behavior must leave room for variants
in both form and meaning, but without being able to provide any
absolute measure of just how much alike or just how different
cither form or meaning or the form-meaning composite may be
before one can no longer cquate two items. In our present theory
we state that the indeterminacy lies in the data, within the struc-

584

ture, and that any arbitrary attempt to force a decision one way
or another in certain instances does violence to the structure
rather than clarifying it.

In view of this admonition, the attempt to maximize the order in
emic phenomena by regarding ambiguity as either inconsequential or
as the result of error is a false strategy.

Before a domain is subjected to formal analysis, we must be told
something about the generality of the distinctions and contrasts in
terms of specific historic events and people. It is remarkable how
little attention has been paid to this issue especially when one con-
siders the importance of statistical data-gathering techniques among
the operations of contemporary social psychology. Indeed, much of
the new ethnography appears to be social psychology shorn of its
statistical base. At least one ethnosemanticist, Goodenough (1965b),
appears to have settled down with the data obtained from only one
informant. Although Conklin (1955:340) reports that he obtained
color naming responses from “a large number of informants,” the
relationship between individual responses and the four-way classifica-
tion about which there is said to be “unanimous agreement” (ibid.:
341) is not specified, despite the fact that this agreement exists side
by side with “hundreds of specific color categories, many of which
over-lap and inter-digitate” (ibid.).

Charles Frake (1961:125) reports that “informants rarely disagree
in their verbal descriptions of what makes one disease different from
another.” It would seem important for us to know just what this
“rarely” means. Did Frake’s informants represent all Subanum actor
types? Given the fact that medical expertise is seldom uniformly
distributed in a population, it would not be unexpected that “rare”
disagrecment was frequent disagreement at least in certain sex and
age categories.

PROBLEM OF THE WELL-INFORMED
INFORMANT

Since much of the terminological data which provides the
basis for the ethnosemantics of kinship derives from fieldwork that
can no longer be repeated, there is little hope of correcting for
overagreement in the formal accounts. All too often, the data have
been obtained from a few “wellinformed informants” (Back 1960).
My own encounter with individual variation and ambiguity in the
terminology of the Bathonga of southern Mogambique may serve as
an example. Convinced by my reading of Radcliffe Brown (1950:34)

585



===== PAGE 298 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

that I was dealing with an Omaha system, I shrugged off the re-
sponses of a half dozen informants until I finally found someone
who “really knew” the system. The justification for this was that
the Bathonga were undergoing intensive acculturation, in an area where
a considerable mixture of Zulu, Ronga, and Shangane “tribes” was
taking place. It seemed best to work with someone who remembered
the old system. But Henri Junfod (1913), who had studied the
Bathonga sixty years ago, had already noted four alternate terms for
mother’s brother’s son: makwabu (sibling); nwana (child) (1912:
220); malume (mother’s brother); and kokwana (grandfather)
(ibid.:229). What I encountered in some of my “ill-informed in-
formants” was an even greater measure of confusion. Thus, while
Junod attributed the substitution of the grandfather term (kokwana)
for mother’s brother (malume) as a dialect difference, I kept running
across people who insisted that both malume and kokwana were
appropriate! Now these departures from the Omaha system are of
the precise order of difference which Lounsbury (1964:354) regards
as requiring the establishment of separate subtypes of Crow and
Omaha terminology. It may be that these variations can be handled
as subcultural or dialect differences taking place inside different
heads. On the other hand, it is equally plausible that these variations
take place inside the same head. Indeed, this is true for many Bath-
onga in the modern situation. If that is the case, then an “adequate”
cthnography must express the ambiguity of the system, and it must
do so statistically.

The way in which the emic formalists have handled this problem in
the treatment of American kinship terminology is scarcely reassuring.
Goodenough has referred to his “dialect” as a means of escaping the
fact that his understanding of “correct” kin terminological usage
does not correspond to mine. Several important foci of functionally
important ambiguity in the American cognitive calculus of kinship
probably get swept under the rug by this maneuver. One strongly
doubts, for example, that Goodenough’s (1963a:206) lumping of Pa
Pa Pa Sb Ch and Pa Sb Ch Ch Ch along with Pa Sb Ch as “my first
cousin” is merely a matter of dialect or subcultural variation. Is it a
valid cognitive principle of American kinship that “first cousin” need
not be included in the basic corpus of kinship terms because it is not a
lexeme? Goodenough proposes that he is representative of significant
numbers of Americans in believing that we cannot say “No, he is
my half brother” but that we can say “Yes, he is my half brother”
(ibid.:265) in responsc to the question, “Is he your brother?” Such
convictions mask the fact that many Americans have trouble applying
kinship terms to relatives outside of a small span of kin types with

586

whom they have significant etic transactions. In this connection,
Schneider (1965a), who uses a more generously functional approach
to the question of American kinship, refers to the “fuzzy boundary
and fadeout principles” (ibid.:291) but does not drive home the
consequences of this fuzziness for a strategy which is inherently in-
capable of accommodating ambiguity.

Goodenough'’s assumptions need to be tested against sample popu-
lation responses under standardized conditions. This is especially true
of some of the basic themes which are taken as underlying the
construction of a componential grid. For example, it is claimed that
an American husband cannot disown his wife’s child and keep his
wife (ibid.:287n). Yet it is common knowledge in welfare circles
that such cases frequently show up in adoption courts; it cannot be
left to intuition to decide the rules by which Americans in general
cognize extramarital pregnancies in wedlock.

A potentially important step has been taken by A. K. Romney
and Roy D’'Andrade (1964) in their use of samples of public high
school students to obtain lists of kinship terms and other relevant
responses. Unfortunately, the implications of their findings are not
developed out of deference to the task of finding the correct set of
rules in conformity with the linguistic model. Thus, in one of Romney
and D’Andrade’s samples, modifier terms which occurred with a
frequency of less than 25 percent with a core term (e.g., great uncle)
were excluded from consideration. Then, an additional simplification
was achieved by excluding responses of subjects whose use of modifiers
constituted a pattern found in less than 10 percent of the sample of 105
(ibid.:156). By this sloughing off of “idiosyncratic or variant” answers,
the conclusion is reached that “cousin” in our terminology takes only
one modifier, “second” (ibid.:156, Table II).

None of the attempts to define the basic cognitive features of
American kinship terminology has thus far made concessions to
the possibility that ambiguity is one of the salient characteristics of
this domain. Wallace and Atkins (1960), Romney and D’Andrade
(1964), and Goodenough (19635a) each operate with a different inven-
tory of basic American kinship terms. Variant treatments by David
Schneider (1965a) and Munroe Edmunson (1957) ought also to be
considered in estimating the scope of the problem which has yet to
be met head on. Conklin has suggested that American anthropologists
who do not know their native terminology had better take steps
to learn it. They are urged to consult:

an explanatory note on “The Mathematics of American Cousin-
ship” in a recent issue of the Kroeber Anthropological Socicty
Papers (Roark, 1961). Therc, the purpose in providing such a dc-

587



===== PAGE 299 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

vice is explicitly the resolution of a frequently met ambiguity
and lack of common knowledge among American anthropologists
as to the steps required in reckoning degrees of cousinship in
English [1964:34]!

This advice carries an implicit warning concerning the kinship
terminologics of the natives in other cultures: If you don’t know
your own minds, we'll teach you. In this vein, one is reluctant to
share Dell Hymes's (1964a:34) nostalgic reverie over “The nights of
beer drinking and brain wracking spent in the Rainbow Cafe at the
edge of Warm Springs reservation” with Philip Kahclamet, “the
most knowledgcable and fluent speaker of Wishram.” There is also
the experience reported by Anthony Wallace (1965:237) with a
Japanese informant who brought along a friend “to check the ac-
curacy” of her kinship definitions: “The informant never completely
accepted our view that her task was to give personal usage; she felt
that she was a representative of Japan and should be ‘correct.””

Among the ethnosemanticists, Hymes has cautioned against trans-
ferring data-gathering techniques appropriate to phonemics and gram-
mar to higher-order semantic phenomena. Hymes secs an “ethnogra-
phy of speaking” as providing the antidote for the lack of information
about the settings and variations in speech behavior which derive
from “the implicitly normative stance long characteristic of linguistic
theory in prescribing its object” (mymEs 1964a:41). He goes on to
point out that other functions fulfilled by agreement about referential
meaning are not always the prime function of speech behavior:

(e) From the standpoint of a general theory of language and its
functioning, it is simply the case that some of the functions of
languages in communities do call for approximation to indepen-
dence of context, simple uniformity, and primacy of organization
about the function of reference, three assumptions so common to
descriptive linguistic theory—and some do not [ibid.].

It is to be hoped that Hymes’s suggestions for placing the study of
speech behavior in a more realistic and more ample functional context
will be given the attention they merit. In the meantime, the failure of
American ethnologists to agree on the analysis of their own native
terminology, the evident tendency among ethnosemanticists to ac-
cept the cognitive expertise of the well-informed informant, and the
failure to accommodate the possibility of functional ambiguity sug-
gest that the ethnosemanticists must take a more critical look at
their basic assumptions. The brilliant efforts lavished upon placing
second cousin, half brother, and grand niece in a single paradigmatic
semantic space may actually result in a serious distortion of emic

588

20.

Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

facts. At the very least, the difficulties and shortcomings of the treat-
ment of American terminology provide a firm basis for skepticism
regarding the attempt to push the study of major terminological
systems into the numerous refinements which are possible if terms
for kin types representing all shades of ambiguity and psychological
and social significance are jammed into the same frame.

EMICS AND ACTUAL VERBAL BEHAVIOR

Consideration must be given to the prominence of operations
involving artificial eliciting situations in the construction of the formal
analyses of the new ethnography. This has meant that much of the
basic data employed consists of verbal statements in which people say
what they would say under given hypothetical circumstances. As Frake
(1961:63) has put it: “Given a set of contrasting disease names, the
problem remains of determining the rules which govern the assigning of
one name rather than another in a particular diagnostic situation.” This
is the problem of referential as distinct from abstract meaning
(HARRIS 1964a:156). For example, most Brazilians verbally agree on
the contrasts out of which rules for distinguishing between a “preto”
(“black”) and a “branco” (“white”) can be constructed. Yet these
rules are demonstrably inadequate for predicting when a specific
individual will call another “preto” or “branco.” In real life a whole
new set of factors enter which may involve calculi from domains far
removed from “racial” categories. Thus as Hymes implies, there is an
air of scholasticism or of arm chair detachment about much of
the formal analysis of the new ethnography, even when we restrict
ourselves to the question of the rules which govern verbal behavior-
stream events. It is as if a generation of anthropologists had never
observed hesitation, “change of mind,” “groping for the right word,”
argument, lying, puzzlement, and many other ordinary speech phe-
nomena.

EMICS AND NONVERBAL BEHAVIOR

But social and cultural anthropology enjoys a more ample
scientific mandate than the study of what people say they will say.
There remains the question of what they say they will do, and of the
relationship between these sayings and the nonverbal happenings of
history.

Now whatever doubts may exist concerning the appropriateness of
the linguistic model for verbal behavior, the application of that model

589



===== PAGE 300 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

to nonverbal behavior is even more powerfully ill-advised. Evidence of
both a logical and empirical nature from many different quarters and
cultures indicates that emic rules of behavior are a poor guide to histori-
cal events and etic regularities in economic, social, and political sub-
systems. If permitted to develop unchecked, the tendency to write
ethnographies in accord with the emic rules of behavior will result in an
unintentional parody of the human condition. Applied to our own
culture it would conjure up a way of life in which men tip their hats
to ladies; youths defer to old people in public conveyances; unwed
mothers are a rarity; citizens go to the aid of law enforcement officers;
chewing gum is never stuck under tables and never dropped on the
sidewalk; television repairmen fix television sets; children respect
their aged parents; rich and poor get the same medical treatment;
taxes are paid in full; all men are created equal; and our defense
budget is used only for maintaining peace. Elsewhere it would turn
the Chinese family into a Confucian fantasy (FrIED 1953); invent
Hindu farmers who starve in order to avoid harming their sacred
cows (HARRIS 1966a); spread the idea that the Portuguese have no
racial prejudice (HARRIS 1964b; 1966b); and convince a whole genera-
tion of introductory anthropology students that the Zufii never get
drunk (see p. 406). If Jules Henry’s recent study of American
culture is at all accurate, American anthropologists should be es-
pecially skeptical of ethnographies in which the rules of behavior
dominate the rules for breaking rules. Commenting upon the per-
vasiveness of cheating amorg American school children, Henry (1963:
205-6) writes: “An honest adolescent life could be a crippling
preliminary for many phases of contemporary culture.” Granted that
this may be a specialty of industrial civilization, it nonetheless poses
an empirical question which cannot be left unanswered when Pangloss-
ian grammars are attempted for other cultures.

In attempting to demonstrate that the grammar of normative status
and role behavior among the Trukese is not “an exercise in sterile
formalism,” Goodenough (1965b:19-20) presents the case of a father
who struck his married daughter. This act violated five of the six
rules in Goodenough’s emic “Duty Scale”: Trukese fathers should
crouch or crawl if a married daughter is seated; they should avoid
initiating action; honor any request; avoid speaking harshly; and
never assault the daughter “regardless of provocation” (ibid.:11-12).
Instead of being dismayed by the discovery that all of these rules
were flouted right before his eyes, Goodenough takes comfort from
the fact that thc woman in question had in turn been breaking
another series of rules! “Her petulant behavior had been getting on

590

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

her kinsmen’s nerves for some time . . .,” and she had indulged in
“an early morning tirade against her husband whom she suspected of
having just come from an amorous visit to her lineage sister next
door.” Tt was therefore “poetic justice,” remarks Goodenough, for
the woman’s father to hit her: “A good hard jolt was just what she
deserved,” he says. It seems to me that Goodenough derives the
wrong moral from this episode. So blatant a failurc of a set of rules
to predict behavior requires a rewriting of the rules. Just how often
do these good hard jolts get delivered? And do the injured ladies

agree with the anthropologist that a good hard jolt is just what
they need?

EMICS AND THE SCIENCE OF TRIVIA

Referring to the accomplishments of ethnosemantics listed by
Frake (1964b:143), Berreman (1966:351) notes:

None of these descriptions, whatever the virtues, can in them-
selves be called very significant . . . they remind of Mills’ warn-
ing that many sociologists have gotten to the point where they
overlook what is important in their search for what is verifiable

. many have worked so hard on what is trivial that it comes to
appear important. . . .

It is no accident that formal analysis has so often been taken
to task for its involvement with trivia (KEESING 1966:23; SWEET
1966:24-25). It is probably only with respect to statistically insignifi-
cant or scientifically trivial performances that behaviorstream events
can be predicted from a small set of emic rules. The insistence by
Frake, Conklin, and Goodenough that “appropriateness or accepta-
bility” be substituted for predictability among the canons of good
ethnography is nothing so much as a tacit admission of this dilemma.
The problem is not that behavior is not governed by cognitive plans,
maps, rules, themes, ideologies, etc. Since these phenomena take
place inside people’s heads in great abundance and on all sorts of
conscious (WARD 1965), preconscious, and unconscious levels with
all degrees of strength and persistence, and in all manner of logical
or illogical, rational or irrational combination, it would be most un-
likely that at some levels, in some degree, and in some combination,
behavior-stream events were not based on or at least accompanied by
some form of cognitive calculus. In all societies, concrete manifesta-
tions of behavior, verbal or nonverbal, result from complicated inter-
actions of specific personalities whose repertories of rules, especially
when it comes to the rules for interpreting or breaking rules, oftcn
seem to have little in common. Unless the new ethnographers are a

591



===== PAGE 301 =====

s

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

breed apart, they must surely have noted by this time that their lives
have consisted largely of trying to figure out what rules one ought to
live by or, what amounts to the same thing, what rules one ought
to invoke in a particular situation. There is little indication that
the normal condition of social life is one in which conformity to emic
norms predominates. The judgment expressed by Hugo Nutini
(1965:723) that “mechanical models” (i.e. models constructed out of
ideal behavior) “are always superior to statistical models” (i.e. models
constructed out of actual behavior) is dangerously detached from
empirical foundations (see pp. 498-99). There is no evidence which
indicates that under “the proper cultural conditions”—whatever these
may be—“the overlapping of ideal and actual behavior would tend to
the ideal limit” (ibid.). Instead, there is a vast literature in anthro-
pology and related disciplines which indicates that emic norms and
etic events never quite match and that not infrequently the main
function of the norms is to obscure the etic reality. A case in point
is Marshall Sahlins’ suggestion about how to resolve the “E.-P.
(Evans-Pritchard) paradox” wherein, as among the Nuer, there is an
inverted relation between commitment to agnation in principle and
commitment to it in deed: “Then too, the agnatic dogma may only
be strengthened by a deepening contradiction with kin group mem-
bership, as ideology undertakes its Mannheimian function of keeping
people from knowing what’s going on in the world” (saHLINS 1965:
105).

I hasten to acknowledge certain recent attempts to link formal
analysis with social-structural or comparative generalizations. It would
appear on balance, however, that the net contribution to substantive
theory is less than what usually results from equivalent labor in-puts.
For example, Conklin’s conclusion that the Hanunéo’s terminological
specialization in cousin terms reflects payment of fines in accordance
with degree of incest scarcely requires the elaborate descriptive ap-
paratus with which it is juxtaposed (1964:48).

THE CASE OF CROW TERMINOLOGY

Among formal analysts, the most ambitious claim for so-
ciological significance has been set forth by Floyd Lounsbury (1964;
1965). Lounsbury suggests that Crow and Omaha kinship terminolo-
gies and their variants, including Trobriand, are best understood as ex-
pressions of the extension of nuclear family terminological categories
outward to other kin types on the basis of what he calls “status suc-

592

cession.” It is the passing on of statuses such as “head of family, other
positions in the domestic group, headship of lineage or kin-based
corporation, hereditary political office, religious office, etc.” (1965:
383) which accounts for the overriding of generational distinctions
typical of Crow and Omaha terminologies. This principle is set forth
in opposition to that endorsed by Leach (1958), derived from Rad-
cliffe-Brown, subscribed to by Lowie, Murdock, and White, and ulti-
mately traceable to Morgan that Crow and Omaha terminologies
reflect first and foremost the alignment of people into unilinear
groupings.

In the first place, we should note that Lounsbury’s interpretation
at no point contradicts the principle of lineage solidarity; instead
his “status successions” might all be viewed as measures of the
degree of lineage corporateness. But Lounsbury is really not interested
in his analysis as a means of discovering the causal ingredients in the
evolution of kinship systems. What he actually tries to show is that
given the Crow-type terminologics it is possible to write rules for
extending nuclear family kin terms which “account for” the system.
These rules account for dll of the terminology, whereas the principle
of lineage solidarity accounts for only the bulk of the terms, leaving
certain residues which are anomalous (as when certain Crow-types call
ego’s Fa Mo Br by a general grandfather term rather than Fa) (ibid.:
355). The disparity in completeness, however, is not a legitimate test of
theoretical adequacy. Lounsbury is privileged to keep adding trans-
formation rules precisely until the point is reached at which all of
the features of the particular case have been taken care of. In writing
these rules, Lounsbury chose not to employ an extensional principle
which explicitly incorporates or depends upon the principle of lineage
solidarity. Instead he employs such principles as “skewing rules,”
“half-sibling rule,” and “merging rule”” In rejecting the established
lineage principle, Lounsbury makes no sustained attempt to evaluate
the possibility that the terminological phenomena it does not account
for are sociologically or statistically insignificant, or semantically am-
biguous or that the principle could be made to account for them
with minor addenda. As we have scen, the Bathonga’s Omaha termi-
nology involves ambiguities at a number of points. Similar alternate
manifestations are regarded by Lounsbury as having separate socio-
logical significance. Furthermore, although admitting the general
correlation between strong lineage principle and Crow-Omaha termi-
nologies, Lounsbury chooses to emphasize the fact that there are five
deviant cases in which Crow terminologies are associated with patri-

593

|
|
!
|
|



===== PAGE 302 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

lineal descent (ibid.:354-55). He does not elect to study these cases
in the light of the special conditions which, had he done so, would,
for at least three of the instances, permit an interpretation perfectly
compatible with the lincage principle.

THREE ETHNOGRAPIIC CASES

These three cases deserve our attention because they are
indicative of what happens when supersophisticated formal analyses
are reared on a foundation of shoddy primary materials. Lounsbury
(1964:388) cites Murdock (1949:168) as the source of three of his
five cases in which Crow terms occur with patrilineal descent and
patrilocal residence. These are the Bachama of Nigeria, the Koranko
of Sierra Leone, and the Seniang of the Solomon Islands. First of all, it
must be made perfectly plain that Murdock’s definition of a Crow
terminology is scarcely the equivalent of what Lounsbury is interested
in subjecting to formal analysis. For Murdock, the Crow form exists
when cross cousins are distinguished from parallel cousins and siblings,
while the Fa Si Da is classed with Fa Si and/or the Mo Br Da with
Br Da (MURrpOCK 1949:224). This says nothing about the treatment
of the uncle and aunt terms in relationship to each other and to Mo
and Fa, and little about these uncle and aunt terms in relation to the
sibling and cousin terms. Turning to the Bachama in the original
source (MEEK 1931:18-20), we find not only that Fa Si and Mo Si
are terminologically equated, but that Mo Bro, Fa, and Fa Bro are
also terminologically equated. Worse, the terms for both kinds of grand-
mothers and grandfathers are the same as those used for cross uncle
and for father’s elder brother. As for the patrilineality of the Bachama,
Meek (ibid.:15-17) makes it perfectly clear that a form of double
descent is operating; that the sister’s son inherits horses, goats,
clothes, cash, and cattle, and the mother’s brother's widow or her
brideprice, his standing crops, and the contents of his granary; and
that the system was in transition from an earlier form of still greater
emphasis upon “mother right” in which: “The sense of kinship
with the mother’s family was undoubtedly in former times greater
than that with the father’s family” (ibid.:16).

Turning to the Koranko (N. tHOMAS 1916) we find that the Fa Si
Da is not equated with Fa Si although the rest of Murdock’s condi-
tions are met. The system thus barely survives as Crow by virtue of
invoking the and/or in the definition. It is incredible, however, to
discover in the setting of the refined analysis presented by Louns-
bury an appeal to this cthnographic case. The Koranko terminology

594

v

20.

Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

appears as part of a foldout in which the terminological systems for
eight Sierra Leone peoples are set forth in tabular fashion. The
only statement specifically concerned with Koranko descent and
locality is herewith reproduced: “Descent is reckoned in the male line,
and there are no clear traces of the existence of matrilocal marriage,
though some of the birth customs seem to suggest it” (ibid.:107).
The ethnographic standard of Thomas’s account is unacceptable
(except in a large sample), and any attempt to hinge an important
theoretical issue on the Koranko is as good as resorting to scapulim-
nancy.

Finally, there is the Seniang division of Malekula, subtitled “A
Vanishing People in the New Hebrides.” Tt is relevant to point out
that not only had the Seniang been afflicted by the worst sort of bio-
cultural collapse at the time of A. B. Deacon’s (1934) visit, but that
the monograph in question was put together from Deacon’s field
notes by Camilla Wedgwood, who comments:

. it must be stressed here that, far from finding a living so-
ciety, Deacon found at South-West Bay only relatively few sur-
vivors of several districts. He was therefore unable here to study
the social, economic, and religious life of a living community,
but had to acquire his knowledge of what that life had once been
by means of the tedious and not wholly reliable method of ques-
tioning the older men [1934:xxxii].

The Seniang satisfy Murdock’s criteria for Crow terminology. Fa Si
Da is classed with Fa Si and Fa Si So with Fa, but there is no infor-
mation concerning the terms for the children of these cross cousins.
Because of this and other gaps it is difficult to assess the strength of
the Crow pattern. There is at least one anomaly: Wedgewood directs
special attention to the fact that Fa Fa Fa Fa is called by the term
for elder brother and that So So So So is probably called by the
term for younger brother. This is not the kind of terminology on
the basis of which one would predict strong matrilineal or matri-
local clans, although admittedly, it also is not at all suggestive of
the reported rather strong patrilineal and patrilocal principles. Addi-
tional reasons for rejecting Malekula as a negative case for the cor-
relation in question arise on all sides. The neighboring Newun with
whom the Seniang intermarry and who recognize descent from each
other’s localized patrisibs classify Fa Si with Fa Si Da but the same
root term is also used for Mo. The classification of Mo, Fa Si, and
Fa Da under the same term is repeated among many of the other
Malekulan groups, including the Lambumbu (pEACON 1934:98); Sen-

595

4


===== PAGE 303 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

barei (ibid.:121); Uripiv (ibid.:124); Nesan, Uerik, Bangasa, and Ni-
viar (ibid.:125). This is a most un-Crow-like feature and is certainly
not provided for by Lounsbury’s sub-types. It should be mentioned
that definite traces of double descent crop up to the north among the
Lambumbu (ibid.:101) and Lagalag (ibid.:110); although nothing
like a reliable description is anywhere available concerning relations
with matrilineal kinsmen. Both Deacon and Wedgewood were con-
vinced that Malekula has been invaded by a succession of different
cultures, the last of which were strongly patrilineal. To what extent
this may have obscured the observation of de facto matrilineal group-
ings among the Seniang is unclear. Similarly in doubt is Deacon’s
ability to have salvaged information of such a nature from the cul-
tural wreckage in which he was working, even if it had occurred to
him that the Crow cousin terminology required special attention in
the light of the heavy patri-bias which he attributed to the entire
island. One point is clear, however, this is not a very convincing case
of anything.

THE QUEST FOR FORMAL ELEGANCE

The critical test of Lounsbury’s thesis concerning the short-
comings of the lineage solidarity principle hinges on the question of
whether a set of emic rules can be written which build upon or in-
corporate the lineage principle and which will be as productive and
parsimonious as Lounsbury’s. Allan Coult (1968) claims to have
done just that. Starting with a set of principles first proposed by Tax
(1955a; orig. 1937), and adding the principle of lincage solidarity,
Coult says that he “accounts for” all of the features which Lounsbury
“accounts for,” and that he does it in a more simple and elegant
fashion. Coult disposes of the anomalies in the relationship between
lineage membership and terminological lumping by applying logical,
as opposed to sociological, principles: “the terms applied to relatives
outside of either own or M’s patriline are determined, given the
terms applied within these two lines, and the operation of the princi-
ples of uniform succession and uniform reciprocals” (court 1968:11).

But the significance of Coult’s achievement is not to be judged by
these purely formalistic criteria. As Coult himself expresses it, “A
good theory should be phrased in such a way that not only can it
predict empirical phenomena, but the reasons why it predicts should
also be apparent” (ibid.:10). That is, as stated carlier, a good cthno-
graphic description must link up with a corpus of explanatory theory.
“Lounsbury in fact has no theory, he has merely a set of empirically
observed relationships . . .” (ibid.:11).

596

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

THE NEW OLD ETHNOGRAPHY

Formal analysis presents itself as a new and revitalizing
movement, whereas, in fact, it is actually the latest in a series of
cultural-idealist proposals for intensifying cultural anthropology’s
commitment to emic rescarch strategies. The “new approach to
ethnography,” what Sturtevant (1964:99) is tempted to call “the
New Ethnography,” has a definite and highly compromised historical
position of which its practitioners seem unaware. In one important
sense, this is not the new ecthnography, but the new old ethnog-
raphy. It is a better operationalized but narrower version of a re-
search strategy which has already proved itself incapable of solving
the major substantive issues of the social sciences.

In evaluating ethnosemantics’ claim to newness, we must bear in
mind the fact that almost every major theoretical school in anthro-
pology has expended the bulk of its research effort in the pursuit of
some form of emic analyses. The main historical lines of influence
have been set forth in the previous chapter. Here it must suffice
merely to recall the heritage of what Lowie (1956b:1007) has called
the Southwest German school of philosophy—Windelband, Dilthey,
Rickert—which transmitted eighteenth-century rationalism and ideal-
ism through its Hegelian culmination into contemporary anthropology
(see Chap. 12). In the twentieth century many prominent spokesmen
representing a nominally wide variety of theoretical positions have
exhorted anthropologists to give priority to emic analysis. Among the
Boasians, Lowie’s opinion as previously quoted, was typical. The field-
worker’s business is to understand the “true inwardness” of the beliefs
and practices of the people he studies. The fieldworker does not simply
record that there is infanticide or cannibalism. If he does not also record
how his informants feel about these practices, “he has failed in his task”
(see p. 365).

Kluckhohn (1949:300) may be taken as representative of another
broad spectrum of American anthropologists: “The first responsibility
of the anthropologist is to set down events as seen by the people he
is studying.” Malinowski, in the Argonauts, wrote of “the final goal, of
which the ethnographer should never lose sight.”

This goal is, bricfly, to grasp the native’s point of view, is relation
to lifc, to realise his vision of his world. To study the institutions,
customs, and codes or to study the behavior and mentality with-
out the subjective desire of fecling by what these people live, of

597



===== PAGE 304 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

realising the substance of their happiness—is, in my opinion, to
miss the greatest reward which we can hope to obtain from the
study of man [MALINOWSKI 1961:25].

Furthermore, although David Schneider (1965¢:38) contrasts Rad-
cliffe-Brown’s position on social structure with that of Needham,
Lévi-Strauss, and Homans, the common heritage which the structural-
ists and the structural-functionalists derive from Durkheim provides
a common emic bias for both groups. The overwhelming commit-
ment among contemporary British anthropologists to the analysis of
descent, affinity, filiation, prescriptive and preferential alliance should
suffice to establish the emic thrust of their research interests. On the
other side, as we have seen, Lévi-Strauss and Needham have carried
Durkheim’s notion of “collective representations” to the purest
pinnacle of mentalism. As Schneider points out, even the question of
social order is for Needham a question of underlying logical and
symbolic congruence. Although Needham writes about “groups prag-
matically distinguished,” “The word pragmatic can only make sense if
it is taken to mean ‘conceptually,’ and this in turn can mean that
some native will talk about it. A figment of a figment of a figment of
a native’s imagination will do” (ibid.:39).

CONVERGENCE TOWARD MENTALISM

It is a fact of salient importance, however, that the emic bias
of the new cthnography derives its vigor from an infusion of a men-
talism which has more recent origins. The new ethnography repre-
sents a confluence of the interests of the older empathetic, humanist,
emic approach with a newer, narrower, and less humanistic mentalism
arising out of linguistics. Hymes has traced this influence in terms
of Sapir, the “Yale School: complementary distribution, and Jakobson-
ian distinctive features, and Chomskyian generative grammar”
(1964a:10). The linguistic model has also been influential among
French and British anthropologists who have been led by a remark-
able convergence toward an emic strategy in which logic and reason
have taken the place of emotional meaning. In Europe, again specifi-
cally influenced by Jakobson, it is Lévi-Strauss who has led the way to
this new form of idealism (mymESs 1963; 1964a:15; 1964b). Although
formal analysis is deeply committed to the image of “hard science,” it
has its precise parallel in the structuralist position of Lévi-Strauss,
whose essence is captured in the inspired phrase, “Zen Marxism”
(see p. 512). For Lévi-Strauss as for the ethnosemanticists, a quasi-
mathcmatical, linguistic model should be the model for all cultural

598

analysis: “language can be said to be a condition of culture because
the material out of which language is built is of the same type out of
which the whole culture is built: logical relations, oppositions, cor-
relations and the like” (LEVESTRAUSS 19632:68-69). Frake’s image of
ethnography precisely parallels this view:

- . . descriptive linguistics is but a special case of ethnography
since its domain of study, speech messages, is an integral part of
a larger domain of socially interpretable acts and artifacts. It is
this total domain of “messages” (including speech) that is the
concern of the ethnographer. The ethnographer, like the linguist,
seeks to describe an infinite set of variable messages as manifesta-
tions of a finite shared code, the code being a set of rules for the
socially appropriate construction and interpretation of messages

[1964b:133].

It will be seen that Lévi-Strauss’ “incredible ingenuity” (samLins
1966) in discovering the hidden mental structures of society is the
French analogue of Frake’s (1964b:133) invocation: “We must get
inside our subjects’ heads.” When one takes into consideration the
objections which have been raised concerning the lack of statistical
validation of the mental structures which ethnosemantics has sought
to discover, the gap between Lévi-Strauss and the new ethnography
narrows still further. Lévi-Strauss’ (1953:528) justification of the so-
called mechanical model parallels the arguments employed by ethno-
semantics to justify a lack of concern with sampling and prediction.
As T have already indicated, the mentalism of Lévi-Strauss and his
American counterparts departs from previous emic approaches in
laying stresses upon the logical functions of mind as opposed to the
emotional and irrational components: “Lévi-Strauss emphatically re-
jects recourse to affectivity or emotion. Emotion is vague, where
structure is precise, merely sentimental where structure is logical”
(saHLINS 1966:136). An implicit disdain for the emotional events
which go on inside people’s heads is also a conspicuous hallmark
of ethnosemantics. Emics for a previous generation of American
anthropologists meant the discovery of the unconscious psychological
complexes which were assumed to underly ideal and actual behavior.
The linguistic model, however, has no means of accommodating the
Freudian conflict between id, ego, and superego. One might as well
try to squeeze blood from a stone as obtain from Hammel’s “algorith-
mic” masterpiece on Comanche kinship, the kinds of emotions the
Comanche experienced in the presence of their sisters and mothers.
It is indeed a new experience for anthropologists to be exposed to

599


===== PAGE 305 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

an analysis which “does not pretend to offer solutions which have
sociological, psychological or historical relevance in any necessary
sense . . .7 (HAMMEL 1965:104).

BACK TO PLATO

Another novel ingredient in the ethnosemantic approach is
the exclusionist insistence that anthropology must be emic if it is to
be anything at all. Although idealism and mentalism have always
dominated our outlook, this was traditionally combined with an eclec-
ticism by which at least one anthropological foot could touch the
ground. In the past, emic commitments have seldom been so bla-
tant, insistent, and parochial. Earlier idealist and mentalist programs
were pragmatically capable of and interested in describing and ex-
plaining techno-economic, social, and political systems on the basis
of concrete historical events. In the new ethnography, however, cul-
ture is a timeless system of logical categories. Hegel’s historicism,
his only redeeming feature, has been dropped in favor of a synchronic
idealist dialectic known as “distinctive feature analysis.” Although
the ethnosemanticists enjoy the illusion that they are deriving nour-
ishment from new springs of wisdom, even as idealists they may
actually have taken a giant step backward. Thus, according to Good-
enough:

The great problem for a science of man is how to get from the
objective world of materiality, with its infinite variability, to the
subjective world of form as it exists in what, for lack of a better
term, we must call the minds of our fellow man. . . . Structural
linguistics has, I think, made us conscious, at last, of their nature,
and has gone on to convert this consciousness into a systematic
method [1964a:39].

The notion that the objective world of materiality represents the
shadowing forth of the forms which exist in the mind takes us all the
way back to Plato’s cave. Goodenough fails to consider that although
materiality is infinitely complex, this is a condition which has not
inhibited the development of generalization in all the other sciences,
none of which have had to search out subjective worlds of form.
Furthermore, as I have already indicated, if the subjective world of
form appears less infinitely variable, it is because the ethnosemanticists
have ignored the variability which each of us knows exists. Good-
enough’s rejection of the material world as too complex reflects an
opinion which is widelv shared (more in conversation than in print)

600

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

that ethnography must be emic, and emic in the new linguistic sense,
if it is to be anything at all. Indeed, there is the insistence by some
of the ethnosemanticists that the cultural field of inquiry is only
definable in emic terms: “Actually, I find it difficult to conceive of
any act, object, or event which can be described as a cultural artifact,
a manifestation of a code, without some reference to the way people
talk about it” (FRAKE 1964b:133).

CULTURES ARE MORE THAN CODES

Are all cultural artifacts—acts, objects, or events—as Frake
puts it, only conceivable as manifestations of a code? Referring to
the earlier discussion of variation and ambiguity, let me rejoin that
acts, objects, or events relevant to the human behavior stream
seldom express one or a few simple code rules. Some examples will
be helpful at this point. Among the Bathonga there is a strong ag-
natic bias with a rule that brothers and sons rear their families
within or immediately adjacent to their father’s compound. Many
additional rules stress the order in which brothers and sons are to
marry, the allocation of lineage brideprice resources, the treatment of
co-wives and of junior sons. There are additional rules which refer to
how to make witchcraft, how to make accusations of witchcraft, and
how to react to such accusations. There are still more rules which
indicate how a man is to become successful in life, the importance of
plural marriage, the importance of having many children. All of these
rules are in turn related to rules of treating the ancestors with proper
respect and attention. Now it is a regular ctic feature of Bathonga
life that the local lineage fissions when population exceeds 100 or
200 people, that the break involves the establishment of new house-
holds with a junior son and his mother at the core, and that the
break is accompanied by all sorts of hostile expressions, including
witcheraft accusations, which violate the rules of lincage solidarity,
but which give the young man a chance to achieve a measure of
success in life and marriage that he could not otherwise hope to
achieve. To regard the fission event as a result of the intersection of
all of the codes that might conceivably have influenced the behavior
of the agnates, elder and younger brothers, junior and senior wives, as
they wrestled each in their own way with the problem of which rule
to invoke, or as the rules themselves intersected on some unconscious
level in an untraceable skein of guilt and anxiety in each of the actors,
is a hopeless task. The fission of the Bathonga homestead is a cultural
event and is not conceivable in any operational sense as a manifesta-

601



===== PAGE 306 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tion of a code. On the contrary, it is simply and clearly and opera-
tionally conceivable as an etic phenomenon in which the rate of fission
expresses not a mental code, but the density and spacing of the
animal and human population under the techno-environmental condi-
tions of southern Mogambique (HARRIS 1959b).

A similar but highly quantified example is found in Roy Rappa-
port’s (1966) study of the relationship between secondary growth,
sweet potato production, the pig and human populations, warfare,
and major pig-slaughtering festivals among the Maring of New Guinea.
Each of these activities has its emic rules, which cross each other
at numerous points. Thus pigs are to be fed with inferior grades of
sweet potatoes. But as the pig population goes up, the pigs consume
more and more of the labor input that goes into the sweet potato
crop. There is no rule among the Maring that pigs should multiply
to the point of menacing the human calorie ration. Yet without
specifying the cyclical etic regularities in the ratio, between pigs,
people, and garden lands, the ethnography of Maring warfare and
feasting behavior cannot be properly described, ie., it cannot be
linked up with a corpus of diachronic and synchronic theory.

Among the ethnosemanticists, Frake (1962b) has gone so far as to
attempt to treat the interaction between a human group and its
habitat primarily in emic terms. Noting that there is no explicit rule
among the Subanum by which their settlement pattern can be ac-
counted for, Frake proposes to derive the implicit rule from the
intersection of a number of “quite explicit principles about the
desirable relations among houses and fields” (ibid.:56). The analysis
is presented largely as a methodological proposal and hence starts
off with the major features of the agricultural system as given. But we
are assured that these givens, for example, that new swiddens are
started every year, can also be derived from a calculus of emically
informed individual decisions. Three emic rules are offered by which
an emic “accounting” of settlement pattern is to be achieved: mini-
mum number of wild vegetation boundaries; minimum house to
swidden distance; and maximum house to house distance (ibid.:56-
57). These rules, even with the givens of no larger than nuclear
family work groups and an annual shift in locus of the main swidden
input, are obviously incapable of predicting (as distinguished from
“accounting for”) the spatial distribution of Subanum households.
Even if they all invoke the same rules at the same time in Subanum
land, it cannot be that everyone gets the same result in terms of size
of household, size of swidden, and productivity of swidden. Some-
where the emic rules must confront the etic rcality of how much is

602

Y‘

20.

Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

produced under the given techno-environmental conditions. Whatever
else must be taken into consideration, it is obvious that the diminish-
ing returns for labor input must figure prominently in the etic
formula governing house site shifts among swidden farmers. It is
symptomatic of the mentalism and formalism of the ethnosemanti-
cists that Frake does not describe the actual pattern of dispersal of
household sites. One description of such a pattern showing long-term
stability or change in relationship to population size and production
factors would be worth a thousand emic rules. Subanum scttlement
pattern, a characteristic distribution of people across a portion of the
earth and through a specific portion of the earth’s history, is a cultural
artifact. It is not necessary, indeed, it is impossible to derive this
pattern solely from the emic principles, explicit or implicit, by which
the Subanum think they conduct their lives.

In northeastern Brazil, peasant fathers accept the pan-Brazilian
rules emphasizing the importance of the kindred and of compadrazco.
Family size, both in terms of the number of kinsmen per household
and total effective kinship network, varies from fifteen to twenty to
several hundred, according to class. Within a given village, the most
economically successful peasant has the largest circle of kinsmen.
Unlike his upper-class metropolitan counterparts, however, the circle
of kinsmen which surrounds him is associated with the siphoning off
of his wealth rather than its consolidation. It is a cultural fact that
the pressure upon the Brazilian peasant to expand his family size
reduces his chances for upward mobility; yet T challenge the ethno-
semanticists to find a mental locus for the rule which links large
families to the maintenance of poverty. This problem may be viewed
on a still broader scale: Is the poverty of the world’s peasant masses a
cultural artifact? If so, and it is hard to imagine a negative answer,
then are we to suppose that this poverty results from a set of emic
rules to which the poor obstinately subscribe?

ETHNOSEMANTICS AND ARCHAEOLOGY

Finally, the relationship between ethnosemantics and the
diachronic approach to sociocultural phenomena through ethnology,
history, archaeology, and the comparative method deserves comment.
Ethnoscmantics may be able to develop valid and, within limits,
useful descriptions of contemporary social systems, but the linguistic
model, even more strongly than the model employed by the British
structuralfunctionalists, is inherently incapable of making discover-
ies about the content of history and the nature of historical pro-

603



===== PAGE 307 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

cesses. If anthropology is to have a diachronic component, that
component cannot consist of an inventory of cognitive rules. The
reason for this is that for most human history we have no operational
basis for getting inside people’s heads in the manner proposed by
Frake. But even if we did, we would still confront an insuperable
difficulty. The archaeologically recoverable portion of most of human
history consists of the environmental modifications which different
varieties and expressions of energy quanta have brought into being.
Binary oppositions, contrastive features, skewing rules, etc., have this
in common: they have no measurable energy cost.

604

s

Statistical Survey and
the Nomothetic
Revival o1

S
SO53

Ihe Boasians themselves would occasionally remark upon the empti-
ness of the anthropoligical landscape. Kroeber's (1920b:380) review
of Lowie’s Primitive Society was one of the earliest expressions of
misgiving:

As long as we continue offering the world only reconstructions of

specific detail, and consistently show a negative attitude toward
broader conclusions, the world will find very little profit in ethnol-

ogy.
Noting that Lowie’s achievement is a great improvement over

Morgan’s “brilliant illusions,” Kroeber nonetheless “sighs regretfully

that the honesty” of Lowie’s method “is not stirred into quicker

pulse by visions of more ultimate enterprise” (ibid.:380-81). Some |

years later, Sapir, elsewhere opposed to Kroeber’s hankering after ulti- ]

mate determinisms, came out with a similar expression of discomfort: h

But anthropology cannot long continue to ignore such stupendous
facts as the independent development of sibs in different parts of
the world, the widespread tendency toward the rise of religious or

605


===== PAGE 308 =====

v

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

ceremonial societies, the rise of occupational castes, the attach-
ment of differentiating symbols to social units, and a host of
others. Such classes of phenomena are too persistent to be with-
out deep significance [SAPIR 1927:204].

But historical particularism continued to exercise its sway over an-
thropological theory well into the middle of the century. If we in-
clude not only those who are historical particularists, but the related
viewpoints represented within culture and personality, the new eth-
nography, and structural-functionalism, we must acknowledge the con-
tinued dominance of idiographic currents right through to the present
moment. Beginning with the mid-1930’s, however, currents of thought
and practice associated with a recommitment to nomothetic inquiry
have steadily gained strength and stature within the anthropological
community. We have already entered a new era of creative theory in
which once again a science of man based upon the comparative
method boldly confronts the great questions of origins and causality.
Although this renaissance has already transformed the research strate-
gies and teaching practices at a number of major university and
museumn departments, the effects seem not yet to have been noticed
in sociology, political science, academic history, philosophy, and re-
lated disciplines. But to paraphrase Sapir, the social sciences cannot
continue to ignore the stupendous innovations of fact and theory
which are associated with the end of the Boasian era.

The mid-century collapse of historical particularism was brought
about by the critique of two very different revivals of the comparative
method. On the one hand, through the efforts of George Peter
Murdock, the statistical form of the comparative approach, which
had been originated by Tylor, reasserted itself, greatly strengthened
by new techniques and enlarged facilities. Although deeply com-
mitted to a physicalist model and nomothetic perspective, this
school, as we shall see in the present chapter, has remained aloof
from, or even antagonistic toward, cultural materialism. The second
line of attack against the Boasians, led by Julian Steward and Leslic
White, explicitly embraces the strategy of techno-environmental and
techno-economic determinism, although it has for the most part either
obfuscated or shied away from an acknowledgment of its debt to
Marx, We shall leave the discussion of this manifestation of the nomo-
thetic revival to the next chapter.

Murdock has not only rejected Boas’ criticism of the comparative
method, but he has gone far beyond any other figure in the nomothetic
revival in utilizing statistical techniques to provide testable generali-

606

zations. Nonetheless, Murdock’s position remains heavily compromised
by particularist residues. If we were to arrange White, Steward, and
Murdock in order of furthest departure from the Boasian strategy,
Murdock would fall closest to the Boasian extreme. The distance be-
tween him and Steward is made up of the issue of relatively long-run
versus relatively short-run evolutionary parallels. Although Murdock
has devoted himself to proving that in the short run, the evolution of
kinship terminologics, postmarital residence, and descent rules are
obliged to follow a highly predictable sequence, he has denied that
anything similar exists over an extended period of time. We find him
offering therefore a strange counterpoint to both Steward and Boas.
Murdock’s position in this respect is actually very similar to that of
the synchronic functionalists for whom the laws of functional relation
were to be expressed independently of long-range diachronic implica-
tions. But in other respects, especially in the manner of treatment of
data with regard to functional context, Murdock and the British
functionalists have little in common.

SPENCER, SUMNER, KELLER

Murdock has long been an outstanding critic of historical
particularism, charging, as we have seen, that Boas was “extravagantly
overrated by his students” (see p. 315). But the sources of Mur-
dock’s nomothetic interests are remote from the experiences of
White and Steward. One set of influences represents, in large measure,
a specialty confined in its effects, practically to Yale and to two men,
William Graham Sumner and his intellectual executor, Albert Keller.
These two figures accounted for a unique prolongation into the
twenticth century of Spencerism. To understand Murdock’s position,
we must revert briefly to Sumner and Keller.

The vast, four-volume masterpiece, The Science of Society (1927),
which Keller completed on the basis of Sumner’s notes, carried forward
Spencer’s grandiose plan for a total picture of world evolution. Al-
though not a typical Spencerian product by virtue of its cautions
concerning the biological transmission of cultural patterns, it is heavily
committed to analogy with bio-evolution. As explained in the “Note
to Index” in the fourth volume, “the text of this treatise is adjustment,
as resulting from the factors of variation, selection, and transmission”
(1927:1269).

It would be impossible in the space available to describe Sumner
and Keller’s vast scheme of cultural evolution. It must suffice merely
to indicate that no attempt to limit their perspective to one of

607



===== PAGE 309 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Steward’s three categories of evolutionism could be justified (see p.
642). Although perfectly well aware of specific adjustments to local
environmental and historical conditions, they experienced no diffi-
culty in stepping back from the canvas for the general view. Pethaps a
partial list of topics drawn from the tables of contents of the first
three volumes may serve to convey some idea of the enormous scope
of this extraordinary work: there are first the “maintenance systems”
under which fall such items as subsistence, division of labor, speciali-
zation and cooperation, the accumulation of capital, and advances in
energy utilization; then the effects of domestication of plants and
animals and of men as slaves, evolution of property ideas, and prop-
erty types, evolution of war, associations, government, fraternities,
classes, types of justice, antecedents of the state; and religion, ani-
mism, “eidolism,” ghost-cult, “daimonism,” fetishism, totemism, sin,
sacrifice, shamanism; also, marriage, endogamy and exogamy, purchase
and dowry, status of women, divorce; and finally evolution of mar-
riage forms, family forms, “transition to patriarchate,” and hundreds
of subtopics.

Volume 4 is wholly given over to cases linked to the other three
volumes by an elaborate index system. This index provides a direct
link between Murdock’s attempt to set up a universal file of ethno-
graphic materials and the great compendia organized by Frazer, West-
ermarck, Tylor, and, most important, by Spencer’s Descriptive Sociol-
ogy. The actual evolutionary sequences in the various branches of
sociocultural life tend toward a consensus drawn from Morgan, Tylor,
and Spencer. Of paramount interest is the avowedly materialistic
determinism upon which the overall argument is hung. Despite a
conservative political position based on their Spencerian support of
competition as the agent of evolutionary improvement, Sumner and
Keller's acceptance of cultural materialism goes far beyond that of
any of their non-Marxian predecessors.

Our contention is briefly this: that if society is to endure, no
considerations whatever can take precedence over success in self-
maintenance, that is, in the food quest and in the provision of
protection of all kinds to life. . . . Unless the earth provides suf-
ficient sustenance, men may fail. They fail in any case if there
are too many of them; they will succeed with a minimum of
effort if they are few in comparison with resources; the sort of
struggle they will be forced to make will vary according with the
proportion of numbers to resources.

What they can do in ranges outside of material self-mainte-
nance cannot but vary, and will be seen to vary, with the type of

608

Y

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

struggle they have to maintain in order to supply basic necessities.
Ways outside of self-maintenance proper must take their general
tone from self-maintenance ways [suMNER and KELLER 1927,

I:42].

MATERIALISM AT YALE

Keller was perfectly aware of the resemblance between this
point of view and that of Marx. If we are moved to wonder how he
managed to survive at Yale, it must be remembered that Sumner’s
and Keller's views were categorically opposed to socialism. They were
convinced of the victory of capitalism on the grounds of superior
maintenance institutions. Class competition would not dissolve into
socialism but rather would lead to a superior form of adaptation. Their
position confounds at once any attempt to equate evolutionism in a
blanket fashion with leftist politics, as in White’s denunciation of the
Boasians.

If this is “economic determinism,” so be it.

[The] objection to that theory seems to inhere in its application
rather than in its own validity. Marx had a therapeutic plan,
based upon his doctrine, for changing the maintenance mores, a
plan of selection from which most men of perception would dis-
sent. Doctrinaire socialists do not study to adjust to verities, but
challenge them in utopian fashion. Their assumption that the
mores must be changed wholesale gives many a student of society
pause. It is possible, however, to believe in the basic nature of the
economic life and then, when it comes to planning action, mod-
estly try to help society adapt to the conditions of life as learned:
it is not necessary to have in view the radical alteration of the
whole social order, rejecting the experience of the race and testily
sctting out to change human nature and other somewhat per-
manent elements, rather than accommodate one’s self, even
though it is not so easy, speedy, or grandiose, to actual life-condi-
tions. Belief in some of the Marxian positions, together with
entire distrust in the plan for their application, does not make
one a socialist or a communist, any more than disbelief in the
doctrine of absolute state power and control renders one an-
archistic, with leanings towards bomb-throwing [KELLER 1931:

249-50]-

Murdock, as we shall see in a moment, has reflected Sumner and
Keller's emphasis upon economic determinism but only in a highly
evasive and cryptic fashion.

609



===== PAGE 310 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

DARWIN AND SPENCER

In Keller's (1931) summary of the evolutionary principles
embodied in The Science of Society, we find an insistence upon the
literal appropriateness of Darwin’s model, with “adjustment” changed
to the more fashionable “adaptation”:

It is clear enough that the idea of taking the issue up, as it is
done here—of exploring the nature of social variation, social selec-
tion, social transmission and social adaptation—was suggested by
the Darwinian system . . . [KELLER 1931:18].

But in The Science of Society the debt to Spencer is expressed no
less emphatically. Speaking of the results which justify the possibility
of such a science, Sumner and Keller accord Spencer the kind of
praise of which he was seldom the object in the twentieth century:

The credit of this demonstration of results belongs, above all,
to Herbert Spencer, and can never be taken from him. It has
worked out, in brief, to a conception of socicty as a unified whole
—as a great entity, self-maintaining and self-perpetuating, some-
thing more and greater than the sum of its parts, whose evolution
and life are susceptible of investigation, whose forms pass from
phase to phase, from the most primitive up to the most sophisti-
cated, remaining yet constantly interdependent in the most inti-
mate and intricate of relations. The local form of society is seen
to be an adaptation to environment, and the phases of institutions
are found to be due to mutual adjustments between them. De-
mocracy did not simply happen, nor was it revealed; it is a char-
acteristic form under certain conditions—and so were and are
communalism, polygyny, fetishism. Property and marriage are
seen to be closely interlocked; likewise property and religion, re-
ligion and government, government and economic organization,
economic organization and property. Fossil forms of institutions
—survivals—exist, as in organic evolution, and afford links with
phases of the evolutionary far past. In short, the conception of the
nature of society and of the rise and decline of societal institu-
tions has come to be a broader one, and it has entered into and
vitally affected all subsequent study and thought along social
lines [1927 I11:2194].

THE SCIENCE OF SOCIETY

One part of Murdock’s historic role appears to center on his
transmission of Sumner and Keller’s interest in a “science of society,”
especially in terms of the emphasis that cultural evolution is “orderly
adaptive change” (MURDOCK 1949:xii). In his most significant book,

610

I

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

Social Structure, Murdock acknowledges that the Sumner-Keller ap-
proach is “perhaps the most influential single intellectual stimulus
behind the present volume” (ibid.:xiii). This book is dominated by
the promise that the study of sociocultural phenomena can be carried
out in conformity with the strictest physicalist model of science:

It scems clear that the clements of social organization, in their
permutations and combinations, conform to natural laws of their
own with an cxactitude scarcely less striking than that which
characterizes the permutation and combination of atoms in chem-
istry or genes in biology [MURDOCK 1949:183].

It is to Sumner and Keller that Murdock owes his confidence on this
issue. Yet he insists that The Science of Society is “permeated with
survivals of nineteenth-century evolutionism which historical anthro-
pologists have long since disproved” (ibid.:xiii).

SCALING DOWN THE SCIENCE OF
SOCIETY

In response to historical-particularist currents, Murdock’s ap-
proach to evolution and causality is heavily compromised by his
adoption of a short timescale and by a failure to combine his
comparative approach with the nomethetically relevant data of pre-
history or, indeed, with any macro-temporal view of the human condi-
tion. Murdock joins White, Steward, and Sumner-Keller in urging
that evolution is the central concept in sociocultural studies. But
the evolutionary model with which he works is so close to the end-
lessly branching tree of life that there is actually little difference on
this score between him and the historical particularists. Indeed, all of
Murdock’s contributions are suffused with a painful paradox: While
arguing persuasively for a nomothetic interpretation of the varieties
of sex-regulating and kinship institutions, he has denied that whole
sociocultural systems also exhibit diachronic regularities and that
long-range parallel and convergent evolution are significant features of
culture change.

In Social Structure, this paradox is manifest in the studied failure
to relate kinship structures and kinship ideologies to the development
of political institutions; by the failure to treat the rise of caste and
class hierarchies as a category of “social structure.” Murdock’s great
predecessors at Yale treated these subjects in ways which deserved to
be improved upon, rather than to be negated or ignored. We shall
return anon to the basis of Murdock’s rejection of macro-evolutionary
sequences.

611



===== PAGE 311 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE ORIGIN OF THE HUMAN
RELATIONS AREA FILES

But first, we must credit Murdock with his historic contri-
bution, the triple linking up of modern ethnography, modern statistics,
and the statistical comparative cross-cultural survey method. His great
achievement along this line was the creation of the Human Rela-
tions Area Files (until 1949, the Cross-Cultural Survey), a catalogue
of indexed ethnographic summaries collated under uniform headings.
Begun in 1937, the files in 1967 contained the description of the
relevant portions of more than 240 cultures. These files are the
culmination of an unbroken line of statistically oriented enthusiasts
extending back from Murdock to Tylor (1889), whose essay, “On a
Method of Investigating the Development of Institutions; Applied to
Laws of Marriage and Descent,” was the originating impulse (see
p- 158).

Tlsle)earliest sustained follow-up to Tylor’s suggestion was embarked
upon by the founder of the Dutch School of inductive sociology,
S. R. Steinmetz (1930; orig. 19oo). Like Spencer and other mass
compilers of ethnographic data, Steinmetz set about establishing a
catalogue of world tribes and cultures. He hoped eventually to have
at his disposal coded information on 1000 to 1500 “peoples and
phases” (ibid.:2z09-10n.). Although Steinmetz did not come close to
completing his proposed catalogue, several of his students used
samples and statistical correlations to explore important evolutionary
issues. H. J. Nieboer's (1goc) Slavery as an Industrial System is one
of the most important achievements of this school. Drawing upon
Steinmetz’s tables, Nieboer investigated the distribution of slavery on
an area basis and then attempted to discover the causes of this distri-
bution. Assuming that economic factors are most potent in account-
ing for slavery, he proceeded to a classification of his sample in terms
of economic types (which are carefully distinguished from evolu-
tionary stages). Nieboer’s tables are based on 65 hunting and fishing
societies, 22 pastoral groups, and 219 agricultural groups.

The next great book in this line is The Material Culture and Social
Institutions of the Simpler Peoples by L. T. Hobhouse, G. C. Wheeler,
and M. Ginsberg (1915). Although not students of Steinmetz, the
authors of this “Essay in Correlation” built upon Nieboer’s techno-
economic classification of societies to establish their major rubrics:
lower, higher, and dependent hunters; three grades of agriculturalists;

612

.

21

. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

and two grades of pastoralists. Their main interest was to discover to
what extent varieties of modes of food production were correlated
with the evolution of other aspects of culture. Using an initial sample
of about 640 ethnic units, they carried out simple correlation calcula-
tions on five major categories, namely political and juridical organi-
zation, family, warfare, social stratification, and control over property.
They concluded that “upon the whole the variations accord with
general probability, for the economic development may be taken as a
rough index of the amount of intellect and organizing power available
for the shaping of the life of a society” (ibid.:254).

Hobhouse, Wheeler, and Ginsberg placed considerable empbhasis on
the point that “economic development has no necessary connection
with improvement in the relations between members of society”
(ibid.). This issue of “improvement” loomed large in their overall
approach to sociocultural studies, and its injection into the argument
concerning the extent to which modes of food production influenced
the other categories of cultural phenomena obscured the strong posi-
tive correlation which most of their tables exhibit.

Among several additional studies directly inspired by Steinmetz, we
must mention especially J. H. Ronhaar’s (1931) neglected treatment
of matrilineal societies, Jan Tijm’s (1933) study of the role of women
in North American Indian culture, and T. S. Van Der Bij’s (1929)
study of warfare.

HUMAN RELATIONS AREA FILES

Murdock’s development and utilization of the Human Rela-
tions Area Files surpasses all precedents in several crucial respects.
First, the files have been available on a subscriber basis in Xerox and
microfilm form to large numbers of institutions and scholars, all of
whom thus have or will have access to the same set of primary ma-
terials. Second, the quality, quantity, and depth of information avail-
able in the files go far beyond what had hitherto been possible. Over
450,000 pages of source material already had been filed by 1967 (cf.
MOORE 1961:335). Third, the growth of the files has been accompanied
by a steady improvement in the capacity of anthropologists to make
use of statistical expertise and thus to coax maximum significance
from the techniques of correlation.

Although it can scarcely be maintained that the files have suddenly
made the results of ethnographic inquiry more secure, or more
scientific, we must admit that they have helped to generate a number

613



===== PAGE 312 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of valuable nomothetic essays among which the works of Murdock
(1949), Whiting and Child (1953), and Whiting (1964) may be
taken as representative.

Murdock’s Social Structure, aspects of which we shall discuss in a
moment, would alone probably justify the enterprise. But the creation
of the files must be seen as ushering in a whole new era of the compara-
tive method in which the search for nomothetic regularities has led
to the development of a number of additional world samples. Most
of these take the Human Relations Area Files as their starting point.
Murdock himself (1957) has led the way here with the development
of a “World Ethnographic Sample” and an Ethnographic Atlas of that
sample in which some 6oo societies are described with respect to
several dozen coded features. This atlas is being issued in serial form
in the journal Ethnology, which Murdock founded in 1962.

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FILES

The principle upon which all of this activity has proceeded
seems unassailable and to be representative in large measure of the
future course of ethnology. Ethnological statements which aspire to
nomothetic status must be checked for their degree of correspondence
to the ethnographic reality in as large a number of cases as possible.
This requirement is imposed on us by virtue of our inability to
perform laboratory tests on human history. Dependent as we are on
the unfolding of the natural continuum of events, our generalizations
must be couched in probabilistic terms derived from the observation
of the frequencies with which predicted or retrodicted events occur.
Synchronic and diachronic causal relations, so often hitherto expressed
in terms of approximate trends or tendencies, can only benefit from
more precise statements of operationally defined measures of proba-
bility. Once the practice of stating causal relationships in terms of
probabilities of association becomes firmly established, many problems
which have plagued generations of determinists and antideterminists
will dissolve themselves into a more profitable level of discourse.
Furthermore, it is obvious that the social sciences are about to glut
the conventional library channels of information storage and retrieval
with indigestible quantities of raw data. We must welcome all at-
tempts to enlarge the utility of the data on hand and to maximize
the effectiveness of the yearly crop.

To appreciate these information devices as technical assets implies,
of course, that one is aware of their technical shortcomings. Problems
~xist on many levels and manifest varying degrees of resistance to

614

v

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

improvement. The Files, for example, are dependent upon ethno-
graphic monographs whose scope, quality, and theoretical design are
highly variable. Answers to many ethnographic questions simply can-
not be extracted from the sample as it is now constituted. There is
very little which the Files can do, for instance, by way of compensat-
ing for the relative paucity of reliable quantitative information on all
aspects of primitive economics and social organization (cf. kOBBEN
1967:10). The need to overcome the unevenness of the monographic
resources prevented Murdock from establishing a random sample of
cultures, since cultures were included or rejected partially in accor-
dance with the quality of the available literature. It may very well be
that this factor biases the sample in unknown ways, as would happen,
for example, if the best known and best reported groups were the
most peaceful, or the most acculturated. This in turn places limitations
on the kinds of statistical measures which can legitimately be applied
to the typical correlation analysis end-product.

DIFFUSION AND THE PROBLEM OF
UNITS

The Files and all similar ethnographic samples are plagued by
difficulties in establishing the boundaries of discrete sociocultural
systems. Some cultures in the sample may actually consist of several
such systems, whereas others, counted separately, may actually de-
serve to be lumped together.

In addition, there is the notorious question, first raised by Sir
Francis Galton, of how to distinguish correlations which arise from
nomothetic influence from those which reflect diffusion (e.g., gasoline
and aeroplanes as distinguished from bow ties and aeroplanes). It is
interesting to note that it was this issue which discouraged Boas,
despite an interest in statistics, from adopting Tylor's method, about
which he was initially enthusiastic (LOWIE 1946:227).

Since 1961 Raoul Naroll (1961; 1964) and Naroll and D’Andrade
(1963) have proposed a total of five solutions to the problem which
baffled Galton. These solutions involve the establishment of arcs of
contiguous cultures extending over hundreds and preferably thou-
sands of miles within which various mathematical devices are em-
ployed to sift out the probable effects of contact.

Murdock (1957:193) has argued persuasively on behalf of the point
of view which minimizes the diffusionary effect, in conformity with
the viewpoint generally adopted by Steward and other critics of the
extreme diffusionists and historical particularists:

615



===== PAGE 313 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

The mere fact of historical relatedness does not disturb the au-
thor, for the evidence now seems clear that societies borrow
from one another, much as they invent for themselves, cultural
elements for which they have a need and which are at least rea-
sonably consistent with preexisting usages, and that borrowed like
invented and traditional clements undergo a continual process
of integrative modification leading to the emergence of new in-
dependent configurations. Diffusion negates the independence of
two cultures only if it has occurred too recently for the integrative
process to have run its course.

Additional study of this problem by Harold Driver (1966), J.
Jorgensen (1966), and Driver and Sanday (1966) has failed to sustain
Murdock’s optimism on this point. Analysis both of North American
distributions and of world samples shows that at least one prob-
lem, namely that of the explanation of mother-inlaw/son-in-law
avoidance, cannot be solved by ignoring the possibility of diffu-
sionary influences. (This is especially galling, if I may be permitted
the pun, because it is the first trait which Tylor sought to explain in
the article which provoked Galton’s critique.) The trouble is that
higher correlations of association can be demonstrated for temporal
and spatial propinquity than for any of the variables which are said to
have a nomothetic causal relationship to the avoidance patterns (e.g.,
kinship terminology, residence, descent). Driver’s suggestions for im-
proving the reliability and significance of the statistical cross-cultural
method go beyond Naroll’s solution to Galton’s challenge. In order to
control for diffusion and at the same time to have a permanent sample
adaptable to any number of problems, Driver advocates an initial
group of 1,000 societies (1966:147). Jorgensen goes even further and
suggests that “exhaustiveness of data should be sought” rather than
sampling, implying that perhaps 2,000 cases may have to be con-
sulted in order to overcome Galton’s objections. Jorgensen’s solution
also calls for the collation of data from at least two time periods per
culture (1966:168-69), a requirement which it would seem difficult
to reconcile with the need for exhaustiveness.

THE PROBLEM OF FUNCTIONAL
CONTEXT

One of the most persistent criticisms of Murdock’s strategy
comes from those who are alarmed by the mechanical nature of the
operations by which cross-cultural correlations are established. This is
the point on whose behalf Boas sought to abandon the comparative

616

v——»

21.

Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

method: items are wrenched out of context by coders unknown to
the reader or to the original ethnographer. Items which should be
treated separately are lumped together and those which should be
lumped together are counted as examples of different traits. The
British social anthropologists, as might be expected from their func-
tionalist heritage, have been especially disturbed by this aspect of
the comparative survey. A. J. F. Kobben’s (1952:142) critique in the
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute may be taken as
representative:

A consequence of Murdock’s insufficiently functional approach
is that his product often amounts to no more than mere classify-
ing. Where he enters into the minutiae of a problem, as occa-
sionally happens, his argument at once becomes more lively and
interesting. More often, however, he simply formulates rules or
produces columns of figures. A Dutch sociologist once called a
certain book “a work without a heart,” and in reading Murdock’s
Social Structure one is constantly reminded of this description.
Of course, the author may well protest that what he writes has
gained in exactness what it lacks from a functional point of view
and that a functional treatment is hardly compatible with mathe-
matical precision. Now every effort to be exact is welcome in our
discipline, which certainly does not suffer from an overdose of this
tonic, but it must be real and not quasi-exactness. Can quasi-ex-
actness be denied if different phenomena are placed in the same
category and treated as though strictly comparable when in fact
they are not?

The reply to this sort of criticism is best stated in its most general
form. Does one object to the isolation, codification, and cross-cultural
comparison of traits in general? Or is it that one objects to the mis-
takes which are made in the name of this procedure? In the former
instance, carried to its logical conclusion, we reach the impasse of
Ruth Benedict’s Digger Indians, wherein cultures can be compared
only as wholes and as such are really noncomparable. As Murdock
has put it in his critique of cultural relativism:

Benedict held, not only that cultures must be viewed in the con-
text of the situations faced by the societies that bear them—a
position with which few modern social scientists would quarrel
—but also that they must be viewed as wholes. To her, every cul-
ture is a unique configuration and can be understood only in its
totality. She strongly implied that the abstraction of elements
for comparison with those of other cultures is illegitimate. An
element has no mcaning except in its context; in isolation it is
meaningless. I submit that this is nonsense. Specific functions, of

617



===== PAGE 314 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

course, are discoverable only in context. Scientific laws or proposi-
tions, however, can be arrived at, in anthropology, as in any
other science, only by abstracting and comparing features observa-
ble in many phenomena as they occur in nature [1965:146].

This defense of the comparative method, with which all who aspire
to nomothetic expression must concur, does not eliminate the tech-
nical difficulties associated with the statistical survey approach. Until
such time as the method under consideration approaches more closely
to the idcal model, there is one firm conclusion which must be kept
in plain view of those who are working with the considerably less than
perfect ones: Statistical cross-cultural surveys can, indeed must, be
used to supplement other modes of generating and testing hypothe-
ses, but they cannot be used alone or even as the primary sources of
nomothetic statements.

THE PROBLEM OF CAUSALITY

That the technique as it now stands cannot be used in isola-
tion is evident in one glaring defect which is characteristic of all of
the statistical comparative studies carried out since Tylor’s pioneering
essay. None of them have been capable of showing causal relations.
The reason for this is that the samples consulted have all been
synchronic. None of the studies have concerned themselves with time-
structured data and as a result they merely show probabilities of asso-
ciation between eclements which as far as the statistical methods are
concerned may be indifferently regarded as either dependent or
independent. As Jorgensen (1966:162) observed: “Statistics cannot
validate functional hypotheses or hypotheses about origins when the
data are synchronic.”

THE CASE OF THE DETERMINANTS OF
KINSHIP TERMINOLOGY

One of the most illuminating examples of this limitation on
synchronic correlations may be found at the very heart of Murdock’s
Social Structure. In the chapter entitled “Determinants of Kinship
Terminology,” twenty-seven theorems are put to the test of the
statistical comparative method. These theorems are divided into three
sets, each of which is characterized by a particular class of “determi-
nant,” namely, (1) marriage form, (2) descent rule, and (3)
postmarital residence. After validating all twenty-seven theorems by

618

.

21.

Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

demonstrating various associations between the “determinants” and
kinship terminology, Murdock turns to the question of the relative
“efficacy” of these “determinants.”

He notes first of all that the coefficients of association found in the
tables used to confirm the theorems involving marriage form are
generally lower than those found in the tables used to confirm de-
scent. He interprets this to mean that marriage forms have less
“efficacy” than descent. The same relative standing is suggested by a
test in which marriage form is pitted against descent rule by enumer-
ating cases in which they both occur in a fashion which theoretically
should tend to produce contradictory results in the relationship
terminology. For example, in societies in which there is patrilineal
descent, bifurcate merging terminologies are very common. On the
other hand, in societies with nonsororal polygyny, bifurcate collateral
terminologies are very common. When both patrilineal descent and
nonsororal polygyny are present, what happens? The descent-pro-
duced tendency toward bifurcate merging terminology takes prece-
dence over the “effect” of the marriage rule; bifurcate merging terms
are more common than bifurcate collateral ones. By similar kinds of
steps, Murdock (1949:182) concludes that “the efficacy of marriage
forms is greater than that of residence rules.” Finally separate proof is
offered that descent is also “a more effective factor” than residence.
This leaves us with residence as the least “effective” of the three
“determinants.”

AND THE LEAST EFFECTIVE SHALL BE
THE MOST POWERFUL

It quickly becomes apparent, however, that the so-called de-
terminants are misnomered and that none of the correlations per se
prove the existence of causal relations. Were this not the case, the
most important assumption in the entire book would be wrong. For
it is central to Murdock’s explanation of varieties of descent and
kinship terminology, as well as of the probable direction of the evolu-
tion of “social structure,” that residence is the most powerful determi-
nant of all the factors considered. “Powerful” here means that “the
rule of residence is normally the first aspect of a social system to
undergo modification in the process of change from one relatively
stable equilibrium to another . . .” (ibid.:183). It means that “it is
in respect to residence that changes in economy, technology, property,
government, or religion first alter the structural relationships of
related individuals to one another, giving an impetus to subsequent

619



===== PAGE 315 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

modifications in forms of the family, in . . . kin groups, and in kin-
ship terminology” (ibid.:202). It means also that “no place is allotted
in this hypothesis for the influence of such factors as preferential
marriage customs” (ibid.:222). That is, one does not ordinarily expect
changes in marriage rules or descent rules to initiate changes in resi-
dence, but one does expect changes in residence to initiate changes in
marriage and descent rules. Some additional indication of the im-
portance of this deterministic order can be gained from Murdock’s
lavish praise of Lowie for having been the first anthropologist to
demonstrate the causal significance of residence (actually Tylor long
preceded Lowie on this point): “This is by far the most important
contribution of any modern anthropologist to our knowledge of the
evolution of social organization” (ibid.:202). It should be noted that
the argument of about half of Social Structure is directly or in-
directly contingent upon the validity of this appraisal. Before pursuing
the question of the method which Murdock employs to validate the
importance of residence, the negative significance of the positive cor-
relations should be stressed.

If residence is the most powerful determinant of kinship termi-
nology, why does an analysis of the coefficients of association show
that descent and marriage forms are more “cffective” in producing
particular varieties of kinship terminologies? The answer is that they
do nothing of the kind. They show nothing about one factor “pro-
ducing” another; all they do is predict the frequency with which two
factors will be found in association. They show nothing about the
causes of kinship terminologies. They are not determinants; they are
merely predictors.

CAUSALITY IS ALIVE AND LIVING
EVERYWHERE

It is fashionable in contemporary social science to ignore the
difference between a causal relationship and an associational one. This
haughty attitude no doubt has its roots in Hume’s famous critique of
the inductive method. When we say that x causes y we merely declare
a regular relationship between the two. Thus, the notion of cause as
a metaphysical property is superfluous. But in a causal statement, the
association of x with y has a temporal component, namely that y
follows x. A nomothetic statement which lacks a causal arrow is a
contradiction in terms; its absence can be tolerated only as a token
of work in progress. If mere statistical associations are offered in licu

620

T

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

of statements of cause and effect, science is defeated, for it is knowl-
edge and not ignorance which deserves to be counted.

The difference between causal factors and mere predictive ones is
not to be taken lightly. It is the difference in knowing whether
wounds cause gunshots or gunshots cause wounds. Bullet holes are
excellent predictors of gunshots. As all devotees of Hercule Poirot
know, there is a high correlation between gunshots and bullet holes,
but no murder has yet admitted of the possibility that it was the
fatal wound which caused the gun to discharge its contents. Along
the same lines, one might note how reliably rain predicts clouds, or
how frequently fire engines are found near burning buildings. If any
additional examples are needed, they are available to anyone who
has a movie projector which can be run in reverse.

I am tempted to elaborate further on the method by which the
time relationship between two variables is utilized to separate cause
from effect, since once again it is obviously not merely a matter of
correlating any two variables which happen regularly to occur in se-
quence (cf. BLALock 1961:19ff.). But it is sufficient for our present
discussion that we realize why additional logico-empirical operations
are necessary before synchronic cross-cultural statistical comparisons
can be made to contribute to the advance of knowledge. Perhaps it is
even more important that we realize that the mere multiplication of
correlation studies, as in Robert Textor's (1967) 20,000 computer-
calculated correlations, may actually be the equivalent of running a
movie backwards and hence a source of ignorance and confusion as
well as of correlations.

THE PRIMARY IMPORTANCE OF
MURDOCK S CAUSAL HYPOTHESES

It would be unfair to attribute to Murdock a lack of interest
in separating causal from predictive variables. Indeed, Murdock’s
theory of the determinants of kinship groups and of kinship termi-
nologies must be acknowledged as the most important nomothetic
advance in the study of social organization since Morgan’s Systems
of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family (1870). But the
methodological structure of Murdock’s achievement has been obscured
by the razzle-dazzle of his statistical tables and by his ritualistic avoid-
ance of the consequences of his own major causal premises.

The manifest structure of Murdock’s presentation would have us
believe that the twenty-seven theorems concerning the “determinants

621



===== PAGE 316 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of kinship terminology” are set forth in order to validate a single
postulate which is given formal expression in the following terms:

Postulate 1. The relatives of any two kin-types tend to be called
by the same kinship terms, rather than by different terms, in in-
verse proportion to the number and relative efficacy of (a) the in-
herent distinctions between them and (b) the social differentials
affecting them, and in direct proportion to the number and rela-
tive efficacy of the social equalizers affecting them [1949:138].

Although it sounds impressive, this postulate is rather trivial once the
jargon is stripped away. In translation, what Murdock is really saying
is that kinship terminologies are determined by all the factors that
determine them. He himself practically admits as much in the very
next paragraph:

Rephrased in looser language, the postulate states that the exten-
sion and differentiation of kinship terminology is the product of
the joint interplay of all inherent and cultural factors which sig-
nificantly affect the degree of similarity or dissimilarity between
particular categories of relatives [ibid.].

In order to understand the logico-empirical structure of Mur-
dock’s magnum opus, we must go back to an earlier portion of the
same chapter wherein Murdock undertakes to make explicit all as-
sumptions upon which Postulate 1 is based. There are thirteen such
assumptions, most of which are merely definitional and need not
concern us here. There is one, however, namely the twelfth, which
provides the key to Murdock’s theoretical position:

Our twelfth assumption is that the forms of social structure
are not determined by kinship patterns or terminology, or influ-
enced in any major degree by them, but are created by forces
external to social organization, especially by economic factors. It
is assumed hercwith, for cxample, that the available sources of
food and the techniques of procuring it affect the sex division of
labor and the relative statuses of the sexes, predisposing peoples
to particular rules of residence, which can eventuate in the forma-
tion of extended families, clans, and sibs. It is further assumed
that the prevailing types and distribution of property favor partic-
ular rules of inheritance, that wealth or its lack affects marriage
(e.g. encouraging or inhibiting polvgyny), and that these and
other factors external to social structure can strongly influence
rules of residence and marriage and through them the forms of
social organization and kinship structure. This assumption is de-
rived from the analysis by Lowie of the origin of sibs, from our
own supportive cvidence as presented in Chapter 8, and from the

622

hall

21.

Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

various theorists from Marx to Keller who have stressed the im-
portance of economic factors in cultural change [ibid.:137].

What is the relationship between this assumption and the 27 theorems
which it is alleged to underly? None. If anything, as we have scen,
the analysis of the theorem leads to contradictory conclusions con-
cerning the “effectiveness” of residence. Indeed Murdock is forced to
go through an extraordinary turnabout in order to make the two
ends of his argument meet without the one destroying the other.

Despite our tentative conclusion that rules of descent and the
kin groups resulting from them rank highest in relative efficacy
among the major groups of kinship determinants, followed by
forms of marriage and the consequent family types, the influence
of residence rules should not be too heavily discounted
[ibid.:182].

Note the remarkable understatement embodied in the phrase “the
influence of residence rules should not be too heavily discounted.”
How can we reconcile this hesitancy with the bold language of as-
sumption 12 or the even bolder: “when any social system which has
attained a comparatively stable equilibrium begins to undergo
change, such change regularly begins with a modification in the rule
of residence” (ibid.:221)?

In terms of the larger theory with which Murdock approaches his
subject, the relatively poor predictive value of residence is easily
explained as a result of a lag in the responsiveness of terminology—
precisely the same argument as that used by Morgan to justify the
use of kinship terminology for the reconstruction of earlier phases of
social organization:

Hence in systems undergoing transition, of which any large and
random sample of human socicties will necessarily include a
considerable number, kinship terms will more often be consistent
with the conservative rule of descent than with the progressive
rule of residence [ibid.:183].

THE LOST STRATEGY OF THE TWELFTH
ASSUMPTION

But what is of interest here is that “the adaptive changes”
in kinship terminology described in the twenty-seven theorems are
explicitly said to take place after the initiation of residence changes.
And yet this supremely important causal statement remains through-
out the book nothing but an “assumption” (ibid.:137, 221). What we

623



===== PAGE 317 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

should like to know at once is why this assumption, upon which
rests Murdock’s entire subsequent treatment of the “evolution of
social organization,” is not the focus of intense inquiry.

As Keller freely acknowledged (see p. 60g), this assumption com-
mits one to the strategy of cultural materialism. Applied to kinship
terminology and residence, it calls for the study of the techno-
economic and techno-environmental causes of residence changes. But
the strategy which Murdock actually pursues is highly ambiguous. On
the one hand he establishes himself as the representative of the hard,
statistical approach and on the other hand, he carefully detaches his
deterministic assumptions from any deterministic theory of history.
Although this would not seem possible in view of assumption 12
and in view of other achievements associated with his study of kin-
ship systems, it is accomplished by what I should like to describe as
the “miracle” of the “principle of limited possibilities.” And it is to
this extraordinary doctrine that we must now turn our attention.

THE PRINCIPLE OF LIMITED
POSSIBILITIES

MurdocK’s first reference to limited possibilities occurs in his
article “The Common Denominator of Cultures” (1945), where it is
used to explain why the universal pattern exists. The nature of
man, the world in which he lives, the physical and chemical properties
of materials, the physical and behavioral characteristics of other ani-
mals, set conditions for successful responses: “These conditions intro-
duce into cultures the principle of limited possibilities, which is of
extreme importance in determining the universal culture patterns”
[1945:139]. In this form, the principle of limited possibilities is
unobjectionable and merely states that cultural similarity is “not a
mere artifact of classificatory ingenuity but rests upon some substan-
tial foundation . . .,” namely, adaptive responses to the condi-
tions of human existence. In this form it is merely a reaffirmation of
Sumner and Keller’s belief in the lawfulness of the domain of history
since it predicts that cultures will not diverge endlessly, but will be
confined to a limited number of adaptations to the conditions of
human life.

Murdock’s next use of the principle, however, introduces a rather
new emphasis. In Social Structure (1949:115) he calls it “the crucial
criterion” for deciding whether a comparative or “sociological” as con-
trasted with a “purely historical” approach is warranted:

624

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

Where there are no practical limits to the variety of responses
which people can make in particular situations, cultural forms can
vary endlessly with little comparability between those of unre-
lated societies, with the result that satisfactory interpretation

must depend very heavily upon historical investigation of local
and regional influences [ibid.].

Murdock here informs us that the principle of limited possibilities
applies to some domains of culture but not to others. The list of
domains to which it allegedly does not apply is staggering: language,
ceremonial, folktales, art, technology, and “other aspects of culture.”
“In all such cases, the overwhelming majority of cross-cultural similari-
ties must necessarily be attributed to diffusion” (ibid.). The only ex-
ceptions which Murdock admits are “kinship terms and their deter-
minants.” He proceeds to demonstrate this by asserting that a
group may either “recognize or ignore sex,” affinity, etc., may either
be monogamous, polyandrous, or polygynous; recognize either levir-
ate, sororate, or cross-cousin marriage; have either bilateral, matrilineal,
or patrilineal rules of descent; practice either patrilocal, matrilocal,
avunculocal, neolocal, or bilocal residence; and so on through family
forms and types of kin groups (ibid.:116).

Two problems which escape Murdock’s attention have now
reached the crisis stage. First, it is obviously false that when parallels
occur in the domains which Murdock singles out as being exempt
from his principle, that they must be attributed to diffusion. He is
wrong even in the best case, namely, linguistics, in which parallelisms
and convergences in phonetics, phonemics, and syntax have been
demonstrated by a long line of linguists, from Zipf (1935) to Green-
berg (1963). But much more distressing is the promulgation of a point
of view which asserts that technology is less subject to limitations
than social structure! It was to explain technological parallels that
the concept was originated.

ONE OAR IS NOT AS GOOD AS ANOTHER

The anthropologist who first introduced and elaborated the
principle of limited possibilities—Alexander Goldenweiser—employed as
his favorite examples sword handles, knives and other tcc]mol'ogical
items. Goldenweiser’'s most cherished case, however, was the technology
of nautical propulsion: )

I? may be observed here incidentally that the operative condi-
tions or use to which an article is to be put, often provide limiting

625



===== PAGE 318 =====

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

conditions which in a sense predetermine the technical solution,
thus leading to comparable results whenever such a solution is
reached. Take, for example, an oar. Abstractly speaking, an oar can
be long or short, light or heavy, circular in cross section or flat,
wide or narrow, of even width throughout its length or otherwise;
it can also be made of more than one material. Now in accordance
with local conditions or chance, most of these shapes and ma-
terials may have been used for oars at one time or another, and a
variety are still being used in a pinch. . . . But if you want a
good oar—and this is what at length you do want—the end result
is limited by conditions of use. . . . These limitations are so
drastic that every oar is—emphatically—an oar, implying numer-
ous points of similarity between all oars [1942:124-25].

Let us translate Goldenweiser’s point about “a good oar” into less
anthropocentric terminology: a good oar is an evolutionarily viable pro-
pulsion device adapted to small boats in which energy is transmitted
from the human arm to the water. And now we perceive the second
crisis in Murdock’s version of nomothetic propriety: It is simply false
that there are only nine possible ways to classify kinsmen, three ways
to get married, three (or four) ways to reckon descent, and five ways
to take up postmarital residence. What Murdock means to say is
that there are only a limited number of ways under certain conditions
(not specified by him) to make “a good oar,” or in less anthropocen-
tric terms, only a limited number of evolutionarily viable terminological
systems, marriage arrangements, descent rules, and residence practices.

Early in the century Lowie (1912:37) had asked the rhetorical
question, “How many ways of fastening a skin membrane to a drum
are conceivable?” He actually thought there were only “limited possi-
bilities.” But with Goldenweiser as a guide, it is clear that what Lowie
had in mind was not how many kinds of drums are conceivable, but
rather, how many kinds could be expected to survive the selective
tests (durability, loudness, cost, etc.) to which drums are exposed
under specific biocultural conditions.

It is easy to imagine kinship terminologies which Murdock has
not considered. (Actually, since his major types of “kinship organiza-
tion” are based only on cousin terms, hundreds of variants are known
from fact and not fancy.) Why, for example, is it a nonpossibility for
a terminological system to recognize not two, but three or four sexes;
for new marriages to take place after each pregnancy, the first monog-
amous, the second polyandrous, the third polygynous; or why not
descent which is patrilincal in the morning, matrilineal in the after-
noon, bilateral in the evening, and double on Sundays? Shall we not
ask, in other words, why elephants do not have two heads, why cab-

626

bages do not grow on clouds, and why the moon is not made of Swiss
cheese? The limited possibilities of nature are none other than the
forms which evolution has produced. The task of scicnce is to explain
why they were produced. They cannot be explained by saying the other
possibilities are illogical.

EVOLUTION IS FORTUITOUS AND
UNPREDICTABLE

During a discussion commemorating the one hundredth an-
niversary of the publication of Origin of Species, Murdock explicitly
opposed the doctrine of limited possibilities to a nomothetic view of
history. Objecting to Whitc’s version of evolutionism, he insisted
that the true model of cultural evolution was, as in biology, an end-
lessly diverging “tree.” He proposed:

1. That evolution is an actual process of change, not a classifica-
tory characterization of sequences.

2. That evolution consists of real events, not of abstractions from
events, so that evolutionary development is historical in the
strictest and most literal sense.

3. That the course of evolution is fundamentally divergent or
multilinear. When parallel development occurs in more than
one evolutionary line, the sequences and results are similar
onlly in a typological sense, and are never in any respect identi-
cal.

4. That evolution operates by a purely fortuitous mechanism,
and is neither predictable, predetermined, nor purposive

[1959b:129].

Murdock next proceeds to identify this model with Steward’s concept
of multilinear evolution: “Unless I completely misread him,” he
says of Steward, “he considers all cultural evolution to be basically
multilinear and regards cases of parallel development as exceptions
demanding special investigation” (ibid.:130-31). Murdock then con-
cludes that multilinear evolution is really nothing but what anthro-
pologists have all along been calling “cultural change”:

The group of processes usually designated collectively as those
of culture change, and on which we possess an immense literature,
corresponds closely in practically every respect to the processes of
organic change known to the biologist as evolution. Culture change
meets exactly the criteria embedded in our four statements. It
refers to actual processes of change, not to abstracted typological
sequences. Its events are historical in the most literal sense, and
in their totality constitute culture history. Its course or direction

627


===== PAGE 319 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

is fundamentally multilinear. And it operates in a fortuitous, not
in a predictable or predetermined manner. Moreover, it is adapt-
ive, producing cultural adjustments to the geographical environ-
ment and to the other basic conditions of life [ibid.:131].

But if cultural evolution is “fundamentally multilinear,” “not pre-
dictable” and “fortuitous,” how do we account for the fact that, as
Murdock himself assures us, only “five major kinship systems” are
found in “an analysis of 447 societies drawn from all parts of the
world and from all levels of culture” (ibid.:135)? Murdock’s explana-
tion is as follows:
The resemblances are typological, not historical or necessarily
even functional. They occur because only a certain limited num-
ber of combinations of rules of descent, residence patterns, forms
of family organization, and methods of classifying kinsmen con-
stitute configurations whose elements are genuinely consistent
with each other, so that they represent states of equilibrium to-
ward which other combinations tend to gravitate over time [ibid.].

Were it not for the stipulation in the first sentence that the con-
sistency and equilibrium in question are not necessarily functional,
but may merely be typological, the second sentence might pass
muster as an assertion of evolutionary determinism in the realm of so-
cial organization. But the two together constitute a classic case of
eating cake and having it.

Ordinarily one might suppose that the principle of limited possi-
bilities was nothing more than an improvisation, like the “ether” or
“phlogiston,” for dignifying a lack of knowledge about causal pro-
cesses. But Murdock’s cryptic commitment to cultural materialism
profoundly complicates the issue. This is not the usual case of theo-
retical bafflement, but rather a highly original form of retrenchment:
the causal theory is abandoned, not because it fails to give results, but
because it shows signs of becoming too successful. That only five
major kinship systems emerge from a study of a representative sample
of 447 societies drawn, according to Murdock, “from all parts of the
world and from all levels of culture,” suggests the existence of extraor-
dinarily powerful, selective, deterministic, evolutionary forces.

THE EVIDENCE FOR EVOLUTIONARY
UNPREDICTABILITY

To conclude in the face of his own lifework that evolution
operates in a “fortuitous, not in a predictable or predetermined
manner” (1959b:131) surely must imply an overpowering mass of

628

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

evidence in support of the historical-particularist view. And this is
just what Murdock asserts in Social Structure: “The forms of social
organization, indeed, appear to show a striking lack of correlation
with levels or types of technology, cconomy, property rights, class
structure, or political integration” [1949:187]. What kind of evidence
is presented to justify this extravagant statement, so clearly refuted by
Sumner and Keller; by Hobhouse, Wheeler, and Ginsberg; by Nie-
boer; by Spencer, Tylor, Morgan, Marx, and Engels; not to mention
White, Childe, Steward and Wittfogel?

Since the methodological strength of Social Structure lies in the
statistical cross-cultural survey technique, one might suppose that
“the striking lack of correlation” refers to a set of relevant tables. But
there are no such tables in the book. Not only are tables correlating
technology, economy, property rights, class structure, and political
organization absent from Social Structure, but the book lacks alto-
gether anything remotely resembling a systematic treatment of these
subjects. “Technology” does not even appear in the index! The
“evidence” consists rather of the following taxonomic decision:

As will appear below, an objective classification of societies in
terms of their similarities in social structure results in grouping
together under the same specific type and sub-type such dissimi.
lar peoples as the New England Yankees and the forest-dwelling
Negritoes of the Andaman Islands, the imperialistic Incas and the
Vanimo Papuans of New Guinea, the Mayan Tzeltal of Yucatin
and the backward Miwok of California, the civilized Nayars of
India and the primitive nomadic Veddas of the interior of Cey-
lon. Nowhere does even a revised evolutionism find a shred of
support [ibid.].

DO NEW ENGLANDERS AND
ANDAMANESE HAVE THE SAME TYPE
OF SOCIAL STRUCTURE?

) The only reasonable conclusion which can be drawn from a
classification which lumps the social structures of the New England
Yankees with that of the Andaman Islanders is that the originator of
th.e glassiﬁcation has made a singularly poor choice of taxonomic
criteria. Let us examine the criteria employed by Murdock for bringing
together into one category such unlikely bedfellows. There are nine
traits which the Yankees and Andamanese share in common: (1) Bi-
lateral descent, (2) Eskimo cousin terms, (3) Neolocal residence,
(4) Absence of clans, (5) Incest prohibitions extended to ﬁrs';
cousins, (6) Monogamy, (7) Nuclear family, (8) Lineal aunt

629



===== PAGE 320 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

terms, and (9) Lincal niece terms (ibid.:228). Since three of these
nine (2, 8, 9) refer to kinship terminology, we might very well argue
that there are really only seven traits in common. But there is no
need for pressing in this direction. Let us quickly mention some of
the items of social structure which are present among the Yankees,
absent among the Andamanese, and ignored by Murdock. Such a list
might be expected to contain towns and cities, social classes, endoga-
mous minorities, religious congregations, political partics, benevolent
associations, universities, manufacturing companies, jails, state legisla-
tures, municipal councils, law courts, and street corner groups. The
Andamanese, for their part, have a few items which Murdock has not
managed to squeeze into his check list: the levirate (RADCLIFFE-BROWN
1933:73), infant betrothal (ibid.), communal ownership of land
(ibid.:41), gerontocracy (ibid.:44), and the corporate hunting and
gathering band. Especially interesting is their highly elaborated adop-
tion system (ibid.:77). This institution reduces to a shambles Mur-
dock’s claim that the forms of family organization among the Yankees
and Andamanese are of the same nuclear family type:

It is said to be of rare occurence to find any child above six
or seven years of age residing with its parents, and this because it
is considered a compliment and also a mark of friendship for a
married man, after paying a visit, to ask his hosts to allow him to
adopt one of their children. The request is usually complied with,
and thenceforth the child’s home is with his (or her) foster-
father; though the parents in their turn adopt the children of
other friends, they nevertheless pay continual visits to their own
child, and occasionally ask permission (!) to take him (or her)
away with them for a few days [ibid.].

Is this a way to run a Yankee household?

THE CASE OF THE CHINESE CLAN

The lumping together of Yankee and Andaman social struc-
ture fulfills Boas' worst apprehensions concerning the comparative
method. Murdock is betrayed into this error by his expectation (is it a
hope?) that the blessings of the principle of limited possibilities are
reserved only for residence, descent, and terminology. His conclusion
strongly suggests the need for a revision of the categories upon which
it is based. At the very least, one would expect that it not be paraded

to and fro as a wholesome product of superior scientism.
One additional example of violence to context must suffice for
our rejoinder to Murdock’s denial of evolutionary regularities. Among

630

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

the allegedly false correlations of the discredited “evolutionists” is the
belief_tha.t the sib and clan tend to disappear at the state level of
organization. “That the sib disappears with the development of the
state,” writes Murdock, “is negated by the Chinese and the Manchus.”
(1949:187). This case has been taken up by Morton Fried (1957)
whp has demonstrated the capricious nature of a taxonomic priuc)il/)le,
which would lamp together the egalitarian, land-owning Iroquois or
Tungus sib with the highly stratified Chinese descent groups:

(;hinese social organization includes units which are clearly rccog-
nizable as unilincal descent groups. These groups, houcvér, have
a number of featurcs which distinguish them from apparently
qnalogous groups. In China therc is rclative emphasis on familial
independence, marked differences between the wealth and au-
thority of the family units, and a formal emphasis on written
genealogies. There is also a highly developed ancestor cult which
stresses the importance of direct descent from influential pro-
genitors [ibid.:16].
) It is clear that Murdock can justify the inclusion of his state-level
instances of sibs under the same rubric as that under which egalitar-
1au‘51bs are placed only by ignoring the profound functional differences
which pertain in the two classes of instances (cf. FREEDMAN 1958:
138fF.). But even were he to insist on the residual similarities which
characterize “sibs” under all conditions, he would yet remain very
far fr(_)m sustaining his point about lack of correlation between state
organization and the disappearance of the sib. To begin to make any
headway in this enterprise, one would have to show correlation—
use a sample—and that he has not done. Why do some theories require
a I}undrcd statistical runs to be proven partially true, while others re-
quire no statistics whatsoever to be proven entirely false?

This issue is further complicated by Murdock’s admission that a
statistical treatment of the sib-state relationship would confirm the
generally accepted nineteenth-century position: “Political evolution
from a gentile to a territorial state, for example, has frequently been
followed in Africa, Asia, and Europe, by the disintegration of clans

and the weakening of unilinear ties” (ibid.:203). But why are there
no tables on this subject? ’

TOWARD A BETTER KIND OF SAMPLE

) Pulrt of the answer lies in the nature of the sample which is
contained in the Human Relations Area Files. Murdock’s basic pre-

occupation has always been to achieve representativity of world regions

631



===== PAGE 321 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and of culture areas within these regions. Although this concern is
important and should be maintained, it leaves the question of the
representativity of the sample with respect to major types of social
structure entirely at the mercy of chance. It thus ignores Steward’s
critique of the traditional culture area classification. As a result one
can not approach the Files with questions involving the frequency
with which state-level societies are associated with unilinear descent
groups, nor can one inquire how frequently chiefdoms lack such
groups, or how frequently band-organized societies practice polygyny.

Nonetheless, it should be pointed out that in the construction of
the World Ethnographic Sample, Murdock (1957) has made provi-
sions- for overcoming this kind of problem by including at least one
example of each basic type of economy represented in each of sixty
culture areas. It may be taken as a further sign of Murdock’s retreat
from the exposed position of Social Structure that his contribution to
the Festschrift for Steward (Process and Pattern in Culture) contains
the admission that “Levels of political integration, as many studies
have shown, tend to be correlated with complexity in subsistence
economy and technology and with demographic factors” (murpock
1964:405). With the inclusion of column 38 in the World Ethno-
graphic Sample (MURDPOCK 1962), it is now possible to choose a
sample which will be approximately representative of different levels
of sociocultural integration.

THROW THE WALL AND

SEE IF

IT AGAINST
IT STICKS

A closer look at Social Structure thus reveals why the
statistical cross-cultural survey method should never be the lone or
primary instrument of nomothetic research. The correlations achieved
by what has been called “the-throw-it-against-the-wall-and-see-if-it-
sticks” technique are unlikely to build on their own toward macro-
theory. Let us admit that positive correlations established in the face
of the hazards of coding and the unreliability of the sources may
nonetheless, barring systematic bias, merit our confidence (cf. . camp-
BELL 1961; 1964; 1965). There remains, however, the problem of the
noncorrelations which arise from poor ethnography, biased analysis,
faulty coding, and improperly phrased hypotheses. It is quite pos-
sible by the throw-it-against-the-wall method to write a hundred
trivial equations none of which relate to the others, or all of which
relate to each other indiscriminately, and at the same time to get a
negative result on the theory which subsumes them all. If we wish to

632

e

21.

Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

achieve an orderly picture of history, we must begin by assuming
that there are certain orderly principles which are at work. And
we must use these principles to order and classify the data. We
cannot simply throw our data against the wall to see if it sticks
according to the predicted pattern. Rather, we must process the
data, question it, classify it, and code it, in relation to the expectations
of our major premises. Then and only then can we accept a failure
to stick to the wall as evidence against the major premise. At the same
time, it is only from such a procedure that the particular correlation
on each trial may be seen as connected and governed by the general
principles of sociocultural evolution.

A close look at Murdock’s Social Structure in other words reveals
that there is no substitute for macro-theory founded on detailed dia-
chronic and synchronic causal-functional analysis of specific cases. It
is out of such studies, imperfect as they may have been, that a view
of the macro-evolutionary tendencies of sociocultural systems was
gradually built up during the past two centuries. The general frame-
work of sociopolitical evolution from paleolithic bands to several
different varieties of tribes, chiefdoms, and states is firmly established
(cf. FrIED 1967). The relative fruitfulness of the techno-economic
and techno-environmental explanations is also well established. Classi-
fications which ignore the broad levels of sociocultural evolution
and which evade the consequences of cultural materialist causality in
the name of inductive purity pursue a false image of science. On the
other hand, the utility of the statistical cross-cultural survey is beyond
dispute and Tylor’s belief that “in statistical investigation the future
of anthropology lies” still holds true when statistical investigation is
used as a method for revealing unsuspected connections among
institutions, for identifying exceptions to regularities, as a measure of
probability, and as an indicator for research needs. But it holds true
only if we accept the larger theoretical frame within which Tylor
sought to encourage the use of his method of “adhesions.” It remains
true only if we also acknowledge that the major “institutions of man
are as distinctly stratified as the earth on which he lives” (1889:269).

633



===== PAGE 322 =====

Cultural Materialism:

General Evolution ’)

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

S
5003

It is a misfortune, some of whose consequences have already been
described, that the return to diachronic and synchronic generalization
has acquired the name “neoevolutionism.” This label confounds our
understanding of the developmental continuities within anthropology
by its suggestion of a revival of a doctrine which is associated with
the struggle to establish the fact of speciation. Historical particularism,
culture and personality, and synchronic functionalism are all perfectly
compatible with both biological transformism and cultural trans-
formism. Even the Kulturkreis school, in which religious doctrine
played a definite supporting role, experienced no difficulty in accepting
the fact that cultures evolve and that an explanation for such trans-
formations could be achieved independently of hypothesis of sus-
tained animistic interference. It scarcely strains the canons of scientific
respectability of emic and idealist schools to associate their researclh
with causal and evolutionary relations. Mead has made this clear in
her recent expression of interest in evolutionary problems. She is per-
fectly correct in her obscrvation that “most of the interests of cultural
anthropologists are embraced by this concept” (MEAD 1964:327). And

634

when she traces the causes of change in Manus society to an eclectic
mixture of personalitics and cultural setting, she evidently intends more
than a local lesson in evolutionary causality. Yet Mead’s theoretical
position remains largely uninfluenced by the specific kind of causal and
evolutionary formulations which are distinctive of the post-Boasian
period.

No one has ever denied that cultures evolve in the sense that
sociocultural systems undergo cumulative changes roughly analogous
to those which eventuate in speciation or stellar and galactic trans-
formations. The point at issue has always been the nature of the
process of cultural change. And this dispute has two principal facets:
how much parallelism and convergence has there been in sociocultural
evolution and what has caused both the observed differences and ob-
served similarities in the evolutionary careers of sociocultural systems?

Neither of the two most important figures associated with the no-
mothetic revival, namely Leslie White and Julian Steward, has ade-
quately described the shared, novel, and strategically decisive ingredi-
ent in their approach. Although White has on occasion (e.g., 1949b)
discussed the main issues in anthropological theory in terms of
“spiritualistic, vitalistic, or idealistic” versus “mechanistic, materialis-
tic” views, he has given much greater emphasis to, and has become
almost exclusively identified with, the defense of evolution. An even
more conspicuous avoidance of the discussion of the materialist and
idealist options has been characteristic of Steward’s treatment of
evolution and causality. Yet by objective standards it is the application
of the cultural-materialist strategy to the understanding of history
which distinguishes their point of view from that of their predecessors
and contemporaries.

THE INFLUENCE OF SPENCERISM ON
LESLIE WHITE

In order to evaluate the debate between Steward and White,
it is necessary first of all to recall our previous discussion concerning
the miniscule role of cultural materialism in the works of Tylor and
Morgan, by whom White alleges himself to be directly inspired (see
Chap. 5). Indeed, White has so adamantly insisted on the continuity
of his theories with those of Morgan and Tylor that he has refused
to accept the label “ncoevolutionist” on the grounds that his own
role extends only to the resurrection and not to the remodeling of
nineteenth-century anthropological evolutionary theory:

635



===== PAGE 323 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

But let it be said, and with emphasis, that the theory set forth
here cannot properly be called “neoevolutionism,” a term pro-
posed by Lowie, Goldenweiser, Bennett, Nunomura (in Japan),
and others. Neoevolutionism is a misleading term: it has been
used to imply that the theory of evolution today is somehow dif-
ferent from the theory of cighty years ago. We reject any such no-
tion. The theory of evolution set forth in this work does not
differ one whit in principle from that expressed in Tylor's An-
thropology in 1881, although of course the development, expres-
sion, and demonstration of the theory may—and does—differ at
some points. “Neo-Lamarckism,” “neoplatonism,” etc. are valid
terms, but “neoevolutionism,” “neogravitationism,” “neoerosion-
ism,” etc., are not [WHITE 1959b:ix].

Although White has repeatedly stressed his indebtedness to Tylor,
Morgan, and Darwin, there are two fundamental discrepancies in
this picture. First, insofar as materialism figures in the outlook of
these founding fathers, it is the materialism of Spencerism—the expla-
nation of sociocultural differences in terms of biological selection.
White, on the other hand, has devoted a massive effort to the
criticism of both psychological and biological reductionism. His
refrain, “Culture must be explained in terms of culture” (1949a:141),
is opposed not only to Steward’s admission of the importance of
environmental factors but to the theories of Morgan and Tylor as
well. Second, White’s “Basic Law of Evolution” has no precedent
among the nineteenth-century evolutionists with whom he seeks to
align his work. This law reads as follows:

Other factors remaining constant, culture evolves as the amount
of encrgy harncssed per capita per year is increased, or as the
efficiency of the means of putting the energy to work is increased
[ibid.:368-69; orig. 1943].
White’s “law” sounds like a definition more than a statement of co-
variance. From the actual context, however, it is clear that it is neither
alaw nor a definition but rather a statement of research strategy.

WHITE 'S BASIC STRATEGY

This strategy is the strategy of cultural materialism, phrased
in energy terms. It is employed by White as the point of departure
for the analysis of major trends with respect to both local and world-
wide evolutionary modifications. The linkage with cultural materialism
and with Marx (and not with Morgan, Tylor, and Spencer) is made
clear during the course of the application of the “law of evolution” to
the explanation of the major outlines of world history. For White

636

proposes to regard sociocultural systems as consisting of three parts:
techno-economic, social, and ideological; and he states the causal
relationships among these divisions in unmistakable terms:

Culture thus becomes primarily a mechanism for harnessing
energy and of putting it to work in the service of man, and, scc-
ondarily, of channelling and regulating his behavior not directly
concerned with subsistence and offense and defense. Social sys-
tems are therefore determined by technological systems, and
philosophies and the arts express experience as it is defined by
technology and refracted by social systems [ibid.:3g0-g1].

UN-AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGICAL
ACTIVITIES

In her contribution to the Festschrift for White (Essays in
the Science of Culture), Betty Meggers (1960:302-3) wrote:

The law of energy and cultural evolution was first set forth by
White in 1943. . . . This law is based on the recognition that all
cultures are composed of three general classes of phenomena:
technology, social organization, and philosophy. Of these, tech-
nology is primary and determines the content and form of the
other two components.

This provided the occasion for an illuminating exchange between
Meggers and Morris Opler, one of the relatively few figures in anthro-
pology who may be reckoned as well-acquainted with Marxist theory.
Opler’s point was that it was Marx and the Marxists, especially Nikolai
Bukharin (1925), who were the true authors of “White’s Law,” de-
spite the failure of White and his followers to cite these sources.
Opler was intent on making this point because he apparently sought
to damage the scientific status of the cultural-materialist position by
emphasizing its incorporation into Communist dogma: “Apparently
the ‘practical tool kit" Dr. Meggers urges upon the field anthropolo-
gists is not quite so new as she represents, and its main contents seem
to be a somewhat shopworn hammer and sickle” (1961:13). The
impropriety of this remark is made all the more noteworthy by
Opler’s failure to point out the reasons why White’s ideas could not
conceivably be embraced by Communist doctrine. With his knowledge
of Marxist literature, Opler is in no need of being reminded that
it takes more than cultural materialism to qualify for Communist
approval. One must also accept the dialectic nature of evolutionary
process, cspecially as related to the primacy of conflict in structural
change. One must at least be a dialectical materialist, accepting the

637



===== PAGE 324 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Hegelian clement in Marx, in order to put the “hammer and sickle”
in one’s tool kit. White, who has never indicated the slightest interest
in dialectics, qualifies therefore for one of the worst epithets in the
Communist arsenal of antiheretical verbiage: he is what Engels was
the fisst to call a “mechanical materialist.”

It would be pointless to claborate the aspects of White's views
which falsify Opler’s innuendo. The question of whether or not
cultural materialism is a sound strategy for social science cannot be
left to depend on whether those who espouse it would or would not
be acceptable to the House Un-American Activities Committee. Scien-
tific facts and theories cannot be tested by loyalty oaths. That the
Russian geneticists were ultimatcly triumphant over their govern-
ment’s attempt to purge them of “bourgeois” Mendclian principles
is an encouraging sign for all of the sciences. Although the pressure to
purge Western social science of theories of cultural materialism
has not been as direct (barring the McCarthy interlude), its palpable
cffects are ubiquitous: Western social scientists confront a situation
strictly analogous to the former plight of the Soviet Mendelian geneti-
cists. It is as if merely by virtue of the fact that Communists have
politicized the meaning of cultural materialism that it must therefore
be rejected as a valid strategy for nomothetic inquiry. But we cannot
permit ourselves to be cut off from the valid contributions of Marx
simply because our national ideology is deeply committed to the sup-
pression of Marxist thought in total. Just as our physicists, chemists,
physiologists, and mathematicians have established for themselves the
right to use the products of scientific discovery regardless of the politi-
cal milieu in which these have originated, so, too, must cultural anthro-
pology feel free to use the discoveries of social scientists wherever and
whenever they help to answer the questions in which we are interested

THE ANTHROPOLOGIST IS NOT FOR
BURNING

Opler expressed amazement that anyone discussing White’s
variety of techno-economic determinism could have attributed its
beginnings to the early 1940's (actually, all that Meggers intended to
do was to give the date of White’s statement, not the origin of the
law).

It seems incredible that anyone sccking to place in time and in
the history of theory a point of view which systematically subor-
dinates the social and idcological to the technological should com-
pletcly overlook Marx and Engels and their heirs. It is curious

638

'y

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

that our neo-cvolutionists constantly acknowledge their debt to
Darwin, Tylor, and Morgan and never have a word to say about
the relation of their ideas to those of Marx, Engels, Bukharin,
Plekhanov, Labriola, Suvorov, Lenin, Stalin, et al. Yet it is patent
that their formulations are a great deal closer to those of Bu-
kharin and, indeed, to thosc of any thoroughgoing historical ma-
terialist than they can ever be to those of Tylor or Morgan. What
they share with Tylor and Morgan is a conviction that cultural
evolution has taken place. With Marx, Engels, Bukharin, Ple-
khanov, Labriola, and the others they share, in addition, convic-
tions concerning the elements and mechanisms through which
the process occurs. This close correspondence may be an instance
of parallelism. It may be the result of stimulus diffusion. There is
the possibility of lincal or collateral descent. Tt could reflect still
other dynamic forces. It might be helpful to know what is in-
volved. At any rate, before it becomes a matter of total assimila-
tion, anthropologists might well take a closer look at recent

intellectual history and at some recent trends in American ethnol-
ogy [ibid.:18).

Yet Opler’s incredulity is misplaced; what is hard to believe is that
Opler does not know from firsthand experience the real reason for
the avoidance of Marxist references by anthropologists who have
discovered, or rediscovered, Marx’s contribution to the strategy of
cultural materialism. It is incredible, since Opler himself, with his
political innuendo, reveals himself fully prepared to expose and jeopar-
dize his colleagues before the political passions of the times.

WHITE S CONVERSION

Despite the almost complete lack of reference to Marx and
the Marxist literature in White’s books and articles, White's involve-
ment with cultural materialism need not be ferreted out by lengthy
citations of Bukharin's treatment of energy and technology. In Harry
E. Barnes’s “Foreword” to Whitc's Festschrift, the same volume in
which Meggers provoked Opler's attack, there appears a clear-cut
statement of the relationship between White’s conversion to evolu-
tionism and his exposure to Marxist theories. During his graduate
studies, White had acquired a strong Boasian outlook. At the New
School in New York, he was taught by Alexander Goldenweiser;
and at the University of Chicago, where he obtained his degree in
1927, he was influenced by the Boasians, Fay-Cooper Cole and Edward
Sapir. His first anthropological article (1925) was a typically Boasian
plea for the importance of the cultural factor in the determination of

639



===== PAGE 325 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

personality and was in many ways parallel to the program upon which
Margaret Mead was about to embark. The beginning of White’s shift
to an implacably anti-Boasian position took place during the two
years that he taught at the University of Buffalo. Since this was Iro-
quois territory, he was obliged to read Morgan for the first time. And
he was shocked as anyone must be who had accepted Morgan as a
worthless example of speculative philosophy on the basis of second-
hand opinion. It was at this point that he discovered that Morgan was
a “remarkable scholar, savant, and personality.” The step from Morgan
to Marx via Engels was inevitable, and in 1929 White was deeply
enough involved in Marxist matters to take time out for a trip to
the Soviet Union.

The final step in Dr. White’s conversion to enthusiastic evolu-
tionism was a tour through Russia and Georgia in 1929, during
which he first made his acquaintance in any thorough manner
with the literature of Marx and Engels, particularly those portions
dealing with the nature and development of civilization. In his
treatment of the origins of the family, Engels had made especially
wide use of the views of Morgan on social evolution and thus
tended to impress Dr. White still further with the validity and
importance of the evolutionary approach. The writings of Marx
and Engels also helped to reveal the reasons that Morgan’s theory
of the role of property in cultural development was so vigorously
attacked by Catholic scholars and by capitalist historians and
economists [H. E. BARNES 1960:Xxvi].

There is no need to repeat here the arguments against White’s equa-
tion of antievolutionism with the central theoretical and factual
errors of the historical-particularist school. We may take this whole
issue as evidence of the extraordinary trauma which social science in
the United States had experienced as a result of its isolation from
Marxist viewpoints. White returned from the Soviet Union to take
up a teaching position at the University of Michigan, where he ulti-
mately succeeded in building one of the country’s major centers of
anthropology. Although White was uncompromisingly and outspok-
enly hostile to historical particularism, to psychological reductionism,
to doctrines of free will and theological teleology, and to almost every
other shibboleth of the Midwestern milieu in which he operated, he
managed to avoid placing his critique within the arena of Marxist
disputation. Perhaps this was made possible because the level of
anthropological theory had slipped back so far toward a prescientific
condition that there was enough to do merely by way of recapturing
the ground upon which Marx had built without going beyond or even

640

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

equaling Marx’s own contributions. Nonetheless, many themes in
Whites publications were fully anticipated by Marx and Engels. This
should be understood to include Marx and Engels’s reworking of Mor-
gan, for when White speaks of himself as an evolutionist following in
Morgan’s footsteps, it is the Morgan as reinterpreted by Engels in
the Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State of whom
we must think.

WHITE'S DEFENSE OF MORGAN AND
TYLOR

White’s crusade on behalf of the defeat of the “antievolu-
tionists” in order to restore the theory of evolution to its former
prominence has produced irrelevant polemics. Kroeber (1948c), Lowie
(1946; 1957), and Steward (1955) joined with him in discussions
which have obscured the basic simplicity of White’s point. The
theory of evolution for White is “the old and simple concept so well
expressed by Tylor: . . . the great principle that every scholar must
lay firm hold of, if he intends to understand either the world he lives
in or the history of the past” (WmiTE 1959b:125). Returning to the
full context of this “great principle,” we find:

On the whole, it appears that wherever there are found elabo-
rate arts, abstruse knowledge, complex institutions, these are re-
sults of gradual development from an earlier, simpler, and ruder
state of life. No stage of civilization comes into existence spon-
taneously, but grows or is developed out of the stage before it.
This is the great principle which every scholar must lay firm hold
of . . . [rYLOR 1881:20].

The perfect acceptability of this kind of evolutionism to the Boasian
stalwarts has already been discussed.

As long as there is no claim to the effect that all cultures must
pass through a specific set of stages, no Boasian would ever deny that
a series of worldwide evolutionary stages can be identified. Yet White
has insisted over and over again in his defense of his nineteenth-
century evolutionist heroes that they never proposed that all cultures
necessarily passed through the same set of stages, e.g., Savagery, Bar-
lbansm, Civilization. To speak of the position of Morgan and Tylor
in terms of such an impoverished antinomy is misleading. It was not
an all or nothing question for them nor is it one for us. As Sahlins
and Service (1960:12) have observed, Tylor “laid out the study of
cultural evolution both stage by stage as well as along its many lines.”
The only issue worth discussing is the frequency of convergence and

641



===== PAGE 326 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

parallelism; not whether there are exceptions to the regularitics of
history, but rather how frequently these occur.

In the perspective of Tylor and Morgan, there is no doubt that the
parallclism and convergence were often assumed to be far more fre-
quent than the facts have subsequently justified. For example, it was
because of Morgan’s faith in the uniformity of the historical exper-
iences of widely separated cultures that he was led to argue, on the
basis of fragmentary evidence, that the Aztec were in a stage of culture
which was not significantly different from that of the Iroquois. It
was a similar faith in the uniformity of history which led Morgan to
suppose that his fragmentary data on archaic Greece was adequate for
identifying the matrilineal stage.

When Tylor spoke of the tendency of the experience of mankind to
move through uniform channels, it was not to say that mankind in
general as distinct from mankind in particular cultures shared these
channels. Such a distinction is a refinement for which White’s heroes
had no need. Tylor meant that most (not all) cultures unfolded
along similar lines (see p. 171). The exceptions, recognized by both
Tylor and Morgan, were explicable in terms of race, diffusion, and
environmental specialties.

White has used this recognition of diffusion and local perturbations
in the evolutionary sequence to distort the theories of the nineteenth-
century evolutionists into a shape convenient for the maintenance of
“evolutionism” as the center of twentieth-century controversy. He
has argued that their evolutionism was not one of particular times
and places but rather of the world as a whole. It is clear, however,
that their interests encompassed both levels of generalization.

UNILINEAR, UNIVERSAL, AND
MULTILINEAR EVOLUTION

In an attempt to formalize the differences between himself
and White on the issue of evolutionism, Steward (1955) has proposed
a threefold classification of evolutionary approaches: unilinear, uni-
versal, and multilinear. The unilinear, says Steward, was characteristic
of the “classical” evolutionists who “dealt with particular cultures,
placing them in stages of a universal sequence” (1955:14). Morgan
and Tylor fit in this category. But every one of the “classical” evolu-
tionists also fit in Steward’s second (“universal”) category: “a rather
arbitrary label” to designate Whitc’s “revamping of unilinear evolu-
tion” and which “is concerned with culture rather than cultures.”
Steward’s third brand of evolutionism is called “multilinear evolu-
tion.” This is dcfined as follows:

642

A

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

. it is interested in particular cultures, but instead of finding
local variations and diversity troublesome facts which force the
frame of reference from the particular to the general, it deals
only with those limited parallels of form, function, and sequence
which have empirical validity [ibid.:19].

The inadequacy of this classification is shown by the fact that
the two anthropologists whom Steward nominates for universal
evolutionism, namcly White and V. Gordon Childe, are equally
good contenders for at least one of the other categories. White, as
much as the classical evolutionists, has attempted to locate specific
cultures in relationship to universal schemes (ie., unilinear evolu-
tionism). And in his most sustained substantive treatment of evolu-
tion, The Evolution of Culture (1959b), White not only attempts to
trace the whole course of cultural development, from the transition of
anthropoid to human society to the beginnings of the iron age, but
he also reconstructs specific cultural sequences in the light of the
general trends manifest in the universal sequence. In Australia, for
example, the Arunta system of marriage classes is said to have
evolved from the Kariera type of relationship to “a higher stage of
cultural development and social evolution” when “the maximum
effectiveness of the cooperative group formed by marriage could not
be achieved by union between first cousins” (19359b:173). More
con.imon}y, it is White’s practice to interpret the significance of
vatious institutions in particular socicties on the assumption that
the culture has reached a certain level of evolution. Thus, his treat-
ment of social stratification in Polynesia and the Northwest Coast
draws heavily on the universalistic generalization (first advanced by
the Edinburgh School in the eighteenth century) that “it is not until
kinship has ccased to be the basis of social systems and society has
become organized on the basis of property relations and territorial
distinctions that true classes of subordination and superordination
come into being” (ibid.:203)

WHITE AND CHILDE AS MULTILINEAR
EVOLUTIONISTS

In every respect, White’'s The Evolution of Culture is the
modern equivalent of Morgan’s Ancient Society, the only difference
being the updating of some of the cthnography and the greater
consistency of the cultural-materialist thread. White has explicitly
rejected Steward’s attempt to make the “house of evolutionism” . . .
“falsely divided against itself” (1959a:125). Programmatically, at least,

643



===== PAGE 327 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

he has embraced all of the varietics of evolution set forth by
Steward:

It follows from the foregoing that culture may be regarded as
a one or as a many, as an all-inclusive system—the culture of man-
kind as a whole—or as an indefinite number of subsystems of
two different kinds: (1) the cultures of peoples or regions, and
(2) subdivisions such as writing, mathematics, currency, nlle.ta]-
lurgy, social organization, etc. Mathematics, lzmguagc,. writing,
architecture, social organization, etc. may each be considered as
a one or a many, also; one may work out the evolution of mathe-
matics as a whole, or a number of lines of development may be
distinguished. Evolutionist interpretations of culture will th(-:‘re»
fore be both unilinear and multilinear. One type of interpretation
is as valid as the other; each implies the other [wHITE 1959b:

30-31].

As for the universal evolutionism of V. Gordon Childe, there must
be taken into consideration not only Childe’s adherence to Morgan’s
universal stages of Savagery, Barbarism, and Civilization in the presen-
tation of the Middle Eastern archaeological sequences, but also
Childe’s highly particularistic treatment of the emergence of a fiis—
tinctly European culture area (CHILDE 1946; 1958). In actual practice,
Childe is even more inclined toward multilinear evolution than is
Steward:

So on the whole archaeology does not hold out much prospect of
correlating social institutions with stages of cultural development
as defined in economic terms. But, after all, we have seen that
such stages, apart from the three main status, are themselves
hard, if not impossible to define. For within the status of bar-
barianism at least, the observable cultural sequences do not follow
parallel lines [cHILDE 1951a:165-66].

As a matter of fact, Childe goes on to compare the diversity of
cultural evolution with the Darwinian model of a tree “with branches
all up the trunk and each branch bristling with twigs” (ibid.:166),
and this is none other than the extreme limiting case of multilinear
evolution.

EVOLUTIONARY MODES AND
EPISTEMOLOGY

It is evident that the three evolutionary modes defined b}/
Steward are not mutually exclusive. It is also evident that the logic

644

22.

Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

of Steward’s categories rests on a continuum involving degrees of
abstraction away from the description of specific cases.

At one end of this continuum there is the evolutionary transforma-
tion which is characterized by or known through one case. For
example, onc might want to consider the development of a four-
caste apartheid system (Africans, Europeans, Coloreds, and Asians)
as an cvolutionary product peculiar to South Africa. Similarly, the
Natchez system of exogamous castes is not reported elsewhere, yet it
is obviously resultant of a process of transformation (whose stages are
as yet unknown).

On a slightly higher level of generality, we may note the evolutionary
products characteristic of several societies within a single culture area.
The peculiar Australian speciality involving eight marriage sections is
an evolutionary product of the transformation of two- and four-
section systems. Parallelisms involving one or two cultures in several
different culture areas also occur, as in the case of matrisibs in the
Eastern Woodlands, West Africa, and Melanesia.

Finally, there are the universal evolutionary products such as the
nuclear family incest taboos or the belief in animism.

All of these categories can be expanded or contracted indefinitely
in accordance with the amount of ethnographic detail which is re-
quired before we are willing to grant that two instances are the
“same” or different. Universal evolutionism merely represents an
extreme expansion of the tolerated degree of abstraction. Distinctions
otherwise relevant between patrilateral and matrilateral marriage
exchange system are canceled out and the remainder scooped up
under the rubric “kinship regulation of marriage”; or endogamous
hierarchies in India, the United States, and South Africa are treated
as “caste system.” By ignoring millions of trivial differences, in
order to emphasize a few significant similarities, we arrive at such
theoretically vital notions as cgalitarian societies, state organization,
feudalism, capitalism, or oricntal despotism. Conversely, with a suffi-
ciently intense historical-particularist mandate, we may prove to our
satisfaction that the state of affairs in eleventh century France had no
parallel anywhere else in Europe, much less in Japan or West Africa.
The mutual failure of both White and Steward to grasp the epistemo-
logical issues which underly our judgments concerning evolutionarily
significant similarities and differences goes a long way toward explain-
ing the prolongation of their controversy beyond useful limits. This
failure is especially acute in relationship to White’s refusal to admit
that certain transformations studied by Steward qualify as “evolu-
tionary” phenomena.

645



===== PAGE 328 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

WHEN IS CHANGE EVOLUTION?

My intent here is not to arbitrate the controversy over what
is or is not evolutionary. Nothing could be more fruitless. The point
at which the accumulation of changes in an old form results in the
identification of a new form—in a “temporal sequence of forms’—is
not a matter for research. The predictable end result of the further
discussion of this theme is that differences of opinion will be resolved
by introducing a few new terms (how about “minor,” “major,” and
“mega” cvolution?). The matter for research as distinct from philo-
sophical disputation is: What causes the observed changes, be they
small or large, “systems” or “mere aggregates”? Whatever causes small-
scale changes must be important for an understanding of large-scale
changes; conversely, whatever causes large-scale changes must be im-
portant for an understanding of the small-scale ones. Thus we have
the mutual relevance of genetics and natural selection in the theory of
bio-evolution; and of the physical chemistry of stars and the evolution
of galactic forms.

WHITE'S CRITERIA OF EVOLUTION

Phrasing the nomothetic revival in terms of evolutionism has
meant that the search for the underlying causal processes responsible
for cultural differences and similarities has become mired in scholastic
dichotomies. White has attacked Steward for studying nonevolution-
ary changes on the model of historical particularism, and Steward has
attacked White for his grandiose generalizations. In reviewing Stew-
ard’s Theory of Culture Change, White (1957:541) declares:

Steward falls between the two poles of idiographic and nomo-
thetic interpretation, between the particular and the general. He
is not content with mere particulars, but he cannot go the whole
hog of generalizations. He wants generalizations but, as he says re-
peatedly, they must be of limited scope (Theory, p. 22 et passim).
Try to imagine a law of falling bodies, or of gravitation, of limited
scope. Steward resembles one who discovers that this river and
that flow down hill but is unwilling to go so far as to assert that
“rivers flow down hill.”

The particular transformation which White rejects as an example
of evolution concerns two American Indian groups, the horticultural
Brazilian Mundurucu Indians and the Algonquin hunters and gath
erers of Canada. In a convergent fashion these tribes responded to

646

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

Luropean contact by shifting to dependence upon the production of
trade goods—furs in one case and rubber in the other. One group
became “tappers,” the other, “trappers.” But the involvement with
the trading post through debt obligations followed a similar line of
development despite the different tcchno-environmental relationship
(syurpHY and STEWARD 1955). For Steward these transformations
represent convergent evolutionary sequences. White (1959a:122),
however, demands to know, “What justification is there for calling
them lines of evolution?”

In other studies by Steward, such as the comparison of the de-
velopment of civilization in Mesopotamia and Peru, White is willing

to grant that we have examples of “true evolutionary processes.” But
this

- Is a fundamentally different kind of process than the simple
like cause, like effect occurrences in Steward’s tappers and trap-
pers example. Thus some, or at least one, of the “lines of evolu-
tion” he describes (Steward, 1956) turns out to be a genuine
evolutionary process; others are not evolutionist at all [ihid.}.

But if evolution is “a temporal sequence of forms” (warTE 1959b:30),
how is it possible to deny that the Mundurucu have undergone evolu-
tionary change during their transformation from horticultural tribes-
men to debt-bound rubber collectors? Perhaps an answer could be
built around White’s declaration that “only systems can evolve; a
mere aggregation of things without organic unity cannot undergo
evolution” (ibid.). But he would have great difficulty in convincing
the majority of anthropologists that the Mundurucu’s subsistence
patterns are a “mere aggregation.” Or perhaps, in order for White to
accept a cultural change as evolutionary, it must have produced a
transformation on a certain scale, measured perhaps in energy quanta.
If so, White has nowhere proposed what quantitative operations would
be required.

STEWARD' S CRITIQUE OF WHITE

Steward, on his part, has condemned the universal evolu-
tionist approach of White and Childe for its inability to come to
grips with the question of specific cultural differences and similarities
as distinct from the vague and unilluminating generalities of universal
laws. Steward’s comments hark back to the Boasian response to
highly generalized evolutionism:

647



===== PAGE 329 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

The postulated cultural sequences are so general that they are
neither very arguable nor very useful. No one disputes that hun'E—
ing and gathering, which is Childc’s diagnostic of “savagery,'
preceded plant and animal domestication which is his criterion of
“barbarism,” and that the latter was a precondition of large popu-
lations, cities, internal social differentiation and specialization,
and the development of writing and mathematics, which are
characteristics of “civilization.” . . . It is certainly a worthy ob-
jective to seek universal laws of cultural change. It must be
stressed, however, that all universal laws thus far postulated are
concerned with the fact that culture changes—that any culture
changes—and thus cannot explain particular features of particular
cultures [STEWARD 1955:17-18].

In Steward’s (1960:146) review of White’s Evolution of Culture the
same point is directed specifically at White’s own evolutionary formu-
lations:

Regarding the causal chain that begins with technology and con-
trol of energy and runs through society to religion, there can be
little disagrecment with the self-evident proposition that “as the
amount of energy harnessed by sociocultural systems increases per
capita per year, the systems not only increase in size, but become
more highly evolved, ie. . .. morc differentiated structurally
and more specialized functionally” (pp. 39-40). But this does not
at all explain what kinds of social structures arise from the utili-
zation of technologies in particular environments. White concedes
(p. 41) that “technological and cnvironmental factors both oper-
ate to produce cultural differences quite apart from the source
and magnitude of energy harnessed,” but he is not interested in
these differences and states (p. 51) that “if one . . . wishes to
discover how cultural systems are structured and how they func-
tion . . . then one does not need to consider the natural habit
at dll,” for he is really concerned with “how and why the culture
of mankind as a whole has grown” [italics Steward’s].

WHITE'S DEFENSE

White’s response to such criticism is singularly unconvincing.
He argues that general laws are not supposed to explain particular
events. The kinds of problems which Steward wishes to handle under
multilinear evolution really belong in the historical-particularist tradi-
tion. It is Steward’s training in the “atomistic, idiographic, there-is-
no-thyme-or-reason-to-cultural-phenomena tradition of the Boas school”
which is at fault:

648

The predicament in which we find Steward, suspended  be-
tween the particular on the one hand and the general on the
other, may also be illustrated by citing his objection to broad
generalizations or “universal laws,” as he calls them: they “can-
not explain particular features of particular cultures” (Theory,
p- 18). Of course they cannot! This is precisely the characteristic
of a generalization or law; particulars are subsumed under the
universal. The law of gravitation cannot tell us whether the falling
body is a rock or a feather, much less whether the one is sand-
stone or the other a heron plume. And this is precisely why the
law of gravitation—or any other scientific law—has value: because
it is a universal, i.c., tells us nothing about particulars as particu-
lars [WHITE 1957:541].

Does the law of gravitation tell us nothing about particulars? When
one predicts a particular eclipse on a particular planct of a particular
sun by a particular moon, has this no relation to the general law?
White undoubtedly means to say something else, to wit: no general
law tells us everything about particulars. Hence our lack of information
about whether falling bodies are rocks or feathers. But if a generaliza-
tion tells us nothing about particulars, it can scarcely enjoy the status
of an empirical proposition.

THE NEED FOR STATEMENTS OF
COVARIANCE

A closer look at what White means by cultural “laws” or
generalizations will help us overcome the muddle of evolutionism
and antievolutionism. Two very different kinds of propositions are
offered by White, only one of which might conceivably qualify for
the status of lawful generalization. The kind which definitely does not

qualify is that which sums up universal cultural evolution with obser
vations like:

As society evolved under the impetus of increased technological
control over nature, the processes of exogamy and endogamy
operated to increase the size of the cooperative group of kindred
while at the same time maintaining its solidarity and effective-
ness. The radius of kinship was extended until the boundaries of
the community were reached; eventually the whole tribe became a
unified, integrated group of kindred living togcther on terms of
mutual aid.

Custom in general and special codes of ctiquette and cthics
served to integrate and regulate socictics. Classes were defined

649



