===== PAGE 239 =====

18. French Structuralism

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

work. However, if it was Lucien Herr who in 1886-88 converted
Juarés to socialism, it was Durkheim who in 1889-96 had turned
him away from political formalism and the shallow philosophy of
the radicals [MavUss 1962:34].

DURKHEIM, SPENCER, MARX

Between Spencer’s military and industrial types of societies (see p.
209) there is a transition which appears to resemble the transition be-
tween Durkheim’s own mechanical and organic types. This resemblance
is only superficial, argued Durkheim. Spencer was in fundamental error
concerning the importance of social as opposed to individual factors in
the industrial phase. According to Spencer, the sphere of contractual re-
lationships is destined to expand to the point where the entire social
organization will consist of nothing but a network of voluntary indi-
vidual arrangements of convenience. Individuals would depend upon
the group to a diminishing degree, inversely related to the number of
private conventions.

Social solidarity would then be nothing else than the spontaneous
accord of individual interests, an accord of which contracts are the
natural expression. The typical social relation would be the eco-
nomic, stripped of all regulation and resulting from the entirely
free initiative of the parties. In short, society would be solely the
stage where individuals exchanged the products of their labor,
without any action properly social coming to regulate this ex-
change [DURKHEM 1933:202].

Note that there is a curious similarity between Spencer’s ultimate in-
dustrial phase and the nebulous stateless and classless utopia which
Marx had promised would follow the proletarian victory. Both Marx
and Spencer continued to expect the triumph of the individual over
society as in the dream of Rousseau. For both Spencer and Marx, the
withering away of the state was a withering away not only of the
political apparatus but of the entire supra-individual, sociocultural
nexus of restraint.

Durkheim objected to this predicted diminution of the social factor
in the strongest possible terms, and herein lies, as we shall see, the
unique twist imparted by Durkheim to cultural theory.

THE STATE SHALL NOT WITHER

According to Durkheim, the growth of the division of labor,
and hence of organic solidarity, is accompanied by no weakening of the

468

power of the social organism over the individual; there is rather an
intensification of the mutual dependence of individual and social
group. Much of the Division of Labor is concerned with showing that
the evolution of mechanical to organic solidarity is accompanied by a
“normal” or “healthy” expansion of the legal and administrative ap-
paratus of sociality and of an appropriate set of moral and ethical rules.

. economists have believed that . . . human societies could
and would resolve themselves into purely economic associations.
.. . But such a conception is, in all ways, inadequate for the
facts. The division of labor does not present individuals to one
another, but social functions. And society is interested in the play
of the latter; in so far as they regularly concur, it will be healthy
or ill. Its existence thus depends upon them, and the more they
are divided the greater its dependence. That is why it cannot
leave them in a state of indetermination. . . . Thus are formed
those rules whose number grows as labor is divided, and whose
absence makes organic solidarity either impossible or imperfect
[DURKHEIIVI 19;3407]

THE NEED FOR A SCIENCE OF THE
SOCIAL

Out of this refutation of the individualizing effects of the
division of labor there arises in Durkheim’s outlook the necessity for a
discipline which will concern itself with “social,” as distinct from
individual, “functions.” In his next and perhaps his most influential
major endeavor, The Rules of the Sociological Method (1938; orig.
1895), Durkheim proceeded to set forth the epistemological and
methodological principles of such a discipline. In doing so, he reaffirmed
the superorganic position which was already explicit in the Marxist
tradition, but which for that very reason was elsewhere unacceptable.
Durkheim went far beyond Spencer in this regard. Spencer’s super-
organic was trammeled by bitter opposition to the enlargement of
government and was ultimately, despite his denial of free will and his
use of an organismic model, perfectly reducible to individual motives
and individual strengths and weaknesses in the “struggle for survival.”

Durkheim’s superorganic is in every way anticipatory of Kroeber’s
famous exposition of the autonomy of the cultural level, and also of
Leslie White’s “culturology.” It suffered however from an unfortunate
idealist and mentalist bias which eventually overwhelmed all of its
virtues and produced a distinct heritage within French anthropology
of concern with the mystical properties of group minds.

469

i



===== PAGE 240 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

REJECTION OF RACISM

Among Durkheim’s basic requirements for a science of social func-
tions was the assumption that sociocultural phenomena could not be
understood as the expression of either psychobiological instincts, or
individual conscious willful choices. No social phenomenon, he argued,
can be placed in indisputable dependence on race since the “most di-
verse forms of organization are found in societies of the same race,
while striking similarities are observed between societies of different
races” (1938:108). Unlike Boas, Durkheim rejected the appeal to
racial factors largely on methodological grounds. Racial determinism is
an evasion of sociological problems whose solution require sociological
method:

In short, when the artistic character of Athenian civilization is
related with such facility to inherited aesthetic faculties, we show
as little insight as did scholars in the Middle Ages when they ex-
plained fire by phlogiston and the effects of opium by its dormi-
tive property [ibid.:109].

REJECTION OF INDIVIDUAL
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS

To defend the autonomy of the social realm, Durkheim in-
verted the accepted relationship between consciousness and sociocul-
tural conditions in a manner which is superficially reminiscent of Marx
standing Hegel on his head. One of his cardinal methodological rules
is that “the determining cause of a social fact should be sought among
the social facts preceding it and not among the states of the individual
consciousness” (ibid.:110). The seeming congruence with Marx is sus-
tained by Durkheim’s description of the relationship between the
population of human actors, their raw biopsychological capacities, and
the materialization of the social forces which act through them and
upon them:

Collective representations, emotions, and tendencies are caused
not by ccrtain states of the consciousnesses of individual§ bL!t
by the conditions in which the social group in its t.otahtyAls
placed. Such actions can, of course, materialize only if the in-
dividual natures are mercly the indeterminate material that ?he
social factor molds and transforms. Their contribution consists

470

18. French Structuralism

exclusively in very general attitudes, in vague and consequently
plastic predispositions which by themselves, if other agents did
not intervene, could not take on the definite and complex forms
which characterize social phenomena [ibid.:106].

Yet there is actually little resemblance between Durkheim’s notions
of sociocultural causality and Marx’s materialism. We see that Durk-
heim juxtaposed individual consciousness with the totality of social
conditions. According to Marx, however, it is not the “totality” of so-
cial conditions which deserves emphasis, but rather the techno-environ-
mental and techno-economic aspects of those conditions. It is true that
Durkheim, like Marx, believed that individual states of consciousness
were molded by social conditions of which the individual remained un-
aware. But what is the nature of these social conditions?

THE NATURE OF SOCIAL FACTS

What most impressed Durkheim was that there appeared to
be a “coercive effect” which social things exerted over individual be-
havior. Indeed, the principal test of a social “thing” was that it could
be shown to have “coercive” power. Therefore, in a manner that Durk-
heim admitted could not be fully understood by science, such things
must have an “existence of their own.”

The phenomenological status which Durkheim attributed to social
things is operationally unacceptable. Although social science cannot
function without vigorously defending the reality of traits, institutions,
patterns, and sociocultural forces, we confront an even greater danger
if the reality in question is operationally divorced from the observation
of the behavior of specific individuals. The solution to this problem
is to base the hierarchy of social things upon a series of constructs or
logico-empirical abstractions. As the levels of abstractions depart fur-
ther from the substratum of the historical content of the behavior-
stream, they nonctheless preserve concrete, “material” reality defined
by the logico-empirical process (cf. pp. 333-34, 304).

One must agree completely with Durkheim when he stressed the
point that the individual manifestations of a sociocultural enuty (such
as a particular instance of a phonemic utterance or a given act of avoid-
ance of one’s mother-in-law) are not to be regarded as social (cultural)
things. From an operational point of view, the idiosyncratic or histori-
cal instance is merely the observational raw material out of which the
categorics of sociocultural discourse are constructed by the community
of observers. But for Durkheim, the separation of the specific individual

471



===== PAGE 241 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

performance from the social thing derives from a dmstif:all).' different
epistemological posture. Individual behavior for Durkheim is r;{thcr a
“reincarnation” or reflection of social entities (1938:7) enjoying an
existence which is independent not only of the concrete expression in
a given individual but also of the observer’s logico-empirical proce-
dures. Thus when Durkheim states that “sociological phenomena can-
not be defined by their universality” and that “a movement repeated
by all individuals is not thereby a social fact,” he intends a dichotomy
for which it is impossible to conceive any operational justification.

The metaphysical enormity of Durkheim’s “social things” shows up
in his willingness to concede the existence of widely distributed habits
acquired by learning which do not reflect or “incarnate” social phe-
nomena. This becomes possible in Durkheim’s logic because the gen-
erality and coercive restraints of such habits owe their existence to
forces “internal” to ourselves, whereas, the generality and coercive re-
straint of genuine social facts arise from the exterior and collective
“consciousness”:

The pressure exerted by one or several bodies on other bodies, or
even on human wills, cannot be confused with that which the con-
sciousness of a group exercises on the consciousnesses of its mem-
bers. . . . It is true that habits, either physical or social, have in
certain respects this same feature. They dominate us anfl i'mpose
beliefs and practices upon us. But they rule us from within, for
they are in every case an integral part of ourself. On the contrary,
social beliefs and practices act on us from without: thus the in-
fluence exerted by them differs fundamentally from the effect of
habit [purkHEIM 1938:1v].

THE ORIGIN OF THE IDEA OF GROUP
MIND

We see therefore that the independent reality which Durk-
heim postulates for social things gains its sui generis status frorr? t}'le
alleged existence of a group mind. Durkheim’s group mind is in
every respect the heir of a mixture of Hegelian and Comteian ideal-
ism.

As we have seen, attempts to confine the Hegelian influence to the
later phases of Durkheim’s career are based on the false dichotomy
between French positivism and German idealism. Yet much of Durk-
heim’s formative period was spent studying philosophy lin Qermany
(cf. ARSONS, 1049:307). It is true that Durkheim’s idealism is purely

472

Y

18. French Structuralism

secular with no trace at all of gods and world spirits, but these fea-
tures are easily dispatched without altering the fundamentals of the
cultural-idealist strategy.

One should perhaps also take into account Durkheim’s own protes-
tations against being identified as an idealist. In the preface to the
first edition of the Rules, Durkheim assures us that his “reasoning
is not at all revolutionary” and that if he is a determinist, he is less
dangerous than those who see “in social phenomena only the results of
unrestrained manipulation, which can in an instant, by a simple dia-
lectical artifice, be completely upset” (DURKHEIM 1938 xxxvili-Xxxix) .
He expresses the fear that his attempt to study social phenomena
objectively will be “judged crude and will possibly be termed ‘ma-
terialistic.”” Yet he assures the reader that “we would more justly
claim the contrary designation.” In the final analysis, however, neither
the idealist nor materialist appellation is the correct one: the “only
designation we can accept is that of ‘rationalist’ ” (ibid.).

French intellectuals have always sought surccase from the idealist/
materialist dilemma by similar displays of learned ambiguity. It will be
recalled that for Comte, positivism was to occupy a neutral ground
between the materialism associated with the Revolution and the
idealism associated with the counterrevolution. In Durkheim and
his successors, this same exaltation of learned ambiguity continued
to amuse the “ins” and bemuse the “outs.”

But it was as futile for Durkheim as it had been for Comte to
pretend that he had found some sort of neutral ground. His postu-
lated superorganic social entity is explicitly modeled after the concept
of the individual’s subjectively experienced “mind.” Social facts are
“collective representations,” that is, ideas experienced by the group
mind and expressed or “reincarnated” in the minds and behavior of
the individual members of the social group. “Collective conscious-
ness” is a deliberate play on the ambiguity of the distinction be-
tween conscience as a subjectively experienced moral force and the
experience of conscious awareness, both of which are incorporated into
the concept of the group mind. Every pore of Durkheim’s theory is
filled with mentalist and idealist images and predilections. If he
transcends the individual psychological level, it is in terms of a

series of psychological assumptions which stamp social things with an
indelible idealist commitment:

- nothing collective can be produced if individual conscious-
nesses are not assumed; but this necessary condition is by itself
insufficient. These consciousnesses must be combined in a certain
way; social life results from this combination and is, consequently,

473



===== PAGE 242 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

explained by it. Individual minds, forming groups by mingling
and fusing, give birth to a being, psychological if you will, but
constituting a psychic individuality of a new sort [ibid.:103].

Despite this imagery, Durkheim’s critics continued to accuse him
of materialism. He was prompted, therefore, to begin his preface to
the second edition of the Rules with a most emphatic denial of
materialist leanings:

‘Whereas we had declared repeatedly that the individual conscious-
ness was for us not matenal, but only a more or less system-
atized aggregate of phenomena, we were charged with realism and
with ontologism. Whereas we had expressly stated and rciterated
that social life is constituted wholly of collective “representa-
tions,” we were accused of eliminating the mental element from
sociology [ibid.:xli].

.. . social phenomena, although immaterial, are nevertheless
real things [ibid.:lvii].

It is thus clear that there is no kernel of truth in Parson’s argument
that “Idealistic strains appear in Durkheim’s thought . . . only at
the latest stage of its development” (PARSONS 1949:307). The further
development of Durkheim’s career brought an intensified commit-
ment to the idealist position already evident in the earliest mono-
graphs.

WHAT CAUSES THE DIVISION OF
LABOR?

It is Durkheim’s answer to this question that is important if
one is to understand the rise of the French and English functionalist
schools, and the powerful attraction that Durkheim’s approach con-
tinues to manifest among cultural anthropologists.

From Adam Smith onward, the explanation of the increase in
the division of labor had been based upon the common sense notion
that greater specialization provided a cheaper and more efficient means
for producing the economic goods upon which men depended for
their sustenance and pleasure. Although the soundness of this es-
sentially economic explanation would seem to be unassailable, the
main purport of Durkheim’s first monograph is to deny its validity
and to substitute in its place an explanation that emphasizes above
all else the functional-causal importance of social solidarity.

To defeat the established view, Durkheim proceeds first to challenge

474

18. French Structuralism

the notion that the division of labor is associated with a general in-
crease in “happiness.” Given the condition of Europe’s masses
toward the end of the nineteenth century, it is not difficult to win
the point that a simple utilitarian pleasure-pain principle does not
suffice. In this connection, we sec that it is no accident that Durk-
heim’s second substantive study (1892) was concerned with suicide—
a direct outcome of his somber rejection of utilitarian doctrine.

The specific polemic is once again directed toward Spencer. The
latter alleges, in effect, “that happiness increases with the productive
power of work” (1933:265). It thus seems to Spencer impossible for
us not to utilize each new method for dividing up the work task and
increasing output. But we know things do not happen in this way,
argues Durkheim. The difficulty is that primitive man, living under
arrangements of mechanical solidarity, cannot be assumed to have any
desire for material abundance. This remarkable assertion is crucial
for all that follows. We have already encountered it in the Boasian
attempt to destroy the economic explanation of cultural evolution.
It leads in Durkheim’s case to the view that productivity is epiphe-
nomenal, that the desire for material abundance is a consequence and
not a cause of the division of labor:

The division of labor appears to us otherwise than it does to
economists. For them, it essentially consists in greater produc-
tion. For us, this greater productivity is only a necessary conse-
quence, a repercussion of the phenomenon. If we specialize, it is
not to produce more, but it is to enable us to live in new condi-
tions of existence that have been made for us [ibid.:275].

That much of the academic power and intellectual prestige of
Durkheim’s school rests upon its rejection of economic determinism
becomes apparent as soon as we turn to the absurd explanation
which Durkheim substituted for that which had satisfied his prede-
cessors. Appealing first to Darwin, Durkheim notes that competition
in the biological world is most fierce among the members of the same
or similar species: “Darwin justly observed that the struggle between
two organisms is as active as they are analogous. Having the same needs
and pursuing the same objects, they are in rivalry everywhere” (ibid.:
266). In human population this rivalry tends to increase in direct
proportion to the rise in what Durkheim calls “social condensation”—
an cffect related in not too clear a fashion to increases in population
size and density. But as the “condensation” progresses, the mechanical
cohesiveness which is associated with a small undifferentiated social

475



===== PAGE 243 =====

—————-—v»

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

mass gives way to the organic principle, and the tendency of the
social organism to break apart or consume itself in fatal internecine
struggle is countered by the rise of organic solidarity. Each break in
the equilibrium of the social mass is resolved by a more developed
division of labor. The division of labor thus emerges as a social
arrangement not for increasing productivity, but for reducing compe-
tition. Its principal effect is to increase the amount of heterogeneity
among the parts of the social organism, thereby multiplying and
intensifying their mutual dependence. In other words, the function
of the division of labor is to preserve social solidarity.

THERE WILL BE NO REVOLUTION

It seems sclf-evident that the historical function of Durk-
heim’s explanation lies in the paramount emphasis which Marx had
also given to internecine rivalry. Both Marx and Durkheim assign
an important role to struggle, but with this difference: social rivalry
for Marx is not about to be solved by the division of labor. There is
to be an intensification rather than a diminution of social conflict.
Social cohesion in Marx’s theories would grow only among the prole-
tariat, the social stratum which is destined to be bound ever closer
together by increasing “mechanical solidarity.” Between the prole-
tariat and the bourgeoisie, that is, between the most differentiated
segments of the social organism, instead of organic solidarity, there
is to be war.

The crudity of both Marx’s and Durkheim’s formulations need
not detain us. It is clear that one is the obverse of the other and that
both suffer from a lack of sensitivity to quantity, refinement of con-
cept, overabundance of conviction, and a lack of data. Between
the under- and overestimation of the composability of class struggle,
there is little choice. That it was Durkheim’s view and not Marx’s
which provided the basis for British and French functionalism is
lamentable, but for quite a different reason. Durkheim’s rejection of
an irreconcilable class struggle went along with the rejection of eco-
nomic explanations—a package whose reason for being resided princi-
pally in the fact that these two things happened to be put together
by Marx. Durkheim’s unique contribution was thus the founding of
a science of culture which could explain sociocultural phenomena
without getting involved in techno-economic causation. Henceforth
it would suffice merely to investigate the manner by which a given
trait or institution contributed to the maintenance of solidarity among
the members of the social organism.

476

18. French Structuralism

SLOUGHING OFF MALTHUS, SPENCER,
AND DARWIN

Durkheim’s commitment to an idealist strategy in the Di-
vision of Labor is obscured by ambiguities associated with the process
of “social condensation.” Since “social condensation” is produced by
an increase in population density, a more general treatment of the
conditions responsible for the division of labor would obviously re-
quire an explanation of demographic changes. That is, if we accept
Durkheim’s argument that the division of labor does not derive its
functional importance from production, we cannot admit the im-
portance of “social condensation” without re-admitting the factors
responsible for production at an even more fundamental level. To
this question of what causes the “social condensation” that produces
the crises of solidarity whose function it is the division of labor’s to
solve, Durkheim pays practically no attention. Eventually, as his
position matured, the process of “social condensation” was forgotten.
His explanations tended more and more to assume the great variety
of techno-economic and techno-environmental systems as givens.
With economic factors held constant, the analysis of ideology and
social structure was carried to a new pitch, while the concept of the
collective consciousness assumed an increasingly more autonomous
role. Thus, in The Rules of the Sociological Method, the growth
in the volume and dynamic density of socicties is mentioned only
peripherally to a discussion which moves toward dismissing concern
with ultimate causality in the physicalist sense (purkHEIM 1938:115fF.).
In Suicide, as Parsons (1949:327) points out, the question of
density and Darwinian competition drops out entirely, never to
be heard from again. Instead, in Suicide, we have a series of
explanations which relate different suicide rates to various intensities
of the mechanical and organic components of the collective conscious-
ness. For example, where the collective consciousness is associated
with mechanical solidarity, altruistic suicides predominate. On the
ther hand, where organic solidarity is more important, anomic sui-
Cld.e resulting from an absence of well-defined “collective represen-
tations” (i.c., rules of behavior) comes to the fore.

With the further maturation of Durkheim’s position, the social
mfhcu, which is after all nothing but a system of ideas in the group
mind, achieves a more and more blatant autonomy with respect to
the material conditions of individual and collective life. Durkheim’s
thinking continues along this line until we come, in his last major

477

i
|
}
i
!



===== PAGE 244 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

work, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, to an affirmation of
the power of collective representations, which returns us in unmis-
takable terms to an idealism patterned after the worst of Hegel's
“geists.”

THE ORIGIN OF FUNCTIONALIST
EXPLANATIONS

The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, Durkheim’s last
major work, is an attempt to discover the “origins” of religion. By
“origin,” Durkheim did not mean simply “first beginning” but rather
“the everpresent causes upon which the most essential forms of
religious thought and practice depend” (1915:8). The fundamental
conclusions reached are that all of the basic concepts associated with
religion, such as god, soul, spirit, and totem, originate in the recurrent
experience by which human beings feel the force and majesty of
the social group. Men collectively invent the basic categories of re-
ligion in order to explain the unseen but felt force of the collective
consciousness. Several other fundamental ideas, such as logical classes,
physical force, space, and time, are also said to owe their origin to a
similar sort of apotheosis or concretization of the group mind. Aside
from mentioning the slight possibility that these suggestions merit
serious consideration from the peint of view of social psychology, we
shall not attempt to evaluate their empirical status. Of more enduring
interest is the kind of explanation they embody. We must note first
of all that there is a lack of concern with the explanation of specific
variations in religious systems. Once the totem or magical rite has
been shown to be functionally compatible or illustrative of certain
universal “elementary” collective “structures,” the explanatory quest
terminates.

In subsequent elaborations of the functional method, among both
the French and British social anthropologists, essentially the same
strategy was to be followed with respect to such ‘“elementary”
principles as the “unity of the sibling” group and other so-called
universal structural-functional “laws.” In the case of Lévi-Strauss the
similarity is even more profound since the French followers of Durk-
heim do mnot hesitate to propose universal “elementary” principles
cast in an overtly psychological idiom. In addition, the French struc-
turalists have, to a greater extent than their English counterparts,
permitted themselves the luxury of ambiguous metaphorical evolu-
tionary sequences in which primitive and derived forms are playfully

478

I ot

18.

French Structuralism

bandied about in a spirit of double entendre, best exemplified, outside
of Durkheim, by eightcenth-century discussions of the origin of so-
ciety in the “social contract.”

TRIUMPH OF MIND OVER MATTER

In this final phase of Durkheim’s career, considerations of
the material conditions such as are implicit in the Division of Labor
are finally and unequivocally overwhelmed. We confront at last
the autonomous power of the “collective representations” to mold
themselves into myriads of specific forms. Such forms are intelligible,
if at all, only in so far as they continue to represent universal
principles of collective psychology. But they are neither predictable
nor retrodictable. It is not merely that society has the power to
construct idcologies in the processes of “constructing itself” (1915:
423) but that being a higher manifestation of “idea” in its own
right, society can construct itself in any image to which it happens to
take a fancy.

Paradoxically, Durkheim continues, in the midst of all this, to
fend off possible accusations of materialism. The latter, it seems, were
brought on by the mere fact that he attributes so little autonomy to
the individual. Tt would almost seem as if Durkheim feared that his
colleagues had not heard that there were differences between Hegel
and Marx:

Therefore it is necessary to avoid seeing in this theory of re-
ligion a simple restatement of historical materialism: that would
be misunderstanding our thought to an extreme degree. In show-
ing that religion is something essentially social, we do not mean
to say that it confines itself to translating into another language
the material forms of society and its immediate vital necessities.
It is true that we take it as evident that social life depends upon
its material foundation and bears its mark just as the mental life
of an individual depends upon his nervous system and in fact his
whole organism. But collective consciousness is something more
than a mere epiphenomenon of its morphological basis. . . . In
order that the former may appear, a synthesis sui generis of par-
ticular consciousnesses is required. Now this synthesis has the
effect of disengaging a whole world of sentiments, ideas and
images which, once born, obey laws all their own. They attract
each other, repel each other, unite, divide themselves, and multi-
Ply though these combinations are not commended and necessi-
tated by the condition of the underlying reality. The life thus
brought into being even enjoys so great an independence that it

479



===== PAGE 245 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

sometimes indulges in manifestations with no purpose or utility
of any sort, for the mere pleasure of affirming itself. We have
shown that this is often precisely the case with ritual activity and
mythological thought [ibid.:423-24].

Another way of expressing this triumph of mind over matter is to
assert the causal priority of ideology. This Durkheim proceeds to
do with the proclamation (validated by nothing more than the tautol-
ogy deriving from his definition of the collective consciousness) that
most great social institutions are the causal products of religious ideas:

In summing up, then, it may be said that nearly all the great
social institutions have been born in religion. Now in order that
these principal aspects of the collective life may have commenced
by being only varied aspects of the religious life, it is obviousl‘y
necessary that the religious life be the eminent form and, as it
were, concentrated expression of the whole collective life. If re-
ligion had given birth to all that is essential in society, it is be-
cause the idea of socicty is the soul of religion [ibid.:418-19].

In a footnote to this passage Durkheim himself draws attention to
the fact that he has not yet systematically examined how economic
activity is governed by religious ideas. He is convinced, howeve'r, that
there is no dearth of connection: Magic enters into economic pro-
cesses; economic value is a sort of power or efficacy; richness confers
mana. Thus, we see that Durkheim’s conception of economics was,
like Lowie’s, contaminated with the emic sense of rules and ideals.
When his pupil Mauss and when Mauss’ pupil Lévi-Strauss turned
their attention to phenomena which have a manifest relation with
the material conditions of habitat and technology, they did so, as we
shall see in a moment, in a fashion which preserved the anti-economic
and antimaterialist commitment with undiminished ardor, resulting
in additional flights of fancy and displays of learned obscurantism.

THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF
CONSCIOUSNESS

It remains to be noted concerning the fate of Durkheim’s
science of society that in the final chapter of The Elementary Forms
the influence of an Hegelian version of idealism is everywhere con-
spicuous. Skeptics should review the evidence as presented by T?lcf)tt
Parsons, who, unlike the writer, detects in this influence a gratlfylr_lg
convergence toward his own formulation of social sci‘ence. 'But,,n‘l
view of the Hegelian heritage which has been identified in Lévi-

480

v—

18. French Structuralism

Strauss, it is of singular importance that the continuity of such an
outlook in and through Durkheim be clearly established. This is
additionally imperative, since the British social anthropologists have
for the most part failed to understand how much their own position
is also based upon an attenuated but nonetheless active and theo-
retically decisive variety of idealism.

We must recall in this connection that for Hegel, history consists
of the world mind working its way into awareness of itself. In Durk-
heim, the world mind is replaced by the collective consciousness,
but the imprint of animistic survivals is unmistakable:

. the collective consciousness is the highest form of the
psychic life, since it is the consciousness of the consciousnesses.
Being placed outide of and above individual and local contingen-
cies, it sees things only in their permanent and essential aspects,
which it crystallizes into communicable ideas. At the same time
that it sees from above, it sees farther; at every moment of time,
it embraces all known reality; that is why it alone can furnish the
mind with the moulds which are applicable to the totality of
things and which make it possible to think of them. It does not
create these moulds artificially; it finds them within itself; it does
nothing but become conscious of them [ibid.:444].

The influence of an Hegelian outlook is also evident in Durkheim’s
approach to the problem of cross-cultural typologies. Durkheim made
almost no progress in this matter because he could not rid himself
of the romantic notion that each country had a soul which main-
tained it as a separate social “species” throughout the vicissitudes
of historical experience. Especially important in this regard is that
the identification of social “species” must eschew dependence upon
taxonomic contrasts derived from material differences:

Since its origin, France has passed through very different forms
of civilization; it began by being agricultural, passed to craft in-
dustry and to small commerce, then to manufacturing, and finally
to large-scale industry. Now, it is impossible to admit that the
same collective individuality can change its species three or four
times. A species must define itself by more constant characteris-
tics. The economic state, technological state, etc. present phe-
nomena too unstable and complex to furnish the basis of a
classification. It is even very probable that the same industrial,
scientific, and artistic civilization can be found in societies whose
hereditary constitution is very different. Japan may in the future
borrow our arts, our industry, even our political organization; it
will not cease to belong to a different social species from France
and Germany [DURKHEIM 1938:88n].

481



===== PAGE 246 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Everything about this passage is backwards or standing on its head.
France, a “collective individuality,” is declared unique prior to the
statement of the logico-empirical procedures by which entities in
the domain of sociocultural phenomena are to be identified and
classified. Its techno-cconomic base keeps changing, argues Durkheim,
yet France remains; therefore the essence of France must reside else-
where. That is, Durkheim starts with an operationally undefined
and undefinable entity and systematically casts out all the opera-
tionally definable concepts which contradict the basic idealist posture.
And on what does this idea of France rest if not on the emic con-
viction of Frenchmen that they are different from everyone else and
that France is eternal. Thus we end up with a France that is like
Japan in everything but “spirit,” with a national “geist” that remains
the same no matter how much change occurs. French anthropology
continues to pay a high price for this muddled way of thinking.

MARCEL MAUSS

Mauss was the most prominent of the small, closeknit
group of scholars who collaborated with Durkheim at the turn of
the century, especially in the publication of the journal L’Année
Sociologique from 1898 to 1912. The group included Henri Hubert,
Henri Beuchat, Maxime David, and Robert Hertz. After Durkheim’s
death in 1917, and as a result of the heavy toll taken by World
War I on his younger colleagues, Mauss donned the mantle of leader-
ship. He resumed publication of L’Année Sociologique in 1924, and
with Lucien Lévy-Bruhl and Paul Rivet, founded the Institute of
Ethnology of the University of Paris in 1926. As Seth Leacock (1954:
59) has noted, “Throughout his life, Mauss considered himself a
follower of Durkheim and never knowingly violated any of Durk-
heim’s teachings.” Of special interest in this connection is the empha-
sis given by Mauss to explanations of large domains of sociocultural
phenomena through the identification of archetypical “collective rep-
resentations.”

ELEMENTARY FORMS

Mauss attributed the worldwide manifestations of sacrificial
phenomena to the collective idea of a sacred domain or realm. The
sacrificial victim is the medium through which communication with
this realm is achieved (Mauss and HuBERT 1899). Later the explanation

482

18. French Structuralism

of magic was sought in the idea of mand, a collective belief in an im-
personal force accounting for the efficacy of magical as opposed to
religious behavior (maAuss and HUBERT 19o4). In his most influential
work, L'Essai Sur le Don (The Gift), to which we shall return in a
moment, Mauss used the idea of “reciprocity” to explain such appar-
ently qiverse phenomena as the potlatch and kula.

Lévi-Strauss has pointed out the similarity between Mauss’ modus
operandi and Durkheim’s method of reducing complex phenomena
to lunderlying elements: social bonds to organic and mechanical
solidarity; suicide to the egoistic, altruistic, and anomic varieties:
and god and force to the apotheosis of the social group. To thé
unsympathetic critic, this procedure is, at best, an attempt to classify
together a melange of ideas and practices on the basis of what may
be their most trivial resemblances; but for Lévi-Strauss such idea‘s
reach behind superficial differences and similarities to the “hidden,
fundamental elements which are the true components of the phenomz
ena” (LEVISTRAUSS 1045a:524). “This analytical work, trying to
reduce the concrete complexity of the data . . . into more simple
and elementary structures is still the fundamental task of sociology”

(ibid.:525).

FULGURATING INTUITION

) ) Lévi-Strauss” lavish praise of Mauss is instructive for the
light it sheds on the professional ideal type after which the French
school had modeled itself. Mauss is depicted as having “a bold imagi-

nation,” “a genius-like feeling of the social stuff,” and “unlimited
knowledge.”

In }n's work, and still more in his teaching, unthought-of com-
parisons flourish. While he is often obscure by the constant use of
antitheses, short-cuts and apparent paradoxes which, later on,
prove to be the result of a deeper insight, he gratifies his listener,
suddenly, with fulgurating intuitions, providing the substance for
months of fruitful thinking. In such cases, one feels that one has
reached the bottom of the social phenomenon, and has, as he says
somewhere, “hit the bed-rock” [ibid.:527)

Fulgurating intuitions are, of course, the hallmark of Lévi-Strauss’
own dazzling discoveries of hidden clementary structures. But the
bed rock” in both cases is scarcely the kind of stuff which bruises
heads or which can be used to build pyramids.

483



===== PAGE 247 =====

. ol

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

MAUSS GIFT TO LEVI-STRAUSS

Lévi-Strauss’ magnum opus, (Les Structures Elémentaires de
la Parenté (The Elementary Structures of Kinship), reveals the influence
of Mauss and Durkheim in its title, recalling at once Durkheim’s
search for the “elementary forms” of religion. But Lévi-Strauss him-
self has pointed out the greater strength of the inspiration transmitted
to him by Mauss:

Few people have been able to read I'Essai Sur le Don (The Gift)
without experiencing the gamut of emotions described by
Malebranche upon his first reading of Descartes: the beating of
the heart, the boiling up within the head, the mind overcome by
the certainty as yet undefinable but overpowering, of assisting in
a decisive event in the evolution of science [LEvI-sTRAUSS 1950:
Xxxii].

What is this great event? Lévi-Strauss praises The Gift because Mauss
treats the manifestations of gift-giving as a “total social fact” wherein
“all kinds of institutions find simultancous expression: religious, legal,
moral, and economic.”

Everything in a society—cven the most special things—every-
thing is above all a function, and is functioning. Nothing can be
understood except in relation to everything else, to the complete
collectivity and not simply to particular parts. There is no social
phenomenon which is not an integral part of the social whole
[ibid.:139].

Yet according to Lévi-Strauss, this apparently useless truism ushers
in a new and superior form of functional analysis. Perhaps the reason
for this accolade lies in the connection which Lévi-Strauss draws
between “total social fact” and Mauss’ developing rapprochement
with psychology. Prior to the publication of The Gift, Mauss (1924)
had expressed an interest in bringing psychological and sociological
studies into closer proximity than Durkheim had deemed advisable.
Although it is difficult to isolate the portions of The Gift that are
explicitly dependent upon this new outlook, there are many passages
which could be construed as being concerned with the conscious
and unconscious meanings of gift-giving from the individual actor’s
point of view. With his insistence upon a sharp separation between
the collective and individual mind, Durkheim had failed to give

484

18. French Structuralism

proper emphasis to the possibility of understanding social phenomena
from the inside, so to speak, of the minds of the individual partici-
pants. This corresponds, writes Lévi-Strauss, to a general fault of
science whereby the subjective properties are left to one side while
we seek explanations in purely objective terms:

When Mauss speaks of total social facts, he implies that on the
contrary this facile and convenient dichotomy is inadmissible for
sociology. . . . In order to understand a social fact it is neces-
sary to comprehend it totally, that is, from without, as a thing of
which however, the subjective understanding, both conscious and
unconscious, which we have of it is an integral part; as if, being
inescapably human, we were to live the fact as the native does,
instead of merely observing it as the ethnographer [LEvi-sTRAUSS
1950:Xxviii].

In a more modern idiom, which I have had several previous occasions
to employ and which is the subject of a separate chapter, Durkheim
was not “emic” enough for Lévi-Strauss.

UNCONSCIOUS TELEOLOGY OF THE
MIND

Mauss was showing the way toward “elementary structure”
not grasped by Durkheim because the master too rigidly excluded
the psychological meanings of social facts. It scarcely secms possible
to credit Mauss with the dubious achievement of turning French
social anthropology back into its subjective rut. That there was a
convergence of both Mauss and Durkheim toward essentially psy-
chological categorizations is revealed in their collaborative efforts in
the study of religion, which long preceded the writing of The Ele-
mentary Forms of the Religious Life. Credit Mauss with an intensifica-
tion of a trend rather than with a sharp break.

Elsewhere, Lévi-Strauss is more explicit concerning the particular
kind of emic intensification for which Mauss is to be praised; it is
the kind, of course, which Lévi-Strauss employs as the basis of his
own analytical posture. It is not merely that Mauss is aware more
than Durkheim of the relationship between sociological and psy-
chological phenomena. It is rather that Mauss states that although
sociology is a kind of psychology specifically distinct from individual
psychology, “it is nonetheless true that one may pass from the facts
of individual consciousness to collective representations through a
continuous series of intermediaries” (MAUSS 1924, quoted in Livi-

485



===== PAGE 248 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

STRAUSS 1045:529). What this boils down to, as we shall have
ample occasion to witness, is that Mauss is to be admired for his
realization that there might be deep, hidden inner “structures” in
the human mind, which are causally prior to collective representations
as objective social facts. According to Lévi-Strauss, Durkheim took
what appears to be at first glance a strangely intransigent stand
against such a possibility. But when he first formulated the concept
of the collective consciousness, it was only natural that Durkheim
was unable to grasp how social facts might escape the control of
individual minds and at the same time be, to any significant extent,
projections of individual consciousness. The reason for this is that the
fields of depth psychology and structural linguistics had not yet
achieved their impact:

Modem sociologists and psychologists solve such problems by
calling upon the activity of the unconscious mind; but at the time
when Durkheim was writing the main results of modern psychol-
ogy and linguistics were lacking. This explained why Durkheim
struggled between what he conceived—and this was already a con-
siderable progress upon the thinking of the late 1gth century as
illustrated, for instance, by Spencer—as an irreducible antinomy:
the blindness of history, and the finalism of conscience. Between
the two, there is of course the unconscious teleology of the mind

[ibid.:518].

The special achievement of The Gift is related to this reorientation
of functionalism toward “unconscious mental teleology.” What really
set Lévi-Strauss’ heart beating and head boiling in The Gift was that
Mauss had achieved the threshold of a specific discovery concerning the
“unconscious teleology of the mind” which was to provide the basis for
The Elementary Structures of Kinship and for the entire pattern of
French “structural” anthropology.

TO GIVE, TO RECEIVE, AND TO REPAY

As T have already indicated, Mauss had endeavored to reduce
the worldwide varieties of gift-giving practices, including potlatch, the
Kula, Melanesian and Indian feasting and festivals, to their “elemen-
tary form.” In conformity with the standard practice of Durkheim’s
school, Mauss is able to discern in these apparently disparate phe-
nomena an underlying principle which is supposed to render them,
at one fell stroke, intelligible. All of these phenomena are examples
of an “archaic” form of exchange in which there is a “circulation of

486

g

18. French Structuralism

objects side by side with the circulation of persons and rights”
(MAUSS 1954:45). This circulation is maintained neither by barter,
purchase, nor economic utility, but rather by the threefold obligation
deeply ingrained in the human mind to give, to receive, and to
repay (ibid.:37ff.).

All these institutions reveal the same kind of social and psy-
chological pattern. Food, women, children, possessions, charms,
land, labour, services, religious offices, rank—everything is stuff to
be given away and repaid. In perpetual interchange of what we
may call spiritual matter, comprising men and things, these ele-
ments pass and repass between clans and individuals, ranks, sexes
and generations [ibid.:11-12].

In short these are all expressions of the principle of reciprocity
upon which the solidary relations between individuals and groups
so greatly depend.

We should note in passing that The Gift is thus an outstanding
example of the use of familiar ethnographic cases of apparently
irrational management of resources and labor under ideological or
mentalistic pressure. Despite Mauss’ talk about viewing social facts
in their total functional context, and despite his lip service to the
“economic” function, the essay is made possible only by critical
lacunae which promote the highest tolerance for wrenching economic
behavior out of a structural and dynamic context. Dependence upon
the standard anti-economic analysis of Kula and potlatch is es-
pecially diagnostic. Mauss™ interpretation of the Kula never rises
above the fateful decision made by Malinowski not to place the Kula
in the context of “ordinary trade” in which admittedly its principal
“sociological” significance resided. But this is a theme which requires
more extended treatment and to which we shall turn in Chapter 19.

In the meantime, Mauss’ misuse of the potlatch should be obvious
from our previous discussion of the re-evaluation of this material.
Mauss’ remark that “It is only our Western societies that quite re-
cently turned man into an economic animal” (ibid.:74) is typical of
the “emicization” of techno-environmental and techno-economic
phenomena.

EMICS AND ECONOMICS

- To jump ahead of the story, it is interesting to note how
Levx-St_rauss, who again pays lip service to economic functions, follows
Mauss into a complete misunderstanding of the difference between the

487



===== PAGE 249 =====

———-__ﬁ-‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory M

motives which impel an individual to behave in a particular way during
the processes of production, distribution, and consumption, and the
functional-causal systemic reasons for such behavior. In The Elementary
Structures of Kinship, Lévi-Strauss elaborates Mauss’ suggestion that
gift-giving at Christmastime is a modern proof of the strength of the
reciprocal principle. With amusing references to his own experiences as
a culture-shocked Frenchman in New York, Lévi-Strauss likens the
frenzy, competitiveness, and anxiety of the American holiday season to
the fiercest of Kwakiutl potlatches.

The comparison of course is perfectly apt on the psychological
level, but one does not have to be a Marxist to sense that there is
another dimension to our Christmas madness. Why is an intelligence,
so subtle in other respects, unable to penetrate to the not-so-deep
functions of Christmas purchases in an economy whose productive
capacity has raced ahead of the power to buy and consume? It may
be “irrational” for Americans to crowd each other over the tinsel
and ribbon at Macy’s gift-wrapping counter, but the 25 percent of
United States retail sales, for which Christmas shopping now accounts,
have more serious consequences than tired feet.

This criticism must be distinguished from rejection of the hu-
manistically valuable insight which can be derived from comparing
the respective sentiments of Kwakiutl and Americans when  they
exchange gifts. Thus, one does not object to a comparison between
potlatch and Christmas shopping or potlatch and the exchange of
wines in cheap French restaurants, if it is made clear that these
comparisons are merely intended to bring about a greater degree of
insight into the “native point of view.” In replying to J. F. Revel’s
criticism of his method, Lévi-Strauss has indeed invoked just such a
defense:

When, to Revel's great displeasure, I interpret the exchange of
wine in the restaurants of southern France in terms of social
prestations my primary aim is not to explain contemporary cus-
toms by means of archaic institutions but to help the reader, a
member of a contemporary society, to rediscover, in his own ex-
perience and on the basis of either vestigial or embryonic prac-
tices, institutions that would otherwise remain unintelligible to
him. The question, then, is not whether the exchange of wine is a
survival of the potlatch, but whether, by means of this compar-
ison, we succeed better in grasping the feelings, intentions, and
attitudes of the native involved in a cycle of prestations [1963a:338].

But Lévi-Strauss’ theories concerning the expressions of the principle
of reciprocity have been presented by himself and others as relevant

488

to explanations of sociocultural differences and similarities. That task
cannot be solved by means of psychedelic “trips” in which we
achieve the experience of thinking and feeling like a “native.” Al-
though psychic communion may indeed constitute the best result of
the French structural school, a much more ambitious program has
been announced.

THE PROPHET S PROPHET

For Lévi-Strauss, the grand achievement of the Essai Sur le
Don was that it pointed the way toward the understanding of social
life in terms of cycles of reciprocity involving the exchange of
valuables. It is difficult to know how much of what Lévi-Strauss was
able to build upon the foundation provided by Mauss actually was
foreshadowed by Mauss’ thought. The Gift is an extraordinarily dis-
organized book, as Lévi-Strauss himself admits. According to Lévi-
Strauss, Mauss’ role was rather that of a prophet: “He stopped at the
border of vast possibilities like Moses conducting his people to the
very edge of a promised land upon whose splendor he would never
gaze” (ibid.:xxxvii). But at the decisive point in his journey, Mauss
is said to have been distracted by the New Zealand Maori’s‘explana—
tion of reciprocity in terms of hau. This concept credits a gift with a
kind of transferable spirit which must be returned through the me-
dium of a counter gift in order to avoid harm to the receiver. Mauss
was trying to use hau to explain reciprocity as he had used mana and
sacre to explain magic and sacrifice. But, says Lévi-Strauss, hau is
nothing but a native theory, reflecting the underlying structural truth
without exposing it. “Reciprocity” is the concept which will con-
duct us to the underlying mental structure. And this is the task to
which Lévi-Strauss devotes himself in his major work.

The Elementary Structures of Kinship is unquestionably the supreme
accomplishment of French anthropology. Neither Durkheim nor
Mauss was in a position to make use of the ethnographic literature
that had accumulated by the time Lévi-Strauss embarked upon the
completion of the journey to the promised land. No one before him
in the French social sciences could match the combination of literate
ergdition, in the grand manner, plus extensive firsthand knowledge of
primitive tribal groups (based on his fieldwork in Brazil during the
late 1930s).

'1_1}16 effectiveness of cultural anthropology, measured in terms of
an intellectual influence out of all proportions to the size of its pro-
fessional membership, undoubtedly relates to the juxtaposition of

489



===== PAGE 250 =====

e

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 18. French Structuralism

ivory tower and grass hut. This has been a formidable combination
everywhere; but in France, the art of sociological speculation had
flourished well into the 1930’s. As one of the first French anthropolo-
gists who knew what it was like to gather data by living among
primitives, Lévi-Strauss spoke with an authority few in France could
challenge. On the other hand, in turning to confront the field-hard-
ened professionalism of the English functionalists and the American
Boasians, it was his Gallic erudition that frequently placed him at an
advantage.

THE GIFT OF WOMEN

The contribution of The Elementary Structures of Kinship
is the application of Mauss’ suggestions concerning the circulation
of a particular kind of valuable to the explanation of incest prohibi-
tions, preferential marriages, and the principal varicties of kinship
groupings. The valuable in question, merely lumped by Mauss, along
with arm bands, feathers, and yams, is the most precious gift which one
group can give another, namely, women. The fundamental phenome-
non underlying all matrimonial systems is seen as resulting from the
prohibition of incest and is always the same: “that is, starting from the
moment that I prohibited the use of a woman to myself, who thus be-
comes available for another man, there is somewhere, a man who re-
nounces a woman who then becomes disposable for me” (LEvI-sTRAUSS
1949:65). The function of incest prohibition is thus to compel the
reciprocal exchange of women. From this point onward, the study of
kinship resolves itself essentially into the analyses and classification of
the various systems of women-exchange, which are more or less implicit
in the gamut of institutional arrangements that regulate descent, mar-
riage, and intergroup relations. Given Lévi-Strauss’ intellectual pedi-
gree, it is not surprising that at several critical junctures, equivocation
and ambiguity overwhelm the often brilliant and always ingenious
explication. At the very outset, for example, there is the question of
the function of reciprocity. On the one hand, following Durkheim’s
master strategy and Mauss’ specific suggestion, we encounter the
theme that reciprocity is the ancient and continuing condition for
social solidarity in groups larger than the nuclear family. But what
are the rcasons for having socially solidary units larger than the
nuclear family? Evidently, if the gift of women brings people closer
together, fathers and sons would benefit from such an exchange.

490

RENUNCIATION OF SURVIVAL-VALUE
THEORY

Although Lévi-Strauss cites E. B. Tylor’s famous aphorism
concerning the choice between marrying out and dying out (ibid.:
53), the factor of intergroup competition and differential survival is
consistently ignored or underplayed.

It is difficult to share Homans and Schneider’s (1955:17) enthu-
siasm with respect to this unfortunate choice: “He does not use, and
in this we think him wise, a survival-value theory.” It is precisely
because of this strategic error that Lévi-Strauss ends up with a theory
incapable of explaining specific cultural differences and similarities.
Instead of considerations of survival, we are treated to a number of
vague suggestions concerning advantages of a secondary or tertiary
order: social solidarity, the advantage to the group of being able
to control the distribution of women (LEVISTRAUSS 1949:55-56), and
the sexual advantage to the individual of a larger circle of women
from which to choose (ibid.:52). By not concerning himself with
differential survival effects, Lévi-Strauss is able to ignore the rela-
tionships between social structure and productivity, demography,
and warfare in bringing about cultural adaptations.

APPEAL TO THE STRUCTURE OF THE
MIND

In keeping with his praise of Mauss’ “total social facts,” our
author posits, side by side with the sociocultural advantages of re-
ciprocity, a fundamental universal psychological need for gift-giving
and gift-receiving. He argues that historical or geographical studies
would not contribute to the explanation of the basic forms of reci-
procity as embodied in the nuclear constellation of incest categories
and their expression in a simple moiety organization: In order to
comprehend these phenomena, “one must appeal to certain funda-
chntal structures of the human mind” (ibid.:108). The main

structures” in question are based on a dialectic between “self and
others.” It is this opposition which is resolved by the idea of reciproc-
ity. To establish the universality of the opposition and its mode of
resolution, Lévi-Strauss devotes an entire chapter to psychological
studies of children. He concludes that the aptitude for }ecipmcity
is a basic part of the human child’s quest for psychological security.

491



===== PAGE 251 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

It would be pointless to evaluate the psychological evidence and the
use to which it is put. Let it suffice to say that there is no better
example of the futility of psychological reductionism. This search
for elementary mental “structure” is nothing but a return to the
practice of explaining sociocultural phenomena by means of con-
veniently posited instincts. For a universal instinctual dread of
sleeping with one’s mother, Lévi-Strauss substitutes a universal men-
tal duality of self and other. The methodological error is identical.
If exogamic phenomena are the result of an instinct, why are they
so diverse? And if reciprocity is so fundamental to the human psyche,
why do we have the ancient and contemporary condition of the
opulant and powerful haves (possessing, among other valuables,
more than their share of women) and the miserable have nots? In
what way is the concept of reciprocity an improvement over the
Rousseauan conviction that man in his savage state is a noble crea-
ture?

CARTESIANISM

It should be obvious that in order to analyze the variants of
marriage and descent as exchange systems, the positing of a sub-
conscious panhuman mental “structure” goveming reciprocity is
entirely superfluous. The importance attributed to the mental sub-
structure of reciprocity is intelligible only in relation to the history
of the French school. Looking back to Mauss and Durkheim, it
reveals the devotion to a method which depends upon finding col-
lective archetypes or mental common denominators. Looking ahead, it
provides a mid-career manifestation of what looms more and more
important in Lévi-Strauss’ later development. For, as we shall see,
there is a progressively more intense commitment to the discovery of
the mental substratum of which social life is the material embodi-
ment. In this regard, one of the most interesting specialties of the
French tradition is the lingering influence of a kind of Cartesian
rationalism. Cartesian mental structures differ from those which Freud,
Jung, and other depth psychologists were convinced lay at the bot-
tom of social behavior. The relevant components are the structures
of thought rather than the structures of fecling. If emotions are
taken into consideration, they are reduced to mathematized plus
and minus qualities. Lévi-Strauss’ picture of the human psychological
Jandscape is thus noteworthy for its disregard of the biopsychological,
emotional, and affective drives and instincts. Hunger, sex, fear, love,
are present, but they seem to be peripheral. More important for the

492

v‘

18. French Structuralism

French structuralist program is the basic propensity of the human
mind to build logical categories by means of binary contrasts. For
Lévi-Strauss such oppositions or dualities lie at the bottom of large
portions if not the totality of sociocultural phenomena.

At this point, a fascinating confluence of sources occurs. On the
one hand, binary oppositions suggest the dialectical processes as formu-
lated by Hegel and passed on by Marx. The work of Lévi-Strauss
is indeed everywhere pervaded with a dialectic mode of presenta-
tion: first the superficial facts, then the hidden negation, and
finally the dazzling insight into a new and more fundamental
reality. Lévi-Strauss has pointedly sought to achieve some sort of
identification with Marx and has consistently promoted his own work
as being compatible with the Marxist tradition. This claim, which I
shall refute, will be examined at another juncture. Let us take
notice, first, of the other methodological world with which the con-
cept of binary opposition joins. By his own admission, the greatest
influence upon his method has been the development of linguistics
and the convergence of linguistics and cybernetics toward a general
science of communication. It is in the work of the Prague linguistic
circle, founded by N. Trubetzkoy and passed on to Lévi-Strauss by
R. Jakobson, while they were both teaching at the New School, that
the main inspiration for Lévi-Strauss’ notions of binary contrast
analysis has its roots.

THE LINGUISTIC MODEL

The appeal of a linguistic model for general sociocultural
analysis is by no means restricted to Lévi-Strauss. The remarkable
convergence of French structuralism and the rise of the ethno-
semantic approach in the United States is important enough to war-
rant treatment in a separate chapter. For the moment we shall confine
our attention to the profound effect upon Lévi-Strauss of the success
achieved by the Prague school in using the principle of distinctive
feature contrast. A familiarity with general principles will suffice for
an understanding of the school’s impact on Lévi-Strauss’ thought.
The great accomplishment of Trubetzkoy, Jakobson, and their fol-
lowers was to demonstrate the systemic nature of the set of phono-
logical contrasts employed by each language in building its repertory
of significant sounds. The structure of such a system cannot be
described by a simple linear catalogue of the significant sounds; the
structure consists rather of the matrix or network of oppositions in
which binary groupings of sound differences take their position in a

493



===== PAGE 252 =====

——————__—_v—ﬁf

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

multidimensional space. By viewing phonological repertories in this
perspective, the apparently infinite variety of sound specialties charac-
teristic of the world’s languages is reduced to a small number of
systems of contrast in which general categories of contrast substitute
for specific phones (e.g, consonants versus vowels and voiced
versus unvoiced features). This discovery of the deeper structure
underlying surface appearances provides the model scientific achieve-
ment toward the cmulation of which Lévi-Strauss had already turned
his energies during the preparation of his study of kinship. But the
advent of structural linguistics constitutes for Lévi-Strauss a scien-
tific revolution comparable to that which flowed from Copernicus or
from the development of nuclear physics.

Three basic shifts in emphasis are involved. The study of conscious
phenomena is to give way to the study of their “unconscious infra-
structure.” Second, terms or items are not to be treated as inde-
pendent entities; the basis of analysis must become the relationship
between terms or items. Third, general laws in the form of necessary
or cross-culturally valid invariant relationships are to be exposed, over
against the assumption of random and arbitrary concatenations. A
fourth shift, exposited by the linguist Trubetskoy in Lévi-Strauss’
paraphrase, is the demonstration of concrete systems in terms of
specific cases, as opposed to mere abstract theorizing concerning the
systemic nature of phonological phenomena (LEVE-STRAUSS 1963:33).
This last part of the revolution would appear to be either redundant
or trivial with respect to the others, at least as far as applications to
extralinguistic analysis is concerned.

It would appear that the relevance of the linguistic structural model
to the study of kinship had been worked out by Lévi-Strauss sometime
during the preparation of The Elementary Structures of Kinship.
Not until the last chapter is there a sustained discussion of the
similarities between the search for the mental structures which underly
kinship systems and the progress made by linguistics in the same
direction (611fF.). The book constitutes a bridge between a period in
which the characteristic source of structure is found in social soli-
darity to one in which structure is dominated by the distinctive
feature contrasts of the linguistic model. At least this hypothesis
helps in understanding some of the ambiguities of the presentation.

MOTHER’S BROTHER/SISTER’S SON

The clearest exposition of the relevance of structural lin-
guistics to the study of kinship appears in an article published in
Word (1945b). Here Lévi-Strauss attacks the famous problem of the

494

18. French Structuralism

mother’s brother/sister’s son relationship in order to demonstrate
the characteristics of structural as opposed to other brands of socio-
cultural analysis. The regnant interpretation (discussed at length in
thc‘ following chapter) was that of Radcliffe-Brown: in patrilineal
socicties, mother is an indulgent figure with whom her brother is
identified; father is an authoritarian figure, with whom his sistelr
is identified. The trouble with this analysi évi-Strauss observes, is
that it “arbitrarily isolates particular elements of a global struct’ure
which must be treated as a whole” (vLévisTrauss 1963a:41; orig
1945b). This larger system (on the analogy with a l:mguage’s’ com:
plete system of phonological contrasts) should include not only
mother’s brother/sister’s son and father/son but also brother/sister
and husband/wife. The reason for this modification, as expounded at
ler_lgth in The Elementary Structures of Kinship, is that the relation-
ships in question constitute the fundamental “unit of kinship” which
results from the incest prohibition and the exchange of women:

The primitive and irreducible character of the basic unit of
kIﬂ.Shlp, as we have definited it, is actually a direct result of the
universal presence of an incest taboo. This is really saying that in
human society a man must obtain a woman from another man
wh? gives him a daughter or a sister. Thus we do not need to ex-
plain how the maternal uncle emerged in the kinship structure.
He does not emerge—he is present initially. Indeed, the presence
of the matcrnal uncle is a necessary precondition for the structure
to exist. The crror of traditional anthropology, like that of tradi-
tional linguistics, was to consider the terms, and not the relations
between the terms [1949:46].

THE LAW OF NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE
KINSHIP RELATIONS

In order to understand the avunculate one must penetrate
to the systemic relationships which “organically link” brother/sister,
husband/wife, father/son, and mother’s brother/sister’s son. This
penetration is facilitated by grouping together free and familiar rela-
tions under one rubric (4 ) and relations of hostility, antagonism, or
reserve under its opposite (—). According to Lévi-Strauss there is a

'.]aw” which limits the possible combinations of negative and posi-
tive relations as follows:

. . . the relation between maternal uncle and nephew is to the
relation between brother and sister as the relation between father
and son is to that between husband and wife. Thus if we know
one pair of relations, it is always possible to infer the other [ibid.:42].

495



===== PAGE 253 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

As Sahlins (1966:134) points out, this does not amount, as one
might expect from a literal acceptance of the “law,” to a decisive
limitation on possibilities, given one relationshp out of four. In-
stead, we must know two of the relationships in order to predict
the other two. For example, if father/son is positive, husband/wife
may be either positive or negative, and at the same time, brother/
sister may be either negative or positive. Only if we know the
sign for both father/son and husband/wife or both uncle/nephew
and brother/sister can we complete the paradigm. The possibilities
as given in Lévi-Strauss’ examples are as follows:

Trobriand Siuai Cherkess Tonga
uncle/nephew — - + +
bro/si - + + —
fa/so + + - —
hu/wi + — — +

It would be pointless at this juncture to bring up the issue of
whether the relationships in question can in fact be reduced to
simple positive and negative contrasts. In real life as a minimum
acquaintance with the phenomena of ambivalence would suggest,
all the people involved in the formula tend to have, as we say, “mixed
feelings” about each other. But let this be a secondary consideration
for the moment (in Chapter 20, the inability of the linguistic model
to cope with structural ambiguity will receive due emphasis). Yet
even if one accepts the schematization into binary contrasts, we are
left with a dilemma which is characteristic of the structural approach
as embodied not only in the article under consideration but through-
out the rest of Lévi-Strauss’” work, including his treatment of kinship
systems in The Elementary Structures of Kinship. Exposed mental
structures can only explain similarities; they cannot explain similarities
and differences: “. . . to say that one society presents some combina-
tion of main contrasting characteristics and another society some other
combination is not very satisfying” (saHLINS 1966:134). What we
want to know is why the Trobriands have the minus, minus, plus,
plus rather than some other pattern; why they are matrilineal and
avunculocal; why they have exogamous sibs and do not have sections;
and so forth. Now Lévi-Strauss is not unaware of this difficulty; indeed,
he attempts to meet it head on, but with results that are not worthy
of his intellect. If the mother’s brother is part of the kinship “atom,”
he asks, why do we not find the avunculate at all times and places?
His answer is that other factors intervene, factors whose relationship
to the theory in question cannot be defined:

496

v-’

18. French Structuralism

Let us point out, first, that the kinship system does not have
the same importance in all cultures. For some cultures it provides
the active principle regulating all or most of the social relation-
ships. In other groups, as in our own society, this function is
cither absent altogether or greatly reduced. In still others, . . .
it is only partially fulfilled. The kinship system is a language,
and a socicty may prefer other modes of c,:(prcssion and action.
From the viewpoint of the anthropologist this means that in deal-
ing with a specific culture we must always ask a preliminary ques-
tion: Ts the system systematic? Such a question, which” seems
absurd at first, is absurd only in relation to language; for lan-
guage is the semantic system par excellence; it cannot but signify,
and exists only through signification. On the contrary, this ques-
tion must be rigorously examined as we move from the study of
language to the consideration of other systems which also claim to
have semantic functions, but whose fulfillment remains partial,
fragmentary, or subjective, like, for example, social organization,
art, and so forth [1963a:47—48]

The immense latitude of interpretation which this set of qualifica-
tions confers upon those seeking to confirm the validity of the “law”
of negative and positive relations should be obvious. Here we have
the perfect methodological analogue to Merton’s “self-fulfilling proph-
ecy”: only the corroborative cases are acceptable as evidence. Given

this privilege, what structural subtlctics cannot be made to obey a
convenient hypothesis? ’

THE EMPEROR'S NEW LAMP

) Because of the fact that the entities with which Lévi-Strauss
Is concerned in the final analysis are mental structures—what to
Durkheim were collective representations, and what are best simply
called “ideas”—there spreads over the entire corpus of his work a
pargl)'sis of reality whose ultimate consequences we shall have oc-
casion to describe at length. In conformity with his interpretation of
the linguistic model, the surface of events is always misleading; the
structural reality lies beneath and is never accessible to direct mea-
surement. As Sahlins puts it, “what is apparent is false and what is
hidden from perception and contradicts it is true” (saHLINS 1966:
134). -Now, this is a perfectly respectable and, indeed, a vital as-
sumption, provided that there are concrete, material expressions,
direct or indirect, by which the underlying structure issues forth into
some sort of material embodiment. To employ an analogy: if a genie
stays in the lamp and never comes out to do anythiné which his

497



===== PAGE 254 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

master tells him to do, does the genie exist? Yes, argues our 1‘\‘laddin.
Since the essence of what’s in the bottle is ﬂﬂfhll'.lg but a mentgl
structure,” what right has one to expect that rubbing the lamp will

produce a concrete result?

For a theory like ours, which makes certain logical structurcslthg
fundamental basis for understanding matrimouia! customs,v ¥t is
not a matter of indifference that this structure is often visible,
in systems where it has not concretely materialized [LEVI-STRAUSS

1949:184].

STATISTICAL AND MECHANICAL
MODELS

The distinction between “mechanical” and “statis.tical”
models is related to an immense debate centering on the reality of
certain phenomena which are of central sigrliﬁcapc.e in The Eleminifnly
Structures of Kinship. According to Hugo Nutini (1965:716), “Lévi-
Strauss’ most distinctive and important contribution to the t}'leory of
social structure was his dichotomizing of models into mcchamcalAalnd
statistical.” Nutini has to admit, however, that Itévi—S'trauss' exposition
is “not altogether clear.” The definition of the two kinds of models as
set forth by Lévi-Strauss is as follows:

A model the elements of which are on the same scale as the
phenomena will be called a “mechanical model”; when the
elements of the model are on a different scale, we shall be deal-
ing with a “statistical model” [1963a:283].

As Nutini demonstrates by an analysis of examples provided by‘Lléw-
Strauss, the distinction involved is actually quite simp]e-: statistical
models must reflect the frequencies of events, me.chamcal models
are free to ignore such frequencies. Models of marriage systems pro-
vide the best illustration. Let us follow Nutini’s hypothetical ex'amplcl:
in two societies, X and Y, the frequency of polygynous marriages is
10 percent. Yet in X, the ideal cultural standard is monogamy, while
in Y, the ideal cultural standard is polygyny. What to do?

First, we must construct a mechanical model of polygyny‘for so-
ciety X and a mechanical model of monogamy for society Y.
Second, we subordinate a statistical model of monogamy to the
mechanical model of polygyny in society X and statl§hcnl .modcl
of polygyny to the mechanical model of monogamy in society Y
[NUTINI 1965: 722-23].

498

18. French Structuralism

It may disturb the reader that Nutini would take a frequency of
10 percent and urge that a scientific model can be constructed which
takes no account of go percent of the cases. But having gone so far,
can there be an objection to a mechanical model which is fulfilled in
§ percent, 1 percent . . . or fewer instances? Well then, what about a
mechanical model which is never fulfilled in actual practice? As we
shall see in a moment, a decade of fierce polemic has centered on just
such a case, namely Lévi-Strauss’ model of patrilateral and matrilateral
cross-cousin marriage. But let us first complete Nutini’s train of
thought. Why is he convinced that a statistical model should always
be “subordinate” to a mechanical one?

In societies of type X the mechanical model would account for
only a fraction of the total number of marriages, and the statis-
tical model for the great majority. Yet I would still maintain that
the statistical modcl should be subordinated to the mechanical

model, for, given the proper cultural conditions, the overlapping
of ideal and actual behavior would tend to the ideal limit. What
I am saying herc is . . . the allimportant fact that mechanical
models arc always heuristically supcrior to statistical models. . . .

[ihid.:723].

Nutini does not name the corpus of evidence which leads to the
conclusion that “actual behavior tends to the ideal limit.” The
overwhelming evidence to the contrary will be discussed in Chapter
20. Here, let it suffice to say that mechanical and statistical models of
both actual and ideal culture are possible. Insofar as quantification
and science have displayed a conspicuously beneficial partnership in
all of the sister sciences, it is a mystification to urge the superiority of
nonstatistically based models for anthropology. This is not to say that
science and quantification are synonymous, but rather that if we pro-
ceed in ethnography to formulate models which lack statistical au-
thority, we do so out of humility, hoping some day to possess the
research facilities for correcting our lack of data.

Let us return now to The Elementary Structures of Kinship and fol-
low out the consequences of Lévi-Strauss’ privileged disregard of the ma-
terialization of the structural possibilities of kinship systems.

RESTRICTED AND GENERALIZED
EXCHANGE

The aspect of Lévi-Strauss’ book which has stimulated the
greatest amount of cxegesis is concerned with his discovery that mar-
nage systems could be classified into two major types: those which

499



===== PAGE 255 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

produce “restricted” exchanges of women, and those which produce
“generalized” exchanges of women. By a restricted exchange sys-
tem, he meant one in which the obligation of reciprocity was ful-
filled by a direct exchange of females between groups. A moiety
situation in which the men of groups A and B exchange sisters for
wives is the simplest case. In a generalized exchange system, on the
other hand, the reciprocity takes place in a delayed fashion: A gives
women to B, B gives women to C, and C gives women to A. Lévi-
Strauss must be credited with making the important discovery that
these two kinds of exchange are logically associated with different
forms of cousin marriage. Restricted exchange would result auto-
matically from regular cross-cousin marriage, provided that there is
marriage with both the mother’s brother's daughter and father’s
sister’s daughter. This is the symmetrical form of cross-cousin mar-
riage. Generalized exchange, on the other hand, is logically associated
with asymmetrical cross-cousin marriage, specifically of the mother’s
brother’s daughter variety. This is called matrilateral cross-cousin
marriage. That is, where ego marries mother’s brother’s daughter
and does not marry father’s sister’s daughter, there logically results a
form of circulating connubium in which the cycle A-B-C-A takes place.
LéviStrauss must be credited with the further important discovery
that the patrilateral variety of asymmetrical cross-cousin marriage is
not the mirror image of the matrilateral varicty. Instead, there
logically results a shunting effect such that the cycle A-B-C is re-
versed to C-B-A in alternate generations.

Although there is a marked reluctance on the part of Lévi-Strauss
to place his discussion in an evolutionary context (cf. 1049:277),
restricted exchange systems have the nuance of being more archaic,
and general exchange systems seem modern. This would certainly
follow from the emphasis placed upon associating generalized ex-
change with the achievement of a higher degree of social solidarity
than that achieved by restricted exchange:

In effect, generalized exchange allows, the group remaining the
same in extension and composition, the realization, in the heart

of this mechanically stable group, of a greater organic solidarity
[ibid.:548].
From considerations such as these Lévi-Strauss proposes that the
peculiar shunting effect of the patrilateral asymmetrical form must
be associated with an inferior degree of solidarity:

Instead of constituting a global system, as do both bilateral and
matrilateral cross-cousin marriage cach in its own sphere, mar-

500

?’

18. French Structuralism

riage with father’s sister’s daughter is not capable of attaining any
other form tlmr.x a multitude of little closed systems, juxtaposed to
one another, without ever realizing a global structure [ibid.:553).

Noting that the patrilateral variety has a much more restricted distri-

bufio;x than the matrilateral variety, he offers the following Durk-
heimian solution:

1If then, in the last analysis, marriage with the daughter of the fa-
ther’s sister is less frequent than that with the daughter of the
mother’s brother the reason is that the latter not only permits but
favors a better integration of the group, while the former never
succeeds in creating anything more than a precarious edifice, made
f’f merely juxtaposed materials, obeying no plan of cnscmbic* and
its texture is exposed to the same fragility as that of each of the
little local structures of which it is composed [ibid.:558]

The first sustained evaluation of The Elementary Structures of Kin-
ship was written by Josselin de Jong (1952). Confining his critical com-
ments to matters of detail in the Australian systems, Jossclin de
Jong lclndcd his colleagues for their lack of response “t:) one of the
most myx,pmitant contributions to anthropological theory of the present
century” (ibid.:59). But in 1955, a decidedly negative reaction was
b'rought forth by George Homans and David Schneider. Their criti-
cism centered on the explanation of the matrilateral /patrilateral cross-
cousin problem, as outlined above; and it touched off an acrimoniaﬁs
debate which is of central importance in the recent history of anthro-
pology.

THE HOMANS AND SCHNEIDER
CRITIQUE

Homans and Schneider rejected the postulated relationship
betw‘een freqtlellcy of occurrence of matrilateral and patrilateral cross-
cousin marriage and degree of social solidarity resulting from ex-
change cyc}es. Although respectful df Lévi-Strauss’ erudition and
etlmogmphnc competence, they express their suspicion that the in-
vocation of social solidarity as a final cause is mere “rhetoric.” To
:xplam the dlsparity between the incidence of the two asymmetrical
orms of cross-cousin rules, a theory involving “cfficient causes” is
required. That is, the theory must specify how the human actors
short-run personal interests are better served by adopting one form
rather th.:m the other. Such a theory, they propose, is already present
in Radcliffe-Brown’s solution of the avunculate problem. In hl:ief, as

501



===== PAGE 256 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Radcliffe Brown saw it, the presence of patrilineal descent groups
tends to produce a situation where restraint and authority center about
father and the male and female members of his descent group. At
the same time, informality and indulgence characterize relations
with mother and all of the male and female members of mother’s
patrilincage. Mother’s brother is thus a sort of “male mother,” while
father’s sister is a “female father” Homans and Schneider take off
from this point by posing the question of what significance this
“patrilineal complex” might have for the differential treatment of
the mother’s brother’s daughter as compared with father’s sister’s
daughter. Since indulgent freedom characterizes relations with moth-
er's brother, is it not likely that his daughter will be preferred in
marriage? The theory involved could be summed up by the rule:
“Where a man finds love in one generation, he will find it in the
next” (Homans and SCHNEIDER 1955:38). The other cross cousin,
associated with the stern and distant father’s sister, is less likely to
appeal to the sentimental efficient causes of marriage.

Homans and Schneider then take the additional step of postulating
that where the descent rule is matrilineal rather than patrilineal, an
opposite sort of jural and sentimental complex would exist. Mother’s
brother now becomes the stern authoritarian figure, while father, fa-
ther's sister, and father’s sister's daughter bask in the warmth of
indulgent sentiments. This suggests the hypothesis that matrilateral
and patrilateral asymmetrical cross-cousin marriages are rcspectively
correlated with patrilineal and matrilineal descent. This is a prospect
that was not considered by Lévi-Strauss, who states that the structure
of exchange docs not depend upon descent (1949:599). But if the
correlation can be demonstrated, it at once explains why the fre-
quency of matrilateral cross-cousin marriage should be so much
greater than its opposite: the reason is simply that matrilineal descent
occurs much less frequently than patrilineal descent.

With mounting confidence, Homans and Schneider proceeded to
formulate a statistical test of their hypothesis. Assisted by the Human
Relations Area Files they gathered together all the available cases of
preferential asymmetrical cross-cousin marriage and demonstrated a
strong statistical correlation in support of their hypothesis. Of twenty-
six societies in which mother’s brother’s daughter is the preferred
marriage, twenty-two have patrilineal descent, while of the seven
socicties which preferred father’s sister’s daughter, five have matri-
lineal descent. Homans and Schneider conclude that Lévi-Strauss’
theory is not necessarily wrong (solidarity may still have its effect

502

T

18. French Structuralism

somehow), but that it is now unnecessary. Their own theory “pre-

dipts what societies will adopt what form, and Lévi-Strauss’s theory
will not” (ibid.:59).

REPLY TO HOMANS AND SCHNEIDER

In 1958, Lévi-Strauss responded to this critique by means
of a pagelong footnote to the republication of his article, “Social
Stmcturle” (1963a:322; orig. 1958). Homans and Schneider’s statistical
correl.atlon “proves nothing,” he asserts. There was, first of all, the
question of statistics. Since both patrilineal descent and matrilateral
marriage occur so much more frequently than their opposites, a
purely random distribution would result in the kind of correlation

Which was advanced in favor of Homans and Schneider’s hypothe-
sis.

Sogict_ics with patrilineal descent are much more numerous than
SL_)Cletlf:s with matrilineal descent. Furthermore, matrilateral mar-
riage is more frequent than patrilateral marriage. Thus, if the
distribution occurred at random, we might expect that tilC inci-
dence of socicties characterized by an association between
patrilineal descent and matrilateral marriage would be higher, and
thus the correlation claimed by my critics would be meanir;gless

libid.].

We shall note only briefly, as André Kébben (1966:148) points out,
that this suggestion is “contrary to simple statistical theory.” (Hoi
mans and Schneider employed the method of correlation inorder to
rule out the possibility of “random” effects.) The necessity for this
embarrassing comment has scarcely been lessened by ]A‘Pouwcr's
(1965:155) tejoinder to the effect that Lévi-Strauss did not flatly
declafe that the correlation was worthless due to random effects
(preglse.ly what Homans and Schneider’s correlations were intended
to .Ellll"lll‘liltc) but that they “could” be due to random effects. Trans-
latlolnf the great man may have been in error, but you can’t prove it.
LéviStrauss did, however, have a telling point to make with
regard to the statistical‘issue. In 1957, Murdock had tested the Ho-
rSr;ans and Schneider corrclations on an enlarged sample, and Lévi-
so infrequently that

;};e correlation in question, while still evident, could not be relied
on.

Cuntmnmg his rebuttal of Homans and Schneider, however, Lévi-

503



===== PAGE 257 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Strauss went on to express himself as willing to concede, at least for
the sake of argument, that matrilateral and patrilateral marriage rules
are statistically connected with matrilincal and patrilineal descent.
In case this should be so, he is prepared to offer an explanation in
conformity with his theory. Since matrilineal systems are (by general
agreement) inherently more unstable than patrilineal ones, the long
exchange cycle of the matrilateral rule could not be maintained by
matrilineal socicties, “while the extremely short cycles of patrilateral
marriage would be less affected by the conflicts always found in
matrilineal societies.” He then made the following fateful remark:
“If such were the case, matrilateral marriage would be more frequent;
but it would not have to be prescribed” (LEVI-STRAUSS 1963a:322).

PRESCRIPTION VERSUS PREFERENCE

It is at this point that Rodney Needham, a British devotee of
structural anthropology, enters the scene. The italicized “prescribed”
in Lévi-Strauss’ footnote appeared to link with certain additional hints
in The Elementary Structures of Kinship adding up to a crucial distinc-
tion between prescribed and preferred marriage rules. “Prescription”
means absolute, exclusive demand for a certain type of alliance to take
place, while “preference” is merely suggestion and exhortation. Need-
ham then races ahead to the conclusion that Homans and Schneider
have busied themselves with the collection of a lot of data that is
irrelevant for Lévi-Strauss’ main thesis. For in their cross-cultural test,
Homans and Schneider have paid no attention to the difference
between mere preference and absolute prescription.

Homans and Schneider were forthwith attacked by Needham
(1962), in what must be the most surly if not the most sadistic
assault in the annals of scholarly publications. His words dripping
with contempt, Needham pushes his opponents into the figurative
abyss that their failure to separate preference from prescription
scemed to have earned for them. After examining each of the thirty-
three societies in the Homans and Schneider sample, Needham
throws out twenty-four of them as practicing something other than
prescriptive cross-cousin marriage. Of the nine admissible cases, all
have the matrilateral form, and one of these is a combination of
matrilaterality with matrilineality.

Now Homans and Schneider claim to explain both types of

«ynilateral cross-cousin marriage.” The argument is about pre-

scriptions, and their theory applies in part (specifically, not only
by the fact of contending with Lévi-Strauss) to prescriptions. But

504

18. French Structuralism

wh_cn we cxamine their test cascs we see that they have no pre-
scriptive patrilateral cases at all. Their own evidence thus relates
to only one form of prescriptive marriage, and cannot therefore
vield any support whatever for their claim to explain the differ-
ential incidence of both types [ibid.:57].

As for the 8:1 ratio of patrilineal to matrilineal societies with
the matrilateral prescription, there is nothing here but a complete
vindication of Lévi-Strauss’ proposal that there was no necessary rela-
tion between descent rule and type of prescription:

He is not concerned with, and says nothing about, statistical
frequencies. If it were the case that all societies practicing general-
ized cxchange were patrilincal and patrilocal except one, and that
the one were matrilineal and matrilocal, then his proposition
would be validated. Even if no such society existed, the proposi-
tion would still hold in a formal scnse: matrilineal and matrilocal
societies exist and form viable systems, and there is no obvious
structural reason to deny or doubt that such a society might also
practice prescriptive matrilateral cross-cousin marriage [ibid.].

I must confess to a total lack of sympathy for Homans and
Schneider over the drubbing they received  because of  their
failure to distinguish preference from prescription. They in effect
“asked for it” by deliberately confining themselves to mechanical
models. That is, by virtue of their own emic and idealist predilections
they chose to criticize Lévi-Strauss on his own home territory. '['hcilj
test cases arc assembled with respect to the ideological norms of
rules of marriage. They nowhere inquire into the operation by
which the amount of solidarity in a social group can be measured.
(Actually, they reject this strategy at the outset—roMaNs and SCHNEI-
DER 1955:13). More importantly, they do not object to the absence
of a discussion of the measurable material manifestations of the
fules in question, in terms of actual numbers of historically real mar-
riages involving specific men and women and specific kinship groups
at definite times and places. They are content instead to grapple with
the phantoms of idealized rules and idealized marriages, from which
beautifully logical idealized exchange cycles result. Innocents
abroad! They are prepared to deal with phantoms, but not with ele-
mentary ones. They do not realize that among professional idealists,
as distinct from the eclectic American amateurs who have rubbed
shoulders with logical positivism and behaviorism too long to know
how to really get off the ground, a rule which is manifest in a
hundred cases is no better than that which is manifest in none.

505



===== PAGE 258 =====

v—‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 18. French Structuralism

THE SEARCH FOR THE UNICORN

The rout of Homans and Schneider appeared complete, but
Needham would settle for nothing but unconditional surrender. Sta-
tistical correlations are, after all, not very informative, he argued.
What we are after is a knowledge of structure. We need “a total
structural analysis of all the recorded facts of one society” (NEEDHAM
1962:73). The real question before us continues to be the value of
Lévi-Strauss” application of the principle of reciprocity to the under-
standing of marriage systems. We must take one specific case of
matrilateral prescription and see how our understanding of it is
enriched by Lévi-Strauss’ theory of generalized exchange.

This sounds like a reasonable idea as long as one ignores the fact
that Needham was only able to find nine cases of matrilateral pre-
scription in the entire world—nine cases to substantiate empirically
the material existence of the long-cycle, generalized exchange system
which is supposed to be the more organically solidary of the only
two viable elementary exchange systems that have ever existed. If
all the remaining thousands of known cases represent “complex” sys-
tems, do we not have the obligation to insist upon interpretive
principles which are first and foremost responsive to the conditions
of the universe in which we happen to be living? In this regard,
it cannot be overemphasized that there is not the slightest clue in
Lévi-Strauss’ tome as to why one finds so few “generalized” exchange
systems; nor are there, aside from a few evolutionary innuendos, sug-
gestions of what might be the conditions which lead to the appear-
ance of the restricted rather than the generalized form. But let us
follow Needham in his application of the exchange cycle theory to a
specific case, for there are more surprises ahead.

ENTER THE PURUM

The society selected for intensive study are the Purum of
Manipur, as described by T. C. Das (1945). Needham presents a
lucid summary of the rules of the marriage and exchange system
which hinges on a firm matrilateral cross-cousin prescription. Various
alliance cycles are described, some of them binding wife-giving and
wife-receiving lineages in chains involving as many as seven different
patrilineages (e.g., A-B-C-D-E-F-G-A). Moreover, Needham goes on
to show that many symbolic aspects of Purum ritual life, including
such everyday matters as the arrangement of sleeping quarters and

506

household architecture, can be rendered intelligible if they are
interpreted as expressing the fundamental “structural” distinction be-
tween wife-giving and wife-receiving groups. The symbolic confirma-
tion of the importance of Lévi-Strauss’ principle even embraces the
ritual difference between left and right, female and male, sun and
sky, death and life, and below and above (NEEDHAM 1962:96). Crow-
ing with satisfaction, Needham taunts his victims in the following
words:

All this we are able to see thanks ultimately to the astonish-
ingly fertile notion of “exchange” as an analytical concept, fash-
ioned for us by Mauss and developed in the field of marriage by
Lévi-Strauss. It is true that this is only a mediating concept, and
that it alone could not bring the analysis quite to the point of
radical understanding that I think we have reached here; but it is
an essential notion, and it has done for us what a truly scholarly
insight should do—it has made things plain. Would Homans and
Schneider be prepared to claim as much now for their own
theory? Is all this really to be explained, as they say, by “the
Oedipus Complex” [ibid.:9q]?

Now the raison d’étre of the Purum case is that it is supposed to
vindicate Lévi-Strauss by showing: (1) the distinctive results of
generalized versus restricted exchange; (2) the analytical advantage
of viewing kinship in terms of exchange cycles; (3) the importance
of the difference between prescription and preference. Even the skep-
tical reader, having witnessed the merciless destruction of Needham’s
enemies, finds it hard to imagine that the Purum could in any way fail
to accomplish their assigned task. After all, it is Needham who
suggests that a case is mecessary to the exposition, and even then,
there are several from which to choose. But no reasonably alert
graduate student could avoid the tidal wave of disbelief which Need-
ham’s presentation of Purum ethnography sets in motion.

PURUM DO NOT ABIDE BY THEIR
MATRILATERAL PRESCRIPTION

Needham describes circular connubiums of bride-givers and
bride-receivers extending through seven lineages. He lists twenty
such cycles and admits that there are many more. Yet of actual
historical marriages, Das provides information on only 141. Clearly
some of the cycles in entirety or some of the links in some of the
cycles reflect ideal, rather than actual, culture. We begin to wonder,

507

i



===== PAGE 259 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

therefore, what relationship there might possibly be between the
ideal wife-givers and wife-receivers and the actual wife-givers and
wife-receivers.

This question has been pursued by Charles Ackerman (1964). The
141 recorded marriages took place between 39 pairs of lineages; but
12 (30 percent) of the members of these pairs were both wife-takers
and wife-receivers, violating the fundamental condition of general
exchange.

In addition, marriage took place between 15 pairs of lineages out
of the 39 in the absence of any normative status as either wife-giver
or wife-receiver. Yet of the 48 pairs of lineages between whom wives
should have been exchanged, only 23 actually were demonstrably
linked on the basis of recorded marriages.

Turning to the question of whether the pattern of alliances pro-
duced by the actual marriages could have resulted from chance,
Ackerman matches actual against potential forms of alliance and
concludes that “the probability that the distribution arises from chance
and not from any ‘avoidance’ of direct exchange, is greater than
three in ten” (ibid.:60). Ackerman further demonstrates that if the
obscrved pattern were to be maintained through a large number of
marriages, all of the possible alliances would be realized. That is, the
observed alliances could just as well be described as a function of the
number of marriages contracted by a particular lineage as of the
prescriptive rule.

But the rule itself turns out to be something different from what
Needham says it is. The rigorous distinction between prescribed and
preferred begins to slip away when the evidence is given careful
scrutiny. Das does not specify the procedures which he employed to
reach his formulation of the marriage rule. That is, there are no
formal eliciting or polling procedures (and Needham never explains
what he would do with minority opinions—see Chap. 20). The
Purum seem to insist on marriage with either mother’s brother’s
daughter or some other woman of mother’s brother’s sib, but 48 per
cent of the recorded marriages actually contracted are with women
outside of this “prescribed” category (ibid.:56).

Thus, all the uses for which the Purum case is intended are
defeated. Both generalized and restricted exchange occur; reciprocity
is fragmentary and unproven; prescription remains a degree of pref-
erence rather than a sharply different structural matter. As Ackerman
puts it:

508

18. French Structuralism

No tendency to avoid the direct exchange of women exists in
the distribution of actual marriages. On the contrary, in a series
of tests the null hypothesis has been corroborated: the distribu-
tion of actual alliances is a function of the marginal distribution
among the lineages of the total population of marrying acts.
Where direct-exchange cells are not used, the situation is one of
few marrying acts and low a priori expectation of use; such cells
are not “avoided,” they are merely not used—yet. Purum mar-
riage choices are not ordered by a matrilateral connubium [ibid.:

64].
Lévi-Strauss’ basic distinction between restricted and generalized
exchange is thus returned to the logical exercise from which it sprang.
There is one escape from this situation for Lévi-Strauss’ followers
and they were quick to take it; show the bottle instead of the genie.
As for Lévi-Strauss, he had another option, to which we refer in a
moment. Thus, rising to Needham’s defense, David Maybury-Lewis
(1965:221) insists:
When we refer to unilateral cross-cousin marriage as an asym-
metric system, we are referring to an asymmetry in the rule, not
in its social consequences. The consequences are perhaps likely to
be asymmetric but they need not necessarily be so. Similarly it is

possible for a society to have a symmetric marriage rule and for
the application of the rule to result in asymmetry.

Referring specifically to Ackerman’s “erroneous analysis of the Pu-
rum material,”

It can now be seen why there must be a distinction maintained
between prescriptive and preferential marriage systems. A pre-
scriptive marriage rule entails . . . the division of Ego’s concep-
tual universe in a determined fashion, irrespective of the per-
centage of people who marry their actual MBD or into their
MB’s descent group. These percentages may be of considerable
interest in the handling of certain problems. They do not affect
the prescription as here defined or its minimum social entail-
ments [ibid.:225].

THE OLD ROPE TRICK

There is nothing to be shocked about in the proposal that
the existence of the prescribed system depends upon whether or not
an appropriate “conceptual” distinction is made by the culture car-
riers. Setting aside for the moment the nagging operational questions

509



===== PAGE 260 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 18. French Structuralism

which are to be taken up in the chapter on emics and etics, let us
grant the possibility of a neat dichotomization between a preferential
and prescriptive conceptual state. But now what becomes of the
social solidarity argument? If it doesn’t matter whether or not there
are material manifestations (i.e., historically specific arrangements of
people and their behavior), then there can be no basis for supposing
that the matrilateral system occurs more frequently than the patri-
lateral one because one is associated with more solidary consequences
than the other. Unless, of course, the solidary effects are to be viewed
as consisting of the same stuff as the rules! Let it be recorded then
that in this fashion, the structuralists climb up ropes and disappear
off the tops of them.

One of the most impressive exhibitions of this trick is to be found
in J. Pouwer’s defense of Lévi-Strauss against criticisms proposed
by A. J. F. Kobben. The latter supports Homans and Schneider’s
statistics, noting that their opponents “simply cannot disregard their
results” without placing themselves “outside of the sphere of science”
(x0BBEN 1966:147). To which Pouwer (1966:155) replies that Lévi-
Strauss cannot be attacked for the failure of his theories to be corrob-
orated by empirical data. Marriage rules cannot be explained by
actual marriages. There is no necessary connection between the logic
underlying cultural representations and empirical reality! When he
wrote his masterpiece, Lévi-Strauss was well aware that “discontinuity
and discrepancy can occur between the structuring activities of the
human mind and the empirical reality in which those activities
manifest themselves”: “. . . empirical data yield at most an indica-
tion of the direction in which we should seek an explanation for
the occurrence of a phenomenon” (POUWER 1966:155). From this
remark in its actual context one can only conclude that Pouwer is
either beyond the sphere of science or that he would wish science to
be defined as the study of nonempirical phenomena.

A VOICE FROM ON HIGH

The Homans and Schneider and Needham clash gave rise to
a controversy in which dozens of anthropologists became embroiled
and about which scores of learned papers were published in profes-
sional journals. In an early draft of this chapter, I had despaired of
doing justice to the rival claims of so numerous a swarm of exegetical
combatants. At the last minute, however, a new development oc-
curred, which simplifies the problem. This development consists of

510

the publication of a second edition of Lévi-Strauss’ The Elementary
Structures of Kinship with a preface containing the master's comments
upon Needham’s attempt to protect him from the Homans and
Schneider critique. To the astonishment of his entire professional
audience, and certainly not least of all of Needham, Lévi-Strauss has

denied the validity of Needham’s main point. He has expressed him-
self as follows:

Led by Needham, several authors today affirm that my book is
only concerned with prescriptive systems, or more precisely (since
it suffices to glance through it to be convinced of the contrary)
that such would have been the case had I not confused the two
forms [i.e. prescriptive and preferential marriage rules]. But,
since, according to those who defend this distinction, prescriptive
systems are very rare, a curious consequence results, if they are
correct: I would have written a very big book . . . which was
concerned with facts so rare, which applied to such a limited do-
main, that one no longer comprehends what importance it might
have for a general theory of kinship [in press].

Lévi-Strauss goes on to say that if this had been the case he finds
it hard to understand why Needham would have busied himself with
the task of bringing out an English translation or why his publishers
should pay for his work with a “splendid check.” The fact, he asserts,
is that the distinction between prescriptive and preferential systems
does not constitute an important issue as far as he or the groups
which practice asymmetrical cross-cousin marriage are concerned:

If T have indifferently employed the notions of preference and
obligation, even sometimes associating them, as I have been re-
proached for doing, in the same sentence, it’s because to my eyes
they do not connote different social realities, but correspond
rather to slightly different ways by which people think about the
same reality [ibid.].

It cannot but strike the unsympathetic observer that if Rodney
Needham and his followers were unable to understand what was
going on inside of Lévi-Strauss’ head, they show little promise of
getting to understand what goes on inside the heads of the Purum.
Even morc alarming is the possibility that Lévi-Strauss may not even
understand what's going on inside his own head. For, in’ discussing
the problems he confronted in bringing out a second cdition of The
Elementary Structures of Kinship, he confesses that once he has finished
a book it becomes a strange body to him, no longer capable of engaging

511



===== PAGE 261 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

his interest, and that “it is with difficulty sometimes, that I come to
understand it.” All this would be funny were it not for the huge
investment in research time and journal space that has been squan-

dered on this issue.

LEVI-STRAUSS AND MARX

One final aberration requires our attention. Despite all the
evidence of actual behavior to the contrary, Lévi-Strauss has repeatedly
asserted his fidelity to Marx’s teachings. For example, in his reply to
M. Rodinson’s criticism of his mentalistic use of the concept of
“structure,” he says Rodinson, “did not think it profitable to inquire
about my endeavors to reintegrate the anthropological knowledge
acquired during the last fifty years into the Marxian tradition”
(LEVI-STRAUSS 19032:343 ).

Just what do Lévi-Strauss and Marx have in common? A number of
similarities come to mind, but all of them are superficial. We may note,
first of all, that there is a shared suspicion of the devices by which
social systems consciously offer up explanations of themselves. Lévi-
Strauss is concerned always with the discovery of the “true” social
structure as opposed to surface reflexes or epiphenomena. But this atti-
tude merely identifies the basic intellectual posture of every serious
modern social scientist and philosopher. If it were peculiar to Marx,
then we should have to conclude that Freud, Durkheim, and a hun-
dred other unlikely figures were also working within the Marxist
tradition. Secondly, there is the evident infatuation of Lévi-Strauss

1 As the page proofs of this chapter were being corrected, T was able to inspect the
galleys of Rodney Needham’s “Introduction” to the forthcoming English transla-
tion of the second edition of Les Structures Elémentaires de la Parenté. This trans-
lation, upon which Needham and two collaborators worked for over six years,
includes the startling new “Introduction” described above. But Lévi-Strauss opened
this window to his mind only after the hapless Needham had reported that the
translation and editing were finished. Indeed, according to Needham, Lévi-Strauss
steadfastly refused to examine the translation before it went to press. Needham was
thus obliged to add a post-script to his own “Editor’s Note,” in which he admits
that his idol has charged him with a “fundamental misunderstanding of the very
title and subject matter of the book”! Needham “can only explain that if the views
in question had been published earlier, at a more decisive date, he could never
have consented to edit the work (even, as he understood, at the author’s wish) or
to take any part in its translation.” This phrase was deleted in publication, leaving

us in a state of uncertainty concerning Needham's true sentiments.

512

18. French Structuralism

with a dialectic mode of thought. This may be defined as an aversion to
simple dualities, as in his study of Bororo moieties:

. . . the study of so-called dual organizations discloses so many
anomalies and contradictions in relation to extant theory that we
should be well advised to reject the theory and to treat the ap-
parent manifestations of dualism as superficial distortions of struc-

tures whose real nature is quite different and vastly more complex
[ibid.:161].

If fascination with the number three makes a Marxist, then perhaps we
should include Pythagoras. Or shall we argue that the affectation of a
dialectic style is alone sufficient? Shall we make of Hegel the thesis,
Marx the antithesis, and Lévi-Strauss the synthesis? Robert Murphy
(1963:17) shows quite succinctly that when you stand Marx on his
head, you get “Zen Marxism.” I should prefer, however, to call it
French Hegelianism. Although the phrase lacks the brille which Murphy
has managed to put into his, it keeps Marx out of it. For Lévi-Strauss
no more represents the synthesis of materialism and idealism than
Comte did. Every substantative report, every choice of hypothesis,
every sustained analysis, from his Nambikwara research to his studies
of myth, draws its principal sustenance from the mainstreams of
French and German idealism. To protest that Marx was interested in
ideology, that Marx also realized that the ideological expressions of
social structure were dialectically rather than mechanically related, and
that Marx, as well as Lévi-Strauss, assigned creative and determinative
roles to human ideas is to pay tribute to Marx, not to Lévi-Strauss.
But to count the dialectic and the cautions concerning a rigid exclu-
sion of ideology as his chief contributions is to fail utterly to compre-
hend Marx’s role in the development of the social sciences. Unlike
Marx, Lévi-Strauss confronted a great opportunity to which he did
not respond. He found Comte, Durkheim, and Mauss standing on their
heads, and he joined them.

513



===== PAGE 262 =====

British Social Anthro-

pology 19

U
Sl

rI]:e challenge to nineteenth-century evolutionism in England arose
from two uncqually endowed groups of scholars. On the one hand
W. H. R. Rivers, E. J. Perry, and E. G. Smith paralleled many mem-
bers of the Boasian school in their idiographic, diffusionist emphasis.
At approximately the same time the foundations were being 1aid'for
another approach, which spurned both the evolutionists and the diffu-
sionists. Morcover, this second group of scholars, unlike the ﬁrs‘t,
equaled and in many cases surpassed the Boasians in the.ir emphasis
upon and actual exposure to ficldwork. Intensive field studies among a
small number of aboriginal societies, and intensive analysis of the data
from such studies, were organized by this British school around the
theme of synchronic functional relations. It was by means of the syn-
chronic functionalist framework that the British “social arlthlrop(?lo-
gists” hoped to preserve the heritage of nineteent'h.»c'entury scientism
while ridding themselves of the accumulated liabilities of the search
for diachronic, evolutionary regularities. By the late 1930’s thls group
had gained virtually unchallenged control of the anthropological estab-
lishment throughout the British Empire.

514

—_————Y-f

19. British Social Anthropology

DURKHEIM AND STRUCTURAL-
FUNCTIONALISM

The fundamental theoretical premises of British social anthro-
pology are based upon Emile Durkheim’s apotheosis of social solidar-
ity. Durkheim’s influence is especially basic for an understanding of the
rise of the so-called structural-functionalists. Alfred Reginald Radcliffe-
Brown, the principal theoretician of this movement, was quite ex-
plicit about Durkheim’s role. On the one hand he hailed Durkheim’s
definition of “function” as “the first systematic formulation of the
concept applying to the strictly scientific study of society” (RADCLIFIFE-
BROWN 1952b:178). On the other, he explicitly rejected definitions of
function which did not relate to “social structure,” a concept which
can be shown to derive its main inspiration from Durkheim’s emphasis
upon social solidarity. The combination of “function” with “social
structure” gave rise to the awkward but descriptive label, “structural-
functional.” RadcliffeBrown placed great emphasis upon distinguish-
ing structural functions from functions that Bronislaw Malinowski and
others associated with the biopsychological needs of individuals. For
Radcliffe-Brown the only acceptable definition of function was the
“contribution” an institution makes to the maintenance of social
structure. “This theory of society in terms of structure and process,
interconnected by function, has nothing in common with the theory
of culture as derived from individual biological needs” (RADCLIFFE-
BROWN 1049b:322).

This theory does, however, have everything in common with Durk-
heim’s approach to sociocultural phenomena via the conditions of
social cohesiveness or social solidarity. The structural-functionalist’s
basic assumption is that social systems maintain themselves for signifi-
cant intervals of time in a steady state during which a high degree of
cohesion and solidarity characterizes the relationships among its mem-
bers. The only difference between Radcliffe- Brown and Durkheim in
this regard is that Radcliffe Brown substituted the terms “unity,”
“harmony,” or “consistency” for Durkheim’s “solidarity.”

Such a view implies that a social system (the total social structure
of a society together with the totality of social usages in which
that structure appears and on which it depends for its continued
existence) has a certain kind of unity, which we may speak of as a
functional unity. We may define it as a condition in which all
parts of the social system work together with a sufficient degree of

515



===== PAGE 263 =====

-

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 19. British Social Anthropology

harmony or internal consistency, i.c. without producing persistent
conflicts which can neither be resolved nor regulated [RADCLIFFE-
BROWN 1952b:181].

COLONIALISM AND THE HYPOTHESIS
OF FUNCTIONAL UNITY

It is an error to portray the structural-functionalists as polly-
annas, innocent of the occurrence of internal conflict and dissension.
Durkheim made ample provision for such phenomena in his assump-
tions concerning the existence of pathological afflictions to which
social systems are prone. Although Radcliffe-Brown disapproved of
this effort to identify the structural analogues of disease (ibid.:182),
neither he nor his students were unaware of the existence of sharp and
unresolved conflict. But they were not prepared to accept such conflict
as a normal, or fundamental, aspect of the human condition. Assump-
tions concerning functional unity are, according to Radcliffe-Brown,
merely hypotheses which “it seems worthwhile to test by systematic
examination of the facts” (ibid.:181).

One might very well argue that the concept of functional unity is a
necessary heuristic assumption, equivalent to the belief that the system
under observation is a phenomenon which lasts long enough to warrant
abstraction from the stream of history. As Radcliffe-Brown put it, “In
such an analysis we are dealing with a system as it exists at a certain
time, abstracting as far as possible from any change that it may be
undergoing” (1950:3). In theory, there was nothing to prevent
Radcliffe-Brown and his students from exposing and emphasizing the
lack of solidarity and cohesion in the larger societies which they were
studying. But the argument for heuristic advantage must be placed in
the actual research context in which the theory of structural-functional-
ist ethnography was put to the test. Between 1930 and 1955 the over-
whelming bulk of the contributions of the structural-functionalist
school was based upon fieldwork in African tribal societies located in
European, especially British, territories. Under such circumstances it
is impossible not to draw a connection between the proposal to study
social systems as if they were solidary and as if they were timeless, with
sponsorship, employment, and indirect association of the members of
this school by and with a now defunct colonial system (cf. FORDE
1953).

As late as 1950, Radcliffe-Brown’s “Introduction” to African Systems
of Kinship and Marriage included an opening quote from Gobineau ad-

516

vising Europeans who wish their civilizations to spread of the impor-
tance of knowing and comprehending those who were to be benefited.
This is followed by the author’s wish that “this book will be read not
only by anthropologists, but by some of those who are responsible for
formulating or carrying out policies of colonial government in the
African continent.” As we shall sce, there is something to be said for
Gregg and Williams™ portrayal of functionalism as a new kind of
“Dismal Science” whose function it was to provide a scientific ration-
alization of the status quo, especially in reference to the British policy
of indirect rule. Since this relationship is not peculiar to the structural-
functionalist position, but is shared by Malinowski as well, we shall
have to return to it later on.

MEANING OF SOCIAL STRUCTURE

As I have already suggested, at the root of the association be-
tween structuralfunctionalism and the Durkheimian heritage there
lies an insistence upon viewing functional relations exclusively in the
context of social structure.

Just what is this “social structure” which lies at the heart of the
structuralfunctionalist movement? In the context of the research
product achieved by Radcliffe-Brown and his students, a pragmatic
definition might be offered: the study of groups, especially those
organized along territorial, kinship, and political lines and the inter-
relationships among these constitute the core of social-structural phe-
nomena. In a slightly different sense, all differentiated social positions
or statuses derived from a consideration of membership in social
groupings constitute parts of social structure (RADCLIFFE-BROWN
1952b:193).

It is of the greatest importance to specify how this notion of social
structure is related to the other parts of a sociocultural system. Ac-
cording to Radcliffe-Brown, there are three heuristically separable
“adaptational” aspects of the total social system. Social structure, “the
arrangements by which an orderly social life is maintained,” is one of
these three aspects. The other two are the “ecological,” or the way
the system is adapted to the physical environment; and the cultural,
or the mechanisms by which an individual acquires “habits and mental
characteristics that fit him for participation in social life” (ibid.:g).
Substituting the concept “ideology” for the category to which Rad-
cliffe-Brown arbitrarily assigned the term “culture,” we are left with
the familiar Marxist three-part division of sociocultural systems into

517



===== PAGE 264 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

techno-economic, social-structural, and ideological phenomena. ‘What
is of greatest moment in this arrangement is the separability of social
structure from considerations of the techno-environmental and techno-
economic complex.

THE PRIORITY OF SOCIAL STRUCTURE

What is the relationship between ecological-economic “adap-
tion” and social-structural “adaption”? Is it the function of the eco-
nomic and ecological adaptations to sustain the social structure, or is it
rather the function of the social structure to maintain the economic
and ecological adaptations? According to structural-functionalism, it is
the social structure which always deserves priority of analysis. In Rad-
cliffe Brown’s theory and practice of structural-functionalism, it is only
legitimate to ask how the economic system results from, or contributes
to, the maintenance of a given social structure, never, how a particular
social structure results from, and serves to maintain, a given set of
techno-economic adaptations:

The economic machinery of a society appears in quite a new light
if it is studied in relation to the social structure. The exchange of
goods and services is dependent upon, is the result of, and at the
same time is a means of maintaining a certain structure, a net-
work of relations between persons and collections of persons. For
the economists and politicians of Canada the potlatch of the In-
dians of the north-west of America was simply wasteful foolishness
and it was therefore forbidden. For the anthropologist it was the
machinery for maintaining a social structure of lineages, clans and
moieties, with which was combined an arrangement of rank de-
fined by privileges [ibid.:197-98].

Although Radcliffe-Brown’s threefold division of social systems is not
consistently adhered to, either in his own writings or in those of his
students, the tactical and theoretical priority of social-structural factors
is seldom compromised.

Meyer Fortes, for example, confused a good many American cultural
anthropologists by using the term “culture” in a more global sense
than that proposed by Radcliffe Brown. In speaking of “optional
frames of reference,” Fortes (1933b:21) mentions “ideological,” “nor-
mative,” and “biological viewpoints,” omitting the techno-economic
altogether. But according to Fortes all the phenomena observable
within these frames are to be regarded as facets of social structure: “In

518

B ol

19. British Social Anthropology

this sense social structure is not an aspect of culture, but the entire
culture of a given people handled in a special frame of theory” (ibid.).
It is interesting to note how Lowie reacted to this proposal. He could
“admit that it is profitable to view the culture of a people with social
structure as a starting point,” but he felt that there would be an “ap-
pallingly large” residue of other cultural items which would remain
unstudied if one approached the “entire culture” from Fortes” point
of view (LOWIE 1953:531-32). This seems to suppose that an appalling
residue of unstudied facets of culture was not left over by the Bo-
asians. The question cannot be put in the form of why not study the
whole of culture rather than a part—a complete ethnography is impos-
sible to achieve. The decisive question is rather, why one part more
than some other part?

THE ANTIFUNCTIONALIST BOGEY

Before attempting to learn how Radcliffe-Brown and his
students handled this question, let us take time out to bury the mis-
conception that the historical particularists and the structural-function-
alists represent, respectively, anti- and profunctionalist positions. This
popular notion arose as a result of a breakdown in communication
over the meaning of the term “function.”

During the late 1920’s and early 1930’s when the Boasians first began
to take cognizance of the structural-functionalist program, there seems
to have been little comprehension of the highly specific meaning which
Radcliffe-Brown was giving to the concept of function. At a joint ses-
sion of the American Anthropological Association, the American Folk-
Lore Society, and Section H of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science at Pittsburgh in 1934, Radcliffe- Brown was
invited to comment on a paper by Alexander Lesser in which function
was treated as follows:

In its logical essentials, what is a functional relation? Is it any dif-
ferent in kind from functional relations in other fields of science?
I think not. A genuinely functional relation is one which is es-
tablished between two or more terms or variables such that it can
be asserted that under certain defined conditions (which form one
term of the relation) certain determined expressions of those con-
ditions (which is the other term of the relation) are observed. The
functional rclation or relations asserted of any delimited aspect
of culture must be such as to explain the nature and character of
the delimited aspect under defined conditions [LESSER 1935:392].

519



===== PAGE 265 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Radcliffe Brown understandably enough felt that there was so little in
common between his “function” and the one which Lesser had that
he declined to “offer any real criticism of his paper” (RADCLIFFE-BROWN
1935:394). But instead of taking advantage of the opportunity to ad-
vise Lesser on the Durkheimian meaning of function, Radcliffe Brown
added to the confusion by declaring that the “functional hypothesis”
was in conflict with the view held by some ethnologists. He called this
view “the ‘shreds and patches’ theory of culture,” from Lowie’s phrase,
“when he speaks of that planless hodge-podge, that thing of shreds
and patches called civilization” (RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1952a:186).

The indignation which this produced in the ranks of the Boasians
was certainly justified. Lowie’s phrase, as we have seen, although it
appears on the last page of Primitive Society, bears little resemblance
to the main substance of that work, which at every point emphasized
the importance of examining cultural traits in relationship to their
larger cultural context. Unfortunately, in rebuttal, Lowie shifted the
focus of criticism of both RadcliffeBrown and Malinowski toward
proof that “In his functionalist approach, Boas . . . antedates others
by decades” (LowiE 1938:142).

It was unwise for Radcliffe-Brown to have mixed up the shreds and
patches heresy with the structural-functionalist program; any kind of
functionalism was an antidote to extreme diffusionism, and Lesser,
Boas, and Lowie scarcely needed to be warned about the dangers of
diffusionist schemes. In addition, all the Boasians operated with an
implicit model of total sociocultural systems. On the other hand, the
Americans were certainly guilty of failing to grasp the significance of
Radcliffe-Brown’s Durkheimian heritage.

As a result of this kind of off-center parrying, plus Malinowski’s
crusade against Graebnerian “museum moles,” too many scholars have
befuddled themselves with the question of who was and who was not
a functionalist. It was left for Kingsley Davis to declare that functional
analysis as a special method of social rescarch was nothing but a myth.
Much as Lesser had insisted twenty-six years before him, Davis (1959)
declared that sociological analysis is inscparable from an attempt to
show the relationship between the parts of social systems. Therefore,
sociological analysis and functional analysis should be treated as syn-
onyms. Although Davis is essentially correct, his understanding of the
problem suffers from a lack of historical perspective. If functionalism
is a matter of showing the contribution that one part of culture makes
to another part, teleologically, or by mathematical correlation, then
Turgot, Malthus, Marx, Boas, Lowie, and yes, even Graebner and Graf-

520

v—

19. British Social Anthropology

ton Elliot Smith, were functionalists of sorts. There is no name of con-
sequence in the history of the social sciences who is not in some
measure concerned with the relationships among the parts of culture.

The contrast between different kinds of sociocultural theories is not
built around the question of whether sociocultural systems have parts
which are integrated with or effected by other parts, but rather which
parts, and how often and with what kind of effect and for how long?
In this sense we may distinguish the functionalism of Radcliffe-Brown
from the functionalism of Boas from the functionalism of Marx, etc.
To cut through the verbiage, the ad hominem sniping, the prestige-
building value of obscurantism which baffles our understanding of the
development of the social sciences, we must revert to the fundament
of all such inquiry: how does a particular theoretician propose to ex-
plain observable cultural differences and similarities? If he is to provide
any explanation at all, he must sooner or later commit himself to the
assumption that he is dealing with systems—i.e., sets of causally related
variables. What we want to know, what we must know, is why he
emphasizes certain sets of variables rather than others.

STRUCTURAL-FUNCTIONAL LAWS

This brings us back to the question of why the structural-
functionalists insist that social structure provides the central set of
variables for orienting social anthropology. Ostensibly, the answer lies
in the claim that by concentrating on social structure anthropology
could be cured of the explanatory impotence which had followed upon
the demise of evolutionary schemes. This pretension to superior un-
derstanding or explanation is an explicit feature of the program set
forth by Radcliffe-Brown, and it was explicitly opposed to the Boasian
conclusion that the search for sociocultural laws was futile. Radcliffe-

Brown’s displeasure with the dogma of no sociocultural laws was ex-
pressed as early as 1923:

Now while cthnology with its strictly historical method can only
tell us that certain things have happened, or have probably or pos-
sibly happened, social anthropology with its inductive gencraliza-
tions can tell us how and why things happen, i.c., according to
what laws [1958:29].

This attempt to rcturn anthropology to social science deserves our
admiration and reflects with credit upon the guiding influence of Durk-
heim. Later, responding to his American critics, who insisted that

521



===== PAGE 266 =====

—_—_——f

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

there were “no discoverable significant laws such as the functionalist
is seeking,” Radcliffe-Brown delivered a telling blow, very reminiscent
of Spencer’s attack on his ninetecnth-century opponents of a social
science.

I have found it impossible to know what they mean, or on what
sort of evidence (rational or empirical) they would base their
contention. Generalisations about any sort of subject matter are
of two kinds: the generalisations of common opinion, and gen-
eralisations that have been verified or demonstrated by a system-
atic examination of evidence afforded by precise observations
systematically made. Generalisations of the latter kind are called
scientific laws. Those who hold that there are no laws of human
society cannot hold that there are no generalisations about human
society because they themselves hold such generalisations and
even make new ones of their own. They must therefore hold that
in the field of social phenomena, in contradistinction to physical
and biological phenomena, any attempt at the systematic testing
of existing generalisations or towards the discovery and verification
of new ones, is, for some unexplained reason, futile, or, as Dr.
Radin puts it, “crying for the moon”. Argument against such a
contention is unprofitable or indeed impossible [1952a:187].

The structural-functionalist school thus came forward to be judged on
the basis of the adequacy of its explanations of sociocultural differences
and similarities according to the common standards of science. For
Radcliffe-Brown at least, structural-functionalism was not to be valued
merely for its stimulus to improved standards of fieldwork or for its
organizing contribution to ethnographers in search of a theme to hang
their data on. The tests of adequacy were to be the ability to generate
lawful statements in terms of which explanations of sociocultural
phenomena could be achieved that were superior in accuracy, general-
ity, and economy to rival theories. It is by these standards that the
structural-functionalists will be judged here.

Other British social anthropologists have exercized greater caution in
their declarations concerning the ultimate objectives of social anthro-
pology. For some, the concentration upon social structure was probably
little more than a matter of personal taste, to which they are of course
inalienably entitled (but not in the name of science). Many of the
British social anthropologists often allude to the need for specializa-
tion, and it is, after all, impossible for a small group of scholars to study
everything. Raymond Firth, for example, rejected what he called “an
old-fashioned and spurious-unified science of man. . . . What a ‘cul-

522

19. British Social Anthropology

tural’ upbringing does seem to mean in some cases is too great diversifi-
cation of interest and lack of opportunity to get a really specialized
training” (FIRTH 1931:484). Piddington (1957:49) puts this notion
into more pictmesque, if no more accurate, terms:

The British trend toward specialization has had a stimulating ef-
fect on ethnographic research. Social anthropologists no longer
clutter up their minds with information about skulls and pot-
sherds but look instead to cognate social sciences (such as eco-

nomics, jurisprudence and psychology) for a stimulus in extending
and deepening their research.

In this vein, the structural-functionalists have repeatedly expressed
their antipathy to the concept of culture as employed by Malinowski
and the Boasians, arguing that it is too vast and shapeless a notion to
be of much use for the individual researcher. As Fortes (1953b:20) put
it, “A serious limitation to this point of view is that it is bound to treat
everything in social life as of equal weight, all aspects as of equal
significance.” “Malinowski, in common with all who think in terms of
a global concept of culture, had no answer to it” (ibid.:21). Although
Fortes does not specifically claim that the structural-functionalists do
have the answer to this problem, his exposition of the accomplish-
ments of social anthropology is set in the context of superior explana-
tory power: Says Fortes, “Anyone who has tried to understand African
religious beliefs and practices in the field knows, for example, that one
cannot get very far without a very thorough knowledge of the kinship
and political organization” (ibid.:22). One can only conclude that
social structure is to be regarded as “the foundation of the whole of
social life of any continuing society” (ibid.:23) because by so doing
one achieves superior “understandings” or explanations of sociocultural
phenomena.

In view of all that has been said in previous chapters, it is perhaps
repetitious to declare my deepest sympathy for Radcliffe-Brown’s
attempt to return anthropology to social science. His role in keep-
ing alive and nourishing the study of sociocultural regularities has
carned for him a distinguished place in the history of cultural theory.
As an opponent of the relativism, quixoticism, and psychological re-
ductionism which had brought the end of nomothetic theory in the
United States, Radcliffe-Brown was a lonely voice in a wilderness inter-
lude. But there remains the nagging question of why the path back to
science was to be paved with social structure. It is not, I trust, ungrate-
ful to point out that there is no theoretical justification for this

523



===== PAGE 267 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

strategy. Certainly none can be found in the works of Radcliffe-Brown
and his students. Appeals to the richness of the ethnographic report-
ing achieved under the structural-functionalist banner are not relevant
to this discussion. It might be possible to justify the theoretical infatu-
ation with social structure by appeal to the pragmatic results obtained
from such studies in terms of lawful generalizations. One might
possibly say, “Well, but you see, it works,” without specifying the
underlying reason for why it is so conspicuously productive of power-
ful nomothetic statements. But the tragedy of Radcliffe-Brown’s con-
tribution to theory is that the “laws” which he produced were
distinguished by their weakness, their low capacity for prediction and
retrodiction, and their vapidity.

HISTORY, ORIGINS, EVOLUTION

This failure to formulate significant sociocultural laws is not
the simple consequence of the structural-functionalist pursuit of Durk-
‘\‘heim's grail. The deliberate subordination of techno-economic param-
eters would of course constitute a serious flaw in any program
‘concerned with discovering the causes of sociocultural differences and
\similarities. But in Radcliffe- Brown’s case, even if the Durkheimian
mystique of social solidarity is set aside, there remains an additional,
and perhaps even more injurious, ingredient, which cannot be laid at
the door of French anthropology. Radcliffe-Brown set himself the task
of discovering sociocultural laws under the rigid and unprecedented
handicap of restricting anthropology to the data collected from a single
time level, namely the mid-twentieth century.

Uncharitable and not too well-informed critics have turned this
feature around to mean that the structural-functionalists were “op-
posed to the study of history.” This is a vulgar distortion. It is impos-
sible to suppose that reasonable men would deny the importance of
history for achieving a full explanation of sociocultural phenomena.
Indeed, Radcliffe Brown repeatedly urges the importance of historical
inquiry. If the structural-functionalists seldom concerned themselves
with historical perspectives, it was because they remained convinced
that little useful historical information could be obtained with respect
to primitive societies. It was not history, but “pseudo history” to
which they objected:

In the primitive societies that are studied by social anthropology
there are no historical records. We have no knowledge of the de-
velopment of social institutions among the Australian aborigines

524

7’

19. British Social Anthropology

for example. Anthropologists, thinking of their study as a kind of
historical study, fall back on conjecture and imagination, and in-
vent “pseudo-historical” or “pseudo-causal” explanations. We
have had, for example, innumerable and sometimes conflicting
pseudo-historical accounts of the origin and development of the
totemic institutions of the Australian aborigines. . . . The view
taken here is that such speculations are not merely useless but are
worse than useless. This does not in any way imply the rejection of
historical explanation but quite the contrary [RADCLIFFE-BROWN

1952b:3].

Like Boas, Radcliffe-Brown was scomnful of the evolutionary schemes
which his nineteenth-century predecessors had elaborated. Again, like
Boas, this did not mean that he was an antievolutionist in the sense of
being opposed to the Darwinian version of evolution (1947:80). Rad-
cliffe-Brown even declared himself to be a social evolutionist, defined
as one who is interested in studying the process of diversification by
which “new and different forms of societies are produced” (ibid.:80-81).
His expressed objections to evolutionism provide a curious coun-
terpoint to the complaints of the Boasians. According to Radcliffe-
Brown, the trouble with the evolutionists was that they got lost in the
search for origins when what they should have been doing was looking
for laws.

All that T am concerned with here is to point out that the an-
thropologists of this school considered culture and the history of
culture from one standpoint only, namely, as a process of develop-
ment, and were interested only or chiefly in the problem of de-
velopment, and that they regarded the development of culture
from the historical standpoint as a succession of stages rather than
from the inductive standpoint as the action of specific laws . . .

[1958:11].

The effect of the historical bias of the early anthropology, and of
the false idea of evolution to which it led such writers as Morgan,
was to set anthropologists seeking not for laws, but for origins

libid.:19].
This rejection of nincteenth-century evolutionism because classic evo-
lutionary theory did not lead to laws is, of course, contradicted by the
Boasians who allegedly gave up evolutionism because it was predicated
upon the assumption that the search for evolutionary laws had per-
verted the search for historical origins. Since it is clear that Radcliffe-
Brown was doctrinally opposed to the possibility of formulating laws
of parallel and convergent evolution, and that the lawfulness to which

525



===== PAGE 268 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

he alludes is merely that of synchronic regularity, the contradiction
here is more apparent than real. What is essential in the passage just
quoted is that the search for origins could not be carried out by means
of evolutionary formula. Here Boas and Radcliffe-Brown concur. Im-
mediately thereafter, however, a fundamental difference in strategy
separates the two schools. For the Boasians, the remedy for false evo-
lutionary reconstructions are specific historical inquiries; for Radcliffe-
Brown, the remedy is more drastic: avoid all historical inquiry for
which historical documents are not available. Up until the 1950’s, this
restriction resulted in a de facto separation of synchronic structural-
functional studies from diachronic inquiry.

We need not concern ourselves at any great length with the question
of to what extent the alarm over pseudo history with the resulting
synchronic emphasis was another convenient rationalization for avoid-
ing fundamental issues. I shall present evidence in a moment which
proves that the structural-functionalists did not take advantage of
reputable or otherwise useful historical sources even when these were
available in great abundance. Had they used these sources, vital sectors
of sociocultural inquiry would possess a set of assumptions different
from those which prevail at the moment.

STRUCTURAL-FUNCTIONALISM AND
THE ORGANISMIC ANALOGY

The theoretical case for Radcliffe-Brown’s synchronic laws de-
pends on the validity of the biological organismic model upon which
he explicitly based his exposition of the principles of structural-
functional analysis. The aspect of the model to which attention is
directed is the set of relations among an organism’s parts which consti-
tute its morphology or physiology. This analogy, which goes back at
least to Hobbes, and which received its highest elaboration by Spencer,
is not necessarily ill-advised. There is much with which we may agree
in Radcliffe-Brown’s defense of it:

In using the terms morphology and physiology, T may secem to be
returning to the analogy between society and organism which was
so popular with medieval philosophers, was taken over and often
misused by nineteenth century sociologists, and is completely re-
jected by many modern writers. But analogies, properly used, are
important aids to scientific thinking and there is a x:cal and sig-
nificant analogy between organic structure and social structure

[1952b:195].
526

v

19. British Social Anthropology

To accept the appropriateness of this analogy is not to concede the
possibility of a synchronic science, from which statements similar to
those describing life-sustaining functions of the pancreas, or the kid-
neys, or some other physiological relationship concerning the parts of
delimited categories of organisms, can be expected. The situation is
scarcely so simple, however, and in practice there results a significant
abuse of the analogy in question. At the core of the matter there lies
an unanswered problem in epistemology, one which I have sought to
attack with draconian measures in The Nature of Cultural Things.
Individual biological organisms, at least as far as all higher forms are
concerned, enjoy an epistemological status which is radically different
from that of sociocultural organisms. It is part of a species-given bio-
psychological gestalt, a product of man’s adaptive phylogeny, that
boundaries of individual organisms are delimited by unequivocal
intersubjective criteria. We see whole bio-organisms, regularly, effort-
lessly, and infallibly. We do not see whole sociocultural organisms.
These, and all their parts, including social structure, must be con-
structed through a process of logico-empirical abstraction out of the
material furnished by the observation of the behavior of specific human
beings. The structural-functional analysis of the functions of parts of
sociocultural organisms is thus obliged to proceed without reasonably
certain knowledge that the whole organism has been laid out, so to
speak, on the dissecting table.

It is as if in attempting to discover the functions of the spinal
columns of amphibia, we ran the risk of examining a series of headless
frogs. By virtue of the same species-given gestalt, the various sectors
of an organism, if not its organs, present themselves to the community
of observers in a fixed and orderly spacial arrangement. But when I look
at an African society, I see whole sets of vital organs, great throbbing
nerves and sinews, which the structural-functionalists either do not
consider part of the organism at all, or which they relegate to the
position of toenails. That this is no idle danger as far as our sociocul-
tural specimens are concerned is evident in the announced program of
the structural-functionalists and abundantly demonstrated in their han-
dling of specific cases to which we shall now turn.

MOTHER'S BROTHER AGAIN

The classic attempt by Radcliffe-Brown to offer a synchronic
explanation of a structural feature is that of the relationship between
the mother’s brother and sister’s son among the Bathonga of Mogam-

527



===== PAGE 269 =====

__—_——.—f'

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

bique. This relationship, an asymmetrical joking relationship, was
characterized by the extraordinary liberties which sister’s son took with
his maternal uncle’s property and wives. In his uncle’s absence, sister’s
son would enter his hut, steal his favorite spear, carry on a lewd con-
versation with his wife, demand to be fed, and in many ways comport
himself in an utterly disrespectful fashion, all without fear of retalia-
tion or remonstrance. These liberties extended even to the solemn oc-
casion of uncle’s funeral when sister’s son was expected to snatch the
sacrificial chicken from amid the grave offerings and run off with it to
his own house. In marked contrast to this behavior was the great re-
spect which the same man would be obliged to display in all of his
dealings with his father’s brother. Junod (1913:253) had treated this
situation in the typically evolutionary style of the times:

Now having enquired with special care into this most curious fea-
ture of the Thonga system, T come to the conclusion that the only
possible explanation is that, in former and very remotc times, our
tribe had passed through the matriarchal phase.

Radcliffe Brown took up this challenge by proposing to offer, if not
to prove, an alternate hypothesis which would require no reference to
history. His explanation, which was alluded to in the previous chapter,
went about like this: among the patrilineal Thonga, there is a tendency
to extend to all of the members of ego’s mother’s patrilineage the kind
of behavior and attitudes which characterize ego’s relation with his
mother, and to all of the members of ego’s father’s patrilineage, the
kind of behavior and attitudes which characterize ego’s relations with
his father. Since mother is a warm and indulgent figure, so will be her
brothers and sisters; since father is a stern patriarch, so will be his
brothers and sisters. But this equivalence is disrupted by the principle
of sexual differentiation. Generally speaking, argues Radcliffe-Brown,
the greatest degree of familiarity is possible only between people of the
same scx. If mother and mother’s sisters are indulgent, then mother’s
brother, the term for whom (malume) actually means “male mother,”
will be even more so. Conversely, if father demands respect, father’s
sister should be even more aloof, since she is called by a kinship term
(nanani) which means “female father.” And that is indeed the case.
Although not spelled out in the original article, it would be correct, I
believe, to add that the structural-functional significance of the Thonga
joking relationship is the contribution which it made to the mainte-

nance of the patrilineages.

528

19. British Social Anthropology

A CULTURAL-MATERIALIST
ALTERNATIVE

One of the problems which such an explanation confronts is
that the structural-functionalists have not cornered the market on the
stuff u)ut.of which “just so stories” can be made. Granting Radcliffe-
Brown's ingenuity in drawing attention to a set of variables which are
analytically ignored by Junod, how do we know that there are not other
functional relationships which are equally relevant or more so? Let
me offer an alternative: Ego takes advantage of mother’s l)rothér be-
cause he has an economic claim on that man’s wife and children, a
claim whi?h by virtue of the corporate nature of the lineage invol\’/es
everyone i it to some extent. The claim arises because mother’s
brot!ler has married his bride directly, or indirectly, with the brideprice
furnished by ego’s patrilineage to mother’s pat}ilincage, When ego
stftals mother’s brother’s spear, propositions his wife, and runs off wi%h
his grave goods, this all functions to remind the members of mother’s
patrilineage that sister’s husband’s patrilineage gave them the cattle
to which they owe so much of their welfare.

In this connection, it should also be mentioned that the most im-
portant “respect relationship” which exists among the Bathonga is that
between a man and his wife’s brother’s wife, i.e., between ego’s father
and ego’s maternal uncle’s wife, a relationship the Thonga explain in
terms of the temptation a man feels to sleep with a woman who has
heel? bought with his cattle. It is not ego alone therefore who enjoys
the joke on mother’s brother; all the members of his patrilineage, who
must maintain proper decorum with their inlaw and his wife, rejoice
at tl}e nephew’s antics. For father to do those things would e;ldanger
the intricate web of marriages, which have been built up around the
exchange of women for cattle, but everyonc knows that sister’s son is
merely joking. ’

Which of these is the correct explanation? T prefer mine, because it
does not involve the assumption that the mother-son relationship is
the basic one from which the other kinship positions derive their
value. It also seems to me preferable insofar as it links the lineage sys-
tem to the economic domain through the emphasis on cattle. For the
Bathonga lineages are not, in my view of the Bathonga “organism,” the
beall and end-all of the Bathonga life. The lineages arise fron; and
reflect the adaptation of the Bathonga population to a mixed pastoral-

529



===== PAGE 270 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

horticultural way of life in which cattle are a vital resource and in
which the techno-economic patterns of cattle breeding and gardcnix.]g
are more important sociocultural “organs” than the lineages. That is,
the function of the mother’s brothersister's son relationship is to
maintain the population’s techno-economic adaptation. Of course, ‘this
institution may also contribute to the maintenance of lineage solidar-
ity, but if that solidarity did not contribute to the maintenance of the
techno-environmental adaptation, or to a better one, it probably would
not long endure.

TIME AND THE ORGANISMIC ANALOGY

It is not essential to my point that a choice be made between
the above explanations of the mother’s brother-sister’s son phenome-
non. Although T believe that definite criteria can be eilaboratcld for
preferring one to the other, these criteria demand that a dtachromc‘ per-
spective be adopted. In effect, in order to assign priorities of functional
order within a sociocultural organism, that is, in order to be able to
describe its structure, we must simultaneously study its history and
the history of similar organisms. From such a study there emerges a
conception of how the parts of sociocultural systems relate to each
other in general and specific terms, for we observe the phenorn@a of
parallel and convergent development and note how the changes in one
part are regularly succeeded by changes in another. Parallel .and con-
vergent evolution made manifest through comparative and dlgclquntc
anthropology is the anthropologist’s equivalent of thc'physmlogl?ts
laboratory. To ignore the results of the natural experiments Wh'lCh
constitute the stuff of history is to abandon all hope of understanding
how sociocultural systems are put together in the present.

SOCIOLOGICAL LAWS, STRUCTURAL
PRINCIPLES, AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
REDUCTIONISM

What, then, are the sociological laws which emerge from syn-
chronic structural-functionalism? In what sense can they be said to
fulfill Radcliffe-Brown’s intentions of achieving a science of society?

Radcliffe-Brown’s thought and technique followed a smqoth and
continuous development stemming directly from the analymg of the
mother’s brother-sister’s son. He gradually came to see the ]ok-mg rela-
tionship as an aspect of a larger complex of phenomena which included

530

19. British Social Anthropology

kinship terminologies, the treatment of lincage members as a unit,
cross-sex differentials, and the differential treatment of adjacent and
alternate gencrations. These notions were gradually formulated as
structural principles and presented as satisfying the quest for socio-
logical laws.

Eggan (1955b:503) refers to two of these principles, “the lineage
principle and the principle of the unity and solidarity of the sibling
group,” as “the most important concepts guiding the analysis of social
structure today. . . .” Under the direct stimulation of Radcliffe-
Brown, during the latter’s stay at the University of Chicago, Tax
(1955b:19ff.) proposed twelve such principles, or rules, which are listed
here in order to convey an idea of the nature of the “structural” laws
associated with this movement: the rule of uniform descent, uniform
reciprocals, uniform siblings, uniform mates, uniform ascent, equiva-
lence, terminological correlation, reciprocal behavior, equivalence of
siblings, sex differentiation, generation principle, and the sex principle.

As discussed in the next chapter, Coult (1966b) has re-established
the relevance of Tax’s structural principles to the ethnosemantic analy-
sis of kinship terminologies. But for Radcliffe-Brown and his American
students, these principles were regarded as useful for the analysis of
both kinship terminologies and social structure. The connection with
cthnosemantics is instructive because it highlights the heavy psycho-
logical component in the generalizations produced by the structural-
functionalists.

Bottomore (1962:44) correctly associates functionalism with the
interpretation of institutions in terms of the values and purposes of
individuals. He seems to regard Radcliffe-Brown as an exception, or at
least as an instance of a functionalist who also managed somehow to
remain on the sociological level. Of course, Radcliffe-Brown shared
Durkheim’s doctrinal opposition to psychological reductionism, but
neither he nor Durkheim, nor the French school, including Lévi-
Strauss, has found a way to avoid dependence upon phychological
universals as one of their main explanatory devices.

The theoretical penalty of this form of reductionism is always the
same: since all men are equipped with the same psychobiological
tendencies, all sociocultural systems should be the same. As White
(1949a:139) correctly insists, constants cannot explain variables. If al-
ternate generations everywhere tend to have friendly relations, while
adjacent generations are more agonistically inclined, then why don’t
all societies have the Australian four-section system in which alternate
generations are formally distinguished? Or why, if the unity of siblings

531



===== PAGE 271 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

is universal, do some systems distinguish collaterals from lineals while
others do not? The answer is that these universals, important aqd
valid as they may be, cross-cut each other and are embcd(.led in still
other crosscutting skeins of additional unive_rsal tlendenC{es (c.g.,.a
principle of least effort, or a principle of Anstote?h:{n loglcal consis-
tency, or a Freudian Ocdipus principle or a behaviorist reinforcement

principle).

SOME PECULIAR LAWS

There were also, to be sure, structural-functional principles

which were less conspicuously psychological. Thus, in 1935 Radcliﬂe—
Brown named three sociological, but otherwise no less peculiar, laws,

as follows:

. if we could define any universal condition to which a social
system would have to conform, we would therel?‘,{ have a sngolog-
ical law. . . . One such law or necessary condition of con}tmued
existence is that of a certain degree of functional consistency
amongst the constituent parts of the social systems. . . . To this
law we may add a second . . . rights and duties need to pc de-
fined in such a way that conflict of rights can be rgsolx’ed “'1thqut
destroying the structure. Another sociological law is the necessity
not merely for stability, definiteness, and consistency in the social
structure, but also for continuity [1952b:44-45].

But the best that can be expected from the application of alll such
universals, be they psychological or sociological, in the cxplahnah(m of
particular concrete varieties of sociocultural ananggments is a‘wgak
form of “interpretation.” Indeed, the general instructions for achieving
such interpretations were given in 1929 as follows:

The functional method aims at discovering general laws and
thereby at explaining any particular element of culturc‘by‘rcfer—
ence to the discovered laws. Thus, if it is a valid g.engrahzauon to
say that the chief function of ritual or ceremonial is to express
and thereby maintain in existence sentiments that are necessary
for social éohesion, we can “explain” any given rltuall or cere-
monial by showing what are the sentiments C)fpreSSCd in it §nd
how these sentiments are related to the cohesion of the society

[RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1958:40].

In other words, given the variety of systems, we can sl}ow how one 10:
another principle is reflected in it. But we cannot-expliam the particula
variety of system in terms of the conditions which yield a generation

532

T

19. British Social Anthropology

terminology here, a lineage organization there, now a moiety system,
sometimes an eight-section system, and then again, no sections at all.

It must be said that Radcliffe-Brown from the outset was probably
quite well aware of the limitations which the synchronic approach im-
posed upon the predictive and retrodictive powers of the laws he in-
tended to discover. It was, however, easy to become confused, as
when in his haste to oppose the Boasian position, he proposed “to tell
how and why things happen” (see above, p. 521). This stirring invita-
tion to science was indeed followed by a series of studies culminating
with a now classic examination of Australian kinship in which the main
synchronic structural-functional principles were blocked out. But Rad-
cliffe-Brown could not resist the temptation to assimilate psychosocial
interpretation to the standards of genuine scientific explanations, and
hence made the mistake of referring to “a universal sociological law
though it is not yet possible to formulate its scope, namely that in
certain specific conditions a society has need to provide itself with a
segmentary (clan) organization” (RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1931:109, quoted

in LOWIE 1937:224-25). Lowie’s (1937:225) scornful retort was per-
haps not completely justified:

Whoever heard of a universal law with an as yet undefinable
scope, of a Taw that works in certain specific but unspecified con-
ditions? Is it a law that some societies have clans, and others
have not? Newton did not tell us that bodies either rise or fall.

CONFESSION OF EXPLANATORY
IMPOTENCE

Radcliffe-Brown by this time had actually achieved a more
realistic appraisal of his “laws” quite on his own. His 1935 paper on
patrilineal and matrilineal succession, after in effect showing how all
societies must somehow or other handle the question of lineality in
conformity with the laws of consistency, control of conflict, and con-
tinuity, leaves the reader with slight expectation of ever getting to
know anything about the classic problems of descent: namely, why are

some descent systems matrilineal, others patrilineal, double, bilateral,
ete?

It might well be expected that such a paper as this would deal
with the question of what general factors determine the sclection
by some people of the matrilineal and by others of the patrilineal
principle in detcrmining status or succession. My opinion is that

533



===== PAGE 272 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

our knowledge and understanding are not sufficient to permit us
to deal with this problem in any satisfactory manner [RADCLIFFE-
BROWN 1952b:48].

This admission of explanatory impotence was repeated in 1941 for th‘e
entire field of kinship terminology, one of the lifelong fog ‘of his
search for lawful principles: “If you ask the question, ‘how is it that
the Omaha (or any tribe we have considered) have the system they
do?’, then it is obvious that the method of structural analysis does not
afford an answer” (1952b:85). With this admission we are brought
back to a point remarkably close to that of the Boasxgns. For, ot
only is structural-functional analysis incapable of answering t‘he ](I.HdS
of ;lussh'ons which have occupied the minds of social scientists since
the cighteenth century and the dreams and mytbs of primitive and
folk philosophers since the dawn of time, but let it be known, hence-
forth and forever more, that no one, no other school, shall ever ﬁqd the
answers to these riddles. For the structural-functional 1n§thod “is Fhe
only method by which we hope ultimately to arrive at valid g’?enerallza»
tions about the nature of human society” (ibid.:86). Anything that a
synchronic study cannot do, cannot be done; apd, as we have seen,
causal explanations have no place in a s_vnchro_mc study. The missing
ingredient is, of course, history, but to establish any probability for
historical explanations, “we should need to haye a knowledge of the
preceding conditions and events which we certzur}ly do not Possesiand
to which I do not think we shall ever attain” (ibid.:50). It is the “can-
not be done” which must strike a generation already acct}smmcd to
the search for the origin of life in the conditions of the prlmal‘a’(mo-
sphere five billion years before our time as‘oddly unprophetic. To
adopt a sociological perspective, which Radchﬁ'etBrown, were he alive
today, might appreciate, does science shackle 1t-sc1f to such narrow
prospects, if not out of obedience to a social function?

THE NEW DISMAL SCIENCE

For an explanation of this function, Dorothy Gregg levld
Elgin Williams (1948) proposed an analogy between thel entire syn-
chronic functionalist movement and the classical laissez-faire floctr|nes
of economics. Although frequently incorrect in fact and ethxcall‘y en-
tirely too wild and presumptuous (KROEBER 1049:318 cz{l]cd it an
“Authoritarian Panacea”), this analogy, nonetheless, requires sc.nou.s
consideration. It is an undeniable consequence of both the Malinow-
skian and Radcliffe-Brownian versions of functionalism that every sor;
of institution, from witchcraft to war, receives its due as a functiona

534

.

19. British Social Anthropology

contribution to the welfare and maintenance of the social system. As
the outraged leftleaning economists saw it, . . . predisposed to think
that all's well, social scientists will devote their time to metaphysical
eulogy, inventing high sounding purposes for the most absurd and per-
nicious customs while their actual social consequences go unregarded”
(GREGG and WILLIAMS 1948:508).

I believe that an objective appraisal of the contribution of the
structural-functionalists requires one to acknowledge the streak of
intellectual know-nothingism which flourished in their work despite
the ostensible emphasis upon scientism and orderliness. This negative,
narrowed-down view of the world, brought on by the deliberate use of
blinders to blot out the significance of history, is not as pronounced as
in the case of the Boasians, nor is it as politically reactionary as Gregg
and Williams claim it to be. Like the Boasians, most of the British so-
cial anthropologists would probably pass muster as left-wing liberals or
socialists. Their emphasis upon the orderliness of contemporary sys-
tems was not, as Gregg and Williams would have it, part of an attempt
to prove that all was well in the world in order to sustain the belief that
“Capitalism is human nature, and the social organization of modern
times, with its depressions, imperialism and war,” is a necessary part
of the human condition. The functionalists may have been naive, but
they were not insensitive. I venture to guess that the question was not
so much whether the world contained evils, but rather whether there
was any likelihood that less evil substitutes were about to be found.

The point here, however, is not to criticize the functionalists for
their political and ethical beliefs, about which we are at any rate very
badly informed. The know-nothingism to which I refer is a scientific
rather than an cthical problem. It is an affliction which leads the
functionalists to ignore, or even deliberately obscure, the amount of
order that human history exhibits. Its most serious intellectual conse-
quence is that it fails to come to grips with the fact that the evolution-
ary careers of both bioforms and sociocultural systems consist of an
array of eminently functional structures, all doomed to extinction.
Dinosaurs were no less a marvel of consistency, coordination, and
continuity than the mammals which replaced them; similarly there is
ample justification for the sympathetic wonder with which an anthro-
pologist describes the subtle perfections of a beautifully organized
patrilineal, patrilocal Omaha system. What history teaches us, how-
ever, is that the great issues of any period are not bound up with the

question of which element in the structure or which structure as a
whole is functional. Rather, it is a matter of which of a number of al-
ternative structures is the most functional under the specific condi-

535



===== PAGE 273 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tions which evolution has provided for them. Without recourse to
diachronic data, the whole question of degrees of functional adaptive-
ness is shut out, and yet surely there is no subject of more vital concern
to social science than the prospects for survival of our own way of life
and of the ways of life of our contemporaries, both primitive and
civilized. Failure to come to grips with this domain of problems is not
an ethical fault, or at least need not, as Gregg and Williams demand, be
phrased as such. It may very well be that many of those functional
adaptations, which “liberals” and “leftists” find most odious, are going
to survive for a long time to come. This does not relieve social
science of the burden of studying the diachronic and synchronic con-
ditions responsible for the origin, perpetuation, and dissemination of
cultural differences and similarities any more than the likelihood of a
more pleasant prospect would constitute by itself sufficient reason for
ignoring the blights of the past.

THE DISMAL CASE OF POLITICAL
ORGANIZATION

The treatment accorded the subject of political organization
was perhaps the most serious victim of the synchronic approach. In
1940 Meyer Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard edited a volume of con-
tributions by their fellow social anthropologists in which the structure
of African political systems was defined in a lasting manner for a large
professional audience. Yet, it is difficult to imagine a less propitious
combination of place and subject for synchronic analysis. The fact that
direct European political control, especially of the interior, goes back
only about one hundred years does not mean that in the days of
Stanley and Livingstone a pristine ethnographic situation existed in
Africa. For as surely as the slave-run plantation system of the New
World sounded the death knell of American aboriginal societies, it also
marked the beginning of vast upheavals of human populations in
Africa. For something like three hundred and fifty years the “Dark
Continent” was utilized as a breeding ground for cheap and docile
labor. It is estimated that forty million Africans were caught up in the
slave trade in one way or another, although possibly only as few as
fourtcen million were still alive when they got to their destinations
overseas. Advancing before this scourge were shock waves of wars, mi-
grations, political upheavals, and vast demographic changes. In such a
context, restriction to an ethnographic present of the 1930’s, in the
name of empiricism, has little to commend it.

536

19. British Social Anthropology

UNDOING THE DAMAGE

~ Distortions introduced by means of the synchronic focus in

African Political Systems threatened to reduce our understanding of
state formation to a shambles. Apparently oblivious of, or uninterested
in, the fact that for every other continent a close correspondence be-
tween state systems and high population density had been established
beyond a doubt, Fortes and Evans-Pritchard reached the conclusion
that “it would be incorrect to suppose that governmental institutions
are found in those societies with greatest densities. The opposite
seems to be equally likely judging by our material” (rorTEs and EvaNs-
PRITCHARD 1940:7-8). This conclusion was based on the evidence pro-
vided by six case studies, the Zulu, Ngwato, Bemba, Nuer, Tallensi, and
Logpli. R. F. Stevenson (1965) has taken each of these cases, applied |
a diachronic perspective, utilizing sources available in any major li-
brary, and reversed or seriously modified every negative instance.

Stevenson shows how Zulu territory and population were influenced
by the compression of the Bantu frontier under the shock of British
anq Boer penetration. M. Gluckman’s 3.5 persons per square mile
estimate accepted by Fortes and Evans-Pritchard is replaced with a
ﬁgur}e of 20 per square mile for the Shaka period (pre-1850), with the
possibility of densities as high as 46 per square mile. The historical !
data requires a similar upward revision for nineteenth-century Ngwato
population. For the Bemba, Stevenson shows that the paradox of
low population density and state apparatus is “an illusion” created
by the collapsing of history into the ethnographic present and the
consequent neglect of the effect of the advent of British indirect rule
upon the aboriginal local political monopoly over slave and ivory
trade: The Nuer paradox of acephalous polity combined with “high
density” also turns out to be illusory. With the upward revision of
the nineteenth-century Zulu and Ngwato densities, the figure of 7 per
square mile for the Nuer fits into the theoretically expected sequence.
The Logoli, who have a population of 391 per square mile, but al-
legedly no state system, probably had a nineteenth-century density
closer to 70 per square mile. They were surrounded on all sides by
state-organized societies and, in addition to possessing a number of
statelike features, were partially under the control of their neighbors.
The most startling case is that of the Tallensi, who have come to
serve as the classic instance of an “acephalous society” due to Fortes’
(1?4;:1949) elaborate descriptions of their kinship ideology. Elliot
Skinner had previously pointed the way for Stevenson:

537


===== PAGE 274 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Fortes’ insistence on the acephalous nature of Tallensi society
stems from his failure to consider that these people had been de-
feated and dispersed by the British at the turn of the century and
had probably lost a great deal of their organization. The society he
describes can be compared to a modern community arbitrarily
divorced from its nation state [SKINNER 1964:7].

Far from being acephalous, as Stevenson shows, the Tallensi inhabited
an area which had been controlled before the advent of the British by
the Mamprusi kingdom.

It must be emphasized that Stevenson’s brilliant defense of the
population density-state formation hypothesis in Africa does not rest
with the reformulation of the Fortes and Evans-Pritchard materials.
Historical and demographic evidence from all over the continent is also
reviewed, including the most puzzling case of all, the Ibo. In total, the
evidence is overwhelming that African political systems, like those
found almost everywhere else, show a definite relationship to density
phenomena. Stevenson’s use of readily available and abundant histori-
cal sources to correct the conclusions of the structural-functionalists
jeopardizes the credibility of the “pseudo-history” excuse for syn-
chronic specialization. At any rate, Radcliffe- Brown’s (1950:2) assertion
that “We cannot have a history of African institutions” can no longer
be taken as anything more than a rationalization for avoiding a con-
frontation with the past.

WAS JUNOD RIGHT?

Among the more sensational rebuttals of Radcliffe-Brown’s
position is Murdock’s (1959a) culture history approach to African
institutions, in which there is a fateful return to the article which
started it all, “The Mother’s Brother in South Africa.” Reviewing the
evidence for Junod’s “pseudo history” of matrilineal descent, Murdock
strikes at the roots of the structural-functionalist movement. According
to Murdock, the speculative shoe belongs on the other foot. Radcliffe-
Brown’s argument with Junod represented an “opposition between
sound historical scholarship and untrammeled sociological specula-
tion” (ibid.:378). There is every reason to believe that the Bathonga
had passed through an earlier matrilineal phase. This does not, of
course, signify that Radcliffc- Brown’s synchronic interpretation was in-
correct but that his conclusions require further interpretation in rela-
tionship to the probable trajectory of Thonga history.

538

19. British Social Anthropology

FRED EGGAN AND THE RESUMPTION
OF DIACHRONIC RESEARCH

It must be made clear that the end of the synchronic obsession
has been brought about less by this kind of attack than by a gradual
drift among the younger generation of British social anthropologists
toward combining diachronic and synchronic interests. This reconcilia-
tion may actually have been stimulated by Radcliffe- Brown himself,
upon his return to Oxford in 1937 as a result of his American
experience.

Certainly, the most profound effect of his sojourn at Chicago was
the development of a point of view, most impressively represented in
the work of Fred Eggan, by which structural-functionalist principles
were combined with the Americanist’s concern with historical docu-
ments. By the time of Radcliffe-Brown’s departure, Eggan (1937) had
already achieved a brilliant synthesis of the structural-functional and
the historical-particularist approaches. Using what he later called the
“method of controlled comparison,” Eggan (1954) attempted to ex-
plain puzzling variations in Crow terminology among the Choctaw,
Creek, Chickasaw, and Cherokee, a group of southeastern United
States tribes which had been exposed to a similar set of acculturative
pressures. Eggan demonstrated that length of time and degree of ex-
posure matched the amount of departure in the terminological systems
from a matrilineal Crow type to something more closely resembling a
patrilineal Omaha type.

It is difficult to discover any definite historical link between Eggan
and Radcliffe- Brown’s students and colleagues in England. Among the
contributors to African Systems of Kinship and Marriage (roroE and
RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1950), only Audrey Richards shows an inclination
toward the kind of comparison which Eggan had proposed. Fggan’s
name does not appear in the volume’s index, although he was a con-
tributor to the Radcliffe-Brown Festschrift (ForTES 1949)

THE COLLAPSE OF SYNCHRONISM

) In 1954, Eggan was still predicting that the social anthropolo-
gists would eventually become more interested in diachronic studies:
“Ultimately the British anthropologists will discover that time per-
spective is also important and will encourage archacology and historical
research” (1954:755). According to Raymond Firth (1951), however,
this interest had already reached important dimensions before the

539



===== PAGE 275 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

1950’s. Rejecting Murdock’s (1951) characterization of social anthro-
pology as not interested in history, Firth cites a number of cases in
which his colleagues had made an attempt to concern themsclves with
social change (e.g, MAIR 1938; WILSON and HUNTER 19Q30; EVANS-
PRITCHARD 1049). Firth (1951:486) correctly emphasizes the im-
portance of culturecontact studies, a theme coincident with the
formalization of acculturation research by American scholars (RED-
FIELD, LINTON, and HERSKOVITS 1936), as one of the sources of dia-
chronic comparisons. For example, Monica Hunter (Wilson) had
written extensively of Pondoland acculturation as early as 1936. Dur-
ing the Second World War, the interest in contact phenomena in-
tensified, and both Malinowski (1945) and Wilson and Hunter (1945)
came out with elaborate theoretical statements concerned with the
trajectory of colonial relations, especially in Africa. Firth (1954) cites
Read (1942), Schapera (1947), Hogbin (1939), Richards (1954), Freed-
man (1950), Gluckman (1955a), and Berndt (1952), among others, as
having produced social anthropological studies involving the analysis
of social change. It must be made clear that important ethnological
contributions employing a wide variety of historical research methods
have become an accepted feature of the most recent period of British
social anthropology (cf. STENNING 1950; M. G. SMITH 1960; J. A. BARNES
1954). According to C. Daryll Forde (1965:19):

There is no need to labour the point that outsiders may have pro-
vided documents concerning the forebears of an unlettered people
which can be of great value to a social anthropologist. The re-
covery of such documentation and its study, when this is done
with detailed knowledge and understanding of the contemporary
ethnography, has enabled social anthropologists to analyse devel-
opments of structure and process over considerable time spans.
The importance of the search for, and the use of, documentation
both indigenous (where it exists) and foreign, is accepted as obvi-
ous by the anthropologist as by any other student of some phase or
aspect of the life of a people. We need to recognise however, that
the extent to which such documentation can be found is very vari-
able, and that for many peoples in Africa it may be nonexistent
before the turn of the century.

It must also be emphasized, however, that this return to diachronic
interests has not as yet contributed to a revival of diachronic theory.
Indeed, as Leach (1961a:1) has commented, “Most of my colleagues
are giving up the attempt to make comparative generalizations; instead
they have begun to write impeccably detailed historical ethnographies
of particular peoples.”

540

.

19. British Social Anthropology

EDMUND LEACH

Leach himself is responsible for one of the most effective
critiques of the structural-functional model. In his Political Systems
of Highland Burma (1954), he was obliged to analyze a region-wide
process involving slow but drastic changes of democratic dispersed hill
peoples (gumlao type) to democratic-in-theory intermediate types
(gumsa), to stratified lowland irrigation rice kingdoms (Shan). This
dynamic could lead to change in the reverse direction as well, involving
the progressive alteration of peoples of Shan background to the
gumlao condition. Leach refused to see this situation in terms of a
static model: “We can no longer be satisfied with attempting to set up
a typology of fixed systems. We must recognise that few if any of the
societies which a modern ficld worker can study show any marked ten-
dency towards stability” (LEacH 1954:285). Leach’s treatment of
evolving political modalities in Burma leaned heavily on an ecological
analysis, since the extreme types, Shan and gumlao, were obviously
dependent upon contrasting forms of cultivation and occupied differ-
ent habitats. The promise of greater attention to such matters has not
been fulfilled. Instead, as we shall sce in a moment, Leach’s fancy has
been captured by Lévi-Strauss.

RAYMOND FIRTH

Among those who have long been dissatisfied with the syn-
chronic limitations of structural-functionalist theory, the name of
Raymond Firth is outstanding. Through his concept of social organiza-
tion, Firth hoped to achieve a closer approximation to actual behavior-
stream events, espccially to the variations which are largely ignored in
the static formulations of social structure. From a study of these
variations, Firth hoped to be able to discover the processes by which
fundamental structural changes occurred (FIRTH 1954; 1961:40ff.). Ac-
cording to Firth, neglect of such variations was responsible for the fact
that “structural analysis alone cannot interpret social change” (ibid.:
35). In 1951 Firth saw British social anthropology, after a quarter of
a century of structural-functional typologies, moving “slowly and un-
evenly toward a more systematic study of variation, including variation
over time” (1951:488). But in 1954 he admitted, “We are hardly yet
on the threshold of any general theory of a dynamic kind which will
enable us to handle comprehensively the range of materials within our
normal anthropological sphere” (quoted in FirTH 1964:7). In 1962

541



===== PAGE 276 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Firth went so far as to base most of his discussion of “dynamic theory”
upon a reconsideration of the contributions of Marx (ibid.:7-29). Al-
though scarcely prepared to embrace a Marxist-derived variety of
historical determinism, Firth has recently made it clear that he believes
no approach to a theory of change can be attempted which does not
seriously reconsider Marx’s proposals concerning the importance of the
material conditions of production. In Firth, we secem almost to have
come full circle, to a social anthropology whose main concern is the
understanding of sociocultural change. Firth’s explanation of this phe-
nomenon is as follows:

The present day interest in dynamic theory for social anthro-
pology is partly a response to increasing perception of deficiencies
in earlier theoretical approaches. But it is partly a response to
changed conditions in our field of observation itsclf, and it has
been influenced by modern intellectual movements of a more
general kind [ibid.:28].

One assumes that, above all, the change in question reflects a Britain
no longer interested in preserving the world’s largest colonial empire.

MYSTICISM, CYNICISM, AND MINI
SKIRTS

With the collapse of the structural-functionalist program,
British social anthropology has entered a phase of confused and con-
flicting trends. It is clear, however, that the return to diachronic data
has not as yet contributed to a revival of diachronic theory. Nor should
we expect, from all that has been said about historical particularism,
that mere attention to change over time will produce thcoretically
interesting results. Indeed, British social anthropology may be on the
verge of something quite different from a return to the formulation
of diachronic-synchronic regularities. For some famous Britishers,
the waning of influence of Radcliffe-Brown and the intensification of
historical research has resulted in complete disillusion with the en-
tire scientist pretension. FEvans-Pritchard is the most outspoken
heretic in this regard. For him, the end of Radcliffe-Brown’s reign has
meant a return to the dichotomy between history and science as
proposed by the Southwest German school of philosophy (see p.
344) and, closer to home, by the philosopher Karl Popper (1957).
The resemblance to Kroeber is striking:

Social anthropology has more in common with history than with
natural science . . . it studies societies as moral or symbolic sys-

542

D

19. British Social Anthropology

tems and not as natural systems . . . is less interested in process
than in design . . . seeks patterns and not laws, demonstrates
consistency and not necessary relations . . . interprets rather
than explains . . . [EVANS-PRITCHARD 1951:60-61].

Up to the present nothing even remotely resembling what are
called laws in the natural sciences has been adduced—only rather
naive deterministic, teleological, and pragmatic assertions. The
generalizations which have so far been attempted have, moreover,
been so vague and general as to be, even if true, of little use, and
they have rather easily tended to become mere tautologies and
platitudes on the level of common sense deduction [ibid.:57].

I do not believe that there can ever be a science of society which
resembles the natural sciences . . . [ibid.:117].

Social anthropology is best regarded as an art and not as a social
science [ibid.:85].

Fortes, who has been the most faithful of Radcliffe-Brown’s pupils,
warns that Evans-Pritchard “contrived to throw out the baby of func-
tionalist theory with the bath-water of evolutionary speculation”
(1953a:32). To save the baby, Fortes recommends that we return to
a view of man which places him squarely in the midst of nature and
which invokes a remembrance of his origin in the processes of organic
evolution. Although these reminders of the material basis of sociocul-
tural systems are better than nothing, Fortes” defense of the scientist
posture does not really break new ground:

I hold with Frazer and Haddon, Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown
that there are regularities independent of period and place in so-
cial organization and culture, and that the main aim of social
anthropology is to investigate the general tendencies, or laws,
manifested in them [ibid.:35].

There is no room to doubt that what is meant here are the uniform-
ities which occur in social life despite the lack of regularity in history,
‘Iather than the uniformities which result because of historical regular-
ity: “It is perhaps superfluous to add that this view does not imply a
belief in mechanical determinism in human life or a denigration of
man’s intellectual and spiritual qualities” (ibid.).

Leach has been no less outspoken than Evans-Pritchard concerning
his “dislike” of the comparative method as proposed by Radcliffe-
Brown (Leacm 1g61a:2). Instead of circling back to the historical-
particularist position, which is implicit in the reaction of Firth and
Evans-Pritchard, and even in Fortes when he invokes “evolution,”

543



===== PAGE 277 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Leach has extended himself along the lines which have made of
Lévi-Strauss a French national treasure. As an “intellectual” (one who
knows how to say less than what he means but more than you can
understand), Leach believes that the “butterfly-collecting followers”
(ibid.:1) of Radcliffe-Brown have got to start rethinking the really
basic issues. However, what Leach considers the basic issue can only
leave the rest of us trembling over our failure to appreciate what is
really important in life. We have not properly conceptualized the
difference between incorporation (as into a lineage) versus alliance (as
through marriage). Previous models of this duality have been overly
ethnocentric. A correct formulation requires a mathematical approach,
preferably a topological one, because topology is nonmetric, thus con-
forming to the criteria of Lévi-Strauss’ “mechanical models” (sec p.
498). It turns out, however, that the topological presentation can easily
be omitted. The central concern settles down to the rather simple idea
that relations of incorporation are emically phrased as those of com-
mon substance (blood, milk, bone, etc.), whereas alliance relationships
are viewed in terms of metaphysical forces. In keeping with this dis-
tinction, there are different kinds of witches: those found in one’s own
lineage have an ability to control their powers to do evil and theirs is a
deliberate witchcraft. But affinal or alliance-type witches are like fate:
they do their evil as a result of “uncontrolled mystic influence.” Other
conclusions relating the varicties of witchcraft to intensities of political
power are also advanced, but we are warned that there can be such a
thing as too much “popshy” (to use Leach’s term) for one night
(ibid.:27). In the same volume of essays, Leach attempts an interpre-
tation of the myth of Cronos and the representation of time in world-
wide ritual calendars. One is amazed at the imaginative fashion in
which Durkheim’s conception of time as a projection of the collective
consciousness is vindicated. For more daring myth fanciers, there is
“Lévi-Strauss in the Garden of Eden” (LEAcH 1961¢), a Biblical exe-
gesis the nature of whose correspondence to empirically verifiable
facts is exceeded in ambiguity only by what Lévi-Strauss has achieved
in his flirtations with Hegel's dialectic.

There are, of course, more serious sides to Leach. His contribution to
the typology of the varieties of cross-cousin marriage will endure as a
solid achievement. But what is most distressing to view is the veritable
debauchery of method which has succeeded Radcliffe-Brown’s puritan-
ical reign. This weakening of the empirical fibers (can it be the same
influence which has made London the exporter of all manner of musi-
cal and sartorial novelty?) stands out in morbid contrast to the utiliza-

544

f

19. British Social Anthropology

tion of the linguistic model by American cultural anthropologists in
their study of emic categories.

The path along which Leach has followed Lévi-Strauss leads in a
remarkably parallel fashion to the swamp of linguistic analysis, where
a search for systems of contrastive meanings is now being carried
out by some of the best brains in the United States. Leach undoubt-
edly deplores the cramped vision of the world which serves its scholars
a steady diet of componential, transformational, and algorithmic anal-
yses of how to distinguish rashes from boils in Subanum, types of
firewood in Chiapas, and varieties of rice in Hanundo. But there is a
limit to the amount of “popshy” which anthropology can absorb, even
when it comes wrapped up in pages torn from topological texts. With
the discovery that synchronic structural-functional models were of little
use for the analysis of the Kachin, with the realization that after fifty
years of polemic concerning the meaning of descent and marriage, no
one yet could define them to his liking, Leach indeed had a lot of
“rethinking” to carry out. Instead of rethinking his way to an unopera-
tional, intuitive, synchronic form of the dialectic, he might well have
pondered why he so devoutly believes, “Now whether or not evolu-
tionary doctrine is true, it is certainly quite irrelevant for the under-
standing of present-day human societies . . .” (LEACH 1957:125).

THE UNCLEAN AND UNHYPHENATED

The publicly announced bankruptcy of the structuralfunc-
tional school provides us with a fresh perspective on one of the most
animated controversies in the history of anthropological theory, that
between Radcliffe-Brown and Malinowski. From Radcliffe Brown’s
“Protest” (1949b) over Gregg and Williams’ “The Dismal Science of
Functionalism,” one gathers that the worst of the injuries sustained
appears not to have been the accusation of reactionary politics but the
lumping of the two functionalists in the same category. The indigna-
tion of Radcliffe-Brown was monumental, as he took the opportunity
not only to chastise Gregg and Williams, but to deride Malinowski:

Malinowski has explained that he is the inventor of functionalism,
to which he gave its name. His definition of it is clear; it is the
theory or doctrine that every feature of culture of any people past
or present is to be explained by reference to seven biological
needs of individual human beings. I cannot speak for the other
writers to whom the label functionalist is applied by the authors,
though I very much doubt if Redfield or Linton accepts this doc-

545



===== PAGE 278 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

trine. As for myself I reject it entircly, regarding it as uscless and
worse. As a consistent opponent of Malinowski’s functionalism
I may be called an anti-functionalist [RADCLIFFE-BROWN 194gb:
320-21].

I have no wish to follow further the irresponsible extravagances of
the authors. They certainly do not deserve to be taken seriously.
I only ask to be permitted to register a personal protest against
a procedure, for which they can find no possible justification or
excuse, by which, having applied to me the label “functionalist,”
they attribute to me, first, acceptance of the Malinowskian theory
of culture, which I reject, and second, the quite impossible view
that all customs and institutions of any society are right and good,
and I suppose they might add that all socially accepted beliefs are
true [ibid.:322].

It is true that I make use of the concept of function, and I did so
in my lectures at Cambridge and the London School of Economics
before the time when Malinowski began to study anthropology.
All physiologists make use of the same concept, but they are not
called functionalists [ibid.].

To the outsider, and in retrospect, this fuss about being identified
as a Malinowskian functionalist seems rather like a tempest in a tea-
pot. Both brands of functionalism arose in opposition to the dia-
chronic schools of the evolutionary and diffusionist traditions. Both
devoted their major efforts to intensive field experience, and both
employed an organismic analogy as their main analytical crutch. As one
of Malinowski’s students has said,

Both denied the value of speculative reconstruction of history;
both emphasized the need to study existing social institutions;
both conceived of cultures as wholes; both developed a concept of
function in terms of the social effect of any custom or institution

[kABERRY 1957:75].

The Radcliffe-Brownians, it is true, tended to be more comparative and
were guided, initially at least, by the hope of achieving synchronic
laws. We have seen, however, that these laws turned out to be state-
ments concerning universal psychosocial tendencies by which cultural
differences and similarities could be “interpreted” but by which they
could not be predicted or retrodicted. In compensation, Malinowski’s
ethnographic contributions were unexcelled. His Trobriand Island
monographs (MALINOWSKI 1922; 1929b; 1935) still constitute the great-
est cthnographic description ever achieved. Although Malinowski’s
concept of function developed along a trajectory, which removed it

546

v—-»

19. British Social Anthropology

further and further from Radcliffe- Brown’s formulation, there initially
was a very strong resemblance between them.

EARLY MALINOWSKI

Malinowski's earliest publication was about the family in
Australia and bore the subtitle, “A Sociological Study.” It contained
a defense of Edward Westermarck’s position on the universality of the
nuclear family. Although the theme of social solidarity is not conspic-
uous, the conclusions pay lip service to Durkheimian functions:

Social institutions should in the first place be defined by their
social functions; if the functions—religious, magical, legal, eco-
nomic, etc.—of the totemic class, the exogamous class, and other
divisions be known and compared with the functions of the indi-
vidual family, each of these institutions will appear as occupying a
definite place in the social organization, and playing a determi-
nate part in the life of the community. And such a knowledge
would afford a firm basis for further speculations.

In the foregoing investigations we have omitted this side of the
problem partly in order to avoid increasing the bulk of the mono-
graph, but above all, that we might develop more clearly the
features of the institution described [1913a:303].

In a footnote to this passage, Malinowski promised to go beyond the
family to study the clans and sections in terms of their “social func-
tions.” It was in fact Radcliffe-Brown (1931) and not Malinowski
who was to achieve the promised analysis. As J. A. Barnes (1963:xvi)
has noted, Radcliffe-Brown’s review of this book already contained the
seeds of their future disagreements:

Radcliffe-Brown reviewed Malinowski’s book in 1914 and after
commenting that “it is by far the best example in English of
scientific method in dealing with the descriptions of the customs
and institutions of a savage people” went on to argue that Mali-
nowski’s statement of the theoretical framework for the study of
kinship (Chapter VI) was “the least successful in the book. The
Australian notions rclating to kinship cannot be studied without
reference to what the author calls ‘group relationships’; in other
words, the relationship systems, classes, and clans. As Mr. Mali-
nowski has confined himself, quite justifiably, to a study of the
individual family relationships, this part of his work remains im-
perfect.”” Here we have the criticism, often repeated, that
Malinowski could not sec a descent system existing save as an
“extension” of relationships within the elementary family.

547



===== PAGE 279 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

SEX, FAMILY, AND THE INDIVIDUAL

Malinowski’s interest in the family provided a major focus for
his work up until the ill-fated switch to problems of Colonial accultur-
ation. It led him quite logically to a confrontation with the theories of
Freud, which he put to the test, guided by books sent to him by C. G.
Seligman (MALINOWSKI 1927a:ix), during his Trobriand fieldwork. The
matrilineal inclinations of this group provided the world with the first
ficld examination of Freud’s theories concerning the universality of
the Oedipus complex, as well as of many other Freudian notions such as
racial conscience and infant sexuality. Barnouw (1963:59ff.) points out
that Malinowski’s conclusions were not unequivocal. But the net im-
pression of Sex and Repression in Savage Society is that of a substantial
blow from which Freud’s original doctrines were never able fully to
recover. It was certain at least that relations between father and son in
a matrilineal and avunculocal descent system were radically different
from what Freud had been able to observe in his Viennese patriarchy.

The influence of Malinowski’s work on sex and the family earned
for him a reputation outside of anthropology which was in no way
matched by Radcliffe- Brown’s arid discussions of the lineage principle.
He had a predilection for juicy titles (The Sexual Life of Savages), and
his flamboyant treatment of the Trobriands as a Rousseauan sexual
paradise is properly emphasized in Leach’s (1965a:36) attempt to ex-
plain Malinowski’s public success. But I do not accept Leach’s sour
conclusion, obviously intended to include Radcliffe-Brown, that “there
are many lesser, more pedantic men who in some ways can be con-
sidered much better anthropologists.” Malinowski’s concern with sex,
family life, and individual psychology is no evidence of his lack of
awareness of the Durkheimian kind of functional relations with which
the structural-functionalists had become obsessed. Malinowski’s func-
tionalism was a bigger, potentially more powerful, and emically more
interesting armamentarium than anything Radcliffe-Brownians could
muster. It both included and surpassed the principles with which the
structural-functionalists operated.

TEMPEST IN A TEAPOT

Malinowski’s explanation of the universality of nuclear family
incest prohibitions is not at variance with a structural-functional ap-
proach. Indeed, his appeal to individual biopsychological givens is a

548

. ol

19. British Social Anthropology

necessary part of any structural-functional “explanation.” Malinowski’s
interpretation of all incest prohibitions is that they originate within the
family and function to preserve the family and thus the rest of social
organization (see p. 198 for earlier precedents):

In any type of civilization in which custom, morals, and law
would allow incest, the family could not continue to exist. At
maturity we would witness the breaking up of the family, hence
complete social chaos and an impossibility of continuing cultural
tradition. Incest would mean the upsetting of age distinctions,
the mixing up of generations, the disorganization of sentiments
and a violent exchange of roles at a time when the family is the
most important educational medium. No society could exist under
such conditions. The alternative type of culture under which in-
cest is excluded, is the only one consistent with the existence of
social organization and culture [MALINOWSKI 1927a:251].

There can be no basis other than scholastic snobbism for setting this
interpretation in opposition to a more “sociological” approach which
would start with extrafamilial group incest prohibition and extend
these to the nuclear family. Many of Radcliffe-Brown’s structural
principles assume the existence of the nuclear family (as in the case of
the “male mother”); in both approaches it is not the survival of the
individual which is at stake but that of the “social organization and
culture.”

MALINOWSKI'S SCHEME

With the gradual formalization of Malinowski’s theory of cul-
ture during the 1930’s, a propagandistic exaggeration of the incompati-
bilities between the two approaches took shape. Malinowski came up
with a list of seven basic individual biopsychological needs for the
satisfaction of which the social organism or culture was a “vast instru-
mental reality.” The latter was made effective by a series of direct and
indirect, primary and secondary collective needs and collective instru-
mentalities in the form of institutions and symbolic projections,
presentations, and defenses. The scheme, as laid out in 1939, is illus-
trated in the table on pp. 550-351.

It is obvious that in a scheme so vast as Malinowski’s, everything has
its place. Thus, the set of “instrumental needs” is very close to the Durk-
heimian notion of social structure. But Malinowski chose the same
occasion to insist that everything rested on the individual needs and
that therefore an unbridgeable gap had opened between on the one

549



===== PAGE 280 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

.l

19. British Social Anthropology

Symbolic and Responses to
Responses to Integrative Symbolic and
Instrumental Needs Needs Integrative Needs

Economics

Social control

Education

Political organization

Knowledge

Magic, religion

Art, sports,

Basic Needs Direct Responses Instrumental Needs
NUTRITION Commissariat Renewal of cultural
apparatus
REPRODUCTION Marriage and
family
BODILY COMFORTS Domicile and Charter of behavior
dress and other sanctions
SAFETY Protection and
defense
RELAXATION System of play Renewal of personnel
and repose
MOVEMENT Activities and system Organization of force
of communication and competition
GROWTH Training and
apprenticeship

hand “pure functionalism” and, on the other, “hyphenated func-
tionalism” (a splendid riposte upon Radcliffe-Brown’s structural-
functionalism—cf. BRADSHAW-MORREN 1966) :

Professor Radcliffe-Brown is, as far as I can see, still developing
and deepening the views of the French sociological school. He
thus has to neglect the individual and disregard biology.
Functionalism differs from other sociological theories more defi-
nitely, perhaps, in its conception and defmition of the individual
than in any other respect. The functionalist includes in his analy-
sis not merely the emotional as well as intellectual side of mental
processes, but also insists that man in his full biological reality
has to be drawn into our analysis of culture. The bodily needs and
environmental influences, and the cultural relation to them, have
thus to be studied side by side [MALINOWSKI 1939:939].

Admittedly, Malinowski’s listing of needs is rather ad hoc—physiol-
ogists and psychologists would certainly want to make substantial
emendations—and the logic connecting the various instrumentalities to
their biopsychological base is never more than arbitrary. Nonetheless,
the “hyphenates” cannot convert the virtue of Malinowski’s vivid con-
cern with the full amplitude of individual and social functions into a

550

games

[MALINOWSKI 1939:942]

vice. It would be a less questionable matter were the hyphenates able
in any consistent fashion to stay away from a larger framework of
their own. But one can easily find statements among Radcliffe-
Brown’s definitions of function which are so broad as obviously to
require an accommodation with Malinowski’s ideas, as for example:
“Function may be defined as the total set of relations that a single
social activity or usage or belief has to the total social system” (RraD-
CLIFFE-BROWN 1048:85, italics added).

MALINOWSKI AND EVOLUTIONISM

As we have seen, Radcliffe-Brown accepted a “sociological”
type of evolutionism, of which he considered Spencer to be an early
representative. In Malinowski’s case, there is an even more positive re-
lationship to evolutionary doctrines. Edward Westermarck, “to whose
personal teaching and to whose work” he acknowledged owing “more
than to any other scientific influence” (FirtH 1957:5), was, of course,
an armchair evolutionist of the classical mold. It was to Westermarck
that Malinowski owed his conception of the diachronic and synchronic
universality of the family, an orientation which pervades cvery aspect
and period of his scholarly work. The second most influential figure

551



===== PAGE 281 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

19. British Social Anthropology

in Malinowski’s background was James Frazer, whose evolutionary
view of magic as a pragmatic instrumentality, the forerunner of science,
is a constant theme in Malinowski’s treatment of both magic and
religion.

The recent attempt by philosopher Karl Popper’s student 1. C.
Jarvie (1964) to set Frazer, the evolutionist, off against Malinowski,
the antievolutionary functionalist, has been properly rebuffed by
Leach (1965a). Jarvie displays a poverty of historicism, which is a dis-
mal science all its own, in failing to apprehend the strength of Mali-
nowski’s evolutionary interests. As Malinowski put it, “The functional
view obviously does not dispose of a sound and limited evolutionary
conception of culture, though it discourages any hope of giving an
exact reconstruction of human development” (1927b:41). Malinow-
ski’s conviction that “savage” cultures in general were inferior to
civilized cultures provides an essential clue to his long-term devotion
to “practical anthropology.” Although I shall discuss this aspect of
Malinowski’s career in a separate section, it should suffice to silence
Jarvie that as Malinowski matured, he displayed increasing permissive-
ness toward evolutionary reconstructions which were anything but
“exact.” During the Second World War, which Malinowski spent in
the United States, he wrote an effulgent pacan on “freedom.” Aside
from its frankly political commitment, the book is remarkable for its
wedding of functional theory to a universalistic variety of evolution-
ism (MALINOWSKI 1944a). Sweeping generalizations about primitive
stages and developmental sequences are tossed about with no notice-
able indications of restraint:

‘We cannot imagine the earliest beginnings of culture without at
least two social groupings, the family and the horde [ibid.:227].

Inequality in wealth, in the distribution of valuables, of privileges
and enjoyments, starts in human evolution with the first advent of
war [ibid.:194].

Only gradually there emerges a centralized authority within the
tribe, such as the council of elders . . . [ibid.:234].

The carliest ways of using wealth as power are related to magic
and religion [ibid.:247].

We can apply in all evolutionary arguments the principle of the

become the monopoly of one or a few lineages, such a culture
would have become wiped out within a few generations

[ibid.:238].

The central animus of Malinowski’s attacks on evolution concern
the use of “survivals” to reconstruct past evolutionary phases. Here,
antievolutionism and antidiffusionism were merged in a loud chorus
of protest against explanations of cultural facts without due attention
to their fullblooded, living context. Just as Radcliffe-Brown argued
that the mother’s brother/sister’s son relationship was not necessarily
a survival of a matrilineal phase, so too did Malinowski repeatedly
substitute functional interpretations for diffusionist or evolutionist
reconstructions. If you want to know the origin of a fork, he would
argue, then pay heed to the service it renders in conveying food
to the mouth. This attitude, however, reflects a concern with a
question of method rather than fact and was perfectly compatible
with evolutionary ideas. Indeed, both men seem rather to have en-
joyed the image of themselves as having remained aloof from the
fashionable disdain which the Boasians were supposed to have
conferred upon evolutionary theories. (But as we have seen, the
Boasians were, in their own intimate circle, fully convinced that
they too were not really antievolutionists.) Obviously both Malinow-
ski and RadcliffeBrown made the most of this opportunity of
distinguishing themselves from the Americans. Said Malinowski:
“Evolutionism is at present rather unfashionable. Nonetheless, its
main assumptions are not only valid, but they are also indispensable
to the field worker as well as to the student of theory” (1944b:16)
Said Radcliffe-Brown:

Back at the beginning of the century I accepted the theory of
social evolution as a useful working hypothesis. In 1931, when I
spoke of social evolution in my lectures in Chicago, one of the
students pointed out to me that “Boas and Lowie have proved
that there is no such thing as social evolution.” I found that this
was a generally accepted view in the United States. But to my
mind the arguments of Boas, Lowie, and other anti-(cultural)-
evolutionists have no bearing at all on the theory of social cvolu-
tion [1947:80].

But the fact remains that, despite their acceptance of more or less

well-defined evolutionary stages, neither Malinowski nor Radcliffe-

survival of the fittest cultural constitution. . . . Were we to imag- Brown can be credited with contributing to the development of
inc a primitive community where the making of fire, the 5‘;131’& evolutionary theory, except in the negative and critical sense in which
ing of stones, the techniques of food collecting (etc.) . . . ha the Boasians can also be said to have made such a contribution.

552

553



===== PAGE 282 =====

*‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 19. British Social Anthropology

PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN GLASS HOUSES

This brings us to the question of whether as an evolutionist,
openly admiring Spencer’s organismic scheme, in which the super-
organic is rclated to “the physical and biological environment and
the physical, emotional, and mental characteristics of social individ-
uals” (spENcEr 1896:8), Radcliffe-Brown’s disdain for Malinowski’s
more earthy functions can be taken seriously. It would scarcely seem
consistent with Radcliffe-Brown’s professed interest in adaptation
(1952b )to insist upon the irrelevance of the parameters with which
Malinowski was concerned. Indeed, Meyer Fortes, clinging to the
functionalist baby which Evans-Pritchard has almost washed out of
existence, berates the latter for not viewing man in evolutionary
perspective and adds:

When we speak of kinship, chiefship, magic, witchcraft, and so
on, we are using abstractions. But it is not true to say that their
meaning is purely symbolic. For we arrive at them by observing
the general features of human relationships and activities in ex-
ploiting the environment, in speech and in work, in bringing up
children and waging wars, in coming to intellectual and emotional
grips with the inexorable facts of birth and death. Concepts
become meaningless in social anthropology if they cannot be
related to such real activities in their full context of human social
life, the artifacts in which knowledge and skill, beliefs and aspira-
tions are given enduring form and without which mankind could
not survive [FORTES 1953a:34].

The cheapest of all the invidious comparisons between Radcliffe-
Brown and Malinowski is that Malinowski’s list of needs, insofar as
they are universals, cannot explain observed cultural differences and
similarities. (PIDDINGTON 1957:39 attempts to refute this argument.)
But this is precisely the main defect and major characteristic of
Radcliffe-Brown’s “laws.” For those of us outside the teacup, the
major difference on this score is that Malinowski more or less starts
out with his major principles as given, accessible to anyone who
wished to erect a heuristic scheme of necessary biocultural conditions
in the manner of Wissler's universal pattern. Radcliffe-Brown’s prin-
ciples, on the other hand, are much narrower and result from an
attempt to interpret specific sociocultural contrasts. But in both
instances, all that happens is that an institution gets “explained”
by a functional requirement which could just as well serve to “ex-
plain” any other institution you might care to name. It is especially

554

distressing to recall how Max Gluckman poked fun at this aspect of
Malinowski’s theories without sceming to be aware that he and the
rest of the structural-functionalists were equally vulnerable:

There is a myth among anthropologists that one of Malinowski’s
students ended a long thesis: “Our survey of the facts has forced
us to conclude that the function of leadership in primitive so-
cieties is to initiate and organize activities.” Is this much more
of: “There’s ne’cr a villain, dwelling in all Denmark but he’s an
arrant knave” than Malinowski’s . . .. “We could state that the
function of the tribe as a political unit is the organization of force
for policing, defence, and aggression . . . the function of age-
groups is the coordinating of physiological and anatomical char-
acteristics as they develop in the process of growth, and their
transformation into cultural categories. In occupational groups we
sce that the carrying out of skills, techniques, and such activities
as education, law, and power, constitute the integral function of
the group.” [GLUCKMAN 1949:24]

Cranted that this is an appropriate point at which to make fun of
Malinowski’s functionalism, is it any less appropriate with respect to
the hyphenated varicty? Consider, for example, Radcliffe-Brown’s
attempt to turn Malinowski’s explanation of magic inside-out by
stressing social rather than individual needs. For Malinowski, the
most dangerous and uncertain occasions were filled with magic, a
pragmatic attempt to cope with the reality of human means and
ends. For Radcliffe-Brown, magic and ritual in general arise out of
requirements imposed by the social system. The individual's per-
ception of what is dangerous is guided at every point by the commu-
nity (RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1952b:149). Thus if an Andaman Islander is
afraid to eat dugong during his wife’s pregnancy, it is because the
social structure has put the fear into him in order to mark the
importance of his social responsibilities toward his wife and offspring:

The primary basis of ritual . . . is the attribution of ritual value
to objects and occasions which are either themselves objects of
important common interest linking together the persons of a com-

munity or are symbolically representative of such objects
[ibid.:151].

The latitude this formula provides is surely no less than that which
Gluckman attributes to Malinowski. If the members of a commu-
nity repeatedly spend a good deal of time and effort on sacrificing
pigs, making canoe magic, or cutting off foreskins, one can be sure
that in some fashion or other thesc rituals relate to important

555



===== PAGE 283 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

common interests linking them together. Or at least it would be a
dull anthropologist who could not come up with a couple of guesses
along these lines. Incidentally, it is symptomatic of the whole interne-
cine fracas that both interpretations of magic are transparently com-
plementary rather than exclusive. In the words of George Homans:

A study of the theories of Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown illus-
trates a common feature of scientific controversies: two distin-
guished persons talking past one another rather than trying to
find a common ground for discussion, presenting their theories as
alternatives when in fact they are complements [HOMANS 1941:

172].

MALINOWSKI'S APPROACH TO
CULTURAL CHANGE

Between 1929 and 1943 Malinowski published about thirteen
articles on culture change. The ideas they embody, together with
sundry unpublished materials, were put together by Phyllis Kaberry
and brought out after Malinowski’s death as The Dynamics of Culture
Change (1945). Although the point of view adopted may have
seemed quite daring at the time of publication, in retrospect it bears
a heavy burden of conservatism, if not of unreality. The essence of
Malinowski’s theory is that Europeans and Africans are involved in a
give-and-take which must balance out through the development of
“common measures” or compromises in “tasks of common interest”
(1945:72). In order to assess the likelihood of such peaceful and
mutually beneficial adjustments, a scientific contribution which the
anthropologist is duty bound to make to colonial administrators, the
full cultural context of the African and European institutions and
alternatives must be examined. The anthropologist should accept
the task of performing this analysis, making a special effort to
withhold no facts concerning the failure of the Europeans to give as
much as they have taken from the African, without, however, suc-
cumbing “to an outburst of pro-native ranting” (ibid.:s8). Moder-
ation, compromise, and civil service decorum are the ethical bases
for the aspiring “practical anthropologist”:

The ethnographer who has studied culture contact and has
assessed its active forces, its potentialities and dangers, has the
right and duty to formulate his conclusions in a manner in which
they can be seriously considered by those who frame policies
and those who carry them out. He also has the duty to speak as
the Natives’ advocate. But he can go no further. Decisions and the
practical handling of affairs are outside his competence. His pri-

556

Y

19. British Social Anthropology

mary duty is to present facts; to develop concepts theoretically
valid and practically useful; to destroy fictions and empty phrases,
and thus to reveal the forces and factors which are relevant and
active. Through comparative study he can discover and define the
common factor of European intentions and of African response.
He can lay bare the sources of maladjustment. These, at times, he
will find are due to real intrinsic conflict of interests; at times
they arise from faulty assessment of African realities; or again,
from almost adventitious misunderstandings. . . . Knowledge
gives foresight, and foresight is indispensable to the statesman
and to the local administrator, to the educationalist, welfare
worker, and missionary alike. This discovery of long-run tenden-
cies; the capacity of foreseeing and forecasting the future in the
light of full knowledge of all the factors involved; competent
advice on specific questions—these are the tasks of the contact-
cthnographer as a practical expert [ibid.:161-62].

INCOMPETENT ADVICE

Much has happened in Africa since Malinowski’s tour in
1934. We have the benefit of hindsight. But it would scarcely seem
accidental that amid all the events which have taken place, the one
thing that has not happened is compromise. Instead, everywhere in
Africa there occurred a polarization of African nationalist versus
white settler and colonial interests, leading to decisive victories for
the Africans in west, central, and east Africa and continuing
struggle or sharp setbacks in the Portuguese and southern sectors.
The judgment of history lies heavy on those anthropologists who
believed themselves free of ethical involvement because they were
advocates of the “Native” cause before the tribunals of the European
racists while at the same time preaching moderation to the exploited
and underprivileged.

Were it constructive in this context to plunge into a discussion
of ethics, T should raise the question, never entertained by Mali-
nowski, of why the Africans who had been invaded, conquered, en-
slaved, and exploited owed the Europeans anything else in return.
The basic premise of Malinowski’s position involved him in the
assumption that the Europeans had a right to be governing the
Africans and that every future adjustment rightfully demanded that
the European intcrests be given their legal and customary due. Despite
the admonitions to the Europeans that they had better be nice to the
natives or the natives would go on misbehaving, there is a sancti-
monious note in Malinowski’s theory which helps to explain why
anthropology is still a dirty word among many African nationalists:

557



===== PAGE 284 =====

R

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

19. British Social Anthropology

I suggest that first and foremost it would be well to unify, coordi-
nate, and harmonize various policies. For we have already noted
the considerable discrepancy between the enthusiasm of good-will
and educational zcal, and the existence of the color bar; between
the requirements of the scttler and the activities of the agricul-
tural department, which may develop economic ambitions be-
yond the legitimate scope of their realization. Whenever
Europeans plan the settlement of large portions of any colony,
segregation and color bar become inevitable. This ought to be
remembered by the enthusiastic minority of good-will, who may
involuntarily raise high hopes through such doctrines as the
Brotherhood of Man, the Gospel of Labor, and the possibilities
of assimilation through education, dress, manners, and morals. If,
from the outset, it were possible to make quite clear in preaching
the gospel of civilization that no full identity can ever be reached;
that what are being given to the Africans are new conditions of
existence, better adapted to their needs but always in harmony
with European requirements, the smaller would be the chances of
a strong reaction and the formation of new, potentially dangerous
nationalisms [ibid.:160].

A LARGE GRAIN OF DISMAL TRUTH

Perhaps Kroeber’s (p. 331) reaction to Gregg and Williams’
link-up of functionalism with a conservative political position was just
a little too self-righteous. It was, after all, Malinowski himself who said
in a context different but not altogether remote from colonialism:
“Functional anthropology is thus an essentially conservative science”
(1930a:168). Ironically enough, Malinowski’s basic errors, with re-
spect to a theory of change, reflect his lingering Frazerian evolutionist
biases. I would say that he never quite achieved the ability to dis-
tinguish between the native as a primitive, and the “Native,” as an
actor-type in a definite Euro-American colonial order. We suffer from
the lack of this distinction even in the Trobriand monographs. Failure
to make it in Africa can lead to disastrous mistakes. We have, at any
rate, a clearcut statement from the very beginning of Malinowski’s
involvement in practical anthropology which it is very difficult to
shrug off:

The practical value of such a theory (functionalism) is that it
teaches us the relative importance of various customs, how they
dovetail into each other, how they have to be handled by mission-
aries, colonial authorities, and those who economically have to
exploit savage trade and savage labor [MALINOWSKI 1927b:40-41].

558

INABILITY TO EXPLAIN CHANGE

But it is not the ethic of one form or another of political
collaboration which constitutes the main subject matter of this
book. Here we must inquire instead into the adequacy of the theory
of cultural change which Malinowski had sought to erect on the
unlikely basis of his previous synchronic functionalist principles. It
must be admitted that at one point Malinowski appears to be on
the verge of proposing an interesting and truly dynamic theory of
culture change. Invoking his own ethnic background, he contrasts
the experience of Polish Americans and Africans in the following
terms:

Successful culture change in Africa demands enormous expendi-
ture. For it is onc of the soundest and most important principles
of social science that people are prepared to pass only from worse
to better. Only such change is encompassed without much friction
and with relative rapidity. This of course is the reason why the na-
tional minorities in the United States changed culturally with
comparatively amazing ease, with little resistance, and with a
rapidity incredible to a European brought up as one of a minority.
.. . The main reason for this, though there are also others, is
that in the United States they are offered all along the line sub-
stantial economic, political, and social advantages, which was by
no means the case under Russian or Prussian rule [MALINOWSKI

1945:56].

This being the case, it then would seem a prime requisite of any
theory of cultural change applicable to Africa to assess the probability
that substantial economic, political, and social advantages were about
“to be offered” to the Africans. Or if one is more ambitious, to
inquire, what in general arc the conditions under which such offers
are likely to be made? Or, even more to the point, under what
conditions have colonial peoples or other minority groups sat around

for tens or even hundreds of years waiting for advantages which
never came?

MAX GLUCKMAN'S CRITIQUE

It is in large measure because Malinowski could not shake
loose from the functionalist emphasis upon equilibrium that his
theory ncver gets off the ground. His system of cultural instru-
mentalities can only explain how tensions and conflicts are reduced

559



===== PAGE 285 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

or climinated, never why or how they originate or why or how they
intensify. Thus, instcad of producing a theory of change, all he suc-
ceeded in doing was to enlarge upon a theory of no-change. Events
in Africa have since rendered his analysis superfluous, since the
situation for which it was intended no longer exists.

I find myself in complete agreement, therefore, with Max Gluck-
man’s appraisal of Malinowski’s attempt at a theory of change.

This is a bad book. . . . His “theory” does not bear examination
from any point of view. It is analytically sterile, and it ends in the
worst kind of practical anthropology: welfare work without moral-
ity, based on naive oversimplification . . . [1949:21].

Morcover, Gluckman’s perception of the source of so much of
what is wrong with this in part at least corresponds to my own:
“He cannot admit ‘conflict’ into his frame of integrated institutions;
that is, conflict as an inherent attribute of social organization” (ibid.:
8). But the ironical rub in this fierce criticism is that Gluckman’s
ability to handle conflict is not that different from Malinowski’s.
Although Gluckman and other social anthropologists have written
extensively of the matter of conflict, and unresolved tension, they
have done so only within the framework of their Durkheimian heri-
tage, in terms of how, despite such conflict, social solidarity is main-
tained. Gluckman, for example, has expended his main theoretical
thrust in attempting to show how conflicts are a normal (even
“healthy”) part of social life not at all incompatible with the main-
tenance of social order. This is because “conflicts in one set of
relationships, over a wider range of society or through a longer period
of time, lead to the re-establishment of social cohesion” (GLuckmMAN
1963:2). Feuds, hostility to chiefs, estrangements within the family,
witchcraft, and even South African apartheid are all grist for his mill.
This is not to say that Gluckman is unaware of structure-breaking
conflict, but rather that he is unprepared to deal with it through a
theory of sociocultural change. We are much in debt to Gluckman
for his honesty on this point. Still referring to The Dynamics of
Cultural Change, he comments:

It is also a humbling book. For if, on the positive side, Mali-
nowski’s thesis remains descriptive, no social anthropologist has
yet put forward an alternative. The Marxists have a theorctical
framework. Among ourselves the Wilsons have tried to formulate
one. But we have still to establish a right to maintain that we are
more than good recorders of contemporary events [ibid.:21].

With this much admitted, the remarks of one of the very few frankly
Marxist British anthropologists deserve special emphasis:

560

i o

19. British Social Anthropology

Malinowski’s basic sociological heritage like that of Radcliffe-
Brown, derived from Durkheim in whose writing conflict was
primarily treated as a form of social pathology, and where atten-
tion was focussed on the normative and integrative elements in so-
cial life. The problem of order was considered to be logically
prior to the problem of change. . . . Neither showed much in-
terest in structural change [WORSELEY 1961:28].

I hasten to express my agreement with Firth (1964), an agreement
which incidentally is shared by Worsley to judge from his treatment
of cargo cults (1957), that an adequate theory of sociocultural
change cannot confine itself to considerations of overt and irreconcil-
able conflict. Even in orthodox Marxism, class struggle is after all
relevant only to the evolution of class-structured society. An anthro-
pological theory of sociocultural change obviously must include more
subtle and covert selective mechanisms, and these must be admitted
as having their effect at the state as well as the pre-state level. But
there is surely a monument to the power of culture that will long
endure in Malinowski’s attempt to analyze colonialism as if the
Furopeans and Africans were about to become part of one big
happy Kula ring.

GLUCKMAN DID NOT GET TO THE
HEART OF THE MATTER

It does not seem to me to get at the heart of the matter to
stress Malinowski’s difficulties with deepening and irreconcilable con-
flict situations at the state level. Even if the functionalists of either
variety had somehow made over their schemes to accept conflict as an
important engine of change, there would yet remain a profound
impotence with respect to the explanation of cultural differences and
similarities in terms of lawful diachronic-synchronic principles. As I
have already indicated, the main defect of both kinds of functionalism
is the attempt to interpret differences and similarities in terms of
constants. In the case of Radcliffe-Brown, the issue of whether one
part of the system is causally more significant than the others was
given an illusory solution by relating everything to social structure. It
is Radcliffe-Brown’s failure to inquire systematically into the causal
relationship between techno-environmental adaptation, productive and
distributive arrangements, and social structure, which should most
disturb my own generation of anthropologists. In Malinowski’s case,
however, given the vastly expanded notion of function with which
he operated, the failure to give special weight to techno-economic

561

1



===== PAGE 286 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

functions is not a case of omission, but a result of deep commitments
to anti-economic determinist dogma. In the chapter which follows,
I describe Malinowski’s strong attachment to the emic option in
the context of the development of the linguistic model, and the
“New Ethnography.” Some advance reference to this matter is re-
quired at this juncture.

ATTACK AGAINST CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

Only by considering Malinowski’s treatment of techno-eco-
nomic factors in connection with the emic/etic distinction can we
appreciate the extent to which his theories participated in and con-
tributed to the downgrading or obstruction of techno-environmental
and techno-ecconomic research options. Superficially it would seem
that no subject was of greater import to Malinowski than that of
primitive economics. Nutrition and reproduction topped his list of
needs, and in all of his work there appears to be an intense concern
for all manner of mundane detail. His first Trobriand monograph,
The Argonauts, was largely devoted to a description of the Kula
ring and contained a Preface by Frazer in which Malinowski was
congratulated for his emphasis upon economics:

Little reflection is needed to convince us of the fundamental im-
portance of economic forces at all stages of man’s career from the
humblest to the highest. After all, the human species is part of
the animal creation, and as such, like the rest of the animals, it
reposes on a material foundation; on which a higher life, intellec-
tual, moral, social, may be built, but without which no such
superstructure is possible. That material foundation, consisting in
the necessity of food and of a certain degree of warmth and
shelter from the elements, forms the economic or industrial
basis and prime condition of human life. If anthropologists have
hitherto unduly neglected it, we may suppose that it was rather
because they were attracted to the higher side of man’s nature
than because they deliberately ignored and under-valued the im-
portance and indeed neccssity of the lower . . . Be that as it
may, Dr. Malinowski has done well to emphasise the great sig-
nificance of primitive economics by singling out the notable ex-
change system of the Trobriand Islanders for special consideration
[FRAZER 1922:viii].

As Frazer goes on he becomes even more enthusiastic, for Dr. Mali-
nowski has not confined himself merely to the surface phenomena

562

f

19. British Social Anthropology

but at every point has searched out the full complexity of human
nature and found the “motives and feelings,” the “emotional as
well as rational basis” of Trobriand life.

But there is a great muddle in all this. If there is any single theme
pervading The Argonauts, it is precisely that the motives and feelings
which arise from noneconomic needs dominate the whole Kula
enterprise. The fact of the matter is that Malinowski deliberately
refrained from carrying out a genuine economic study of the pro-
ductive and distributive system of the Trobriand Islands because
his ethnographic orientation was overwhelmingly opposed to any
such option. Malinowski himself is my authority for this statement,
for he was perfectly aware of what he was doing and of how his
monographs would have looked had he really been concerned to
examine the “material foundation” of Trobriand culture.

The Kula, that splendid example of commerce inscrutable in its
risk of life on long sea voyages all for the sake of a few spondylus and
Conus millepunctatus shells, is to the functionalists what potlatch
is to the Boasians. But economic analysis is properly a matter of a
system of production and distribution: of energy, of time and labor
in-put, of the transformation, transportation, mechanical and chemi-
cal interplay between a human population and their habitat and of
the distribution of the products of this interaction in terms of
energy, especially food energy, and the mechanical and biological
apparata upon which all these processes depend. Malinowski treats
us instead to a vastly elaborate account of the ritual aspects of the
preparations for open-sea expeditions in which the subjective moti-
vations of the actors in terms of prestige and magical aspirations
dominate every aspect of the ethnography. We learn only incidentally,
never in detail, that the whimsical voyagers circulate not only arm
bands and necklaces but coconuts, sago, fish, vegetables, baskets, mats,
sword clubs, green stone (formerly essential for tools), mussel shells
(for knives), and creepers (essential for lashings). Malinowski’s
explanation is as follows:

Both the canoe-building and the ordinary trade have been spoken
of as secondary or subsidiary to the Kula proper. This requires a
comment. I do not, by thus subordinating the two things in im-
portance to the Kula, mean to express a philosophical reflection
or a personal opinion as to the relative value of these pursuits
from the point of view of some social teleology. Indeed, it is
clear that if we look at the acts from the outside, as comparative
sociologists, and gauge their real utility, trade and canoe-building
will appear to us as the really important achievements, whereas

563

|
1
}
|


===== PAGE 287 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

we shall regard the Kula only as an indirect stimulus, impelling
the natives to sail and to trade. Here, however, I am not dealing
in sociological, but in pure ethnographical description, and any
sociological analysis T have given is only what has been absolutely
indispensable to clear away misconceptions and to define terms
[1961:100; orig. 1922].

In this passage, “ethnographic” and “sociological” correspond to
emic and etic, respectively. The result of Malinowski’s option is to
submerge the entire issue of the significance of the techno-economic
subsystem in an irrelevant and obscurantist context. For we next find
that the opposite strategy of giving priority to the techno-economic
factors is attacked on the very grounds which an etic approach to
sociocultural systems is designed to overcome. We are thrown back
upon the ethnosemantic categories and subjective psychological ap-
praisals and reactions of the actors, who constitute those elements
in the whole array least capable of comprehending the sociocultural
system to which they have been conditioned. We are henceforth
denied a picture of the whole system as it moves through time,
related to an island habitat, rich in ecological specialties, fluctuating
in population, variable in annual production, precarious for human
existence during droughts, typhoons, and war, and progressively
subject to European blackbirding, pearl diving, and copra trading.

A TATTERED SCARECROW

In his South Sea Island paradise, experienced through the
eyes, minds, and ears of the “native,” Malinowski attempted to con-
front Marx in much the same way as he had confronted Freud. But
the paradox is evident: emics are essential for psychoanalytical com-
ment; they in no way prepare one to come to grips with the issues
raised by Marx. Thus we see Malinowski’s Trobriand material falling
into place among the long line of anthropological attacks against the
scarecrow called “economic man.” The economic determinists, so the
refrain goes, treat man as motivated by purely rationalistic calcula-
tions of self-interest. But ethnology shows that even the savage has
his ideals, his values, his occasions of self-sacrifice, and his postpone-
ment of gratification. Therefore, the priority given by some to the
economic factors in history is patently false.

All of The Argonauts is in fact harnessed to this non sequitur.
Throughout the book there are numerous outbursts concerning

564

v

19. British Social Anthropology

“economic man,” any one of which would serve to make the point.
But it is in the concluding chapter, during the discussion of “The
Meaning of the Kula” that the climax is reached:

At one or two places in the previous chapters, a somewhat de-
tailed digression was made in order to criticise the view about the
economic nature of primitive man, as it survives in our mental
habits as well as in some text books—the conception of a rational
being who wants nothing but to satisfy his simplest needs and
does it according to the economic principle of least effort. This
economic man always knows exactly where his material interests
lie, and makes for them in a straight line. At the bottom of the
so-called materidlistic conception of history lies a somewhat
analogous idea of a human being, who, in everything he devised
and pursues, has nothing but his material advantage of a purely
utilitarian type at heart. Now I hope that whatever the meaning of
the Kula might be for Ethnology, for the general science of cul-
ture, the meaning of the Kula will consist in being instrumental
to dispell such crude, rationalistic conceptions of primitive man-
kind, and to induce both the speculator and the observer to
deepen the analysis of economic facts [1922:316, italics added].

SO-CALLED MATERIALISTIC
CONCEPTION OF HISTORY

No informed critic of the historical-materialist position could
confuse the utilitarian doctrines of classical economic theory with
the research strategy associated with Marx. For what is more con-
spicuous in Marx’s analysis of capitalism than that millions of people
spend their lives making choices and upholding values which are
not only “irrational,” but positively contradictory to their own “en-
lightened sclf-interest”? The promise of the research strategy which
lies buried under the political debris churned up by the clash of
capitalism and communism is that these irrational ingredients are
nonetheless “functional” features of the particular sociocultural sys-
tems in which they are found.

Whether this means that they are rational in terms of the actors’
short- or long-run “goals” (whatever these are) is a philosophical issue
into which we need not venture. What is vital to a science of
culture is that an attempt be made to relate such apparently in-
scrutable phenomena to the basic techno-economic arrangements by
which the total sociocultural system interacts with its natural and
cultural habitat. Historical materialism as proposed by Marx did not

565



===== PAGE 288 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

consist of attempts to explain particular sociocultural systems by
reference to individual economic motivations. Nothing could be
more contrary to Marx's position. He rather sought to explain the
peculiar conditioned forms of a group’s collective and individual
economic behavior in terms of an adaptive evolutionary sequence. In
a modern anthropological formulation, it is the techno-environmental
and techno-economic conditions in which the human population
finds itself which demand priority of analysis because there exists
overwhelming evidence that these are the parts of the total socio-
cultural system which in the long run and in most cases swing social
structure and ideology into functional conformity.

To take another example from Malinowski: The Trobrianders, like
many other Melanesian groups, apparently produce a temporary
surplus of yams which they display at harvest time on special racks.
Malinowski reached the conclusion that the prestige derived from
the display of this surplus is an adequate account of why it occurs.
Many other anthropologists have emphasized how in Melanesian
villages yams devoured in gluttonous feasts or left to rot in con-
spicuous displays demonstrate that prestige motives will lead people
to produce more than they “need.” As in the case of the potlatch
and the anti-economic food taboos associated with the mismanage-
ment of animal foods (see Chap. 11), the bias against etic interpre-
tations has been overwhelming. In Malinowski’s ethnography,
failure to consider the possibility of a relationship between “over-
production” of yams and certain basic features of the techno-environ-
mental equation, brings to mind his weakness for sensational titles
and his penchant for titillating oddments. It was perhaps important
for Malinowski’s presentation of the Trobrianders as freely fornicating
noble savages (cf. LEACH 1965a:35) that they live in a world of
tropical abundance in which the other basic necessities were also
rather easily taken care of. We learn only in passing and in a separate
context that the Trobrianders not infrequently confront years of
disastrous drought-induced famines (MALINOWSKI 1935:160-61; cf.
HARRIS 1959a:192). But this is enough to raise certain lively alterna-
tives to the prestige interpretations of the rotting yams. Might not
these seemingly superfluous foodstuffs actually represent the innocu-
ous side effect of an adaptive relationship between Trobriand labor
in-put and the conditions of the Trobriand habitat? The extra effort
annually expended to produce a superabundant crop of yams, some
of which will rot in times of abundant rainfall, might be just enough
to ward off starvation in years of scanty rainfall.

566

British Social Anthropology

At any rate, no value system which induces heavy labor in-puts
by pinning “medals” on its Stakhanovite producers can be regarded
as totally anti-economic. It would have been a real coup for the
camp of the antideterminists and culture-by-whimsy school if Mali-
nowski had discovered the Trobriand Ppracticing a custom whereby,

among the commoners, the man who produced the least number of
yams had the biggest house and the most wives.

567



===== PAGE 289 =====

Emics, Etics, and the

New Ethnography 20

S
5000

At mid-century there arose within cultural anthropology a movement
dedicated to the improvement of standards of ethnographic de-
scriptions and analysis, having as its source and inspixation“ the
techniques of linguistics. This movement, for which the name The
New Ethnography” has been proposed (STURTEVANT 1964), origi-
nated at Yale and has spread rapidly throughout the United States.
Known variously as “ethnolinguistics,” “ethnoscience,” or “ethnose-
mantics,” its manifest appeal lies in its promise to achieve the
precise and highly operationalized paradigmatic renderings of 'Cll]tl'llétl
phenomena which have come to be associated with the linguist’s
descriptions of phonology and grammar. Its covert appeal, however,
is that it carries forward the tradition of cultural idealism in anthro-
pology while supplying that tradition with impressive new scien-
tific credentials. These credentials are fully merited within certain
domains and under certain restrictions which I will shortly attempt to
specify. In larger perspective, however, the movement suffers from
the accumulated liabilities of the past two hundred years of cultural-
idealist thought.

568

. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

As we have seen, a convergent, if operationally unsound, movement,
based on the linguistic model, has arisen in France under the leader-
ship of Lévi-Strauss. The primary aim of the present chapter is to
show that the convergence toward the strategy embodied in the new
ethnography derives from an epistemological outlook widely held
among contemporary social scientists of many different theoretical
persuasions. Despite its unique attachment to explicitly linguistic
paradigms, there are certain epistemological assumptions, of ques-
tionable value, which link the new ethnography with schools as
diverse as the Boasians, Culture and Personality, French Structuralism,
and both varieties of British functionalists. In order to demonstrate
this convergence and in order to locate the new ethnography in
relationship to the “old ethnography,” we are obliged to undertake a
discussion of the difference between emic and etic research options.

Recourse to the emic/etic dichotomy, reference to which has
been made at several points throughout the preceding chapters, is
imperative if we seek to identify the prospects of cultural ma-
terialism within the context of modern social science. The concepts
of emics and etics provide an epistemological and operational basis
for distinguishing between cultural idealism and cultural materialism
in an age dedicated to eclectic middle-ground theories. In order to
evaluate the historical significance of these eclectic preferences, cer-
tain epistemological issues must be confronted, at the deepest level
of research design, rather than at the level of sociocultural hypotheses
and theories. We have already pointed to the need for this confronta-
tion in discussing the way in which techno-economic and techno-
environmental data have been “emicized” on behalf of the disproof of
economic-determinist theories. A similar “emicization” of social
structural phenomena is also common. In order for there to be a
fair test of the cultural-materialist strategy, the predominantly emic
corpus of extant ethnography must be supplemented by etic descrip-
tions.

PIKE'S DEFINITIONS

The terms themselves were coined by the missionary linguist
Kenneth Pike (1954:8) on analogy with the “emic” in phonemic and
the “etic” in phonetic. In conformity with this analogy, Pike stressed
“the structural results” obtained by phonemic analysis as opposed to
the “nonstructural” results characteristic of phonetics. From a lin-
guistic point of view, etic analyses cannot achieve structural results,

569

o ————


===== PAGE 290 =====

v

The Risc of Anthropological Theory 20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

since a purely etic system of sound differences is inconceivable. With
all deference to the linguistic origin of the dichotomy, a nonlinguist
must object to Pike’s extrapolation of the correlation between etics
and nonstructural results to nonverbal behavior. What does “structure”
mean in this context? To avoid tautology, it must be taken as suggest-
ing something like the “order in an orderly arrangement.” Structure is
the order in a system. The pairing of structural results with emics
and nonstructural results with etics accords with the history of lin-
guistics. But there is no reason to suppose that this equation must
hold for nonlinguistic phenomena. There are structures in an atom,
a molecule, a cell, and an organism, the description of none of
which depends upon emic operations. Why should we not also as-
sume that there are sociocultural systems whose structure can be
exposed independently of procedures modeled after phonemic analy-
sis? Pike’s failure to make provision for this alternative was rooted
deeply in religious convictions which cannot be ignored if one
wishes to understand his meaning (PIKE 1962). Tt is of course
possible to utilize etic categories which will not contribute to an
understanding of sociocultural systems. But many phonological analy-
ses, because of poor technique, also end up with partial or spurious
structures.

In further defining the consequences of the two approaches, Pike
elaborates a theme which he considers to be secondary, but which
assumes primary importance as soon as we disregard the gratuitous
equivalence between emics and structure. Outlining the operations
for the identification of nonverbal emic units (behavioremes), he
makes it clear that emic structure must correspond to the actor’s
“purpose” during the observed performance. That is, an emic de-
scription must be related to a set of logico-empirical procedures by
which the actor’s meaning and purpose is made known: “In spite of
the problems which are involved, it is absolutely essential if one is
to study behavior as it actually functions, that onc assume that the
analyst can detect the presence and to some degree the nature and
meaning of purpose” [PIKE 1954:80] The behavioreme itself is partially
defined as “an emic segment or component of purposive human ac-
tivity” (ibid.:57). Moreover, the same definitional ingredient is para-
mount in an extensive quote from Edward Sapir (1927) who is re-
garded by Pike as having anticipated the distinction at issue:

It is impossible to say what an individual is doing unless we
have tacitly accepted the essentially arbitrary modes of interpre-
tation that social tradition is constantly suggesting to us from
the very moment of our birth. Let anyone who doubts this try the

570

experiment of making a painstaking report (i.e. an etic one) of the
actions of a group of natives engaged in some activity, say re-
ligious, to which he has not the cultural key (i.c. a know]edée of
the emic system). If he is a skillful writer, he may succeed in giv-
ing a picturesque account of what he sces and hears, or thinks he
sees and hears, but the chances of his being able to give a relation
of what happens, in terms that would be intelligible and accept-
able to the natives themselves, are practically nil. He will be
guilty of all manncr of distortion; his emphasis will be constantly
askew. He will find interesting what the natives take for granted
as a casual kind of behavior worthy of no particular comment,
and he will utterly fail to observe the crucial turning points in the
course of action that give formal significance to the whole in the
minds of those who.do possess the key to its understanding
[quoted in PIKE 1954:9-10].

It is the “formal significance” in the “minds” of the actors which
needs to be stressed. The “created” significances of etic descriptions
are not dependent upon the subjective “meanings” and “purposes”
of the actors. Emic distinctions, on the other hand, require one to
enter the world of purpose, meaning, and attitudes. Emic study
“helps one to appreciate not only the culture or language as an
ordered whole, but it helps one to understand the individual actors
in such a life-drama—their attitudes, motives, interests, responses,
conflicts, and personality development” (ibid.:11).

DEFINITION OF EMIC

In keeping with the broader uses to which the emic/etic
distinction has been put and in the tradition which ties Pike to Sapir,
I propose the following definition:

Emic statements refer to logico-empirical systems whose phenome-
nal distinctions or “things” arc built up out of contrasts and discrimi-
nations significant, meaningful, real, accurate, or in some other fashion
regarded as appropriate by the actors themselves. An emic state-
ment can be falsified if it can be shown that it contradicts the cogni-
tive calculus by which relevant actors judge that entities are similar or

different, real, meaningful, significant, or in some other sense “appro-
priate” or “acceptable.”

EMICS AND PREDICTABILITY

o At least two prominent advocates of the emic approach have
insisted upon establishing unusual and, to my view, unacceptable

571



===== PAGE 291 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

criteria for verifying the truth content of emic statements. According
to Charles Frake (1964a:112):

. an ethnography should be a theory of cultural behavior in a
particular society, the adequacy of which is to be evaluated by the
ability of a stranger to the culture (who may be the ethnographer)
to use the ethnography’s statements as instructions for appropri-
ately anticipating the scenes of the society. I say “appropriately
anticipate” rather than “predict” because a failure of an ethno-
graphic statement to predict correctly does not necessarily imply
descriptive inadequacy as long as the members of the described
society are as surprised by the failure as is the ethnographer. The
test of descriptive adequacy must always refer to informants’ in-
terpretations of events, not simply to the occurrence of events.

A similar position is adopted by Harold Conklin (1964:26) who also
specifies “appropriate anticipation” rather than prediction. Since no
attention has been devoted to the question of how to proceed with
this operation, it cannot be taken at once both literally and seriously.

THE NATIVE'S POINT OF VIEW

The unsatisfactory formulation of emic predictability (to
which of course not all ethnosemanticists would subscribe) need
not deter us from sctting rather clear-cut limits to the logico-empiri-
cal domains embraced by emic studies. It is convenient to begin by
demarcating two broad, overlapping subfields: The first is concerned
with semantic and communication phenomena; the second, with
inner psychological states and feelings. All phonological, grammatical,
and semantic analyses carried out by linguists and ethnographers
constitute emically oriented studies. Regardless of how one chooses
to define phonemes, the range of sounds involved must produce
systematic sound contrasts which are significant to the native speaker.
Similarly, in stating the rules by which grammatical utterances are
generated in a specific language, the “test of adequacy” is the native
speaker’s intuitive knowledge of the grammaticality of the sample
utterances generated according to such rules.

It is a fundamental premise of linguistic analysis that the phone-
mic system or the grammatical rules need not correspond to the
analysis which the native speaker is usually capable of performing.
Indeed, the mnative specaker may emphatically reject the linguist’s
analysis. That analysis does not therefore cease to be the product of
logico-empirical operations in which emic distinctions provide the

572

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

basis for subsequent logical manipulation as well as for the ultimate
tests of logico-empirical adequacy.

“Componential analysis,” an analytic procedure first employed by
Ward Goodenough (1956), fits in here as an activity devoted to
the formulation of the rules by which semantic domains are logico-
empirically ordered. As in the case of phonemic and syntactic rules,
the componential formula need not (one can say, probably never
will) correspond to the rules which the native is capable of €express-
ing. Goodenough’s componential definition of an American’s
grandmother’s second husband goes something like this: a kinsman at
less than two degrees collateral distance; at two units of genealogical
distance; in lineal relationship; in a senior generation; of male sex;
in the presence of a marital tie; senior party involved, senior party
being the first person in the particular relationship to become known
to the junior party (1965a:279). Goodenough appears unconcerned
by the possibility that some natives might not share his convictions
concerning the adequacy of the definition. (Actually, few Americans
can confirm or deny Goodenough'’s analysis from personal experience. )

One test of the adequacy of this account, I have said, is that it
not do violence to my own feel, as informant, for the structure
of what is described. This is the subjective test of adequacy. An
equally important test is that it provide an alien with the knowl-
edge he needs to use my kinship terminology in a way I will ac-
cept as corresponding with the way I use it. This is the objective

test of adequacy. An account is deficient to the extent that it fails
the test [ibid.:261].

OTHER COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS

Another kind of ethnography which should be explicitly
associated with the emic point of view is that which Ray Birdwhistell
(}1952) has called “kinesics,” the study of the communication func-
tions of body motions. At least some of the body motions of
interest to Birdwhistell link up with the earlier field of gesture study
and clearly constitute emic entities insofar as they involve the state-
ment of the rules of a public communication system. The study of
other body motions, such as the particular walking gait or sitting
slump of a psychiatric patient, cuts across the second large category
of emically oriented research shortly to be discussed and is not so
easily classified.

It seems obvious that whenever we deal with phenomena that are

573

i



