===== PAGE 203 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

monly decline with a “Makona,” “satisfied.” This he will say
whether he has eaten or not, since he fears the tongue of slander,
which will murmur behind his back, “Ah! There he sits and eats,
but what of his wife and children, hungry at home?” An unmar-
ried person may eat without fear, since he has not such responsi-
bilities. Property which is not specifically linked with one sex is
shared by husband and wife, or used indifferently by them both.
A gift of a string of beads which I made to the Ariki Kafika—
beads are highly valued and worn by men as well as women—
was calmly appropriated by his wife, who took charge of them at
once with the word “Mine,” cliciting merely a joking remark from
the Ariki [FIRTH 1963:124].

The psychologically derived categories in this paragraph range over a
broad spectrum of phenomena. There is not only refusal of sharing
but there is evasion. The married visitor fears being exposed to
slander. Property is used indifferently, beads are highly valued and are
calmly appropriated to the accompaniment of a joking remark.

The most “structural” of the British structural-functionalists is
Meyer Fortes; theoretically, one can go no further in a direction
away from psychological “reductionism.” Yet in The Dynamics of Clan-
ship among the Tallensi, passages such as the one which follows
turn up on almost every page:

A man who married the former wife of another, even if the
marriage was severed for just and accepted reasons, incurs the
hostility of the first husband’s entire lineage both towards himself
personally and towards his clansmen as a group. Reprisals will be
taken when an opportunity occurs. When the parties are clans-
men, feelings about such acts become very bitter, and the more
so the closer the tie. Marriages of this kind take place from time
to time, producing conflicts and reprisals but not disruption of
clanship ties [FORTES 1945:42].

Note here how the feelings of the actors, as expressed in the terms
hostility, bitter, and conflicts, are essential for maintaining the ethno-
graphic thread. If one makes an effort to find still more emphatically
mentalistic statements, it is not difficult to locate the following sort
of descriptions even in The Dynamics of Clanship, which is Fortes’
most abstract and “structural” book:

Tallensi say this is just fun (koohog); but we see again that this
apparently spontancous jesting acts as a means of reconciling and
counter-acting the tensions of a double-edged social relationship.
Where two corporate groups are structurally divided from each

396

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

other to the point of having potentially competitive interests
likely to lead to conflict at one level of the social organization, but
are at the same time bound to each other by strong ties of oblig-
atory co-operation and goodwill in another aspect of their social
relations, the undercurrent of hostility and mutual wariness is
deflected by jest. You jest with people who must be friendly to
you in terms of one set of loyalties and may be hostile to you in
terms of another, and with whom you are on an equal footing as
far as mutual rights and duties go [ibid.:g5].

In this vein it is of considerable interest to note that Leslie White,
one of the anthropologists who have been most critical of the culture
and personality approach, employs in his own ethnography a typical
psychologistic lexicon of cognitive and emotional terms:

In society as in mechanics, the closer moving particles are to
each other, the greater is the friction between them. And the dis-
tance between individuals in a pueblo is very small. A pueblo
is no place for an individualist; an aggressive “go-getter” is espe-
cially obnoxious. He makes life unbearable for his neighbors.
Close contact within a pueblo tends to wear off the sharp corners
and edges of a personality and make it smooth and inconspicuous,
like a water-worn pebble. Children are taught that kindness and
tespect are the greatest virtues. Every effort is made to lubricate
social life, to reduce friction to a minimum so that the pueblo
will function smoothly like a well-built machine. Quarrelling is
intolerable, physical violence rare, murder unheard of.

Although pucblo social life discourages, if indeed it does not
penalize, aggressive individualism, and although intimate social
intercourse tends to rub down the sharp corners and edges of the
individual ego, differences between individuals do, nevertheless,
remain and find significant expression in the life of the commu-
nity. Some men are regarded with more than ordinary respect,
others with less; some are influential, others are mot [WHITE

1942:190].

These examples should suffice to establish the fact that psycholo-
gizing is a deeply rooted habit among cultural anthropologists. It
Is interesting to note that Mead’s (1953:642) paradigm of a cul-
tural as opposed to a psychological statement contains a covert men-
talist concept: “In culture X, married men must avoid their mothers

" as opposed to “In culture X, the mother-inlaw avoidance is
enforced through a sense of shame.” Although the second statement
is obviously more dependent on a psychological frame, the word
“must” in the first statement contains a universe of psychological

397



===== PAGE 204 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

assumptions in its own right. But this merely confirms Mead’s point
that there is no sharp line in practice between personality and cul-
ture and traditional ethnography.

ROOTS OF BENEDICT S PATTERNS OF
CULTURE

One of the characteristics of the modern culture and per-
sonality school is simply the intensification and expansion of ethno-
graphic coverage involving psychological terms and concepts. During
the 1920s a kind of descriptive threshold was crossed, and the usual
mixed data language gave way among the founders of the culture
and personality movement to a conscious selection in favor of psy-
chologistic emphases. This transition is associated above all with the
work of Ruth Benedict who, under the influence of Edward Sapir and
in interaction with Margaret Mead, proposed that the description
of entire cultures might be integrated around one or two major
psychologistic traits. “Cultures from this point of view are individual
psychology thrown large upon the screen, given gigantic proportions
and a long time span” (BENEDICT 1932:24).

It is of considerable interest in terms of the continuity be-
tween Boasian historical particularism and Benedict’s initial “con-
figurationalist” approach in Patterns of Culture (1934), that the
specific psychological idiom that was utilized owed little if anything
to Freudian concepts. Benedict herself traced her major intellectual
heritage to “the German school headed by Wilhelm Dilthey” (ibid.:
2), and this constitutes an additional reason for associating the
Boasians with neo-Kantianism. Mead’s objection that Benedict’s al-
lusion to Dilthey was a pro forma afterthought included to satisfy
Boas’” demands for scholarly acknowledgment, scarcely modifies the
sitvation. Benedict read Dilthey and recognized her indebtedness.
The relevance of Dilthey, as Benedict saw him, was that he ap-
proached history through the grouping together of philosophical
Weltanschauungen expressing distinctive and incommensurable psy-
chological categories which “cannot be resolved the one unto the
other” (ibid.:3). We do not require Mead’s acknowledgment to
assert that she too was influenced by the same school, with or
without having read Dilthey. As for the source of the particular
configurationalist idiom employed in Patterns of Culture, it was, as
Benedict tells us, Nietzsche’s study of Greek drama, The Birth of
Tragedy. It was here that Benedict picked up the idea of the contrast

398

I ol

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

between Dionysian and Apollonian “psychological types,” the “in-
commensurables” around which Patterns of Culture is built (BENE-
DICT 1928:572).

EARLIER PRECEDENTS

Setting aside for the moment the special history of the
Dionysian and Apollonian categories, it is clear that a much more
ancient tradition of pithy psychological portraits underlies not only
Benedict’s scheme, but Dilthey’s and Nietzsche’s as well. For in
addition to the more or less mixed sociocultural and psychological
ethnographies produced by the ancients, condensed psychological por-
traiture slipping imperceptibly into stereotype has always been a vice
of learned as well as vulgar observers of cultural phenomena. In her
description of anthropology in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies, Margaret Hodgen (1964:178) attributes the technique of
presenting capsular epitomes, stereotypes, and typologies to the
brevity characteristic of the medieval scholastic encyclopedias. I
would prefer to stress a more vernacular origin in the common ten-
dency of tribes and nations to stereotype cach other as a consequence
of various forms of intergroup relations. At any rate, early European
prototypes of ethnographers such as Sebastian Miinster, Henry
Agrippa, Johann Boemus, and Gerardus Mercator all indulged in the
practice of condensing ethnographic descriptions into pithy psycho-
logical formulae. For example, in Muenster’s breviary, the Scotch are
faithful and vengeful; the Suevi bellicose; the Jews prudent but en-
vious; the Persians steadfast but disloyal; the Egyptians stable and
crafty; the Grecks wise but deceitful; and the Spaniards drunken,
violent, and sophistic. Writing in 1527, Agrippa declared:

The Scythians were always infamous for Savageness and Cruelty.
The Italians were always eminent for their Magnanimity. The
Gaules were reproached for Stupidity. The Sicilians were al-
ways Subtile. The Asiaticks Luxurious, the Spaniards Jealous, and
great Boasters. . . . Who that sees a man marching in more state
than a Dung-hill-Cock, in gate like a Fencer, a confident Look, a
deep Tone, grave Speech, severe in his Carriage, and tatter'd in
Habit, that will not straight judge him to be a German? Do we
not know the French by their moderate Gate, effeminate Car-
riage, smiling Countenance, pleasing Voice, courteous Speech,
modest Behaviour, and careless Habit? The Italians we behold
more slow in Gate, their Carriage grave, their Countenances
varying, of few words, captious in Discourse, in their Behaviour

399



===== PAGE 205 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

magnificent, and decent in their Habit. In singing also the Italians
bleat, the Spaniards Whine, the Germans Howl, and the French
Quaver [quoted in HODGEN 1964:180].

Boemus in the 1611 edition of his Omnium Gentium Mores associated
Suevia with whores, Franconia with thieves and beggars, Bavaria with
pilferers and slaves, Helvetia with butchers and bawds, Saxonie with
drunkards, Frisia with perjurers, and the Rheinland with gluttons.
For Mercator:

The Francons are simple, blockish, & furious; the Barvarians
sumptuous, gluttons, and brazen-faced; the Sweeds light, bablers
and boasters; the Thuringeans distrustfull, slovens, and quarrel-
some; the Saxons dissemblers, double-hearted, and opinionative;
the Belgians good horsemen, tender, docible, and delicate; the
Italians proud, revengeful and ingenious; the Spaniard disdainful,
cautious and greedie; the Gaules proper, intemperate, rash-
headed; the Cimbrians high-minded, seditious, and terrible; the
Saramates gluttons, proud, and theeves; the Bohemians cruell,
lovers of novelties, filtchers; the Illyricks variable, malicious, and
ryotous; the Pannonians rude, superstitious; the Grecians miser-
able [quoted in HODGEN 1964:181].

ET TU SPENCER

Some idea of the pervasiveness of this kind of psychological
portraiture may be gained from the fact that Herbert Spencer, an
influence which was highly distasteful to Boas and his pupils, in-
cluded the rubric Emotional Characters as a fundamental heading in
his great Descriptive Sociology. Spencer’s capsule portraits are pre-
posterous amusements:

Samoans. Not so lively as Tahitians. Good humored, social in
disposition, very desirous of pleasing, and fond of amusement
and traveling. Indolent, fickle, and deceitful.

Dyaks. Not very impulsive. Seldom, except on festive occasions
going the length of boisterous mirth. Generally mild, polite, and
respectful to superiors. Sociable, amiable, sympathetic and capable
of strong mutual attachments.

Andaman Islanders. Vivacious and affectionate; impulsive and
frightfully passionate; revengeful, crafty, and merciless. Suspicious
of strangers to an inconceivable degree. Manifest no ferocity
when once subdued.

[1873-1933, T1]

Troquois. Show little desirc for social intercourse between the
sexes, and have been said to be incapable of sexual love. The fa-

400

I

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

ther rarely caresses his children. Fond of jest, repartee and
ridicule; also of the excitement of the chase.

[ibid., VI]
Ancient Peruvians. Not impulsive. Patient obedient, industri-

ous, Friendly to one another and kind to animals. Good hu-
mored and gentle.

[ibid., 1)

OUT OF THE DIFFUSIONIST CUL DE SAC

The taxonomic assumptions of Patterns of Culture are

of course considerably more sophisticated than anything Spencer or
medieval and ancient predecessors had been able to achieve. Benedict
based her portraits of the Apollonian Zuni and Dionysian Kwakiutl
on a sustained and highly detailed comparison of institutions and
ideologies ranging across the entire fabric of sociocultural life, from
family to warfare.
] In contrast to vulgar stereotypes, which frequently manifest blatant
inconsistencies and contradictions (Indians are crafty but dumb, Jews
are clannish but cosmopolitan), Benedict's configurations emphasize
a culture’s strain toward consistency. Indeed, the integration and
functional coherence of cultural life when viewed from the configura-
tionist perspective constitutes the main theoretical pretension of
Benedict’s work.

Benedict’s training under Boas had begun in 1921, shortly after the
publication of Lowie’s Primitive Society with its famous “shreds
and patches” conclusion. The model of cultures built up out of
diffusionary hodgepodges was thrust upon her before she had an
opportunity to prepare her own outlook. The influence of Lowie,
with whom she took a course at the Museum of Natural History, is
prominent in her first publication, “The Vision in Plains Culture”
(1922). Margaret Mead (1959a:14) teports her as having said, “
wrote that for Dr. Lowie.” This article presents a point of view
bearing little resemblance to that of Patterns of Culture. Tt even
contains a strident echo of Lowie’s “shreds and patches” declaration,
which was picked up by Radcliffe-Brown and incorporated into the
bogey of the antifunctionalist American school:

It is, so far as we can see, an ultimate fact of human nature
tl_mt man builds up his culture out of disparate elements, com-
bining and recombining them, and until we have abandoned the
superstition that the result is an organism functionally interre-
lated, we shall be unable to see our cultural life objectively, or to
control its manifestations [BENEDICT 1923:84-85].

401



===== PAGE 206 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

But Benedict, who was a poetess (publishing under the name Anne
Singleton) as much as she was an anthropologist, could not long abide
the negativism and emotionally impoverished medium of diffusionist
discourse. In Margaret Mead’s words, she worked “steadily to find
some integrating principle that would explain both the disparate
origins of the elements of which a culture was built and the whole-
ness which she felt was there in each culture” (MEAD 1959a:204).
Psychologistic patterns and configurations were the result of this
search,

THE END OF EXPLANATION

Mead’s use of the term “explanation” in conjunction with
the integrative effect of “individual psychology thrown large upon the
screen” is misleading. The historical function of Patterns of Culture
within the Boasian school was its ingenious evocation of a Dilthian
fecling of understanding, achieved entirely in the absence of explana-
tion in any scientific sense. However useful the configurationist
approach may have seemed to Benedict as a way out of the diffusionist
cul de sac, its contribution to the explanation of cultural differences
and similarities was miniscule. This result was built into the basic
premises upon which she proceeded to employ Nietzsche’s cate-
gories, for she was careful to insist, in proper neo-Kantian style,
that the Apollonian-Dionysian polarity may not be usefully applied to
any but a small number of the world’s cultures. Moreover, Benedict
stressed the improbability that most of the cultures which do not
fit into the Apollonian-Dionysian scheme can be fitted into any
other comparable well-integrated configuration. “All cultures,” she
wrote in Patterns of Culture, “have not shaped their thousand items
of behavior to a balanced and rhythmic pattern; lack of integration
seems to be as characteristic of certain cultures as extreme integra-
tion is of others” (ibid.:196).

Benedict was possibly the student whom Boas in his later years
most admired in his paternal fashion. By 1929, she was addressing
him as “Dear Papa Franz” and complaining that “It seems very
lonely without you,” when he was away (MEAD 1959a:400). Upon
Boas’ retirement in 1937, Benedict became the acting Chairman of
the Department of Anthropology at Columbia. The fact that she
was Boas’ protégée probably helped to obscure the ethnographic
defects in Patterns of Culture, and Boas’ “Introduction” was un-
doubtedly an important asset in its acceptance by the anthropological
community. But there is nothing about her configurationalist ideas

402

halll

Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

which ran counter to Boas’ tutelage. On the contrary, Boas undoubt-
edly felt that his dream of achieving a more intimate knowledge of the
workings of the minds of primitive peoples had been advanced by
her efforts. At the same time, the care which she took to disassociate
the configurations from any global scheme, the strictly limited sample
with which she worked, and the absence of causal explanations were
fully in accord with historical-particularist beliefs.

The central theme of Patterns of Culture is simply that ecach
culture “selects” or “chooses” from the infinite variety of behavioral
possibilities a limited segment which sometimes conforms to a con-
figuration and sometimes does not. In its least flattering light, one
might sum it up as the observation that some cultures are different
and others are similar. One searches in vain through Patterns of
Culture for any explanation. There is not even the saving grace of
the earlier diffusionistic “explanations” by which Apollonian patterns
might be traced back to an originating tribe (the Greeks?). All that
we get by way of accounting for cultural differences and similarities
is the myth of the Digger Indians: “God gave to every people a cup,
a cup of clay, and from this cup they drank their life. . . . They
all dipped in the water but their cups were different” (BENEDICT

1934:33).

ART, CULTURE, AND FREEDOM

In one sense, of course, it is manifestly unfair to judge
Benedict’s contribution in the light of the canons and traditions of
the social sciences. Like Sapir, with whom she exchanged poems and
carried on a voluminous and romantic correspondence, Benedict
seems intuitively to have chaffed at the very notion of cultural de-
terminism. The patterns of culture and language had to be given their
due (how else could one contemplate a separate discipline of an-
thropology or linguistics?), but wherever possible the quixotic con-
ditions by which patterns arise, are adopted, or are cast out deserve
equal emphasis.

It is in this light that Benedict’s discussion of individual deviancy,
the subject of the final chapter in Patterns of Culture, is most
profitably interpreted. Deviants occur in every culture; hence no-

where are men merely puppets dancing on the strings of their cultural
destinies:

Anthropology is often believed to be a counsel of despair which
makes untenable a beneficent human illusion. But no anthropolo-
gist with a background of experience in other cultures has ever

403

i



===== PAGE 207 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

believed that individuals were automatons, mechanically carving
out the decrees of their civilization. No culture yet observed has
been able to eradicate the differences in the temperaments of the
persons who compose it. It is always a give-and-take {ibid.:220].

It is clear that Benedict’s image of cultural anthropology was that
of a discipline whose main function it was artfully to describe the
varieties of man’s cultural traditions and not to explain them. Like
Kroeber, she was not at all averse to the prospect of severing an-
thropology’s ties to the social sciences: “To my mind the very nature
of the problems posed and discussed in the humanities is closer,
chapter by chapter, to those in anthropology than are the investiga-
tions carried on in most of the social sciences” (BENEDICT 1948:585).
The affinity with the humanistic studies expressed by Benedict is
even stronger than that put forth by Kroeber. Her “patterns,” as
Kroeber himself recognized, were very similar to the configurations
of style to which Krocber devoted his later years. The main difference
resides in the diachronic pulsations which Kroeber attempted to dis-
cover. But, in the controversy between Sapir and Kroeber, Benedict
as we have seen, and as might be guessed from the great sympathy
with which she and Sapir regarded each other’s poetry, was very
much on Sapir’s side. “Man is a creature with such freedom of action
and imagination that he can, for instance, by not accepting a trait,
prevent the occurrence of diffusion, or he can at any stage of techno-
logical development create his gods in the most diverse forms”
(ibid.:589). In Patterns of Culture (1934:10) we also find the as-
tonishing remark: “A very little acquaintance with other conventions,
and a knowledge of how various these may be, would do much to
promote a rational social order.”

ETHNOGRAPHIC DIFFICULTIES

The slight theoretical contribution of Patterns of Culture
fails to justify Benedict’s emphasis upon an idiom appropriate to
individual psychology. But the larger functional significance of this
work cannot be appreciated without reference to the dubious factual
foundation on which Benedict reared her psychologistic portraits.
Not only was the success of her book unrelated to its theoretical
payoff, but it was from the outset the object of intense criticism
by anthropologists who possessed relevant ethnographic area special-
ties. I have already indicated some of the main lines of this critique in
reference to Benedict’s portrayal of the Kwakiutl. The reaction among

404

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

Southwest specialists to her treatment of the Pueblo Indians was
more severe, perhaps because so many anthropologists have made
this area the focus of their field research. An excellent summary of
this critical literature has recently been put together by Victor Bar-
nouw (1963), whose own commitment to the personality and culture
movement and whose training under Benedict provide a moderating
note.

It is now generally agreed that Benedict’s sketch of the Apollonian
way of life achieved its beautiful symmetry only as a result of the
omission or selective de-emphasis of nonconforming data. For ex-
ample, one of the first commentators, Li An-Che (1937), noted
that Benedict’s picture of the allegedly noncompetitive and retiring
Zuiii failed to acknowledge historically known incidents of factional
internecine strife. “. . . not only do ordinary forms of struggle for
individual supremacy exist, but violent forms occur once in a while”
(L1 ANcHE 1937:69). One of the deepest splits in the Zufii pueblo
occurred along the lines of rival missionization, and Li An-Che wrote
that “a strife of immense magnitude took place between the Catho-
lic and Protestant elements” (ibid.). Ruth Bunzel (1952:xv) reported
that the Zufii were frequently split into rival factions over the issue of
cooperation or noncooperation with anthropologists. According to
Elsie Clews Parsons, Benedict and other Zufii observers had not had
an opportunity to witness the ceremonial of the Zufi medicine
societies which featured walking over red hot coals and sword swal-
lowing. This contributed to the tendency to “underestimate the or-
giastic potentiality of Zufii character” (PARSONS 1939:879).

If Zuiii puberty practices and child training patterns were any-
thing like those of the neighboring Hopi (Benedict did argue that
all of the Pueblos were Apollonians), the gentle peaceloving stereo-
type must be discarded. Benedict knew that initiates were whipped,
but she denied that blood was drawn or even that welts were raised.
Other eye witnesses report Hopi floggings as “very severe” and as
taking place while “pandemonium reigns” ( H. R. ROTH, quoted by
BARNOUW 1963:46). In the autobiography of a Hopi chief, there
appears an account of one very un-Apollonian initiation:

I stood them fairly well, without crying, and thought my suf-
fering was past; but then the Ho Katcina struck me four more
times and cut me to pieces. I struggled, yelled, and urinated.
- . . Blood was running down over my body. . . . When they
let me go, I wrapped the blanket around my painful body and sat
down. I tried to stop sobbing, but continued to cry in my
heart. . . . I was led home and put to bed on a sheepskin. The

405



===== PAGE 208 =====

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

next morning when I awoke, the pelt had stuck fast to my body,
so that when I tried to get up it came with me [siMMONS 1942:83,
quoted in BARNOUW 1963:46].

Equally distressing is Benedict’s failure to provide a balanced picture
of Pueblo behavior under the influence of alcohol. Although strong
disapproval of drinking exists, actual behavior frequently runs in a
definitely Dionysian direction. “Drunkenness is repulsive to them”
wrote Benedict (1934:82). But this scarcely tells the whole story:

After we read this, it comes as a surprise to learn, in Smith and
Roberts’ recent report on Zuiii law, that by far the most common
“crimes” at Zuiii are drunkenness and drunken driving. “In 1949
there were 57 arrests for drunkenncss on the first night of the
Shalako festival and 150 bottles of liquor were confiscated.”
The anthropologist E. A. Hoebel informs us that “Field work
among the Central Pueblos in 1945 to 1947 revealed the Pueblo
governments almost helpless in the face of uncontrollable drunk-
enness and violence.” And Edmund Wilson, describing a visit to
Zuiii in 1947, tells how his car was searched for liquor by the
police when he entered the Pueblo at the time of the Shalako
festival. He adds: “This I was later told, failed almost completely
in its purpose, since the Zuiiis, by way of their grapevine, would
send the word back to Gallup for their bootleggers to come in
around the hills” [BARNOUW 1963:44].

DECLINING STANDARDS

There are anthropologists who regard criticism of Benedict’s
Patterns of Culture as a kind of sacrilege. This was admittedly a
pioneer work in the field of culture and personality which achieved
the unusual distinction of stimulating both professional and lay in-
terest. Because of its great popularity, it has served as the most
important single source of recruitment for anthropology as a pro-
fession. Moreover, as Barnouw has tried to show, Benedict was aware
of some of the inconsistencies in both the Kwakiutl and Pueblo
configurations. She herself drew attention to the “amiable side” of
Kwakiut] life within the family and noted that “not all situations in
Kwakiutl existence require equally the motives that are most character-
istic of their lives” (BENEDICT 1934:122, quoted in BARNOUW 1957:
533). She further protected herself, according to Barnouw, by stating
that “Integration . . . may take place in the face of fundamental
conflicts.” But Barnouw also tries to show that there was no substan-
tial difference of opinion between Boas and Benedict on the question

406

of configurations and in particular concerning the Kwakiutl con-
figuration. It is this continuity between Boas, Benedict, Mead,
and the other configurationists and psychologically oriented anthro-
pologists which raises the central issue to which we must address
ourselves. This issue is one of method, of scientific standards, and of
the functional significance of the historical-particularist reform. Bene-
dict’s “extravagant assertions,” such as, suicide being “too violent an
act . . . for the Pueblos to contemplate . . . they have no idea what
it could be” (BENEDICT 1934:117), cannot be dismissed as a mere
peccadillo. Tt is difficult to shrug off the “easy refutation” which
Hoebel (1949:452) achieved in citing three documented Pueblo sui-
cides, in view of the captious negativism with which the Boasians
had attacked the use of the comparative method. This is not a
matter of spite, but of principle; it is simply impossible to reconcile
the Boasian self-image of methodological rigor with the highly im-
pressionistic and scientifically unreliable procedures which charac-
terize the early phases of the culture and personality movement.

EARLY MEAD

Configurationalism, the identification of salient cultural
characteristics and their presentation in a familiar psychological idiom,
was the forerunner of the rapprochement between historical par-
ticularism and psychoanalysis. We see this quite clearly in the case
of Margaret Mead, who as a student of both Benedict and Boas
made extensive use of the configurationalist frame during her for-
mative period. Indeed, without minimizing Benedict’s contribution,
Mead claims to have been an active participant in all the important
events leading up to the publication of Patterns of Culture and at-

tributes to hersclf the first published statement of the configuration-
alist idea:

Historically, the first written application of her conceptualiza-
tion was in my chapter on “Dominant Cultural Attitudes,” in
Social Organization of Manu'a, written in the winter of 1927-
1928, before she wrote her own first formulation in “Psychological
T}pC§ in the Cultures of the Southwest.” None of her theoretical
phraS{ngs were included in my chapter, but every detail of the
phr;smg was thrashed out between us. The clarity of her concept,
which owed so much to the lack of a sensory screen between the
field worker and the pattern and to her search for meaning within
fragments, was also subjected to the test of living field work as I

407



===== PAGE 209 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

marshaled a procession of identified Samoan children to challenge
or confirm a formulation [MEAD 1959a:207].

Coming of Age in Samoa (1928), the first major product of Mead’s
prodigious outpouring of field-based books and monographs, bore
the subtitle A Psychological Study of Primitive Youth for Western
Civilization. Although this book was far richer in psychologistic
phrasings than the usual ethnographic report, it cannot be said to
reflect an interest in the summing up of a whole culture in terms of
a few dominant categories. Mead’s mission, chosen for her by Boas,
was to emphasize the existence of biopsychological plasticity in human
affairs sufficient to permit the cultural conditioning of adolescent
behavioral patterns along lines which contrast with the stereotype of
adolescence in middle-class Euro-American culture. The use of the
phrase “for Western Civilization” in the subtitle and the inclusion of
two chapters concerned with the comparison of the Samoan ado-
lescent girl with her counterpart in the United States indicate the
importance which Boas and Mead attached to the simple demonstra-
tion of the power of cultural conditioning in this area of life. The
fact that Samoan sex patterns tumed out to be strikingly less in-
hibited than their Western analogues could not have been unantici-
pated. That adolescence was not necessarily a stormy and awkward
biological epoch was additional support for Boas’ emphasis upon the
influence of culture as opposed to biology. And it also corresponded
well with the contemporary interest in Freudian psychology and the
role of sex in pathological personalities. The Samoan’s relative free-
dom from sexually inspired frustrations was eagerly incorporated into
the scientific foundation of the “sexual revolution” which the Ameri-
can middle class was the process of experiencing. There was also a
strong feminist moral in Coming of Age in Samoa, highlighted by the
description of a carefree premarital sex life for adolescent girls. But
the most important moral proposed by Mead was very similar to that
which Benedict was to urge in Patterns of Culture six years later:
Knowledge of the spectrum of possibilities of enculturation should
be made to contribute to our own process of sociocultural change.
Like Benedict, Mead found an antidote for cultural determinism in
the prospect that once a knowledge of alternative patterns become
widespread, significant changes in the Euro-American way of life
would necessarily ensue:

. it is unthinkable that a final recognition of the great num-
ber of ways in which man, during the course of history and at the
present time, is solving the problems of life, should not bring

408

D

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

with it in turn the downfall of our belief in a single standard
[ibid.:162].

The artful presentation of cultural differences to a wide professional
and lay public by Mead and Benedict must be reckoned among the |
important events in the history of American intellectual thought. The |
significance of their contributions as far as cultural theory is con- i
cerned cannot be regarded as of a similar magnitude. Mead herself i
makes this clear in the preface to one of the reissues of her book,
although she would certainly not agree with the construal just ren-
dered: “It was a simple—a very simple—point to which our materials
were organized in the 1920’s, merely the documentation over and
over of the fact that human nature is not rigid and unyielding”

(1939:x).

METHODOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

Coming of Age in Samoa did not attempt the configura-
tionalist synthesis of the sort on which Benedict was working. But
there are many points of similarity between Mead’s and Benedict’s
early writings, especially from a methodological perspective, and
these resemblances increased as time wore on. Mead as much as
Benedict succumbed to the temptation to exaggerate the decisiveness
with which both individual and cultural personality types can be
identified and contrasted. Although the proposal to find out what is
going on “inside of peoples” heads”—to find out how they think and
feel—is perfectly respectable, it must be admitted that other forms of
cultural investigation are decidedly less risky. No one would wish to
assert that even a matter so simple as counting the members of a
household is without its methodological pitfalls, but the problems
associated with developing verifiable statements about how a man
feels toward his mother or his wife are more numerous and much
more exposed to the observer’'s moods and fancies.

Mead (1962a:134) has recently argued that the adherence to a
physicalist model of science in anthropology is premature, and she
has underscored the “need for waiting until appropriate theories
and methods have been developed to fit our exceedingly complex
materials into an evolving framework.” Yet it cannot be said that
her own launching into the domain of culture and personality was
anything less than precipitous. In the absence of operationally ac-
ceptable research techniques, it might very well be argued that the
entire configurationalist approach was premature and that the attempt

409


===== PAGE 210 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

to sketch the typical Samoan girl’s feelings and emotions during the
transition from puberty to marriage was entirely too ambitious an
undertaking.

In this regard it should be stressed that ethnography can easily
become overcautious and obsessed with a passion for verifiable minu-
tiae. That is also a grave threat to scientific standards, and T would
certainly not wish to be associated with a point of view which de-
means the role of impressionistic, nonstatistical data in cultural
anthropology. But the most important consideration regarding the
appropriateness of rescarch methods, which are relatively “soft” in
terms of verifiability, is the nature of the articulation between the
data and the corpus of orienting theory. If the data-collecting process
is designed to maximize the opportunities for continuous correction
in relationship to a set of cross-culturally relevant hypotheses, one
may tolerate a considerable amount of guesswork and nonquantitative
generalization out of the conviction that some data is better than no
data and that the errors will call attention to themselves during the
process of cross-cultural comparison. Yet it is precisely the de-
velopment of systematic cross-cultural comparisons which Mead be-
lieves is premature for culture and personality studies and which she
believes involve a “violation of the actual complexity of the materials”
(ibid.).

Let us consider what this means in terms of one of the sweeping eth-
nographic generalities which leave many of her colleagues in a state of
wide-eyed wonder. Samoan girls, according to Mead, move through pu-
berty and adolescence without major psychological conflicts, and this is
especially true in the area of sexual development. The result is that
“The girls’ minds were perplexed by no conflicts, troubled by no
philosophical queries, beset by no remote ambitions” (MEaD 194qc:
107). For a generalization which is at once so sweeping and so thor-
oughly dependent upon “getting inside of heads,” Mead’s style
conveys an unnerving degree of conviction. To be sure, Mead does
take up several cases of girls “in conflict.” But these are treated as
deviants and as requiring no modification in her major point. It is not
possible to bring this picture of a serene, even apathetic, passage to
maturity into line with a corpus of interrelated and testable hypotheses
of cross-cultural and causal significance. There is some evidence from
other Occanic societies which suggests that Mead’s Samoan findings
were cxaggerated. As Barnouw points out, studies in Truk and Ifaluk
by Gladwin, Sarason, and Spiro indicate that premarital sexual free-
dom and an apparently placid and leisurely life is no guarantee that
deep inner frustrations and anxieties are not also present.

410

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

MEAD’S DEFENSE OF HER METHOD

It would be a grave injustice to one of anthropology’s most
creative and brilliant personalities to suggest that Mead has not paid
sufficient attention to the special methodological issues associated
with a psychocultural approach. On the contrary, Mead has always
been keenly aware of the need for explicit descriptions of field tech-
niques and methodological assumptions (the same cannot be said
for her sense of philosophical and epistemological issues); and in
certain research specialties to which we shall refer in a moment, she is
without peer. Coming of Age in Samoa contains an appendix on
method in which Mead anticipated the main outlines of the criticism
which she and Benedict were about to provoke. Arguing against
the relevance of statistics for the type of study that requires complex
situational and emotional statements of context, she compared her
role to that of an insightful medical diagnostician:

As the physician and the psychiatrist have found it necessary
to describe cach case scparately and to use their cases as illumi-
nations of a thesis rather than as irrefutable proof such as it is
possible to adduce in the physical sciences, so the student of the
more intangible and psychological aspects of human behaviour
is forced to illuminate rather than demonstrate a thesis

[1949¢:169].
This attitude carries through Mead’s cntire voluminous output and
has been the focus of repeated attacks and counteiattacks concerning
the methodology of psychocultural ethnography. It is once again in-
teresting to note the specific disavowal by one of Boas’ most famous
students of the physicalist model which Kroeber had insisted was
central to Boas’ influence. Writing retrospectively, some  thirty-six
years later, Mead was still unprepared to yield up the intuitive preroga-
tives of a clinical diagnostician. She declared her continuing lack of
sympathy for the attempt to build from the outset, a science of man
which “would conform to the ideal science, physics” and her sympathy
for “those who have insisted on the complexity and uniqueness of

significant events in the life of a bird or the life of a human being”
(MEAD 1962a:135).

FLAWS IN THE DEFENSE

This image of the psychologically oriented anthropologist as
physician or psychoanalyst is dispelled at once when we consider the dif-
ferences between applied and “pure” sciences. Although we may deplore

411

i
|
i
|

———


===== PAGE 211 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the large measure of intuition and guesswork in our doctor’s practice, we
gratefully pay our bills in the knowledge that there is no alternative.
This has never been the case as far as Mead’s explorations of the cul-
tural psyche are concerned. I shall make no attempt here to evaluate the
possible contribution which Mead may have rendered to the improve-
ment of psychiatric therapy. The tone of breathless urgency in some of
her writings seems to promise catastrophic penalties for our failure to
come to grips with the most subtle and variable nuances of the human
mind in its myriad cultural settings. But this leap into the intuited
essences of personality was not a requirement imposed by the profes-
sion in which she had elected to achieve eminence. That it was urgent
to do an ethnographic study of the Samoans (or other Polynesians)
before all traces of the aboriginal patterns were obliterated, none will
deny. But from the point of view of experiment design, there is no
special reason why Boas’ theories about the power of culture could not
have been tested in any number of different settings all of which
would have permitted the use of statistical controls.

It must be remembered that the kind of psychologizing upon which
Mead based her portrait of Samoan adolescence has its analogue in
everyday attempts by notably mature and intelligent people to sum up
their mutual acquaintances along any of the thousands of available
avenues of vernacular characterization. Our common experience in as-
serting that John is clever, Mary dull, Henry gullible, Fred jealous, and
Linda a flirt is that someone who has seen these same people under
different circumstances forthwith challenges our opinion and sets
forth an entirely different interpretation. Life would be decidedly less
complicated were there a larger measure of agreement concerning what
it takes to be a beautiful, intelligent, warm, dependable, magnani-
mous, and charming person. Yet it is just this kind of judgment in
which Mead was obliged to indulge in her efforts to obtain a psycho-
logical portrait of Samoan youth. Here is an enterprise which plainly
requires the courage of one’s convictions, a blessing with which Mead
has been liberally endowed. Thus in Coming of Age, Mead wrote that
Lita was “clever and executive”; Sona “overbearing in manner, arbi-
trary and tyrannous, impudently deferential”; Manita was “haughty
and aggressive”; Ana was “mild, quiescent”; Lola was “quarrelsome, in-
subordinate, impertinent”; Sami was “mild and gentle with a soft
undercurrent of resentment”; Nito was “high spirited”; Siva was “pas-
sionate and easily aroused”; Pusa was “strong minded”; Fuativa was
“cautious and calculating”; Mala was “treacherous”; and poor Tino
was “a dull and good child” (ibid.:112-20, 168). It should be pointed
out that whatever difficulties we might suffer in accepting these vi-

412

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

gnettes as verifiable statements were they delivered in their usual
cultural context, we must now reckon with the additional problem
that Mead was twenty-three years old when she left for Samoa and that
she had to form her impressions of personality differences through the
muffling effect of an imperfectly learned second language, and finally
that the ordinary gestural, facial, and behavioral cues associated with
personality traits in Western culture could not be assumed to corre-
spond to analogous traits in Polynesia.

INTERPRETATION OF MANUS
CHILDHOOD

Mead’s next major book, Growing Up in New Guinea (1930a),
was essentially a repeat performance in a new locale of her Samoan
study. It was concerned with the kind of enculturation processes by
which the Manus brought their children to adulthood. According to
her introductory remarks, she “made this study of Manus education
to prove no thesis, to support no preconceived theories,” but
in the appendix and in retrospective articles she describes how she
had originally intended to test the belief propounded by Lévy-Bruhl
that the animistic ingredients in primitive mentality were similar to
childish thoughtways and that they would therefore be more pro-
nounced among primitive children than among their parents. This hy-
pothesis is interesting for its continuation of the main Boasian thrust
against biological determinism. The Manus child turned out to be less
animistic than his parents and even less animistic than American chil-
dren. Left largely to their own devices, Manus children remained
stunted and they manifested a conspicuously “dull unimaginative, play
life,” a fact from which Mead drew the not altogether shattering con-
clusion that the movement in American education to give more free-
dom to children would produce no desirable results unless they were
given “something upon which to exercise their imagination” (ibid.:152).

DIFFICULT PORTRAITURE

In her third major psychocultural study, Sex and Tempera-
ment in Three Primitive Societies, Mead turned to the question of the
degree of malleability of the sexes with respect to culturally assigned,
sex-linked behavior (1935a). In this book the parallelism in method
between Mead and Benedict is clearly visible and has been pointed out
by Mead herself (1962a:126). Perhaps the major difference was that
Mead’s materials were largely drawn from her own field research. Like

413



===== PAGE 212 =====

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Benedict, Mead compared three different cultures to test the range of
variation of cultural patterns. Instead of a psychologistic portraiture of
the entire culture, however, Mead restricted herself largely to the
problem of typing the varieties of sexually assigned behavioral roles.
Nonetheless, there are some unnerving examples of the more general
kind of portraiture. Undoubtedly these provoked less criticism (cf.
THURNWALD 1036; BERNARD 1045; MEAD 1937a) than was directed
toward Benedict’s treatment of the Pueblos only because of the
paucity of relevant area specialists. For instance:

As the Arapesh made growing food and children the greatest ad-
venture of their lives, and the Mundugumor found greatest satis-
faction in fighting and competitive acquisition of women, the
Tchambuli may be said to live principally for art [MEAD 1950:170].

In pursuing the main thread, Mead appears to have had the extraordi-
nary good fortune to have selected the Arapesh, Mundugumor, and
Tchambuli as the cultures in which to do fieldwork. For as she noted
in the Preface to the 1950 edition, “many readers felt that her analysis
was too pretty” and that “I must have found what I was looking for.”

Here, admittedly looking for light on the subject of sex differ-
ences, I found three tribes all conveniently within a hundred
mile area. In one, both men and women act as we expect women
to act—in a mild parental responsive way; in the second, both act
as we expect men to act—in a fierce initiating fashion; and in the
third, the men act according to our stereotype for women—are
catty, wear curls and go shopping, while the women are energetic,
managerial, unadorned partners [ibid.].

Mead goes on to insist that although it seemed “too good to be true,”
she had reported what was actually there and not what she had wanted
to find. Tt is obvious, however, that such oath-takings are irrelevant.
The issue is not one of good faith but rather of demonstration, verifi-
ability, and intersubjectivity.

CRITIQUE OF CONFIGURATIONAL
HOMOGENEITY

This problem is not restricted to Mead’s work but is, of
course, a matter of grave concern in all ethnographic research. It does
seem, however, to be true that psychocultural studies are especially vul-
nerable to criticisms which challenge their evidential foundations. This
difficulty increases in direct proportion to the size and sociocultural

414

cE)mplcxity of the population from which the typical impressionistic
vignettes are derived. Mead’s rejection of statistical validation tech-
niques cannot be justified when one moves from the world of the
Arapesh, total population several hundred, to Bali, population several
tens of thousands, to Russia, Japan, and the United States, population
several tens of millions. Insight, empathy, intuition, everyday experi-
ence, training as observer—no matter how highly developed these
skills are—provide an inadequate basis for making statements which
purport to describe some typical aspect of the personality of millions
of human beings. As a matter of fact, evidence has accumulated that
even in relatively small populations the amount of emotional and cog-
nitive variability is far beyond that with which nonquantitative psycho-
cultural analysts are prepared to cope.

An early indication of this was implicit in Mead’s own data. The very
fact that personality of the sexes differed so markedly in some societies
—as in Mead’s own account of the Tchambuli and as in Bateson’s
(1936) description of the Iatmul—leads one to expect that other status
differences may also be associated with quite different psychic patterns.
In stratified societies class and caste differences obviously intrude, and
there is every reason to expect that many of the myriad occupational
specialties characteristic of the larger statc-organized societies are as-
sociated with important personality differences.

Actually, the main thrust of the methodological critique to which
Mead, Benedict, and the other pioneers of this field have been sub-
jected comes from within the field itself. Among anthropologists, a
second generation of culture and personality studies have been ap-
proached with a more modest and sober if considerably less exciting
regard for methodological complexities. One of the most conspicuous
results of the increased use of standardized psychological tests and
statistical analysis has been the proof that the variability even in small
populations is too great to be ignored. For example, Anthony Wallace
(1952) in a highly operationalized approach to the analysis of Iroquois
personality, used Rorschach tests to establish statistic;ﬂly meaningful
expressions of modal personality. Working with 21 scoring variables
and setting arbitrary limits upon deviation from each mode, he
counted the number of individuals whose scores on all 21 variables fell
within the modal range. By this approach, only 37 percent of the Tus-
carora could be said to manifest the “modal” personality of their group
(but it should be emphasized that no one can say how much deviation
from the mode constitutes an acceptable definition of “shared” traits.
B. I_\’aplan (1954) compared Rorschach responses in four cultures—
Zuiii, Navaho, Spanish American, and Mormon—with respect to four-

415



===== PAGE 213 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

teen variables. Between-group differences turned out to be much
smaller than expected with only five of these variables exhibiting
statistically valid cross-cultural differences. Moreover, the range of
variability within each of the cultures appeared to be comparable to
that which Wallace found for the Tuscarora. As Kaplan notes:

That great variability exists does not argue against the influence
of culture on personality; it means merely that cultural influences
do not necessarily create uniformity in a group. All individuals
interact with their cultures. However human beings are not pas-
sive recipients of their culture. They accept, reject, or rebel
against the cultural forces to which they are oriented. In many
cultures, including our own, there exists a pattern of outward
conformity and inner rebellion and deviation. It is probably cor-
rect to say that individuals scem a good deal more similar than

they really are [1954:32].

In the same vein, but with different methods, C. W. M. Hart has drawn
personality portraits of five Tiwi brothers, cach of whom showed many
striking diffcrences in such patterns as aggressiveness, cheerfulness,
sexuality, and other personality dimensions. Hart ironically draws at-
tention to Boas’ insistence that there is no uniform mentality to be
associated with primitive cultures:

. if the personality and culture literature is leading young an-

thropologists into the field expecting to find “stereotyped per-
sonalities” in the simpler cultures, they are doomed to

disappointment [1954:259].
Wallace, speaking of what he calls the “New Culture and Personality,”

believes that a fundamental shift away from the search for configura-
tional homogeneity on a tribal or national scale has already occurred.

The magnitude of individual psychological differences within cul-
tural boundaries is rccognized as being so large that the analytical
problem would appear to be the elucidation of the processes of
the organization of diversity rather than the mechanisms of in-
ducing a supposed uniformity [WALLACE 1962:6-7).

MEAD'S USE OF PHOTOGRAPHY

Mead’s response to criticism of her methodology has been ex-
tremely complex. By 1936 she herself had become convinced that the
method she had been using to describe the “ethos” of the Samoans
and the New Guineans was unsatisfactory from several points of view:

416

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

This method had many serious limitations: it transgressed the
canons O.f precise and operational scientific exposition proper to
science; it was far too dependent upon idiosyncratic factors of
style and literary skill; it was difficult to duplicate; and it was
difficult to evaluate [BaTESON and MEAD 1942:xi]. '

One ofvthe ways in which Mead has attempted to overcome this dif-
ficulty is strictly methodological. She has sought to improve the de-
monstrative power of her observations by employing cameras and tape
‘recordgrs to capture characteriologically significant behavioral events
in their situational context and to publish or display these records
along with word descriptions. The latter are in turn based on a phe-
nomenally skilled facility for note-taking.

Mead's turning to photography, both still and cine, was a direct re-
sponse to the criticism to which her first three configurational books
were subjected. In preparation for her fieldwork in Bali in 1936 jointly
with Gregory Bateson, Mead took along an unprecedented array of
phqtographic equipment and film. All together, during the ficldwork
period some 25,000 Leica stills and over 22,000 feet of 16 mm. film
were cxpgsed These pioneering experiments in the use of mechanical
aids to give ethnography an unimpeachable documentary foundation
may very well constitute Mead’s most enduring contribution to the
qevelopment of anthropology as a discipline. The ability to record con-
tmupus sequences of specimens of naturally unfolding human be-
havior—the actual raw material of history and sociocultural evolution
—at once maises the scientific prospects of ethnography far beyond its
prototechnic horizons. It must be emphasized that these prospects
have now become much more obvious than they were only a few years
ago. When it first occurred to Mead that part of the answer to her
critics lay in the hardware of the communications industry, she had
little by way of precedent to guide her. Now, within the né);t decade,
we may anticipate a leap to entirely new levels of machine-assisted
ethnography as the technical advances associated with miniaturization
are declassified and made available to nonmilitary personnel. (We may
of course also anticipate a concomitant intensification of the moral
and ethical dilemmas of the ethnographer whose “snooping” has al-
ways been likened to gossiping at best and spying at worst.) But Mead
was undoubtedly years ahead of her collcagués in this matter, and she
quite properly berated her critics with the observation that “the pro-
ponents of quantification and ‘scientific’ accuracy have made very little
use of the new tools that make greater accuracy ‘available for all of us”

(1962a:135).

417



===== PAGE 214 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Despite its long-run promise, it cannot be said that Mead’s and Bate-
son’s utilization of photography solved the immediate methodological
problem of documenting the intuited personality differences associated
with the large, multivillage, stratified, and specialized Balinese popula-
tion. Several selective processes, some of them unconscious, intervene
between the actual unfolding of Balinese behavior during Bateson’s
and Mead’s sojourn and the printing of the stills and movies, which are
intended as proof if not of the representativity at least of the reality of
these events. In view of the fact that Bateson and Mead were both the
cthnographers and the photographers, it scarcely seems possible that
sustained divergences between written observations and the photo-
graphic record would come to light. The camera had to be aimed and
the shutter made to operate in conformity with the interests, hypoth-
eses, and dramatic and aesthetic inclinations of the moment. The re-
sult is that the photographs have superb illustrative value. As far as
their demonstrative value is concerned, however, they are not con-
spicuously less subjective than a straight verbal report. The use of
photographs in other words has not solved Mead’s difficulties with the
problem of intersubjectivity. In this connection the fact that we are
asked to accept the visual representation of body motion as clues to
the emotional events within the brain places an additional burden
upon the verbal interpretations that Mead and Bateson attached to
each photograph. Both the problems of representativity and of verifi-
ability have thus remained essentially immune to Mead’s photographic
innovations.

INFORMANT REPRESENTATIVITY
AND NATIONAL CHARACTER

One of Mead’s answers to her critics has taken her along quite
a different path, of great interest in relationship to the development of
a similar strategy by certain proponents of the “New Ethnography,” of
the “linguistic model,” and of French anthropology under Claude
Lévi-Strauss.

While recognizing the need for better validation procedures, Mead
and her followers and collaborators plunged ahead into a number of
ambitious psychocultural projects, none of which are notably more
convincing than her analysis of Samoan adolescence, and to which the
photographic innovations of her Balinese experiment have not been ap-
plied. Studies of the national character of the United States, Russia,
and England by Geoffrey Gorer (1948, 1949, 1955); of Japan by Ruth
Benedict (1946); and of the United States by Mead herself (1942,

418

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

1949a) have all been attacked for their unorthodox methodology. The
use of a small number of informants as the basis for gcneralfzation
about the intimate psychic constellations of great masses of people is
the most troublesome aspect of these studies. Mead has responded to
sm}xch criticism by insisting that a single informant, provided that his so-
cial and cultural position is carefully specified, can be a satisfactory
source of information about widely distributed patterns: ’

Any member of a group, provided that his position within that
group is properly specified, is a perfect sample of the group-wide
pattern on which he is acting as an informant. So a twenty-one-
year-old boy born of Chinese-American parents in a small ui:state
New York town who has just graduated summa cum laude from
H?r\fard and a tenth-generation Boston-born deaf mute of United
Kingdom stock are equally perfect examples of American national
character, provided that their individual position and individual
characteristics are taken fully into account [MEAD 1953:648].

Although presented with Mead’s characteristic energy and sense of
conviction, this statement leaves the major challenge to her position
essentially untouched. Mead makes the assumption here that the
atypicality of the Chinese American or the deaf mute can be sur-
mounted by fully specifying their atypicality; but to do this, we must
have already achieved some knowledge of the typical patterns. Al-
though it is doubtless a safe bet that Harvard boys and deaf mutes
have noteworthy psychological specialties, what additional varieties of
actor types in the United States require special identification? Are
tugboat captains and insurance office workers notably different in their
Sexugl standards? Mead in effect runs out from under the methodological
requirement for sampling only to have it drop back on her with in-
creased force. For if we are to take fully into account individual posi-
tion and characteristics, then we must either content ourselves with
200 million different national characters or avail ourselves of sampling

techniques in order to identify our informants in relationship to the
test of the American population.

THE LINGUISTIC ANALOGY

Like many anthropologists, and among them more than a few
who are hostile to her approach, Mead believes that cultural patterns
are somehow peculiarly immune to the need for statistically structured
Samp]’es.' In this regard there is a fascinating convergence between
Mead’s invocation of the linguistic model as a methodological prece-
dent and the similar use of the same model by the practitioners of

419

|
|
|
i
|
i
i
i
|
|
{
|
|
i
I
|
|



===== PAGE 215 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the “New Ethnography.” Unlike the sociologist or the social psycholo-
gist, she argues, the anthropologist is not primarily interested in the
distribution or incidence of a pattern such as “resistance to paternal
authority” but merely in the existence of this pattern as it is mani-
fested in regard to parents, grandparents, siblings, and other sets of
relationships. If one wants to know the grammatical structure of a
language, “it is sufficient to use very few informants.” The same is true
of the rest of culture.

In dealing with culture, the anthropologist makes the same as-
sumptions about the rest of a culture that the linguist makes
about the language—that he is dealing with a system which can
be delineated by analysis of a small number of very highly speci-
fied samples [ibid.:655].

Mead attributes to linguistics the belief that the statement “to be is
an auxiliary verb in English” will not be improved by the collection of
more and more samples of English speech. So too, she argues, will our
statements about patterns not be improved by additional sampling.
The distinction which Mead is making here is also precisely that which
Lévi-Strauss has attempted to set up under the rubrics “mechanical”
and “statistical” models (see Chap. 18). All of these attempts to cir-
cumvent the labor of counting and measuring human responses echo
the idealism and intuitionism of Vico, Kant, Hegel, and Dilthey. The
strongest case for Mead’s point is certainly that furnished by language
and other communication systems. But there are important reasons
why culture as a whole cannot profitably be looked upon as a communi-
cation system. Even in linguistics it is not so apparent that the testing
for behavioral variations will not improve the statement of grammatical
rules. Were linguists not to test for some additional instances of the
use of the sound train “to be,” they would be as much victims of
philosophical idealism as their colleagues in cultural anthropology. To
learn that “to be” occurs not only as an auxiliary verb, but also as three
or more intransitive verbs with meanings such as “to exist,” “to re-
main,” and “to happen” is the kind of improvement which one might
expect from collecting more samples of English speech.

As we shall see, the invocation of linguistics as the patron of intuited
regularities is sometimes more appropriate than in the case of person-
ality studies. Some domains of culture are more highly patterned than
others. Textbook English obviously lies at one end of a very broad
continuum of interpersonal regularities. In between there are such
matters as when to plant corn, where to live after marriage, how to
grect a chief. At the other extreme, there are such concerns as how one

420

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

feels and what one thinks in reaction to a mother’s nagging, a sexual ad-
vance, the death of one’s father. It is to the study of this most perplex-
ing of all areas of human bchavior that Mead’s professional life has
been dedicated. And it is precisely in this area that firm statistical con-

trq] and carefully operationalized and instrumented research methodol-
ogies are most urgently required.

421

i


===== PAGE 216 =====

Culture and Personality.

Freudian 16

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

S
BB

rl_l:e research investment in culture and personality exemplifies the
attraction of mentalistic and individualistic themes in American social
science. The extraordinary influence of Freudian and other depth psy-
chologies is possibly linked with the heightening of social, political,
and economic tension associated with two world wars and the ap-
parently deteriorating prospects of achieving human happiness through
sociocultural evolution. It seems to me not without significance for the
development of theories of culture that widespread attention to psy-
chocultural analysis among anthropologists historically accompanied
the inward-turning of the depth psychologists toward the family’s and
the individual’s responsibility for frustrations and anxieties, and a con-
sequent turning away from the techno-environmental, techno-eco-
nomic, and social and political conditions that control the destiny of
both family and individual.

422

FUNCTIONALIST PARADIGMS

In addition to constituting an enlargement of the descriptive
interests of ethnography, the culture and personality movement has
made a number of tentative theoretical contributions toward the ex-
planation of cultural differences and similarities. For the most part
these contributions have been phrased in terms of loosely formulated,
functionalist paradigms. That is, certain kinds of personality configura-
tions are presented as somehow appropriate to, or consistent with, cer-
tain kinds of institutions or other aspects of the group’s typical or
modal personality. In this sense Benedict’s configurations are obviously
a form of functional analysis which is fully analogous to the attempt by
Radcliffe-Brown and Malinowski to show the interdependence and
functional “fit” of less conspicuously psychologistic elements. There
is the further resemblance in that most psychological functionalism
involves a timeless or synchronic cross-section in which no commit-
ment is made conceming the relative permanence of the observed in-
stitutional and psychological concatenation. Milton Singer’s (1961:28)
observation concerning the timelessness of patterns in the configura-
tional approach actually also applies to the culture and personality
movement as a whole:

The overwhelming impression given by works of this period is
that configurations arc timeless entities without known antece-
dents or consequences, but that, once established in a particular
territory, they automatically become all-powerful shapers of events
and personalities.

A general critique of synchronic functionalism will be found in the
chapter, British Social Anthropology. Tt will then be shown that the
strategy is not a viable alternative to historical determinism. Here we
may note the philosopher Ernest Nagel’s (1953) proof that any logico-
empirically meaningful functional statement must be translatable into
a cause and effect paradigm. The reverse is also true: any cause and
effect statement may also be restated as a functional one. Functional
analysis implies that some sort of covariance of a long- or short-range
time period can be identified in a set of variables.

HOMEOSTATIC MODEL

Paul Collins (1965) has recently formulated the logical prin-
ciples which sustain short-range functional analysis and has advanced
the analogy of homeostatic control through negative feedback as the

423



===== PAGE 217 =====

.

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

basis for functional concatenation between system-maintaining varia-
bles. In Collins’ view, elements of the system are seen as changing
through a range of limited values maintained by sociocultural servo-
mechanisms. The analysis of Melanesian and New Guinea pig popula-
tions has been carried out with this paradigm in mind (VAYDA, LEEDS,
and smiTH 1961¢; RAPPAPORT 1966 ). Homeostasis is assured by periodic
slaughter, under ritual coordination, of herds which place excessive de-
mand on labor input and garden lands. Another variety of short-range
covariance involves a safety-valve effect. This admits the existence of
“waste” or “noise” in the system and assigns to certain cultural ele-
ments the function of ridding the system of potentially disruptive
ingredients. In psychocultural analyses, some combination of these two
short-time functional paradigms seems to be implied whenever ana-
Iytic propositions advance beyond the level of mere equivocation. It is
this kind of covariance, for example, that is implied when one speaks
of the “projective” functions of magico-religious elements. Religious
ceremonial is frequently thought of as fulfilling the psychological func-
tion of allaying anxiety and also as a coordinating mechanism for
heightening cooperation. Translated into the normal cause and effect,
covariant statement, this means that the rituals in question drain off
individual anxieties when system-destroying levels are approached. It
also means that as ceremonials take place, levels of cooperation which
had fallen in the direction of system-destroying values are restored to
tolerable limits.

EVOLUTIONARY MODEL

Homeostatic functional paradigms should be kept distinct
from statements of the conditions under which the system develops
new functional or dysfunctional concatenations: in other words, the
conditions under which cultural evolution takes place. When the sys-
tem cvolves, changes in the value of the clements in one sector ac-
cumulate and in so doing cause changes in other sectors. The cause and
effect sequence may produce positive feedback with the consequence
that the analytical separation of the dependent and independent varia-
bles is made extremely difficult. But the factors responsible for cultural
evolution are both functionally and causally related. Nothing could be
more futile than to oppose functionalism to historical determinism.
An understanding of cultural evolution requires the study of both
system-maintaining and system-changing phenomena, and in both
cases we are concerned with probabilistic versions of causality. When
a functional statement cannot be made to yield a prediction of the

424

changes of state of dependent and independent variables, it is not
properly speaking a functional statement, but rather a functional
equivocation.

This brings us back to the matter at hand, for any attempt to assess
the contribution made by culture and personality studies to cultural
theory must grapple with the highly equivocal nature of the relational
propositions that dominate the field. These propositions are frequently
worded in such a way as to defy all efforts to categorize them as either
of the two viable varieties of functionalism. Yet, it is the evident in-
tent of the responsible parties that psychocultural analysis be regarded
as more than mere descriptions barren of testable hypotheses.

FREUD S EVOLUTIONISM

The basic psychological frame of reference for the modern
culture and personality school derives directly or indirectly from
Sigmund Freud. Paradoxically, there is no equivocation in Freud’s
psychocultural pronouncements as regarding the category of functional-
ism to which they are meant to conform. When Freud turned his at-
tention from the analysis of the individual psyche to psychocultural
phenomena, it was to identify the causal processes in cultural evolu-
tion. This was the avowed objective of Totem and Taboo (1913), his
first sustained foray into the domain of culture. In every respect,
Totem and Taboo may be taken as representative of what the Boasians
considered to be the worst form of evolutionary speculation. In the
grandiosity of its compass, the flimsiness of its evidence, and the gen-
erality of its conclusions, it was scarcely approached by anything Mor-
gan had conceived. A direct clash between Freud and the Boasians
was thus inevitable.

According to Freud, man began his cultural career under a form of
social organization in which a single patriarch held exclusive sexual
privileges over his sisters and daughters. At some unspecified moment,
his sexually deprived sons plotted their father's murder, killed him,
and ate him. But the brothers were overcome with guilt; they hence-
forth repressed their desire to have sexual relations with their mothers,
sisters, or daughters. At the same time, in expiation of their murder-
ous deed and cannibalistic orgy, they created the myth of the totem,
the animal symbol of their father, henceforth taboo as food except on
titual occasions. In this fashion, the primal patricide, helped along by
hereditary memory traces in the “racial unconscious,” gave rise to the
Oedipus complex, nuclear family incest taboo, group exogamy, totem-
ism, and many other features of primitive civilization.

425



===== PAGE 218 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Within this anachronistic framework Freud sought to handle the
problem of the diversity of cultures. Savage personality was equated
with infantile personality; each modern individual in a sense recapitu-
lates the evolution of culture by passing through the various stages of
progress toward maturity, and some cultures like some individuals have
their development arrested at various points short of “civilization”
(maturity). Nothing in these doctrines prepared orthodox Freudians
to cope with the great variety of culturally determined personality
structures which the data being collected by Malinowski, Mead, Bene-
dict, and other psychologically oriented fieldworkers seemed to demon-
strate.

THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL CRITIQUE OF
FREUD

The reaction of the Boasians to Totem and Taboo is well
represented by Kroeber’s 1920 review of the book’s English translation.
Although Freud is called a “gallant and stimulating adventurer into
ethnology,” his theories are scoffed at wherever they purport to explain
social origins and evolutionary phases. The entire historical dimension
is associated with the era of discredited speculative anthropology. The
Boasians, understandably enough, were not about to substitute the
phantasies of neurotic patients for a study of actual historical events.
Boas himself was considerably less charitable than Kroeber:

While, therefore, we may welcome the application of every ad-
vance in the method of psychological investigation, we cannot
accept as an advance in ethnological method the crude transfer of
a novel, one-sided method of psychological investigation of the in-
dividual to social phenomena the origin of which can be shown to
be historically determined and to be subject to influences that are
not at all comparable to those that control the psychology of the
individual [Boas 1948:28¢; orig. 1920a).

The anthropological critique of Freudian theories centers on Mal-
inowski’s (1923; 1927a) “disproof” of the universality of the Oedipus
complex. Having had his attention drawn to the strategic value of the
matrilineal, avunculocal Trobrianders by C. G. Seligman, Malinowski
threatened the entire Freudian edifice with his description of how in
a Trobriand family it was mother’s brother and not father who was
the figure of authority. This meant that repressive discipline did not
originate in the man who sexually monopolized ego’s mother, thereby
depriving the father-son relationship of the ambivalent love-hatred
which Freud had observed in his European patients.

426

.

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

To a significant extent, the first three of Margaret Mead’s field stud-
ies must also be seen as part of the anthropological critique of Freud.
Not that Freud was the specific target of her fieldwork, but rather that
her main concern was to disprove the widespread belief of which
Freud was one of the most prominent advocates, that human nature
contained biopsychological components, such as libido and its com-
plexes, which express themselves in definite behavioral stages indepen-
dently of the specific sociocultural environment. Freud, in other
words, in the nature-nurture controversy, leaned heavily toward the
side of the physiologists, biologists, instinct psychologists, and Spen-
cerian anthropologists. Boas and his students were concerned to prove
that culture has the power to make every human being different from
what “nature” has decreed, while Freud and his disciples were con-
vinced that cultural differences were superficial and that in the most
significant psychological sense, all human beings were led along similar
developmental routes by their common hereditary endowment.

From the morphology of the id, ego, and superego, to the interpreta-
tion of dreams, to the origin of civilization, Freud’s scheme depended
upon the existence of a well-defined universal human instinctual en-
dowment and a definite universal ontogenetic progress through ma-
turational stages (oral, anal, genital). Freud originally gave the name
libido to the instinctual source of human behavior. Later, with the
publication of Civilization and Its Discontents (1930), he spoke of
“eros” and opposed this life force to a death instinct (from which he
derived such phenomena as masochism, suicide, and war). Every-
thing in Mead’s approach weighed against such compulsory psychic
freight. It was her mission, set for her by Boas, to defeat the notion of
a narrowly fixed racial or panhuman hereditary human nature. And it
was for this reason that she tirelessly stressed the absence of matura-
tional regularities: adolescence is not always a time of stress; children
are not necessarily more imaginative than adults; women are not
necessarily more passive than men (MEAD 1939:x-xi).

THE FREUDIAN PURITY OF RCSHEINI

During the period under discussion there was one field-experi-
enced anthropologist of major stature who argued on behalf of the
whole Freudian doctrine: Hungarian-born Géza Réheim. By Réheim’s
own reckoning, Bruno Bettelheim was the only other authority with
possibly comparable credentials (including clinical practice).

Roéheim is one of the most flamboyant figures in the history of the
culture and personality movement. Although his method of reaching
psychoanalytical conclusions is intolerably linked with clinical author-

427



===== PAGE 219 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ity, his didactic “einschnappen” are not appreciably more amazing
than those associated with the Mead-Bateson-Gorer axis. On the other
hand, Réheim had the virtue of clarity and frankness, always stipulat-
ing that the fundamental causal sequence rises from infant experience
to adult practice. Everything else is superficial. It is the Oedipus com-
plex which lies at the root of all psychologically significant sociocultural
happenings, and from Réheim’s perspective anyone who denies this
is suffering from a repressed Oedipus complex of his own and should
at once tush off to be analyzed. Contrary to popular impression, in the
argument between Réheim and Malinowski over the effect of the
Trobriand matrilineal organization on the Oedipal situation, it is
Réheim who holds the trump card. By Malinowski’s own admission,
the Trobriand child is brought up largely under the influence of the
usual nuclear pairs. Mother’s brother enters the picture only when
the child is seven or eight years old, an age by which the Oedipal
constellation is firmly entrenched.

Réheim’s long-running battle with the members of particularist and
synchronic anthropological schools on both sides of the Atlantic en-
gendered much acrimonious debate. His rejection of the Boasian
emphasis on the alleged uniqueness of each culture, due to its separate
historical growth, has many points in common with the neo-evolution-
ist critique of historical particularism. Yet Roheim’s style was so
thoroughly calculated to insult the majority of his anthropological
peers that he gained few converts, and even those who were influenced
by him preferred not to acknowledge his existence. Especially painful
was Roheim’s accusation that when it came down to it, the Boasian
relativists were simply repressed nationalists. The reason why they re-
jected Freud’s evolutionary theory and went about trying to prove
that cultural factors could prevent the formation of Oedipal feelings
was that they themselves were suffering from unresolved Oedipal
urges. His audacious accusations aptly convey both the strength and
weakness of his doctrines:

But the point we are now making is that this impression of
complete diversity of various human groups is largely created by
the Oedipus complex, that is to say, the Oedipus complex of the
anthropologist or psychiatrist or psychologist. He does not know
what to do with his own Ocdipus complex—he therefore scoto-
mizes clear evidence for the Oedipus complex, even when his

training ought to enable him to see it [ROHEIM 1950:362].

Although this seems like a hit below the belt, there are more vicious
blows to come. Réheim must have thoroughly enjoyed the sputtering

428

v—

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

in professional circles which greeted his preposterous notion that
Freud was rejected because the Boasians were crypto-racists:

This repression of the Oedipus complex is paralleled by another
preconscious tendency, that of nationalism. The idea that all na-
tions are completely different from each other and that the goal
of anthropology is simply to find how different they are is a thinly
veiled manifestation of nationalism, the democratic Ccunterparlt
of the Nazi racial doctrine or the communist class doctrine. Now
of course, I am quite aware of the fact that all those who advocate
the study of differences are well-meaning people and that con-
sciously they are in favor of the brotherhood of mankind. The
slogan of “cultural relativity” is supposed to mean just this. But
I am a psychoanalyst. I know that all human attitudes result
from a compromise formation of two opposite trends and I know
the meaning of reaction formation: “You are completely differ-
ent, but I forgive you” is what it amounts to. Anthlupoldgy is in
danger of being led down a blind alley by being subjected to one
of the most ancient tendencies of mankind, that of in-group versus
out-group [ibid.].

The audacious ironies in which Réheim delighted are not wholly
devoid of rational substance. One of the basic requirements of a theory
of cultural continuity and change is a description of what used to be
called human nature. All cultural items are partially the product of a
set of biophysical constants which are shared by most if not all Homo
sapiens. Correct though it may be that the explanation of differences
and similarities cannot be achieved merely by invoking these con-
stants, it is no less improbable that explanations can be achieved with-
out them. These constants interact with the variables of specific
cultural and natural environments, and they form a necessary part of
the equation by which we seek to explain specific classes of phenomena
of less than universal occurrence. At a minimum, the species-given re-
quirement of metabolism, the conditions and phases of human sexual-
ity, the universals of somatic and psychic health and discase—all
must be plugged into the equation by which differences as well as simi-
larities are to be understood. In this respect, despite the obsessive
quality of Réheim’s search for Oedipal taboos, Oedipal ceremonies,
and Oedipal organization, we must maintain an open mind regarding
the possibility that much of the recurrent symbolism of dreams and
myths reflects an underlying commonality of Oedipal strivings.

In his later years, Réheim’s case for the primacy of the Oedipal situa-
tion gained immeasurably from his abandonment of Freud’s idea of a
phylogenetic memory of the primal patricide. Réheim pointed instead

429



===== PAGE 220 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

to certain species-given characteristics of Homo sapiens which might
very well account for a universal sexual complex. There is first the
universal affection from mother to child (“sheltered, i.e., libidinal,
mother-child situation”); there is second a precocious sexuality which
sets in before physical or mental maturity is reached; and third, it is
the combination of precocious sexuality and maturing mental processes
which fills the human child with libidinal images. Réheim concludes
that psychoanalysis is not culture-bound and that its methods are
of universal validity: “There can be many types of personality but
only one Unconscious” (1950:491).

Réheim recognized that his defense of a single “unconscious” was a
restatement of the doctrine of psychic unity, which he attributes to
Adolf Bastian, in an acknowledgment almost unique among twen-
tieth-century anthropologists. But Roheim points out that in addition
to universal germ thoughts, Bastian was also aware of the specific devel-
opment which these received in specific cultures. Réheim was similarly
unprepared to dismiss individual cultural elaboration as unimportant,
but he denied that they could be understood apart from their universal
ingredients. This led him to a kind of psychocultural analysis which
was clearly antecedent to that of the entire neo-Freudian culture and
personality movement. Although he insisted on centering all of his
description on the Oedipus complex, he regularly accounted for spe-
cific cultural phenomena in terms of the modification of childhood
experiences by culturally established customs. Among the Arunta for
example, he claimed that the mother slept with her male child under
her as if she were copulating with him from the male position. This
produces a certain amount of confusion in the child, which gets in-
stitutional expression in the famous rite of sub-incision—the slitting
of the underside of the penis back to the urcthra—an anatomical alter-
ation which Réheim declares is an attempt to possess both a vagina
and a penis. The same projective phenomena are invoked to explain
the circular patterns which the adult males incise on their sacred
phallic stones (tchuringas). Let it not be said therefore that Roheim
was insensitive to cultural specialities or that he attempted to reduce
them all to a uniform Ocdipal situation. On the other hand, the ten-
uous nature of his interpretation surely requires no further comment.

IRRESISTIBLE LURE OF FREUDIANISM

Despite the isolated situation in which Roheim found him-
self (not without considerable satisfaction, one suspects), the re-
sistance to Freud was not as great as he seemed to think it was. Freud’s
doctrines held a great appeal for the intellectual denizens of the in-

430

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

terval between the two world wars. Even in the dispute concerning
the universality of the Oedipus complex, Freudian doctrine was actu-
ally accorded a relatively favorable reception. On closer inspection
Malinowski’s point turns out to be rather supportive of Freud’s outi
look. He himself felt that he was vindicating, not destroying, the essen-
tials of Freud’s contributions. '

By my analysis, 1 have established that Freud’s theories not only
roughly correspond to human psychology, but that they follow
closely the modification in human nature brought about by vari-
ous constitutions of Society. In other words, I have established a
deep correlation between the type of society and the nuclear
complex found there. While this is a notable confirmation of the
main tenet of Freudian psychology, it might compel us to modify
certain of its details, or rather to make some of the formulae more
clastic [MALINOWSKI 1923:331].

As Kroeber pointed out, in a reconsideration of Totem and Taboo
{1952:309; orig. 1939), the orthodox psychoanalytic movement re-
vealed “itself as partaking of a religion—a system of mysticism” from
which each deviation was a heresy, and as such, grossly exaggerated the
anthropologist’s resistance to Freudian psychological principles.

During the 1920’s, anthropologists and psychoanalysts were natural
allies in the intellectual revolt against the constraints of sexual and
other forms of provincialism. Anthropologists enjoyed a reputation for
Bohemianism which they carned as proponents of the relativity of
morals, as taboo-breaking feminists, or as practitioners of exotic custom
picked up in jungle villages and Pacific atolls. Freud’s exposure of the
pathological results of Euro-American sexual taboos and family organi-
zation struck a responsive chord in the Boasian progran;. Moral
relativism was an important side effect of the critique of nineteenth-
century evolutionism. Among some of the Boasians, as for example,
Melville Herskovits, the disproof of the superiority of Euro-American
culture in the realm of religion, social organization, and family life
Iloomed so large that the very word “primitive” came to be regarded as
inadmissibly invidious and pejorative.

One of the most important themes running through Patterns of Cul-
ture is concerned with the alternative ways in which different cultures
acf:(?mmodate deviants, with an explicit psychoanalytically derived
critique of our own failings in this respect. The net attractiveness of
psychoanalysis is well illustrated by the fact that about the time Kroe-
ber wrote his rather scathing critique of Totem and Taboo he himself
was undergoing analysis. For two years, Kroeber even maintained an
office in San Francisco in which he set himself up as a lay analyst

431



===== PAGE 221 =====

—————7—‘

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

(sTEwaRD 1961:1050). Moreover, the drift into ever more individual-
ized versions of historical particularism as practiced and advocated by
Sapir, Radin, and Boas also set a premium on achieving a theo-
retical framework for the description of the cognitive and emotional
inner life of one’s informants. In brief, the attraction of Freud’s
psychological, as distinct from his evolutionary and psychocultural,
theories was so great that anthropologists were not prepared to read
themselves out of the Freudian circle simply because of a few crimes
against history. What was needed was a de-mythologized, de-evolution-
ized, de-Europeanized Freud.

Sapir, responding to W. H. R. Rivers’ early criticism, was among
the first to realize that this transfiguration would actually take place
and that Freud’s influence would survive the flames of the anthro-
pological crucible. During the First World War, Rivers had observed
that battle-induced hysteria and anxiety neuroses among British sol-
diers apparently occurred independent of sexual frustrations. Rivers’
book, Instinct and the Unconscious (1920a), challenged Freud’s libido
theory. In his review, Sapir looked beyond the specific defects to a re-
markably prophetic vision of the neo-Freudian movement:

Nearly everything that is specific in Freudian theory, such as the
“QOedipus-complex” as a normative image or the definite inter-
pretation of certain symbols or the distinctively sexual nature of
certain infantile reactions, may well prove to be cither ill-founded
or seen in a distorted perspective, but there can be little doubt of
the immense service that Dr. Freud has rendered psychology in
his revelation of typical psychic mechanism. Such relational ideas
as the emotionally integrated complex, the tendency to suppres-
sion under the stress of a conflict, the symptomatic expression of
a suppressed impulse, the transfer of emotion and the canalizing
or pooling of impulses, the tendency to regression, are so many
powerful clues to an understanding of how the “soul” of man sets
to work. Psychology will not willingly let go of these and still
other Freudian concepts, but will build upon them, gradually
coming to sec them in their wider significance [SAPIR 1049:520;

orig. 1921].

RECONCILIATION OF ANTHROPOLOGY
AND FREUDIANISM

Only after Freud’s scheme had been purged of its historical

determinism was it embraced by the culture and personality move-
ment (which is not to minimize the importance of the other modifica-

tions demanded by the known facts of cthnography). Before this

432

tra.nsformation took place, one can vaguely discern Freud’s influence
l")cmg transmitted through Sapir to Benedict and Mead and adumbrat-
ing the popular treatment of deviant behavior, early childhood pat-
terns, and comparative sexology. After this transformation the debt to
Freud was readily acknowledged. But in the meantime something had
been lost: the definiteness of Freud’s position as far as causality is
concerned. Henceforth, the accent was on synchronic functionalisn; It
should be noted that this transformation conformed to the Boasian
treatment of all other evolutionary schema. The discredited evolution-
ary section of the Freudian synthesis was eliminated with no attempt
made to reformulate the diachronic regularities on the basis of revised
eth'nographic information. Although many anthropologists now gave
their energies and talents to the task of helping the ‘psychoanalysts
and psychologists reform Freud’s psychological theories, they dumpeé
Freud’s cvolutionary views into the same dustbin into which Morgan
and Spencer had been thrown. But for all its errors, Freud’s evolution-
ary hypothesis was presented in terms of a recognizable cause and ef-
fect variety of diachronic functionalism. On the other hand, the
fleo-Frct1dian movement in anthropology, for all of its better gr(;und»
ing in ethnographic data, operates with a highly equivocal version of
synchronic functionalism. From this circumstance there arose a brand
of psychocultural analysis whose relational propositions elude com-
monly understood standards of scientific verification.

One would need a separate volume to unravel the extent to which
anthropological criticism of Freud played a role in bringing about the
new approaches to psychoanalysis. Here it can only be mentioned that
such neo-Freudians as Karen Horney, Erich From;n, Abram Kardiner,
and Erik Erkson were very much involved in a give and take with’
anthropologists who insisted upon opening the Freudian system to
the‘ effects of cultural variables. The resulting neo-Freudianism was
built very much in the image of Sapir’s prophecy. It stressed the im-
portance of early childhood experience, especially such matters as toilet
tr.au_un-g, nursing experience, weaning, sibling ﬁ\;alry, patterns of sexual
qlsc1p11ne, and body contact, which contribute to the human encultura-
tion process. Freud’s emphasis upon the oral, anal, and genital phases of
SeXl'Jélllty was incorporated into a broader spectrum of conditioning
varlal?lesf all of which could be presumed to be related to the adult per-
sonality in different cultural settings. At the same time an eclectic view
was a.dopted toward the application of Freud’s basic psychodynamic
pnnc}ples such as repression, the formation of guilt and anxiéty the
relationship between frustration and aggression, sublimation rcsist;ncc
and symbolization. They were all to be utilized as needed to draw a
connection between childhood experiences and adult personality.

433


===== PAGE 222 =====

—_—_—_7‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

MEAD' S TURN TOWARD FREUD

Mead has set a date—1934—the occasion of the meeting of
an interdisciplinary group at Hanover, as the turning point in her own
utilization of Freudian principles.

From the Hanover Seminar T learned how to handle the prob-
lem of character formation in what I now believe should be
described as a Neo-Freudian way. My understanding of this prob-
lem developed out of long discussions at the Seminar and during
the following winter with John Dollard, whose approach was also
influenced by the work of Karen Horney and Erich Fromm
(Dollard 935). These discussions focused on the relationship be-
tween character formation and the way in which the developing
individual learns to cope with his impulse structure on the one
hand, and with the institutions of his society on the other [MEAD

1962a:127-28].

As remarked previously, however, Freud’s influence was pervasive.
Mead had already adopted certain Freudian premises long before the
Hanover Seminar as revealed in her treatment of ambivalence toward
the dead in a contribution to the Psychoanalytic Review (1930b).
Affirming the cssential correctness of Freud’s use of the ambivalence
concept, she simply adds the usual relativist footnote that it is within
the power of cultural conditioning to find modes of belief and expres-
sion which obviate the need for suppressing either one’s sorrow or joy
at the death of a kinsman. Nonctheless, her Balinese field trip, already
commented on for its methodological innovations, was the first occa-
sion for which Freudian principles provided the major research frame.
Even Réheim later referred to the Balinese study as an instance of
exemplary Freudian technique. Balinese Character is indeed saturated
with psychoanalytic terms, concepts, and nuances. Everything from the
way men handle their fighting rooster to how infants cross open spaces
and women carry their babies is alive with Freudian innuendoes. But
few of these hints are brought into a cause and effect focus.

Mead has never formulated a model of how the parts of culture in
which she has been interested articulate to produce either homeostasis
or predictable transformations. Fach of her sustained attempts at
psychocultural analysis has involved proposals for connecting one set of
institutions with another or with typical character traits. In each case,
however, the items that have been singled out and their functional con-
sequences have been different. In Bali, for example, it is proposed that
Dehavior during conventionalized trance performance is related to the

434

flrustrated attempts of Balinese children to produce climaxes of affec-
tion and anger in their parents (GorER and MEAD 1942:168). None of
Mead's other studies take up a similar theme, and although her analy-
sis sounds plausible, we do not know whether a similar relationshi

can be expected anywhere else in the world. We do have the sugge@tiol;
that Balinese trance is a “return to repressed patterns of l)eha\;ior ”
butlthe pmblem of connecting these two features in terms of homeZJ»
static covariance or diachronic transformation is scarcely touched
upon. As we shall see in a moment from the case of the swaddlin,

hypotheses, Mead has flatly dissociated herself from all attempts tg
establish direct causal connections between any given infantile experi-
ence and developed cultural forms (cf. MEAD 1954:398) P

KARDINER'S SYNTHESIS

The neo-Freudian approach which came closest to achieving
a theory of psychocultural analysis was that of Abram Kardiner. In
1936 Kardiner, a practicing analyst, organized a seminar at the I.\ch
York Psychoanalytic Institute in which Sapir, Benedict, and Bunzel
were participants. In 1937, the seminar moved to Columbia University
and it was joined by Ralph Linton, Cora DuBois, and Carl Withers alf
of whom submitted ethnographic data for Kardiner’s psychocult{nal
an.al.ysis. Kardiner operated with only the barest remnants of Freud’s
ongl.nal scheme. He had dropped the Oedipus complex, with its primal
patnci.dc and phylogenetic memory; the threestage development of
se)fuahty; and the exclusive emphasis upon the sexual aspect of human
drives. With this “superstructure” eliminated, what remained was “a
method for identifying the reaction of men to the realities of life”
(RARDINER 1939:407). Kardiner grasped the fact that the source of
perso-nality differences must be sought in a much broader spectrum of
conditioning factors than Freud had envisioned. In a sense, Freud’s
ana]yl.:ic scheme had concentrated only on those aspects of childhood
experience which permitted him to identify the processes of gratifica-
tion, frustration, and discipline relevant to the typical personality of
Euu.)—American man. In different cultures, varieties of frustration,
gmtlﬁc?tion, and discipline, unknown to Freud, would produce peri
sonalities having little in common with those familiar to psychoana-
lysts from their clinical practice. All this had been apparent to the
psychologically oriented anthropologists with whom Kardiner had come
In contact. But Kardiner now went beyond their documentation of the
Plasticity of institutions and personalities and attempted to create a

435



===== PAGE 223 =====

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

theory involving testable hypotheses concerning the relationship be-
tween institutional matrix and personality.

Postulating the existence of a “basic personality structure” typical of
the members of a given society, he divided the institutional aspects of
culture into two categories—primary and secondary. Primary institu-
tions were those responsible for forming the basic personality structure.
On analogy with Freudian doctrine, these institutions were the ones
most directly concerned with disciplining, gratifying, and inhibiting
the infant and young child. However, Kardiner did not produce a
fixed list of primary institutions. He believed that the relevant
disciplines were administered in different institutional forms from one
culture to the next. In general, the indicated research focus is upon
family organization, in-group formation, feeding, weaning, care or ne-
glect of children, sexual training, and subsistence patterns. “A primary
institution is one which is older, more stable, and less likely to be inter-
fered with by vicissitudes of climate or economy” (ibid.:471).

Secondary institutions are those which “satisfy the needs and ten-
sions created by the primary or fixed ones” (ibid.:476). Among the
secondary institutions Kardiner gave greatest prominence to “taboo
systems, religion, rituals, folktales and techniques of thinking” (ibid.
471). Between the primary and secondary institutions Kardiner inter-
posed the basic personality structure. Fashioned by the childhood
disciplines, the basic personality in turn expressed itself in the group’s
ideologies, in emotional and cognitive orientation to life and death.

According to Kardiner, it was Freud’s The Future of an Illusion
(1928) which contained the most powerful suggestion for adapting
psychoanalytic theory to psychocultural analysis. During his considera-
tion of the illusions which constitute the core of religious phenomena,
Freud detected a correspondence between the methods men use to
approach, communicate with, and control their deities and the expe-
rience which they have had with their parents. The Judeo-Christian
God was thus simply the projected image of Western man’s stern,
patriarchical father. As Kardiner put it, Freud was on the brink of a

new technique.

For the first time, Freud describes here the origin of what may
be called a projective system, that is to say, a system for structur-
ing the outer world and one’s relation to it in accordance with a
pattern laid down in an earlier experience during ontogenesis.
This is a powerful idea and one with many uses [KARDINER and

PREBLE 1961:236].

436

IF s_hould be kept in mind, however, that Roheim had already made
snmx];.n suggestions in his study of Australian totemism (1925) and
tl)at in all essentials Malinowski’s critique of the Oedipus theory had
envisioned precisely the role which Kardiner was now about to assign
to cultural variables. According to Malinowski:

In that full version of my psycho-analytic results I shall be able to
sho_w that in the social life, as well as in the folk-lore, of these
natives their specific repressions manifest themselves unmistaka-
bly. Whenever the passions, kept normally within traditional
bounds by rigid taboos, customs and lcéal penalties, break
thm‘ugh in crime, perversion, aberration, or in one of those dra-
matic occurrences which shake from time to time the hum-drum
hf'e of a savage community—then these passions reveal the ma-
triarchal hatred of the maternal uncle or the incestuous wishes
toward the sister. The folk-lore of these Melanesians also mirrors
the Matrilineal Complex. The examination of myth, fairy tales

and legenq, as well as of magic, will show . . . the repressed
hatred against the maternal uncle, ordinarily masked by conven-
tional reverence . . . [MALINOWSKI 1923:331].

Kardiner’s contribution was to remove Freud’s theories further from
their culture-bound Viennese-European matrix and enlarge the scope
of the basic experiences which have projective consequences. Using
the Freudian mechanisms of repression, substitution, and symboliza-
tion, he proposed to trace the infantile reactions into the inldividual's
psyche, and out again onto a widened projective screen which included
legends, myths, and ceremonial as well as religious doctrine.

SIGNIFICANCE OF KARDINER'S
CONTRIBUTION

The great promise of neo-Freudian schemes like Kardiner's is
that they embody one of the few suggestions which have ever been
made to bring the subtleties of specific magico-religious practices and
beliefs within the compass of determinist explanations. We should
Ppause to note that this task has baffled the ingenuity of some of the
greatest figures in the social sciences. To achieve a causal explanation
of th'e apparently fortuitous minutiae of magico-religious beliefs and
practices was preciscly the kind of accomplishment which the histori-
cal particularists had regarded as forever unattainable except through
the infinite regress of diffusion. Although still only in its most incipient
Phases, neo-Freudian analysis must be recognized as having the poten-

437

{
|
|


===== PAGE 224 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tial of achieving a great advance toward the perfection of the historical-
determinist program. It promises to go far beyond the areas blocked
out by traditional Marxian theory, and it certainly renders obsolete
attempts by Durkheim, Kroeber, Radcliffe-Brown, and White to fight
off “psychological reductionism.”

In actual practice, of course, no culturologists or superorganicists
have been capable of a completely “superorganic” or “culturological”
approach. But the psychological principles upon which they depended
entered through the back door, so to speak, and were poorly elaborated.
Marx and Engels, for example, accorded magico-religious phenomena a
homeostatic psychofunctional role in the social system, as suggested in
the phrase, “religion is the opiate of the masses.” But they had little
insight into how the distinctive characteristics of puberty rites, totem
designs, myths of winged serpents, ctc., might be related to the mate-
rial conditions of social life. As for Morgan, he despaired of any scientific
explanation. Like Freud’s predecessors among psychologists, Morgan
was prepared to cope only with “sane” ideas. Dreams and religion are
irrational, and hence the rational intellect can scarcely aspire to an un-

derstanding of them:

Religion deals so largely with the imaginative and emotional na-
ture, and consequently with such uncertain elements of knowl-
edge, that all primitive religions are grotesque and to some extent
unintelligible [norean 1877:5}.

To be sure, many of Morgan's contemporaries including Spencer,
Tylor, Lang, and Bastian were prepared to offer explanations of recur-
rent religious phenomena on the basis of “elementary ideas” and com-
mon exposure to recurrent natural phenomena (dreams, death, mirror
reflections) . None of them, however, made noteworthy progress toward
the explanation of variable magico-religious content. The same may be
said of Frazer, Durkheim, and the British structural-functionalists, all
of whom made suggestions as to how to explain the generalities of
magico-religious systems, but remained baffled by the problems of the
concrete instance.

Kardiner, with the aid of his anthropological collaborators, now at-
tempted to tackle such questions as why female ghosts are unimportant
among the Tanala, why the Marquesans believed that certain women
could enlist the spirits of dead men called “fanaua” to injure other
women but not men, and why the Alorese make slipshod spirit effigies
which they use in a perfunctory fashion and then throw away. The
answers to such questions lay in the peculiar patterns of childhood dis-
ciplines embodied in the primary institutions. For example, the Alor-

438

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

ese failure to elaborate religious art was said to be associated with their
low expectation of beneficent rewards from supernatural sources: this
apathctlc attitude toward the supernatural was in turn traced t;) the
relationship between Alorese children and their mothers. The overall
treatment of children in Alor was characterized as one of neglect and
inconsistency, the basic pattern for which was set by the way Alorese
mothers left their children behind in the village while they spent lon

hours at work in their subsistence gardens. P ¢

KARDINER'S MODEL BOTH
HOMEOSTATIC AND EVOLUTIONARY

» The logical nature of the propositions advanced by Kardiner
and his collaborators represent an advance over the equivocation of the
Gorer-Mead-Bateson school. Kardiner’s scheme provided for both ho-
meostatic and evolutionary cause and effect relations. On the one
hand, as we have seen, primary institutions are said to be older and
more stable than the secondary ones. This means that in an evolu-
tionary context, the occurrence of certain primary institutions makes
the occurrence of certain secondary institutions more probable. The
fun?tmnal reason for this is revealed by an implicit concept of hémeo—
stasis in which the mechanism of projection is needed to maintain the
tyPlcal individual personality in a condition of relative mental well-
ll)emg. Kardiner specifically rejected the belicf of “the extreme relatiy-
ists w}'lo hold that in social patterning anything goes.” A penalty must
be paid for “bad social patterning” which sooner or later places the
entire glllture “in jeopardy” (KARDINER and PREBLE 1961:245). Some
f‘nshtutmns promote cooperation; others stimulate rage and ;;nxietv
The success or failure of a society depends on a balance in favor of tl{é
former” (ibid.). Earlier Kardiner wrote that “secondary institutions
must” satisfy the needs and tensions created by the prixﬁary or fixed
ones” (1939:476). If this is the case, then it should be possible within
a given culture to show how needs and tensions fluctuate within toler-

able limits set by the feedbacks and saf
mits nd safety valves of the secondary

METHODOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

Kardiner and his collaborators attem i
. Kardi ) a pted to improve the
;ntersub]echvxty of‘thelr psychocultural analysis. They were painfully
Wlare' of the gaps in the ethnographic accounts rendered by anthro-
Pologists whose fieldwork had not been planned to feed information

439



===== PAGE 225 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

into the psychodynamic scheme. To overcome this difficulty, Kardiner
obtained the cooperation of Cora DuBois, who set out in 1937 for
Alor in the Dutch East Indies in order to gather a corpus of appropri-
ate material. DuBois returned in 1939 with a set of Rorschach test
protocols, children’s drawings, and most importantly, eight extensive
life histories, emphasizing childhood experiences, emotional effect,
and dream life. Kardiner then used the interview materials to construct
a picture of the Alorese basic personality. At the same time, the draw-
ings and Rorschachs were given to a specialist who performed inde-
pendent analyses. The conclusions of DuBois, Kardiner, and Emil
Oberholzer turned out to be strikingly similar with respect to the
main features of Alorese personality. Each analyst independently
stressed the shallowness of Alorese emotional life, a prevailing insecur-
ity, suspiciousness, indifference, and apathy. Although this procedure
obviously represented a methodological advance as far as the descrip-
tion of Alorese personality was concerned (provided that DuBois’
informants were representative), the whole elaborate procedure did
little to advance the credibility of the psychodynamic analysis which
was to have been Kardiner's crowning contribution.

Kardiner concluded that the main factor in the etiology of the ob-
served basic personality structure was the maternal neglect experienced
by the Alorese infant. (Although maternal neglect corresponded to his
previous definition of a primary institution, the fact that the Alorese
did not formally recognize such a pattern seemed to Kardiner to re-
move it from institutional status.) But as in all of the other neo-
Freudian psychocultural analyses, the linking up of childhood patterns
with adult character and cultural forms can be achieved in several
alternate ways. Apathy, as DuBois herself pointed out, might be pro-
duced by disease. In other instances, similar syndromes have been
associated with the suspension of warfare and other contact effects.
Furthermore, many cultures practice the kind of division of labor which
lies at the basis of Alorese maternal neglect; yet turning the child over
to relatives while the mother works in her garden is certainly not uni-
formly productive of the psychological constellation emphasized for
the Alorese. In the Alorese case, therefore, we are left, once again, with
an ingenious but highly speculative psychoanalytic tour de force.

The demonstration of the validity of the two varieties of functional-
ist relation with which Kardiner was involved requires certain kinds of
data which he and his group were unable or unwilling to take into
consideration. For the homeostatic and safety-valve effects of his
secondary institutions, short-run fluctuations in group tensions would
have had to be related to fluctuations in the intensity or frequency of

40

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

the projective constellations. For the long-run evolutionary causal rela
tion bgtween primary and secondary institutions, parallel cases subje t
to statistical control would have had to be amassed so that cm’relat]ioC
b§tw?en one and the other could be demonstrated. Although Ka:
diner’s seminar concerned itself with several different cultures, the
comparative study of parallel cases was not achieved. As in Mcadzs ap-

proach, each of the cases involved a differe )
ch of t a nt set of primary
secondary institutions. ? and

MAJOR DEFECT OF KARDINER' S
SCHEME

) Kardiner’s clinically based acceptance of th
etlologicgl statements places him in thepmainstrcameur;etel?cfgslilcr?a?c;
personality movement. But we can scarcely credit his group with a
umquy satisfactory contribution to the theory of culture and per-
sgnahty. When Mead (1959c:1514) noted that “the major theoretical
lines for the study of personality and culture . . . had alread been
worked out . . .” before Kardiner's seminar began to meet, s]};e was
on firm historical footing. The rage into which Kardiner ﬂe,w at this

remark is not justified by the list of accomplishmen i
1 s ts that h
to his group and to none other: ? # he credied

. Inany case, T request that Mead expose me, not by decree or
innuendo, but by documentation. This will require/ finding a
technique (meaning a procedure, based on demonstrable princi-
plcs,lnot an ideology, or intention of finding a procedure) that
was in existence before 1938 and that could perform the follow-
ing: derive the personality formation specific to each culture
w\rthout the aid of the libido theory; demonstrate the relation of
this personality to the adaptational problems of the community
asa whole; demonstrate the relation of the products of fantasy to
this personality; demonstrate the relation of child-rearing p‘rac—
tices to the development of affectivity; demonstrate the relation
of‘ this latter development to the devices the society has for main-
taining . . . social balance . . . [xARDINER 19;():17:‘81.

g::nsl(:rdm.er actuall): succeeded in accomplishing all that he here
et s faz.t 'accomplz, one would be obliged to agree with him. But
; act is, hl'S actual :‘xchlevement was considerably less impressive.
def:;‘ﬁllu:;”'lg Kardiner's contr{hution we must écknowledge the large
JootA :LK IIS'SChC'm.E shared with all gtller psychocultural systems of
o y. Kardiner himself, much to his credit, was perfectly aware of
is problem and made no attempt to minimize it. The rub is that his

441



===== PAGE 226 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

scheme could not explain the existence of the primary institutions.
These were simply the givens from which basic personality might be
predicted but whose origin was inaccessible to psychodynamic tech-
niques:

. . . psychology can cast no light whatsoever without the aid of
history on how these primary institutions took their final forms.
So far as we know, no satisfactory explanations have ever been
made of primary institutions [KARDINER 1939:471].

This admission betrays the influence of historical particularism passed
on to Kardiner through his anthropological collaborators. There is an
immense irony in the way the prevailing hostility to diachronic theory
obscured from Kardiner's view the possibility of linking his formula-
tions with those of cultural materialism and historical determinism.
The domain of cultural phenomena for which he was prepared to offer
causal explanations was precisely the most intractable from the point of
view of long-range diachronic theory. Contrary to his impressions, gar-
nered from the anthropologists who had turned to culture and personal-
ity as a substitute for diachronic interests, excellent hypotheses were
available for explaining the origins of the main features of relatively
stable techno-environmental, techno-economic, and social systems im-
plicit in his concept of “primary institutions.” Indeed, the grand
strategy of psychocultural analysis called for giving priority to the ex-
amination of the effects upon personality of those categories of the
techno-environmental and techno-economic order for which reasonable
diachronic hypotheses were already available. Unfortunately, Kardiner
could not surmount the barriers which the negativism of the period had
erected between him and such an optimal program. Nor does all the
blame fall upon the members of the culture and personality school.
The uniting of psychodynamic theory and historical determinism has
also been made difficult by an overreaction among neo-evolutionists to
anything smacking of psychocultural analysis. It will probably take a
long time before the interests of the two viewpoints will assume their
proper mutually supportive roles.

ERIK ERIKSON’S NEO-FREUDIAN
SYSTEM

Kardiner's adaptation of psychoanalytic theory to the task of
psychocultural analysis appears to be merely the best formulated of
several convergent neo-Freudian approaches which were being tried
during the thirties and forties. Somewhat closer to the Freudian model

was the work of the psychoanalyst Erik Erikson.
442

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

Elaborating on Freud’s three-stage ontogeny, Erikson developed a
theory of infantile sexuality in which various “organ modes” were seen
as modifying the child’s progress through the oral, anal, and genital
“stages.”” These modes are “incorporative” (two phases), “retentive,”
“eliminative,” and “intrusive.” In this fashion Erikson sought to utilize
a much broader spectrum of childhood experience than was allowed
for in Freud’s three-stage scheme. Thus, “retention,” which Freud as-
sociated with anal fixation, may in Erikson’s scheme arise with respect
to oral, anal, and genital functions. In general, Erikson’s psychody-
namic was less formal than Kardiner’s, although there was much in
common between the two:

. . thus a primitive culture scems to do three things: it gives
specific meanings to early bodily and interpersonal experience so
as to create the right combination of organ modes and the proper
emphasis on social modalities; it carefully and systematically
channelizes throughout the intricate pattern of its daily life the
energies thus provoked and deflected; and it gives consistent su-
pernatural meaning to the infantile anxieties which it has exploited
by such provocation [ERIKSON 1950:160].

When applied to the Sioux and Yurok, this psychocultural approach
produced many ingenious connections between stages of growth, type
of “organ modes,” and adult personality and cultural institutions. The
Yurok, for example, are stingy, suspicious, and compulsively dedicated
to the amassment of wealth. Prayers and daydreams, accompanied by
tearful entreaties, center on getting rich. Erikson related these traits to
the retentive mode of the oral stage. The Yurok seem to have no
special phobic or pleasurable focus on feces, but they do suffer an
abrupt weaning at about the time of the “biting” phase of orality.
Erikson’s Sioux and Yurok interpretations have certainly failed to con-
vince psychoanalysts of somewhat variant persuasions. Kardiner says
that he makes a “fecble case for the Sioux and none at all for the
Yurok” (kARDINER and PREBLE 1961:243). Here we may simply draw
attention to the vague functionalist framework and its typical inability
to deal with the origin of the observed variations in training patterns.

THE CASE OF THE JAPANESE
SPHINCTER

Among similar amorphous neo-Freudian synchronic ap-
proaches we must now take note of two famous attempts to relate
ll.lfant training institutions to adult personality and cultural institu-
tions. Both of these involve a group centering on Mead, Benedict, and

3



===== PAGE 227 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Geoffrey Gorer, and both grew out of hot- and cold-war pressures to
. heighten the combatants’ knowledge of themselves and each other.

The first was concerned with the relationship between toilet training
and the allegedly compulsive personality of the Japanese as embodied
in both national character and cultural institutions. During the height
of the Second World War Geoffrey Gorer invoked a toilet-training
hypothesis to account for the “. . . contrast between the all-pervasive
gentleness of Japanese life in Japan, which has charmed nearly every
visitor, and the overwhelming brutality and sadism of the Japanese at
war” (GORER 1043, quoted in BARNOUW 1963:121). According to Gorer
this brutality was associated with “severe early cleanliness training”
which created a repressed rage in Japanese infants because they are
obliged to control their sphincters before the appropriate muscular and
intellectual development has been acquired. Weston La Barre (1945)
had independently been led to the same conclusion. He called the
Japanese “the most compulsive people in the world ethnographic
museum” (quoted in BARNOUW 1963:122) and like Gorer, emphasized
the severity of toilet training. In Ruth Benedict’s The Chrysanthemum
and the Sword (1946:259) there is a similar affirmation of the strictness
of Japanese toilet training, but its effects are not interpreted in psycho-
analytic terms. Instead, the pattern is seen merely as one of the facets
of the Japanese concern for neatness and orderliness.

All of these theories about Japanese national character and toilet
training were made without benefit of field research. After the war,
when such research was undertaken, it quickly became apparent that a
serious error had been committed with respect to the nature of
Japanese toilet behavior. Studies by Edward and Margaret Norbeck
(1956), B. Lanham (1956), and Douglas Haring (1956) all indicated
that Japanese children were not subject to any egregiously severe
threats or punishments. Moreover, the rapidity with which the Japa-
nese adapted to their defeat, accepted American influence, changed
many basic patterns of behavior, and took the lead in the peace move-
ment in the Orient scarcely seems to confirm the wartime portraits
which emphasized their frustration and their brutality.

THE CASE OF THE SWADDLED
RUSSIANS

Another notable attempt to achieve a psychocultural analysis
of a modern nation state in neo-Freudian terms was embodied in
Gorer and Rickman’s (1949) study of Russian national character.
Gorer has indicated that he owed a debt to Margaret Mead for the

444

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

suggestion that Russian national character could best be understood in
relationship to the long and severely restricting form of infant swad-
dling allegedly practiced by the Great Russians (ibid.:211). This case
is very informative because it brings into sharp focus just what kind of i
functional statements can be expected in the absence of a cause and i
effect framework. According to Gorer, swaddling was associated with
a kind of manic-depressive personality corresponding to the alternating
constraint and freedom experienced by the Russian infant, his pent-up
rage while swaddled, his sudden freedom when the swaddling bandages
are removed. The rage is directed toward a diffuse object since the
infant is handled in a very impersonal way and hence never gets a
good “fix” on its tormenters. This rage gives rise to guilt, but once |
again, the emotion is not fixed on any specific set of persons. Gorer \
attempted to show that such phenomena as the Bolshevik revolution,
the Stalin purge trials, the confessions of guilt at these trials, and man}; i
other events of recent Sovict history were “related” to the generalized !
rage and guilt feclings associated with swaddling. He even went so far / E
i
i
!

as to suggest that the Russian interest in the expressiveness of eyes
(think of how the song “Dark Eyes” evokes a characteristic Russian
fecling) stemmed from the fact that the restriction of the other parts
of its body forced the Russian child to depend upon vision for his main
contact with the world.

_Unfortunately, Gorer had no firm evidence concerning the exten-
siveness of swaddling. Indeed, the intellectuals who confessed their
glullt at Stalin’s purge trials were probably not swaddled. The oppres-
sive and fear-haunted ambience of the Stalin period can be found in
association with dictatorships from Ghana to Guatemala, and the al-
leggd compatibility between Russian national character and the des-
potism of the Stalin period is contradicted by the very fact of the '
Russian Revolution. To attribute the uprising against Tsarist despo- i
tism to rage induced by swaddling bandages is to miss the whole point !
of recent FEuropean history. Stalin’s tyranny was founded on the i
corpses of his enemies. Only by filling the Siberian camps with millions
D‘flnonconformists and by relentlessly rooting out all vestiges of po-
litical opposition did Stalin manage to impose his will on his country- 1
men. The notion that the mass of Russians were somehow being \
psychologically fulfilled by the terror of the Stalinist period is abso- \1
lutely without basis in fact. ’

Follow-up studies on the character of Russian exiles—groups com-
parabl_e to those interviewed by Gorer—have drawn conclusions quite
opposite to those indicated by the swaddling hypotheses. A high degree
of incongruence has been found between the central personality modes

445


===== PAGE 228 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of the peasants and workers and the political behavior of the governing
clique (INKELES et al. 1961). Moreover, Gorer’s analysis leaves one ab-
solutely at a loss to explain the whole process of de-Stalinization and
the rapidity with which the monolithic structure of the Stalinist ap-
paratus, so essential to his point, suddenly gave way to a more flexible
if not yet “open” system.

As an application of Freudian insights into political processes,
Gorer’s essay is unacceptable. For example, nothing could have been
less prophetic concerning the directions of Soviet foreign policy than
his comments on the future of the empire which Stalin had put
together in Eastern Europe:

‘Whatever their conscious intentions may be, it would appear that
the Soviet elites find it psychologically impossible to permit their
satellites relative independence, because it is a state they cannot
envisage. The moment the balance is tipped to the slightest
measurable degree from complete equality, they seem to fear that
they will become completely subordinate [GORER and RrICKMAN

1949:179].

GORER’S DISCLAIMER OF CAUSALITY

While assiduously pursuing the relationship between swad-
dling and Russian national character, even to the extent of including a
twenty-five-page historical appendix entitled “A Note on the Develop-
ment of the Swaddling Hypotheses,” Gorer sought to protect himself
from the consequences of his analysis by insisting that he was not
attributing any causal efficacy to swaddling.

It is the argument of this study that the situation outlined in
the preceding paragraphs is one of the major determinants in the
development of the character of adult Great Russians.

It is not the argument of this study that the Russian manner
of swaddling their children produces the Russian character, and it
is not intended to imply that the Russian character would be
changed or modified if some other technique of infant training
were adopted [ibid.:128-29].

A careful reading of this disclaimer does not improve its intelligibility.
Swaddling is said to be one of the major determinants of Great Russian
character in one sentence, while in the next, it is said not to be any
kind of determinant. Gorer goes on to stress what might be called the
heuristic value of the swaddling hypothesis and likens it to a “thread
which led through the labyrinth of the apparent contradictions of

446

)

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

Russian adult behavior.” But one is hard pressed to understand the
epistemological nature of this “thread.” What kind of hypothesis is it
which docs not involve a correlation of some degree of quantity or
quality? ’

MEAD'S DEFENSE OF GORER

In Gorer’s defense, Mead has enlarged at length on Gorer’s
disclaimer, denying that anyone had suggested that Russian national
character was attributable to the swaddling practice. Rather than saying
that “swaddling makes Russians,” Gorer was actually affirming some-
thing else:

From an analysis of the way Russians swaddle infants, it is possi-
ble to build a model of Russian character formation which enables
us to relate what we know about human behavior and what we
know about Russian culture in such a way that Russian behavior
becomes more understandable [MEAD 1954:401-2].

According to Mead, this kind of analysis must be clearly separated
from the kind of psychodynamic relationships which Kardiner had
sought to establish between childhood disciplines and adult character.
Kardiner’s brand of psychoanalytic extrapolation, she insisted, was re-
jected by the majority of anthropologists. Gorer was not saying that
“swaddling per se by members of any culture will have definite pre-
dictable effects of the same sort on all infants, regardless of their
culture” (ibid.:398). No claim was being made that “swaddling was
essential in the Russian pattern” (ibid.:403). Given the facts of Rus-
sian culture and Russian character, it can be shown that swaddling is
one of the techniques by which “Russians become Russians.” She
admits that there are many other techniques by which the same results
might be obtained in different cultures. The Russians themselves
might give up swaddling and still maintain the same personality.

All of this would appear to add up to a unique form of scientific
statement. The relationship between swaddling and the Russian char-
acter is crucial for an understanding of that character, yet there is no
reason to suppose that they are causally related in the sense that one
makcs the other more probable. The vagueness of a statement in
which a “major” variable is held to be neither dependent nor inde-
pendent, neither cause nor effect, neither sufficient nor necessary, is
brought out in an additional comment by Mead in which there is a
lapse back into a more familiar idiom:

447



===== PAGE 229 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

It is the combination of an unusually confining version of a wide-
spread practice, the age of the child which is thus confined, and
an adult insistence on the need to protect the child from itself—
the duration and type of swaddling—which are assumed to have
distinctive effects in the formation of Russian character [ibid.:40z2,
italics added].

With this statement, the entire argument is returned to its initial form,
and the lack of evidence for the “assumed” “effects” once moge sum-
mons forth its full measure of amazement.

ANTHROPOLOGISTS ARE NOT
THERAPISTS

The meeting of anthropology and psychoanalysis has pro-
duced a rich harvest of ingenious functional hypotheses in which psy-
chological mechanisms can be seen as intermediating the connection
between disparate parts of culture. Psychoanalysis, however, had little
to offer cultural anthropology by way of scientific methodology. In this
respect the meeting of the two disciplines tended to reinforce the in-
herent tendencies toward uncontrolled, speculative, and histrionic
generalizations which each in its own sphere had cultivated as part of
its professional license. The anthropologist carrying out a psycho-
cultural analysis resembled the psychoanalyst whose attempt to iden-
tify the basic personality structure of his patient remains largely inter-
pretive and immune to normal verification procedures. In a sense, what
the great figures in the formative phases of the culture and personality
movement were asking us to do was to trust them as we would trust
an analyst, not for the demonstrated truth of any particular item, but
for the accumulating evidence of coherence in a believable pattern.
Although such faith is essential to psychoanalytic therapy in which it
scarcely matters whether childhood events of particular kinds did or
did not take place as long as both analyst and patient are convinced
that they did, the separation of myth from concrete event is the
highest goal of all disciplines which concern themselves with human
history.

448

Culture and

Personality:

New Directions 17

S5
SO

Shortly after the end of the Second World War, the culture and
personality movement was penetrated by an entirely new kind of
psy_chological influence emanating from the deve]oprflcnt within ex-
perimental psychology of neobahaviorist learning theories under the
IEadcrship of Clark Hull and, to a lesser extent, B. F. Skinner. The
most significant feature of learning theory in the present context is
that it embodies a vast eipistemological and methodological reform,
th§ outcome of a deliberate attempt by operationally minded psychol-
ogists to raise the standards of intersubjectivity and verifiability. It is
through the intermediation of culture and pers‘onality studies that this
wave of scientism in psychology is now being passed into the entire
field 9f cultural anthropology. Thus in a remarkable turnabout, the
adoption of the basic scientific premise of neobehaviorism by social
psychologists and cultural anthropologists has meant that culture and
Personality studies once representative of the most broadly humanistic
methods of anthropology have emerged in the last decade as paragons
of methodological purity. Tt is in this area that some of the most
sophisticated anthropological research is now being carried out. By

49

i
i



===== PAGE 230 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the 1960’s the methodological and epistemological reforms in the
culture and personality movement spreading throughout the entire
field of cultural anthropology were threatening to bring about a final
rupture of the humanist and scientific traditions.

JOHN WHITING

The main impetus for the revolution in the methodology
of the culture and personality movement derives from the work of
John Whiting and his coworkers. In this group several lines of de-
velopment converge, foremost among which are the neo-Freudian, as
transmitted through Kardiner; learning theory, through the influence
of Hull; and the statistical version of the comparative method, as
outlined by Tylor and further perfected through the development of
the Human Relations Area Files under George Murdock. In essence,
Whiting has carried the work of Kardiner’s seminar into its cross-
cultural phase and produced the first statistically valid proofs of the
feasibility of explaining the details of ideological patterns through a
modified version of Kardiner's causal chain. In Whiting and Child’s
(1953) version this chain runs:

Maintenance Systems —> Child Training Practices — Personal-
ity Variables — Projective Systems.

Whiting and Child’s “maintenance systems” refers to the entire eco-
nomic, political, and social organization. This is scarcely an improve-
ment over the huge bundle tied up in Kardiner’s “primary institutions.”
It is noteworthy, however, that specific child-rearing practices have
been separated from the rest of the primary institutions. The way is
thus prepared for the systematic exploration of the conditions which
govern the occurrence of various kinds of child-training procedures,
a problem which Kardiner had regarded as insoluble. Using George
Murdock’s world ethnographic sample or other specially assembled
samples, Whiting has systematically explored the basic premise of the
neo-Freudian anthropologists, namely that personality serves as a
mediator between the maintenance and projective systems. In an
overview, Whiting (1961) has brought together an impressive com-
pilation of the most successful hypotheses which have been subject to
cross-cultural validation.

One of the most impressive achievements of the Whiting group is
their demonstration of the theoretical productivity of the personality
concept. Although some of their correlations are suggested by fairly

450

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

obvious functional chains, which probably could be short-circuited
directly from child training to adult practice, others require compli-
cated causal sequences within the personality matrix before the logic
of the relationship becomes clear. An example of the former is the
correlation between harsh parental treatment of children and the
belief that the spirit world is harsh and aggressive. (One might predict
such a correlation on the basis of some very simple associational or
behavioral generalization: subject to harsh treatment, the child and
adult look upon the world in general, including its spirits, as a harsh
place in which to live.)

On the other hand, there is the correlation between the length
of time during which an infant sleeps with his mother and the
occurrence of male initiation rites (WHITING, KLUCKHORN, and
ANTHONY, 1958). This relationship flows ecasily, if at all, only from
the corpus of theory specifically associated with neo-Freudian psy-
chology. In terms of psychological principles, the apparently esoteric
connection is demanded by several different hypotheses. One is that the
sleeping arrangement intensifies the Oedipal rivalry between father
and son and that the puberty rites are a means of asserting social
control over the son’s hostility. Another is that the sleeping arrange-
ment produces a strong identification between son and mother which
must be broken if maleness is to be achieved. A more culturological
hypothesis would predict puberty rites as a necessary antidote to the
mother’s overprotection.

It must be counted a triumph of psychological theory that the nega-
tive relationship between couvade and male initiation rites appears to
be governed by a similar set of factors. Societies with exclusive mother-
child sleeping patterns and patrilocal residence have the initiation
tites, while those with similar sleeping arrangements but matrilocal
tesidence tend to have the couvade. This in tum appears to be related
to inhibition versus expression of cross-sex identification.

Along similar lines, a correlation has been established between pro-
ll.)ngcd postpartum sexual taboos and male initiation rites, the explana-
tion being that under such conditions the male child is subject to
Incestuous seductive temptations which must be controlled at puberty.
Other studies inspired by these mixed varieties of psychodynamic and
learning-theory hypotheses have related the indulgence of infants to
absence of fearful ghosts during funerals; early weaning to the belief
that a sick person is responsible for his own illness; severe oral training
to the belief that diseases can be cured by eating and drinking; and
severe sexual discipline to the belief in sorcery.

451

|
|



===== PAGE 231 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Victor Barnouw (1963:356) has noted that “the complexity of the
Whiting and Child demonstration sometimes takes on the dimensions
of a Rube Goldberg machine,” but it is precisely this complexity which
carries the approach beyond ordinary culturological perspectives.

DEFENSE OF THE STATISTICAL
APPROACH

The accomplishments of this group are somewhat less im-
pressive when one takes into consideration the fact that many of their
hypotheses appear to be post hoc. That is, the statistical approach
permits a certain amount of blind searching for correlations. When
these are found, an claborate causal chain is then set up to serve as
the explanation; it is not unusual for several such “Rube Goldberg”
explanations to be proposed at the same time without being able to
discern which is the correct one. It should also be kept in mind that
many hypotheses set up in conformity with the psychological prin-
ciples under discussion turn out not to be confirmed by the statistical
runs. Since it is usually only the successful runs which get written up,
the approach has what one might call a “good press.” Despite these
and other drawbacks, the cross-cultural survey procedure must be
reckoned as a major advance in the methodology of the culture and
personality movement. Although the data which lies at the basis
of the correlations suffers from the usual ethnographic defects, there
are strong methodological reasons to believe that such errors can be
overcome in a sufficiently large sample.

Donald Campbell (1961:346), a social psychologist who believes
that the Whiting movement represents “one of the major events in
the social sciences of the past twenty years,” defends the use of such
admittedly crude instruments as the Human Relations Area Files.
Errors in the files, which result from inadequate ethnographies or
other unsystematic sources, cannot be used to explain away the cor-
relations. Such errors reduce rather than raise the level of association.

It is a fascinating lesson in the ephemerality of scientific styles to
follow Campbell through his closely reasoned defense of Whiting's
approach. The main line of resistance to Whiting’s methods is pre-
cisely the same as that which the Boasians set up against Spencer,
Frazer, Tylor, Morgan, et al. It is alleged that Whiting's type of survey
deals only with fragments. Pieces of culture are wrenched out of con-
text; noncomparables are compared. Unique situations are crammed
into a set of inappropriate pigeonholes. The unity of the individual
case is shattered, and accuracy is sacrificed for specious generalities. But

452

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

these objections can no longer be invoked in the name of superior
scientism. Despite its limitations, the statistical method is recognized
as the only viable substitute for laboratory control. Errors are inevita-
ble in any research procedure; laws are merely approximation; a few
exceptions neither prove nor disprove a rule; all generalizations depend
on the clause ceteris paribus—*“other things being equal”:

The healthy infancy of the successful sciences seems to have been
predicated upon the stimulating nourishment of crude but ef-
fective ceteris paribus laws. For example, the force fields of atomic
nuclei extend in infinite distance in all directions. However, they
decay so rapidly as a function of distance that they can be
disregarded in the statement of many crude laws, such as those em-
bodied in Archimedes’ mechanics. Were this not so, were Archi-
medes to have had to limit himself to statements about each
particular instance, then physics never could have developed. The
critics of the generalizing social scientists are right in cautioning
against claiming effective ceteris paribus laws when one hasn’t
got them, but pointing to the obvious idiosyncracy of every per-
son, tribe, or swinging cathedral chandelier provides no a (priori
basis for rejecting the enterprise [ibid.:347].

It thus seems quite clear that full methodological initiative has been
restored to the nomothetic tradition. The age of the computer will
not be held back by the handful of exceptions with which the Boasians
brought the machinery of social science to a grinding halt. For Lowie,
one negative case out of a hundred meant the triumph of chaos; for
the cross-cultural hypotheses in the Whiting manner, a dozen negative
cases out of a hundred means the triumph of order.

The abstractive-generalizing social scientist knows that in dealing
with natural groups ceteris are not in fact paribus, and he there-
forc expects cxceptions which represent the operation of many
other laws which he as yet knows nothing of. Such exceptions are
repeatedly found in the law-confirming scatter diagrams of biol-
ogy and psychology. If the over-all significant relationship still
persists when the specific errors are corrected and the new cases
plotted, the exceptions are not invalidating [ibid.].

SOME QUALIFICATIONS

When all of the significant advances in recent culture and
Personality studies have been accorded the respect due to the hard
V‘"Ork and ingenuity which has gonc into them, we must take an addi-
tional step away from the canvas and ask ourselves just what it all adds

453

:



===== PAGE 232 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

up to in terms of a theory of culture. It will then be seen that the
picture we have been studying is drastically incomplete. All of the neo-
Freudian formulations assume the existence of particular varieties of
technology, economics, and social organization. This limitation has not
been especially painful in the context of mid-twentieth-century social
science since the drift has been toward a permanent anesthesia on the
question of cultural causality. The era of “middlerange” theory has
grown accustomed to a truncated account of its origin, its significance,
and its destiny. Many of the contributors to the culture and personality
movement are fully aware of the failure of their specialty to answer the
fundamental questions which were set before us in the eighteenth
century. Others are more or less like the Emperor without his clothes
—victims of a lack of controversy. No cultural determinist can doubt
for a moment that Kardiner’s primary institutions or Whiting and
Child’s “maintenance systems” are associated with specific modal per-
sonalities. Indeed, this guarantee is built in, since from a behaviorist
and operationalist view of personality, the way people make their liv-
ing, the number of wives they live with, the kinds of political controls
they experience—all must have some sort of distinctive effect on the
expectation that they will emit determined frequencies of specific re-
sponses which are not merely tautological consequences of the initial
description. If personality is a measure of probability of verbal or non-
verbal response, then every major cultural difference, and not only
those associated with the Freudian disciplines, obviously must corre-
late with personality differences.

But such correlations, even when they are based on the most inge-
nious Rube Goldberg-Freudianisms and are predictable by ad hoc
hypotheses, avoid the main arena of theoretical confrontation. Given
a particular set of “maintenance,” or “primary,” institutions and their
predictable psychocultural concomitants, what do we then know
about the transformation probabilities of maintenance systems and
their characterological projections? To speak in the analogy of cyber-
netics, given the feedback between basic institutions and basic person-
ality, to what extent may this segment of the larger sociocultural net-
work be regarded as an independent and self-sustaining circuit? Since
evolution is as much a characteristic of the realm of sociocultural
phenomena as it is of the biological realm, we cannot simply posit a
stcady state and shrug off the question of how and when the feedback
loop is broken. This question looms all the more menacing to the
cuphoria of psychocultural enthusiasts when it is firmly understood
that the feedback between basic culture and basic personality does not
involve an eradication of nonconforming individuals and psychological

454

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

complexes. It is a fundamental assumption of the culture and personal-
ity movement, and one which is firmly grounded in fact, that every
culture has its deviants. These may be more or less numerous, depend-
ing one might suppose (the question has not really been studied) on
particular constellations of basic conditioning parameters. But regard-
less of the relative frequency of deviance, everything we have learned
about the “simpler” societies, and everything we have always known
about our own, indicates that the spectrum of available types is very
great. And furthermore, from the same sources of knowledge, it is
perfectly obvious that each individual contains within himself re-
sources, potentialities, inhibitions, and anxieties in multitudes and
varieties far beyond the manifest content of actual, momentary exis-
tence.

There thus arises the fundamental question, the one which is most
blatantly ignored throughout the history of the culture and per-
sonality movement: to what extent does the existence of a par-
ticular momentary feedback between basic institutions and basic
personality limit the rate and direction of cultural evolution?
For there remains, as a limiting case, the specter of an answer which
declares, “every basic cultural change finds its own proper individual
agents.” That is, when the culturological forces, systematically ignored
by the culture and personality school, impinge upon the basic institu-
tions, then those individuals who have harbored in the remote recesses
of their personalities the appropriate loves and hates come to the fore,
or the deviants, banished to the margins of the system—the “noise” for
which there had previously been no use—shunt off into a new circuit,
where their behavior is apt to be treated by the functionally minded
anthropologist as the very music of the spheres.

Surely, it is wrong to suppose that every modal personality type is
equally vulnerable to every wind of change. On the other hand, those
who imply that a particular momentary configuration stands for all
time as a limitation of the possibilities of basic institutional evolution
are sadly in error. The contrary evidence is piled all around us in
monumental quantities. The convergence of widely different cultures
toward similar evolutionary novelties is the prime source of such evi-
dence. Whatever kinds of people were needed to invent and maintain
bifurcate merging kinship terminologies, unilineal descent groups, age
grades, slash and burn agriculture, band organization, social stratifica-
tion, classes, castes, and feudalism, “Yankee ingenuity,” capitalism
and colonialism, and one party rule, they were obviously available over
vast stretches of space and time.

And it is not only from such generalized evolutionary events that we

455

i


===== PAGE 233 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

are led to minimize the lag effect of basic personality. Another approach
to the same subject is to demand that time perspective be supplied to
all psychocultural analyses. We then bear witness to the extraordinary
mutability of national character in relation to the evolution of socio-
political systems. We see the spectacle of enemies become friends and
friends become enemies. We sce the Mozart-loving Germans trans-
figured into the beasts of Buchenwald, the authoritarian Japanese be-
come the democrats of Asia, meek Balinese boys joining death squads,
American troops turning over Vietcong for torture, the staid Britishers
dressed in mini-skirts, the racially democratic Portuguese in league
with South African apartheid, promiscuous South Sea Islanders turned
Protestant prudes, and Apollonian Pueblo Indians who have become
the drunken wards of their former encmies. All this was said a long
time ago and with much greater authority:

Nothing is generally more false and ridiculous than the por-
traits drawn to represent the characters of different nations. Some
paint their own nation after the particular society they frequent,
and consequently represent the people as gloomy or gay, dull or
witty. . . . Others copy what a thousand writers have said before
them; they have never examined the changes necessarily produced
in the character of a people, by those which happen in the ad-
ministration, and the alteration of manners. It has been said, that
the French are gay; and this will be repeated to eternity. They do
not perceive, that the misfortunes of the times having obliged the
princes to lay considerable taxes on the country people; the
French nation cannot be gay, because the peasants, who alone
compose two thirds of the nation, are in want, and want can never
be gay: that even, in regard to the cities, the necessity, it is said,
the police of Paris is under of defraying a part of the expence of
the masquerades performed on holidays at St. Anthony’s gate, is
not a proof of the gaiety of the artists and the citizen; spies may
contribute to the safety of Paris; but being carried too far, they
diffuse a general diffidence through the minds of the people, that
is absolutely incompatible with joy, on account of the ill use that
may be made of them [HELVETIUS 1810:357; orig. 1758].

PERSONALITY AND HISTORY

The facts of sociocultural convergence and parallelism would
work for, rather than against, the attribution of important causal ef-
ficacy to basic personality, only if it were maintained that the origin of
such regularities resides in the personality configurations themselves.
Thus we would have the hypothesis that a particular kind of personal-
ity is the necessary and sufficient condition for the occurrence of

456

W

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

unilineal descent groups, swidden farming, colonialism, communism,
etc. Few of the culture and personality specialists would wish to formu-
late so vulnerable a proposition. For at the end of this chimeric rainbow
there floats a cloud of pure idealism. One can very well understand
how appropriate personality types must predominate or come to the
fore when basic institutional transformations occur, but it is impos-
sible to understand how personality changes would alone suffice for
such transformations. Human personalities, like ideas, are potentially
infinite in variety. If one wishes to start the causal chain from person-
ality type and work back toward basic institutions, there shall never be
an explanation of why specific cultures manifest regular differences and
similarities.

FREUD AND MATERIALISM

The culture and personality movement could scarcely accept
the greatness of Freud and at the same time unambiguously proclaim
that personality configurations provide the key to the understanding of
history. The reason why Freud ranks with Darwin and Marx is that he
was the greatest single influence in bringing the phenomena of the
human mind within the compass of historical determinism. It was his
genius which led the way toward our comprehension of the fact that
even the most intimate details of our dreams and wishes—even the
dreams and wishes of madmen—are rooted in the intelligible material
wants and processes of human childhood. These childhood conditions
he derived in turn from the distinctive material components of the
human, species-given, biophysical endowment. The entire idiom of the
Freudian synthesis with its instinctual drives, its ontogenetic recapitu-
lations, its energy flows and its energy blockages, and its epiphenom-
enal symptoms and subterfuges is a physicalist and materialist tour de
force. But Freud’s system could only generate the universals of culture
and a few crude stages of a unilinear evolution. Specific cultural differ-
ences and similarities were beyond his grasp and interests.

It is also true as we have seen that the neo-Freudians purged Freud
of his historical determinism. Despite these modifications, it is impos-
sible to remain a Freudian in any significant sense and adopt an un-
ambiguously idealist position. For if there is one aspect of Freud
which cannot be dispensed with, it is the fact that the human personal-
ity is not free to shape itself into any form or substance to which an
individual may take a fancy. The minimal definition of Freudian

theory drives us back ineluctably to the determining conditions of
childhood.

The neo-Freudian may yet seek to avoid the materialist option: he

457



===== PAGE 234 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

may attribute the origin of childhood disciplines to the whim and
fancy of some adult generation. To save for himself a determinist
image, he may even stop arbitrarily short of an infinite regress some-
where along the route pioneered by the Kulturwissenschaften. He
would then emerge as an historical particularist suffering from the
typical inability to cope with the regularities of cultural evolution.

To sum up: out of the whim and fancy of early or late weaning,
postpartum taboos, crawling, creeping or frogging, one cannot con-
struct a theory of history. Let no one minimize the possible historical
importance of swaddling or toilet training; but to the extent that these
are significant dimensions of the historical process, to that extent they
must be linked with other regular features of sociocultural systems. If
they are not so linked, if they do not turn out to be articulated with
the techno-economic and techno-environmental conditions of socio-
cultural life, then we shall be left with the reductio ad absurdum that
personality generates personality according to its idiosyncratic disposi-
tions. Were human cultural systems infinitely divergent, such a view
would be tolerable. But infinite divergence is the equivalent of unintel-
ligible chaos, a condition which all previous experience of mankind
denies as an apt description of man, culture, or any other segment of
the universe.

CRUCIAL DETERMINANTS OF
PERSONALITY

In granting the importance of the traditional Freudian or
Freudian-inspired enculturation techniques—the anal, the oral, and
genital disciplines—as intervening variables in cultural evolution and
the maintenance of steady state circuits, we must avoid any implication
that these are the most significant psychological factors either for
evolutionary or homeostatic analysis. And this reservation might even
have to be maintained if it proved to be psychoanalytically correct that
the Freudian conditioning factors are crucially relevant to an under-
standing of individual health and disease. For it might very well be that
for an understanding of cultural evolution, quite a different set of con-
ditioning factors may have to be taken into consideration. For example,
the role which television cartoons, nursery school routines, and chil-
dren’s toys play in the formation of the American basic personality
structure might be more important for the homeostasis of the United
States sociopolitical system and more diagnostic of historical processes
than age of weaning and toilet training. The very fact that the feed-
backs being explored by Whiting and his followers require such com-

458

.

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

plicated circuitry may indicate that the more significant functional
relations between personality and primary institutions are being ne-
glected. The correlation between Max Weber’s Protestant ethic and
capitalism or David McClelland’s (1961) “need for achievement” and
industrial development, with proper readjustment of the causal arrows,
need not invoke psychoanalytic mechanisms. There are obviously
many other capitalist, industrial, and mass-society personality charac-
teristics which are more easily explained in terms of learning theory
than in terms of depth psychology. American children are taught by a
system of rewards and punishments, embracing a sociocultural ap-
paratus much larger than the nuclear family, to be aggressively com-
petitive, to seck solace in consumption of commodities, to ignore
death, and to fear old age. It is quite possible that the primary and
high school experiences of the sort described by Jules Henry (1963)
are more determinative of culturally significant personality than all of
the Freudian factors put together. The same might be true of the kind
of personality factors singled out by David Riesman (1950), Vance
Packard, or other non-Freudian observers of the correlation between
American anxicties and values and the basic economic and social insti-
tutions of mass society under corporate welfare capitalism. General
Motors, the Pentagon, and Madison Avenue may have more effect on
the vital circuitry of the historically and culturally significant American
personality than the nuclear family with all its formal and informal
child-training procedures. The significance of Oscar Lewis’s (1966a)
concept of “the culture of poverty” may also reside in a similar obser-
vation: poverty breeds a particular variety of personality configuration
regardless of the culture in which it occurs. (Not to be confused with
the point of view that poverty is merely a state of mind.) As Aberle
(1961b:395) has noted:

Much of the work on achievement and affiliation, as well as on
other features of American child rearing by class and by time pe-
riod can probably be ultimately related to the nature of the
market system in the modern world.

An extension of the same ego-psychology emphasis to cross-cultural
situations points to the possibility of major personality correlations to
be found among villagers as opposed to band migrants; among swidden
horticulturalists as compared with fixed field peasants; among redis-
tributive systems of distribution as opposed to reciprocal systems;
among hunters as opposed to gatherers; and among egalitarian so-
cieties as opposed to stratified societies.

459

—————eeee e


===== PAGE 235 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

BACKING INTO CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

These fundamental sources of personality differences have not
been completely neglected. Ralph Linton’s (1937) contrast between
the dry and wet rice-producing Tanala provided the basic clues for
Kardiner’s analysis of Tanala personality structure. Similarly, the Alor-
ese subsistence requirements were seen to be the controlling factor in
Alorese infant care. In both of these cases, however, the effect on in-
fant experience was deemed decisive rather than any lifelong series of
pressures and expectations as might be the case in market-induced con-
figurations.

A similar observation is called for in connection with the studies
carried out by Barry, Bacon, and Child (1959), in which it is shown by
the Whiting cross-cultural survey method that where stable harvest
surpluses are produced, there is a balance in the socialization process in
favor of passive compliance as opposed to individualized assertiveness.
The latter is in turn correlated with hunting modes of subsistence.
The conclusion that “child training tends to be a suitable adaptation to
subsistence economy” (ibid.:62) is a welcome confirmation of a some-
what peripheral but nonetheless important aspect of techno-economic
determinism. It should not escape our notice however that there is a
peculiar slant to the message before us. The study remains fixated on
the issue of child training. But it is the adult personality—the product
of the socialization process—with which psychocultural theory must
come to grips. True enough, the authors of the study claim that their
research avoids triviality because it indicates something about adult
character:

Pressures toward obedience and responsibility should tend to
make children into the obedient and responsible adults who can
best ensure the continuing welfare of a socicty with a high-accu-
mulation economy, whose food supply must be protected and
developed gradually throughout the year. Pressure toward
self-reliance and achievement should shape children into the ven-
turesome, independent adults who can take initiative in wresting
food daily from nature, and thus ensure survival in societies with
a low-accumulation economy [ibid.].

But it is a matter of considerable interest to inquire why the research
strategy did not involve an attempt to correlate adult personality di-
rectly with subsistence practices and then to seck additional sources of

460

*

Culture and Personality: New Directions

the same characteristics in the childhood enculturation disciplines.
This question takes us to the heart of the historical role of culture and
personality studies in cultural anthropology. The practitioners of this
specialty seem to be slowly backing into a position which they might
profitably have occupied face-forward from the outset.

WHITING DISCOVERS CULTURAL
MATERTIALISM

Another example from Whiting’s approach will help to make
this clear. As a result of several independent studies, a massive set of
correlations had been established, linking the following traits: exclusive
mother-infant sleeping arrangements, prolonged postpartum sexual ta-
boo, prolonged infant nursing, polygyny, patrilocality, and severe male
puberty rites. In searching for a suitable general hypothesis, Whiting
literally backed into the possibility that there might be a techno-
environmental feedback which is strong enough to generate the entire
complex. First, a possible link with climate was explored. This led to
the discovery of a correlation between the complex in question and
tropical climate. A final link was added when tropical climate was cor-
related in turn with Kwashiorkor, a disease associated with protein
deficiency during infancy. The entire chain could now be read as fol-
lows: Protein deficient tropical diets place a premium on prolonged
lactatior. for maintaining infant’s protein intake during critical period.
Interruption of lactation by demands of a second infant is prevented by
prolonged sex taboo while mother nurses. The sex taboo places a pre-
mium on the second wife. The husband in the polygynous houschold
sleeps separate from his wife. Hence, exclusive mother-infant sleeping
arrangement is the by-product. Polygyny, in turn, also makes patrilocal-
ity more probable as the most convenient way to set up a composite
household. Patrilocality, in turn, is correlated with patrilineality.
With a strong patrilineal, patrilocal emphasis, boys who have spent
a prolonged period with a nursing mother are subject to intense pres-
sures to assure proper male role identity (cf. WHITING 1964).

I believe we are justified in a spirit of constructive criticism to point
out that the strategy of Whiting’s research is inferior to its tactics.
Why start one’s inquiries into personality correlates with exclusive
mother-infant sleeping arrangements which turn out to be a mere ap-
pendage to the central causal chain? Why not start with Kwashiorkor,
malaria, tuberculosis, trypanosomiasis, and other pathogenic conditions
which we may confidently expect to be associated with both personality
and institutional specialties? As A. F. C. Wallace (1961:291) has noted

461



===== PAGE 236 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

in a brilliant article concerned with tracing arctic hysteria (pibloktoq)
to hypocalcemia, “The importance of the organic factors in psychopa-
thology has been largely ignored by anthropological theory, which has
emphasized psychological factors almost exclusively.” But it is not
simply anthropological psychopathology which has suffered from a
failure to explore organic linkages, it is the entire field of culture and
personality. Moreover, it is not merely a neglect of nutritional or epi-
demiological factors which needs to be pointed out, but a thorough-
going neglect of the entire parameter of conditioning factors which
relate personality to the human ecosystem, to the conditions of pro-
duction, to the sources of metabolism, to the disease vectors, to cli-
mate, to population density, to human and infrahuman competitors
and parasites—in short, to the techno-environmental and techno-
economic conditions under which people acquire their adult patterns
of behavior.

CLINICAL VERSUS ANTHROPOLOGICAL
PRIORITIES

The study of personality and culture should be the hand-
maiden of diachronic functionalism, that is, of the study of cultural
evolution and cultural causality. Instead it has all along labored on
behalf of questions related to the etiology of individual psychological
complexes. The “should be” carries more than a moralistic innuendo.
The lack of interest in direct causal connections, sustained throughout
life and not just during infancy, between major modes of subsistence
and personality type is a consequence of the poverty of cultural theory
throughout the Boasian period. The members of the culture and per-
sonality movement have themselves grown up in a milieu which has
been hostile to diachronic theory. They have thus either been led to
believe that the achievement of such theories has been proven impos-
sible, or they have never recognized an obligation to consider the rele-
vance of their work to such matters. But that obligation does exist
insofar as a distinction is to be drawn between culture and personality
studies which serve the interests of psychology and those which serve
the interests of cultural anthropology. To serve the interests of psy-
chology, we operate with the hypotheses which are suggested by the
purged synchronic version of neo-Frendian psychoanalysis. We then
achieve an understanding of how clinically significant complexes arise
in the typical individual. To serve the interests of cultural anthropol-
ogy, we must begin with the hypotheses suggested by a theory of cul-
tural evolution, and we must follow out the consequences of these

462

_——————?—

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

hypotheses upon the formation of feedback circuits between basic
personality and the parameters designated as vital for an understanding
of the behavior not of individuals but of sociocultural systems. The
imperative in the “must” will be evident as soon as we seriously con-
template the very large possibility that the principles governing the
formation of clinically significant syndromes may be quite devoid of
significance in the determination of the main features of sociocultural
evolution. We are left therefore with the unavoidable conclusion that
here as elsewhere in the recent history of cultural anthropology, a re-
search strategy has been pursued which is almost exactly the one least
suited to the solution of the major questions before us.

463



===== PAGE 237 =====

French

Structuralism 18

4

Emile Durkheim led French social science to its emancipation from
biological reductionism. Like Boas m the United States, Durkheim
founded a school of anthropology to which at mid-century the great
majority of French professional anthropologists still owe their origin.
But because of the rigidities and conservatism inherent in the struc-
ture of French higher education, it was not until the 1920’s that
academic curricula resembling the English and American reformula-
tions of anthropology began to appear. To this day, “anthropology”
means physical anthropology to the educated Frenchman. Yet Durk-
heim’s “sociological” school from the outset concerned itself as much
with the data of primitive ethnography as with Euro-American sociol-
ogy. Moreover, as Durkheim’s interests matured, he became increas-
ingly involved with the study of ethnographic data.

‘The rejection of Spencerism in France was not related to a vigorous
expansion of fieldwork. Indecd, the onset of intensive field studies by
French anthropologists began in the 1930’s with pupils sent out by
Marcel Mauss, himself a pupil of Durkheim (cf. BENDER 1965; MERCIER
1966: 104 ff.). Nonethcless, there was much in common between the

464

18.

French Structuralism

trajectories of the French and American schools. Both moved steadily
away from an evolutionary perspective; both tended to encourage emic
approaches on the model of linguistic analysis; and both produced a
steady erosion of the strategy which would have sought the lawful
principles of sociocultural phenomena in the material conditions of
human life. For Durkheim, social facts were entities sui generis, but
from the beginning they resembled mind more than matter. We shall
follow Durkheim’s progressive commitment to a Hegelian form of
idealism, a trend which by mid-century, in the work of Claude Lévi-
Strauss, had returned almost to the rationalism of Descartes.

Durkheim’s influence abroad was perhaps even more important than
it was at home. Between 1893 and 1897 he published in rapid succession
Division of Labor in Society, The Rules of the Sociological Method, and
Suicide. These works eventually provided the basic orientation for the
British school of structural-functionalism, the central movement in
modern British social anthropology. The accomplishments of this
school under the leadership of A. R. Radcliffe-Brown is the subject of
the next chapter.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF DURKHEIM'S
POSITIVIST HERITAGE

Durkheim presents a wide variety of facets from which inter-
pretive efforts (cf. GEHLKE, 1915) reflect at all sorts of unpredictable
angles. He has been classificd as everything from a materialist to a
mystic. In addition to the fact that his outlook underwent consider-
able transformation, he seems to have made less than a total effort to
avoid ambiguity.

Sociologist Talcott Parsons (1949:307) has properly emphasized
Durkheim’s debt to Auguste Comte: “Durkheim is the spiritual heir of
Comte and all the principal elements of his earlier thought are to be
found foreshadowed in Comte’s writings.” But Parsons’ understanding
of Comte is quite different from that presented in Chapter 3. For Par-
sons, Comte’s positivism is the opposite of Hegelian idealism. Thus
Durkheim is represented as a positivist who gradually converts to a
position which mediates between Hegel and Max Weber. Parsons
places himself quite accurately at the end of this sequence. We have
seen, however, that for Comte as much as for Hegel “ideas govern or
overthrow the world.” Parsons’ family tree, in other words, is much
more inbred than he would like us to believe, and French social science
is a much more provincial affair than is usually admitted. It has never,
not to this day, followed a stratcgy other than that of cultural idealism.

465



===== PAGE 238 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Actually, Durkheim and Comte struck remarkably similar balances be-
tween material and ideational factors at similar stages in their careers.
In both cases, they gave increasing emphasis to moral and religious con-
siderations as they grew older.

The suggestion by sociologist Alvin Gouldner (1962:10) that it was
Saint-Simon rather than Comte to whom Durkheim owed the greater
debt should also be seen in the same context. In the crucial matter of
the relationship between ideology and sociocultural change, Comte and
Saint-Simon were like two peas in a pod. Durkheim (1962:127) him-
self provides the decisive quote:

In point of fact the idea from which he [Saint-Simon] takes his
departure and which dominates his entire doctrine, is that a social
system is only the application of a system of ideas. Systems of re-
ligion, of general politics, morality, of public instruction, says he,
are nothing else than applications of a system of ideas, or if one
prefers, it is the system of thought considered under different
aspects.

Gouldner's case rests on the extent to which Durkheim’s first book,
Division of Labor, may be viewed as a polemic directed against
Comte. Because of its divisive effect upon a community’s moral con-
sensus, Comte had pictured specialization as a subversive threat to
orderly progress. Durkheim, on the other hand, set out to show that
the division of labor leads to a different effect, namely an increase in a
new and higher form of social cohesion, which he labeled “organic
solidarity.” According to Durkheim, this new binding ingredient grows
up alongside of, and eventually overshadows, the more archaic “me-
chanical solidarity” based upon cohesion of individuals through the
likeness of their “consciences” (DURKHEIM 1933:226). But Comte’s
apprehensions concerning the possible breakdown in social cohesion
are fully shared by Durkheim. Indeed, Saint-Simon, Comte, and Durk-
heim are all aware of the potentially cohesive as well as divisive effects
of the increase in the division of labor.

Where Comte spoke of order and progress, Durkheim emphasized
“social solidarity.” This idiom is the main relevant positivist contribu-
tion, serving to maintain a focus upon social evolution which denies
the necessity of disorderly structural change.

In this fashion French positivism acted as a buffer between a science
of society and the political and industrial revolutionary agitation
characteristic of the whole century of French history which preceded
the writing of Division of Labor.

466

. A

18. French Structuralism

SOCIAL SOLIDARITY
STRUGGLE

VERSUS CLASS

The use of the concept of social solidarity by Saint-Simon,
Comte, and Durkheim provides an unbroken line of politically conser-
vative theories leading directly to the main varieties of “functionalism”
among contemporary British, French, and American social anthro-
pologists. While radical social science followed Marx into a considera-
tion of what it would take to make the social organism fly apart, the
conservatives, such as Spencer, Durkheim, Radcliffe-Brown, and Mali-
nowski, busied themselves with calculations of the reasons for its hold-
ing together. Let us admit the legitimacy of both interests. In the
ultimate stages of theoretical formulation, no doubt both approaches
are useful. Marx’s effect upon the development of anthropology is
felt, in this regard, as in most others, indirectly, by reaction, in the
painfully elaborate and only partially successful exploration of self-
regulating, sociocultural equilibrium models. Without placing Durk-
heim’s concern with social solidarity in the context of the Marxist
predictions concerning the impending violent explosion of the capitalist
system, the origins of much of recent cultural theory must remain
forever obscure.

Fortunately we have the testimony of Marcel Mauss (1962) and the
text of Durkheim’s (1962; orig. 1896) study of Saint-Simon and social-
ism by which the central historical importance of the political issue is
established beyond doubt. Mauss tells us that Durkheim’s desire to
build a new science of socicty, after the debacle brought about by
Comte’s popish denouement, arose from schoolboy interest in the
“relationship between individualism and socialism.” According to
Mauss, although this interest was temporarily set to one side, it re-
mained with him throughout his life and coincided with a number of
critical biographical events which are relevant to the form in which
Durkheim’s theories were presented to the world.

He clashed with touchy moralists and classic or Christian econ-
omists for their objections to collectivism which they struck at
through his Division of Labor. Due to conflicts of this kind, he
was excluded from professorships in Paris. Some of the most bril-
liant among his own students were converted to socialism, espe-
cially Marxist, and even Guesdist. In one “Social Study” circle
some examined Capital as they elsewhere considered Spinoza.
Durkheim sensed this opposition to liberalism and bourgeois in-
dividualism. In a conference organized by this circle and the
Workers” Party at Bordeaux, Juares in 1893 extolled Durkheim’s

467



