===== PAGE 131 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Boas’ accomplishments as a teacher, administrator, researcher,
founder and president of societies, editor, lecturer, and traveler are
exhausting to behold. To anyone who has ever worried about pub-
lishing or perishing, the fact that all of this activity was accompanied
by the publication of a torrent of books and articles is well-nigh
terrifying. In addition to half a dozen books, Boas published over 700
articles (LESSER 1968:26). Boas™ stature increases with each passing
year, as we find in his work the measure of our own shortcomings.
Yet in order to achieve an understanding of twentieth-century an-
thropology, we must set aside the image of Boas as father, hero, and
“guru” and tum our attention to the task of locating his contribution
to theory within the patterns of an age. That is, we must rise above
personalities and adopt a cultural perspective. In so doing, we render
homage through objective criticism even more than through eulogies,
which impair our understanding of Boas and of ourselves as well.

BOAS’

Margaret Mead (1959b:31) has said, “Characteristically, there
are no methods named after Boas, just as there is no Boas
school. . . .” During an exchange with the South African critic A. W.
Hoérnle (1933), Kroeber (1935:540) also expressed his belief that “there
is no ‘Boas school’ and never has been.” Many of Boas’ students seem
to have shared this view of themselves; and in some ways this belief
in itself constituted the central feature of the Boasian position. Ac-
cording to Kroeber, partisan and propagandistic programs in the social
sciences were a sign of immaturity. There were no schools in physics,
he argued, only physicists doing their job with every available scienti-
fic technique. With Boas, anthropology had come of age; under his
influence there was no “singling out of any one method—psycho-
logic, sociologic, diffusionist, functional, or Kulturkreis—as constituting
a king’s highway superior to others” (ibid.). For Margaret Mead,
Boas was “the man who made anthropology into a science” (1959b:

5).
’ The image of Boas which had the greatest appeal to his students
was that of a professional scientist who had raised anthropological
research methods and standards of proof to a level with which even a
physicist would fecl comfortable. In this regard, the special nature of
Boas’ doctorate has been emphasized repeatedly by his students. His
principal thesis was submitted at the University of Kiel in 1881, and it
was concerned with the color of sea water. Previously he had studied

IMAGE

252

el

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

physics and geography at Heidelberg and Bonn, and he was also
well trained in mathematics. For Kroeber, this background provides
the key to the understanding of Boas’ role:

From physics Boas brought into anthropology a sense of defi-
niteness of problem, of exact rigor of method, and of highly
critical objectivity. These qualities have remained with him un-
impaired, and his imparting them to anthropology remains his
fundamental and unshakable contribution to our discipline
[KROEBER 1935:540].

For Goldenweiser, Boas was anthropology’s “culture-hero.” Like
the heroes of primitive myths who give the essentials of life to man, it
was Boas who bestowed the gift of science upon anthropology:

Indian mythologies tell of culture-heroes, supernatural animals or
birds who bestow culture upon man, teach him the arts and crafts,
introduce songs and ceremonies. To anthropology in this country
Franz Boas, the “Man,” came as such a culture-hero. Brought up
in the atmosphere and methods of the natural sciences and
steeped in the scholarly ideals of pre-war Germany, he bestowed
upon American anthropology that clarification of issues and stiff-
ening of scientific fiber which it stood so sorely in need of
[GOLDENWEISER 1941:153].

According to Ruth Benedict (1943:61), “Boas found anthropology a
collection of wild guesses and a happy hunting ground for the ro-
mantic lover of primitive things; he left it a discipline in which theo-
ries could be tested” (quoted in WHITE 1963:67). Lowie, as we shall
see in greater detail later on, identified Boas with physicist-philosopher
Ernst Mach and associated both of them with the development of

“higher standards of proof” and the perfection of the scientific
method.

THE STANDARDS OF BOAS’
CONTEMPORARIES

There is considerable truth in this portrait. Boas was a veri-
table fortress of scientific sobriety in comparison with most of his
contemporaries. Although his cautious approach to generalization ap-
pears in retrospect overdone and self-defeating, there was nothing
illusory about the shoddy standards of his contemporaries. Lacking
a firm foundation in the universities, anthropological subjects were

253


===== PAGE 132 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

still an easy prey for imaginative amateurs. Consider, for example,
this 1893 description of chimpanzee behavior from the pages of the
American Anthropologist:

The cleared spaces . . . are used by the chimpanzees to build
immense bonfires of dried wood. . . . When the pile is com-
pleted one of the chimpanzees begins to blow at the pile as if
blowing the fire. He is immediately joined by others, and, even-
tually by the whole company, and the blowing is kept up until
their tongues hang from their mouths, when they sit around on
their haunches with their elbows on their knees and holding up
their hands to the imaginary blaze. In wet weather they fre-
quently sit in this way for hours together [BUTTEROFER 1893:337].

It must be kept in mind that many of Boas’ contemporaries were
temperamentally unsuited to scientific discipline. It was an age in
which the license to generalize on the basis of fragmentary evidence
was claimed by second- and third-rate people. Lester Ward, one of the
founders of American sociology, is a case in point. Reviewing a book
on the origin of life, he could let himself go in the following manner,
seemingly without qualms:

The book is purely theoretical, and no facts whatever are adduced.
This is not a criticism of the book. In fact it is one of the beauties
of it. Anyone who reads the book can see that the author’s head is
full of facts and that all he was trying to do was to reason from a
store of facts to certain conclusions. Those who speak disrespect-
fully of this method are often unable to make any use of their

facts, however many they possess [WARD 1904:151].

Since cultural theory in the United States was dominated by a
mixture of Spencer’s and Morgan’s evolutionism, it was to be ex-
pected that the prevalent debauchery of method frequently involved
sins committed in the name of evolutionary reconstruction. William
McGeg, for example, first president of the American Anthropological
Association, was often guilty of naive stage-scheming replete with
jingoistic Spencerian celebrations of America’s evolutionary success:

Just as patriarchy gives way to hierarchy, and hierarchy to absolute
monarchy, so limited monarchy is giving way to democracy or
republicanism; already the foremost nation of the earth is a repub-
lic, and all other civilized nations are either republican or under-
going changes in the direction of republicanism. So according to
the experience of the ages, the best nation is a republican one, and
the best citizen is the individual adapted to life under republican
conditions [nmc GEE 1894:353].

254

?—

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

McGee was an inexhaustible mine of every error of substance and
theory that it was possible to commit on the basis of the most vul-
gar prejudices masquerading as scientific expertise. In seeking to
understand Boas’ renaissancelike involvement with all four fields of
anthropology, we must bear in mind that people of McGee’s ilk
had opinions about everything, most of them so blatantly wrong as to
create a virtual vacuum once they were challenged and assigned to
their proper oblivion. McGee’s thoughts on the connection between
race and language are sobering in the extreme. Here he seeks to explain
“the ascendancy of the simple, tangible, and definite tongue and
writing of the Anglo-Saxon”:

Possibly the Anglo-Saxon blood is more potent than that of other
races; but it is to be remembered that the Anglo-Saxon language
is the simplest, the most perfectly and simply symbolic that the
world has ever scen; and that by means of it the Anglo-Saxon
saves his vitality for conquest instead of wasting it under the

Juggernaut of a cumbrous mechanism for conveyance of thought
[Mc GEE 1895a:281].

McGee's confusion of race, language, and culture was representative
of learned opinion both within anthropology and in Western society
in general. The debasement of contemporary primitive peoples to the
level of Anthropoidea was, as we have seen, an important expres-
sion of Euro-American imperialism. McGee’s version is especially
anoxious: “The savage stands strikingly close to sub-human species
in every aspect of mentality as well as in bodily habits and bodily
structure” (McGEE 19o1:13). John W. Powell, the founder of
the American Bureau of Ethnology (in 1879), was another influential
!Jut distressingly undisciplined dabbler in anthropological evolution-
ism. Like many of his contemporaries, Powell could dash off a
presidential address on the history of mankind with a comprehensive
finality that even Turgot and Condorcet could not have surpassed. In
one colossal synthesis, he arranged the stages of evolution into four
grades: savagery, barbarism, monarchy, and democracy. Then to each
of t_hcse grades he assigned specific social institutions, such as the
family to savagery, the gentes to barbarism, and so forth. In music,
the stages were rhythm, melody, harmony, symphony; in aesthetics:
danlce, sacrifice, ceremony, histrionic art; in technblogy: hunting,
agriculture, artisanry, machinery (powELL 1899).

One of the most influential anthropologists among Boas’ con-
temporaries was Daniel G. Brinton. In his presidential address before
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Brin-

255



===== PAGE 133 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ton (1896:12) reaffirmed the standard Spencerian position: “The
black, the brown and the red races differ anatomically so much from
the white, especially in their splanchnic organs, that even with
equal cerebral capacity, they could never rival its results by equal
efforts.”

Brinton is especially important for an understanding of Boas’
(1896b) famous critique of the comparative method. It was Brinton
more than Morgan or Tylor who was closest to mind when Boas
pointed out that insufficient caution was being exercised in the re-
construction of universal parallel sequences. For Brinton had spoken
of “the nigh absolute uniformity of man’s thoughts and actions,
his aims and methods, when in the same degree of development,
no matter where he is or in what epoch” (BrINTON 1896:12).

It is interesting to note that Leslie White (1963:43) has misrepre-
sented Boas’ reaction to Brinton by associating Brinton’s use of the
comparative method with that of Morgan and Tylor. Brinton, how-
ever, was prepared to go far beyond Morgan and Tylor in regarding
“the modes of thought and feeling” of contemporary nations of
“low culture” as representative of extinct tribes at “about the same
stage of culture.” Indeed, in his presidential address to the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, Brinton attacked Mor-
gan and Tylor for placing too great an emphasis upon diffusion as
the explanation of transcultural similarities. Instead of identifying the
target of Brinton’s remarks as Morgan and Tylor, White has Brinton
criticizing some vaguely defined group of “comparative mytholo-
gists and folk-lorists of the old school” who had not “caught up with
the development of ethnologic science” (WHITE 1963:43). Although
Brinton did not refer to Morgan and Tylor by name, it is quite clear
that they are the intended targets:

The anthropologist of today who, like a late-distinguished scholar
among ourselves, would claim that because the rather complex
social system of the Iroquois had a close parallel among the
Munda tribes of the Punjab, therefore, the ancestors of each
must have come from a common culture center; or, who, like an
eminent living English ethnologist, sees a proof of Asiatic rela-
tions in American culture because the Aztec game of patolli is
like the East Indian game of parchesi,—such an anthropologist, I
say, may have contributed ably to his science in the past, but he
does not know where it stands today [BrINTON 1896:9].

That is, Morgan and Tylor were accused of being overly conservative
with respect to parallelisms, and Boas, in responding to Brinton, was
implicitly defending Morgan and Tylor against an application of the

256

I sl

\ 9. Historical Particularism: Boas

comparative method which they, too, would have found unacceptable.
Since this obviously would not be compatible with the picture of
Boas as an archreactionary, White fails to mention who it is that
Brinton considers to be out of date.

In contrast with many of his American colleagues at the turn of
the century, Boas casts an heroic shadow. His natural gifts, superior
education, and European cosmopolitan advantages make people such
as McGee, Brinton, and even Powell look like hayseeds and bumpkins.
But it is misleading to picture him as the high god-creator of scientific
anthropology. There were many before him who urged and achieved
field research as the basis for ethnology. The scientific description of
American Indian cultures was certainly already well advanced
when Boas arrived at the scene. As far back as the 1830’s, Henry
Schoolcraft, one of the founders of the American Ethnological
Society, had begun the task of sympathetically recording the mental
realities of Indian groups based on extensive firsthand exposure. (His
wife was of Ojibwa descent.) Morgan’s contact with the Iroquois and
his subsequent westward journeys obviously removed him from his
armchair for respectably prolonged periods. Both W. H. Holmes and
Otis T. Mason acquired an excellent firsthand knowledge of aboriginal
technology, and Alice Fletcher and James Mooney were pioneer
ethnographers of high competence (cf. HELM 1966). What was unique
in Boas’ case was not the emphasis on field research and collection of
facts, but his insistence that these activities were more critical, more
prestigious, and more scientific than theory-making on any scale,
grand or small.

Unprecedented also was the precise quality of Boas’ devotion to
the collection of facts. There is a strong puritan element in his out-
look. For him, science was very much a sacred enterprise. Those who
tushed to conclusions without proper attention to facts were in effect
desecrating a temple. His eulogy of physiologist Rudolf Virchow,
another product of nineteenth-century German empiricism, may be
taken as representative of his own outlook:

The sound progress of science requires of us to be clear at every
moment, what elements in the system of science are hypothetical
and what are the limits of that knowledge which is obtained by
exact observation . . . many an impetuous student has felt his
[Virchow’s] quict and cautious criticism as an obstacle to prog-
tess. On this account he has suffered many hostile attacks—until
generally the progress of research showed that the cautious master
was right in rejecting the far-reaching conclusion based on im-
perfect evidence. There are but few students who possess that cold

257



===== PAGE 134 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

enthusiasm for truth that enables them to be always clearly con-
scious of the sharp line between attractive theory and the observa-
tion that has been secured by hard and earnest work [BoAs 1902:443,
quoted in KLUCKHOHN and PRUFER 1959:23].

CRITIQUE OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

‘What then was Boas’ reaction to the widespread conviction
concerning the uniformity, even “monotony,” of evolutionary
change? The fundamental issue to which he addressed himself in
“The Limitations of the Comparative Method” was the problem of
separating instances of convergent from instances of parallel evolution.
He did not doubt that there were many remarkable resemblances of
culture traits that could not be explained by diffusion. But the fact
that such phenomena as shamanism, the concept of a future life, the
use of the bow, geometric designs, masks, and many other items are
widely distributed does not establish the uniformity of history. Con-
clusions concerning whether evolutionary uniformities, that is, paral-
lel evolutionary sequences, have occurred or not must be held in
abeyance until data of a certain sort are collected. The data in
question are the facts of the historical sequences by which in par-
ticular local areas the observed phenomena have come into existence:

The fact that many fundamental features of culture are universal,
or at least occur in many isolated places, interpreted by the as-
sumption that the same features must always have developed
from the same causes, leads to the conclusion that there is one
grand system according to which mankind has developed every-
where; that all the occurring variations are no more than minor
details in this grand uniform evolution. It is clear that this theory
has for its logical basis the assumption that the same phenomena
are always due to the same causes [Boas 1948:275; orig. 1896b].

This assumption, however, argues Boas, is patently false in a large
number of concrete instances. Clans, for example, seem to have arisen
among the Navaho by the fusion of separate groups, but among
the Northwest tribes, they resulted from village fission. Geometric
designs did not necessarily result, as Hjalmar Stolpe (1891) and
Alfred Haddon (1895) had proposed, from gradual conventionaliza-
tion of realistic representations, but rather from any of “four different
lines of development and from an infinite number of starting points.”
Again, masks are sometimes used as disguises, so that harmful spirits
will not recognize the wearer; elsewhere they are wormn to frighten off

258

7‘

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

people and spirits, and in still other contexts, they are worn to
commemorate a deceased relative. It seems unlikely, therefore, that
the same causal sequence can have accounted everywhere for the
development of these phenomena.

Therefore we must also consider all the ingenious attempts at
constructions of a grand system of the evolution of socicty as of
very doubtful value, unless at the same time proof is given that
the same phenomena must always have had the same origin. Un-
til this is done, the presumption is always in favor of a variety of
courses which historical growth may have taken [Boas 1948:275].

In emphasizing the variety of history, Boas had obviously taken a
position against evolutionary schemes which embraced all of mankind
in a single developmental formula. But a contempt for the vogue of
logically fabricated worldwide parallelisms was fully merited in the
context of the age. This does not mean that Boas had consciously
set himself the task of championing the proposition that there were
no regularities in history, but rather that he felt that the amount of
regularity had been grossly overestimated. Appalled by the free-
floating speculation, which his contemporaries had assumed to be
their professional prerogative, Boas struggled to improve the balance.
In the long run, there was a need for both the particularist and
generalist approaches. But priority for the moment must be given
to the study of specific sequences in delimited areas.

The comparative method and the historical method, if I may use
these terms, have been struggling for supremacy for a long time,
but we may hope that each will soon find its appropriate place
and function. . . . The comparative method, notwithstanding all
that has been said and written in its praise, has been remarkably
barren of definite results, and I believe it will not become fruitful
until we renounce the vain endeavor to construct a uniform sys-
tematic history of the evolution of culture, and until we begin to
make our comparisons on the broader and sounder basis which T
ventured to outline. Up to this time we have too much reveled in
more or less ingenious vagaries. The solid work is still all before
us [ibid.:280].

WAS BOAS AN ANTIEVOLUTIONIST?

It was to be expected that the abuse of scholarly standards
would be found among those whose ignorance and incompetence
were buoyed up by the prevailing ideological dogma, which happened
to be Spencerian evolutionism. When altemnative schemes came to

259



===== PAGE 135 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the fore, equally ambitious in scope and vapid in content but having
nothing to do with evolutionism, Boas reacted with comparable vigor.

Boas' early interest in mythology and folklore was based upon
the conviction that these materials would be useful in the attempt to
distinguish independently invented from diffused items. Thus, his
study of the diffusion of the North American raven myth provided
the occasion for a critique of facile assumptions about parallel evolu-
tion. Yet Boas made it clear that he was not about to take up the
cause of dogmatic “antievolutionism.” His paramount interest was
the achievement of high standards of scholarship:

If we want to make progress on the desired line, we must insist
upon critical methods, based not on generalities but on each in-
dividual case. In many cases, the final decision will be in favor of in-
dependent origin; in others in favor of dissemination [ibid.:435;
orig. 18g6a].

Boas tried to steer this middle course throughout his career. When
he reviewed Leo Frobenius, one of the forerunners of the German
diffusionist school, he commented: “By following the methods pre-
sented in this book, anything and everything can be proved. It is
fiction, not science” (Boas 18ggb:755). To Fritz Graebner, chief
architect of the German diffusionist methodology, he was more re-
spectful, but no less critical. Independent invention, parallel evolu-
tion, and convergence are all upheld as commonplace facts of
culture. Although Boas agreed with Graebner that diffusion is more
common than independent invention, this was no license for assign-
ing diffusionary explanations in the absence of practical geographical
connections. Premature generalization is once again the worst error:

1 rather repeat once more the warning that I have given again
and again for twenty years: rather to be overcautious in admitting
transmission as the cause of analogies in cases of the sporadic oc-
currence of similar phenomena, than to operate with the concept
of lost links of a chain of cultural intercourse [1948:303; orig. 1911].

METHODOLOGICAL PURITANISM

Boas seldom permitted himself the luxury of assuming that
he himself had been able to meet his own standards. It was if the orgy
of evolutionary and diffusionist speculation had nauseated him so
that he could never again feel at ease in the presence of a gencraliza-
tion. This facet of Boas’ outlook deserves the emphasis which Kroeber,
Lowie, Sapir, Bunzel, and many others have insisted on giving it,
despite the compilation by Leslic White (1963:41ff.) of a number of

260

o. Historical Particularism: Boas

instances in which Boas himself reached speculative conclusions.
There is no doubt that Boas’ attempts to reconstruct the history of
various American Indian groups are frequently based on thin evidence.
Some of these speculative conclusions must be reckoned with in as-
sessing Boas” influence upon the development of theory, and we
shall consider them later on. But it seems to me that White over-
emphasizes these lapses. After all, as White and many other critics
have pointed out, the chief objection to Boas’ approach is that it
led to a vast collection of primary materials—texts and descriptions
in which practically no attempt was made to orient the reader with
respect to even short-range and tentative generalizations. According to
Helen Codere (1959:61), Boas published more than 10,000 pages on
the Northwest Coast alone; and, as White has taken pains to point
out, most of this went “without commentary, without the bare in-
formation that would be needed to render it intelligible to the
reader” (WHITE 1963:55). In this ocean of facts, the speculations to
which White objects are mere outcroppings, whose disappearance
Boas would probably have accepted with perfect equanimity.

In comparison with his contemporaries, Boas was faithful to his
inductive principles. That he did not inaugurate the reign of
absolute truth goes without saying. But he surpassed most anthro-
pologists before or since in his concern to present to others the evi-
dence from which ethnographic statements could be constructed.
Let us admit that Boas’ empiricism involved standards which even
he could not maintain. Certainly his students were destined to fall
even shorter of the mark and, in some instances, to restore a de-
bauchery of method comparable to that of Brinton, Powell, and
McGee. Let us also admit, for reasons which I shall make plain in a
moment, that Boas’ basic philosophy of science involved errors which
are in the long run inimical to the progress of social science. There
still results no basis for the assertion that Boas retarded the develop-
ment of anthropology by fifty years (cf. raY 1955:140). Given the
condition of anthropology at the end of the nincteenth century, the
one great reformatory movement that was necessary (but not suffi-
cient) to the further progress of the science of culture was precisely
that which Boas initiated.

REJECTION OF PHYSICALISM

Recognition of Boas’ salutary effect in clearing out the ama-
teurs and charlatans, with their snake-oil evolutionary formula, in no
way obliges us to overlook the negative influences that emanated

261



===== PAGE 136 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 9. Historical Particularism: Boas

from other facets of his approach. From the outset, Boas was in-
volved in a philosophical paradox from which he never escaped, but
which in the history of anthropology is of far greater significance
than his methodological puritanism. The nub of this dilemma was
that Boas believed that the patient accumulation of historical data
would lead automatically to the improvement of anthropological the-
ory. Although by his own admission he was temperamentally much
more in sympathy with the collection of historical facts, he suc-
ceeded in convincing himself and his students that generalizing
interests could not possibly suffer from a program of historical re-
construction. He never conceded that a choice must be made between
history and science; rather he conceived of science as having historical
and generalizing components, formally disallowing any invidious
comparison between them. Regardless of his attempt to maintain
an interest in the problem of formulating lawful principles, it is
obvious from the research strategy he followed throughout his career
that he was perfectly content to continue his particularist studies in
complete independence of their nomothetic payoff. It is thus his-
torically more correct to reverse the emphasis that his students give
to his background in physics. Far from applying a physicalistic model
to the study of sociocultural phenomena, Boas reacted against such a
model and was much more concerned with showing how it needed
to be supplemented in the special circumstances of the so-called
Geisteswissenschaften or human sciences.

The published evidence for this reaction dates back to 1887. Having
returned from a field trip among the Eskimo, which he undertook as
a geographer, Boas sought to define the special qualities of geography
as a discipline. “If we would maintain [geography’s] independence,” he
argued, “we must prove that there exists another object for science
besides the deduction (sic) of laws from phenomena” (1948:641;
orig. 1887a). This other aim, argues Boas, is that which characterizes
the difference between the descriptive or historical and physicalist
methods. In the descriptive sciences, the single fact, the single
phenomenon, is sufficiently compelling in itself.

“The object of the historian is . . . the study of the facts . . . [he]
dwells admiringly on the character of his heroes. He takes the most
lively interest in the persons and nations he treats of, but is un-
willing to consider them as subject to stringent laws” (ibid.:642).
Although the physicalists do not deny the importance of every
phenomenon, “they do not consider it worthy of study for its own
sake.” The descriptive scientist, on the other hand,

262

holds to the phenomenon which is the object of his study, may it
occupy a high or a low rank in the system of physical sciences,
and lovingly tries to penctrate into its secrets until every feature
is plain and clear. This occupation with the object of his affection
affords him a delight not inferior to that which the physicist en-
joys in his systematical arrangement of the world [ibid.:645].

REJECTION OF MATERIALISM

It has now been established that this attempt to define the
difference between an historical and a physicalist approach to knowl-
edge expressed a fundamental shift in Boas’ Weltanschauung and was
part of the process which led him away from physics to anthropology.
This shift took place during the decade 1878-88, or from his twentieth
to his thirticth year. During this period Boas gradually gave up the
philosophical premises associated with the mechanistic syntheses of
mid-century physics, chemistry, and biology. Under the influence of
a widespread neo-Kantian idealist movement, Boas turned away from
the materialism with which he had approached his earlier study of
physics. The trajectory of his intellectual growth moved him steadily
along the path from physics to geography to ethnography. Thanks to
George Stocking’s research on Boas’ correspondence, we may now
learn about this transition in Boas’ own words, addressed to his
American uncle, Abraham Jacobi, on April 10, 1882:

The objectives of my studies shifted quite a bit during my uni-
versity years. While in the beginning my intention was to regard
mathematics and physics as the final goal, T was led through the
study of the natural sciences to other questions which prompted
me also to take up geography, and this subject captured my in-
terest to such an extent that I finally chose it as my major study.
However, the direction of my work and study was strongly influ-
enced by my training in natural sciences, especially physics. In
the course of time I became convinced that my previous ma-
terialistic Weltanschauung—for a physicist a very understandable
one—was untenable, and I gained thus a new standpoint which
revealed to me the importance of studying the interaction be-
tween the organic and the inorganic, above all between the life of
a people and their physical environment [quoted in STOCKING

1965a:55].
From this awakening, Boas goes on to say, came the definition of
what he wished to do for the rest of his life:

Thus arose my plan to regard as my life’s task the [following] in-
vestigation: How far may we consider the phenomena of organic

263


===== PAGE 137 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

life, and especially those of the psychic life, from a mechanistic
point of view, and what conclusions can be drawn from such a con-
sideration [ihid.]?

GEOGRAPHICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
INTERESTS COMBINED

Upon the threshold of his voyage to Baffin Island to study
the Eskimo, Boas confided that the discipline to which he intended to
devote himself was not geography, but rather “psychophysics.” Dur-
ing the year of his military service (1882-83), he published six
programmatic articles on this subject. But in order to receive sponsor-
ship for his Baffin Island expedition, he felt it was necessary to re-
strict his research to physical and human geography. He therefore
busied himself with the orthodox geographical proposal of “studying
the dependence of the migration of present-day Eskimo on the con-
figuration and physical conditions of the land” (ibid.:57). In the
following year, just before his departure for Baffin Island, he repeated
his interest in “physiological and psychological mechanisms” and
lamented his inability to go at once to the heart of his life plan:

From the pure scientific standpoint, I would begin the matter
with psychophysics, and T have today the exact outline of a book
on the subject which (I hope!) T may write sometime later. . . .
But from the practical viewpoint I must willy-nilly begin with
geography, since that is the science that I have thoroughly
learned [ibid.:55].

Boas did his best to work out a compromise between the geographical
and the psychophysical. This compromise was embodied in the pro-
posal to study “the dependence of the knowledge of the land area of
wandering of the peoples on the configuration of the land,” that is,
in modern idiom, the relationship between a people’s understanding
of their habitat’s geography and their patterns of movement across
the land.

I am going now primarily to collect material that will give me
points of view for more gencral studies. The general study will be
about the knowledge peoples have of the local geography, which
will be followed by a psychological study about the causes for the
limitation of the sprcading of peoples. From here I wish to gain
the starting point for the general questions which psychophysics
will give me possibly more rapidly and just as surely. Of course on
my trip I must pursue many other goals, make geographical maps,

264

.

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

found botanical and zoological collections, make ethnographical
and anthropological investigations, etc., but I shall keep my chief
aim always in mind [ibid.].

It should be noted that Boas actually did devote a portion of his
work among the Eskimo to the comparison of the Eskimo’s knowl-
edge of the area with cartographic realities. The latter, being un-
known, involved him in thousands of miles of mapping expeditions.
To obtain an understanding of the Eskimo’s point of view, he
solicited numerous drawings, which are of continuing interest.

REJECTION OF GEOGRAPHICAL
DETERMINISM

During the year 1882-83, Boas made the acquaintance of
Adolf Bastian and Rudolf Virchow, upon whom his hopes for an
appointment at the University of Berlin were pinned (HERSKOVITS
1957:114). Both of them, Bastian with his belief in universal germ
thoughts and Virchow with his strong physiological interests, were
concerned with regularities and processes. Earlier, at the University
of Kiel, it had been the geographer Theobald Fischer with whom
Boas had worked most intimately. (It is even possible that when Boas
went from Bonn to Kiel, it was to accompany Fischer, who was
making the same move [KLUCKHOHN and PRUFER 1959:9].) Fischer,
in turn, was a disciple of the geographer Karl Ritter, who was explicitly
devoted to the task of formulating the laws of migrations and cultural
evolution. In a letter from Fischer to Boas, we learn that Boas has
been reading Buckle, the archexponent of geographical determinism,
and that, with some cautions, this was all to the good: “That you
occupy yourself with Buckle is very desirable, but you must not be
taken completely into his tow; he has been called, not unjustly, an
‘ultra-Ritterian’ 7 (ibid.:57). Although Fischer was somewhat less
committed than Ritter to a geographical-determinist position, there
can be no doubt that Boas planned his trip to Baffin Island in con-
formity with a strong presumption in favor of the primacy of
geographical factors in the life of the Eskimo. In an earlier letter to
his uncle, explaining his plans for the expedition, Boas described
himself as having

in mind a geographical investigation which, though it does not fit
into my program of study, should give me materials for a thesis
when I try for the post of University lecturer. That is, I am making

265


===== PAGE 138 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

studies of the Eskimo and their knowledge of the land they in-
habit, as well as of the entire region, in the hope of demonstrating
a certain rclationship between the number of people in a tribe,
the distribution of food, and the . . . [quoted in HERSKOVITS
1957:113. Complete sentence could not be deciphered].

The principal publication resulting from Boas’ expedition to Baffin
Island was The Central Eskimo {1888), a lucid account of life in
the arctic which stressed the interrelationship between geographical
and cultural factors. Henceforth, however, Boas never again gave
prominence to a culture’s geographic milien. As Kroeber (1935:543)
observed, the Eskimo study was “the only one in which the geographic
setting is given other than perfunctory or minimal consideration.”
It is thus clear that in shifting over from geography to ethnography,
Boas was moving away from a belief in geographical determinism.
The Eskimo experience appears to have been critical in this conver-
sion. According to Gladys Reichard (quoted in HERskovITS 1957:

115):

His life with the Eskimo made him change radically his predis-
position to assign geographic influence as primary to the develop-
ment of culture which he went with after Ratzel’s influence. In
other words, he was taught to realize the significance of culture
by the Eskimo, and the environment seemed to him to be at least
secondary. He concluded that they did things in spite of rather
than because of the environment. . . .

George Stocking (1965a:64) has recently attempted to refute the
notion that Boas’ first field trip was such a “conversion experience.”
This may be true as far as the overall drift of Boas toward mentalism
and neo-Kantianism is concerned, but Boas himself seemed to believe
that the Eskimo trip was decisive for his rejection of geographical de-
terminism.

If in later writings I did not stress geographical conditions the
reason must be sought in an exaggerated belicf in the importance
of geographical determinants with which I started on my expedi-
tion in 1883-84 and the thorough disillusionment in regard to
their significance as creative elements in cultural life. I shall al-
ways continue to consider them as relevant in limiting and
modifying existing cultures, but it so happened that in my later
field work this question has never come to the fore as particularly
enlightening [0oAs 1948:306; orig. 1935].

Despite this reaction, Boas’ initial publications on the Eskimo (Boas
1884-85) were couched in the idiom of geographical determinism.
According to Stocking, this proves the tendency of Boas’ epigoni to

266

. ool

g. Historical Particularism: Boas

exaggerate the importance of the Eskimo experience “as the un-
conscious archetype of their own ritual initiations into the culture of
anthropology” (1965a:58). Ruth Benedict, Melville Herskovits, and
Gladys Reichard were obviously wrong about what the conversion was
all about, but something quite drastic certainly did happen on that
trip. To overlook it or minimize it leads to a wholly false view of
the main thrust of the Boasian program. It would take nothing short
of a conversion experience for Boas to have regarded “geographical”
issues as relatively unimportant in his Northwest Coast studies. As
for the delayed effect in terms of publication, it is probably related
to the fact that he was looking for a job back in Berlin as a geographer.

THE INFLUENCE OF THE NEO-KANTIAN
MOVEMENT

It is impossible to understand the the significance of Boas’
progress through the stages of physics, geography, and psychophysics
to ethnology without some reference, however brief, to the main
philosophical currents in nineteenth-century Germany. In an age
characterized by great advances in the laboratory sciences, the gran-
diose speculative metaphysics propounded by Hegel and his followers
fell into disrepute. As an alternative to materialism, a return was
made to the teachings of Kant. The philosophy of Kant was
congenial to the times precisely because it embodied a compromise be-
tween idealism and materialism. The essence of external “things-in-
themselves” was neither mind nor matter, but simply unknowable.
To the extent that knowledge is at all possible, it must depend on
sense impressions. These, however, are constrained by the funda-
mental a priori categories of mind, such as a moral sense and concepts
of space and time. Knowledge is thus an interactive product in
which mind and reality collaborate. It is possible to construe this
formula two ways: first, as a justification for a strong empiricist
approach through sense data; or, second, as the justification for em-
phasizing the contribution that the observing mind makes to the per-
ception of the data. Initially the neo-Kantian movement stressed the
former; by the end of the century, however, it was the influence of
mind that was being stressed, and in effect, the same path that had
led from Kant to Hegel had to be trod once again. The various
stages of Boas’ progress toward anthropology mirror this trend of
Kantian styles. Fechner’s psychophysics, which Boas at one point saw
as his lifework, was itself nothing more than an attempt to provide a
laboratory basis for Kant's ideas. As Wolfgang Metzger (1965:111)

267


===== PAGE 139 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

notes, “Fechner’s original aim was to prove scientifically some as-
sumption about the relations between body and soul that he had
derived from [Kant’s] philosophy.”

Boas’ involvement with the neo-Kantian movement dates at least
from his last four semesters at Kiel when he studied philosophy under
Benno Erdmann, a leading contemporary authority on Kant. Another
prominent neo-Kantian was Rudolf Lehman, with whom Boas cor-
responded on the eve of his arctic expedition. And amazing as it
may seem, during his first field trip to the arctic, Boas spent long
evenings, with the temperature outside at minus forty degrees cen-
tigrade, reading a copy of Kant “so that I shall not be completely
uneducated when I return” (sTockiNe 1965a:58).

WILHELM DILTHEY

For a number of circumstantial reasons it seems appropriate
to ook for the specific influence of the neo-Kantian philosopher Wil-
helm Dilthey. Boas’ 1888 defense of geography bears a striking re-
semblance to Dilthey’s treatment of the distinction between the
Naturwissenschaften (natural sciences) and Geisteswissenschaften
(human sciences), first published in 1883. It is especially instructive to
compare Boas’ description of the historian’s approach to a phenom-
enon—he “lovingly tries to penetrate . . . into its secrets” (see above,
p- 263)—with Dilthey’s own version of the same:

The secret of the individual draws us, for its own sake, into ever
new and more profound attempts to understand it, and it is in
such understanding that the individual and mankind in general
and its creations are revealed to us [DILTHEY 1959:21; orig. 1883).

Although Boas makes no specific mention of Dilthey until 1907
(cf. sTOCKING 19652:64), he could not possibly have escaped Dilthey’s
influence.

Within the German area, including Switzerland, no school of psy-
chology has ever been so generally accepted, so highly estimated
and so predominant among educated people in general and
particularly among the members of the university staffs as the
“geisteswissenschaftliche Psychologie” of Wilhelm Dilthey. This
public opinion has been so effective that even at present it is
hard for the representatives of scientific psychology to carry
through those measures as are necessary to keep up with the inter-
national development [w. METZGER 1965:112].

268

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

For Dilthey, the crucial difference between the human and the
natural sciences resided in the special attributes of mind as distinct
from other phenomena: “we do not know the inner nature of physical
things and processes and have to read causal order into them by
hypothesis, whereas in the world of mind we know directly what we
are dealing with” (HODGES 1952:230). This emphasis upon knowing
irgm within—foreshadowed as far back as Vico—constitutes one of
the central themes of the Boasian program. It is unlikely that Boas
would have articulated the reasons for this—emphasis in conformity
with Dilthey’s technical elaboration, but it is clear from the trajectory
of his career and from the kind of research he carried out and inspired
others to carry out, that a similar stress on the “inner life” was a
fundamental element in his approach to culture.

There is much in Dilthey that is also preparatory to the more
general intention among post-Boasian cognitive specialists in the
United States to “get inside of other peoples’ heads” (see Chap. 20).

‘Wherever there is cognitive activity, wherever values are appreci-
ated or ends pursued, wherever in the midst of the processes of
nature a free agent appears, there is matter for the Geisteswissen-
schaften. . . . It is true . . . that they also deal with many
physical facts; but they deal with them only in so far as they are
related to an inner life, having value for a subject or conditioning
the execution of his purpose [HODGES 1952:228-29].

Like the Boasians, but very unlike the modern “ethnosemanticists,”
Dilthey combined this stress on “emics” with an equally important
emphasis upon history. That is, the path to the understanding of
the inner life lies through the study of an individual’s history. It was
partly as a result of this belief that Dilthey came to oppose the
development of experimental psychology, in favor of “lived experi-
ence” and “understanding.” According to Metzger (1965:111), Dil-
they’s effect upon the development of psychology in Germany was
disastrous:

Dilthey’s combat against experimentation in psychology origi-
nated in another inheritance of German romanticism that lasted
through the whole nineteenth century and in some disciplines,
e.g.,, in education, has not yet been abandoned in our time. The
pivotal idea of this doctrine of historicism is the assumption that
you know all about a person or a fact, or even of an art, if you
know its history. (E. g., German high school teachers are pre-
pared for their educational duties by lectures and examinations
in history of education.)

269

e —


===== PAGE 140 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE INFLUENCE OF RICKERT AND
WINDELBAND

Lowie (1956b:1006) has been one of the few anthropologists
to draw attention to the “Southwest German” school of philosophy—
to Heinrich Rickert and Wilhelm Windelband, who were neo-Kant-
ians based at Baden and who formulated the difference between
human and natural sciences in terms of the concepts of “idiographic”
and “nomothetic” studies. Lowie correctly associates this point of view
with Boas' 1887 discussion of geography, but he fails to mention
Dilthey, with whom the Baden group was closely involved, but who
differed from them in certain historically important respects. In its
original presentation by Windelband in 1894, the nomothetic/idio-
graphic distinction sharply divided the sciences into generalizing and
particularizing disciplines. The study of history could not and should
not be made to yield generalizations. Although Windelband and
Rickert eventually retreated from this position, it was in its original
extreme form that this dichotomization influenced Boas’ students.
Lowie points to eight references to Windelband’s follower, Rickert,
in Kroeber’s collected essays. Most of these are subsequent to Sapir’s
urgings in his critique of Kroeber's “Superorganic” that all anthro-
pologists and social scientists interested in method ought to read
Rickert, to whom he expressed his own great debt. Lowie emphasiz=d
the fact that “The reader of Windelband or Rickert might certainly
conclude that the historical disciplines not only failed to demonstrate
laws, but most emphatically did not wish to find any” (ibid.: 1007).
Dilthey on the one hand and Windelband and Rickert on the other
carried out a long controversy in which the sharpness of the separa-
tion between the particularizing and generalizing sciences was one of
the main issues. In his rejoinders to Windelband, Dilthey insisted
that both idiographic and nomothetic interests were legitimate within
the human sciences. There is a matter of method, however; the nat-
ural sciences systematize their data by moving toward the abstract,
seeking the kind of relation that can be put into an equation. “The
human studies systematize by sceing the particular fact more and
more fully in its context among other facts structurally related to it”
(nopGEs 1952:230). The human studies do indeed take an interest
in the individual

for his own sake, just as he is, apart from all thought of his relation
to laws and determining conditions, and without any attempt to
explain him at all. The human studies, thercfore, contain an ele-

270

g. Historical Particularism: Boas

ment of pure description, a “loving understanding (Verstindnis)
of the personal, a reliving of the inexhaustible totalities,” which
is seen at its simplest in biography [ibid.:231].

However, this does not mean that lawful generalizations cannot be
sought in the sphere of human sciences. The line of division between
the two spheres is not rigid, and provision must be made for inquiries
which have a footing in both realms (ibid.:169). In Dilthey’s view,
human studies actually have three objectives: the description of his-
torical facts, the discovery of laws and regularities, and the formula-
tion of standards of value (ibid.:169-70).

THE ATTACK AGAINST MATERIALISM
AND SCIENTISM

The controversy between Dilthey and Windelband was only
a small eddy in a huge Euro-American ideological whirlpool. It seems
likely that the motive power of this vortex derived from the menace
of materialism.

The first indication of the awakening of the mind from the ex-
tremely negative attitude of the materialists may be seen in the re-
turn to the teaching of Kant; the activity of the subject in the
claboration of science, which had been for long ignored, and had
been thrust into the background by the triumphs so easily achieved
by the mechanical method, asserts its right once more and inaugu-
rates the fruitful work of salutary criticism [ALIOTTA 1914:13].

It scarcely seems necessary to elaborate on the connection between
philosophical materialism and the rise of radical political movements,
especially Marxism. Toward the end of the last century, the social
structures of Europe and America had become vulnerable to commu-
nist and socialist subversion. As the political struggle for the control
?f the bourgeois state intensified, learning and lore were swept up
into the battle. Conscious as well as unconscious attempts were made
on a wide front covering all intellectual media to annihilate the sub-
versive doctrines. In the rapidly expanding and highly competitive
subcommunity of professional intelligentsia, prestige and emolument
closely adhered to the contribution which one made to the rout of
the materialists. Science itself became the object of suspicion. Con-
trary to all the experience of the past four hundred years, science was
declared incompetent to judge or modify religious doctrine. This
peculiar belief, unique to Western civilization, saved theology from
any repetition of the severe mauling it had received at the hands of

271



===== PAGE 141 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the Darwinists. The floodgates of science were lifted. Out poured
countless varieties of idealist, vitalist, pragmatist, and historicist fads
and philosophies. Looking at this advancing tide from the vantage
point of a rationalist, the philosopher Morris Raphael Cohen pro-
phetically grasped its ultimate significance for the twentieth century
in an essay entitled, “The Insurgence against Reason.”

There can be little doubt that this distrust of reasoning and intel-
lect has its roots deep in the temper of our age. The art, literature,
and politics of Europe and of our own country show an ever-grow-
ing contempt for ideas and form. The popular philosophies of
the day, those which emanate from James, Bergson, Croce,
Nietzsche, Freud, Chamberlain, Spengler and others, are cer-
tainly at one with the recent novel, drama, music, painting, and
sculpture in attaching greater value to novel impressions and
vehement expression than to coherency and order. The romantic
or “Dionysiac” contempt for prudence and deliberative (so-called
bourgeois) morality is simply a more intense, if not more crude,
expression of the reaction against scientific or rigorous intellectual
procedure, a reaction which makes our modern illuminati like
Bergson and Croce dismiss physical science as devoid of any
genuine knowledge, or as at best a merely practical device for
manipulating dead things [1925:113].

Darwinism of course was one of the chief objects of this onslaught.
Everywhere voices were raised arguing for the return of life to mys-
tery. Among the intelligentsia there were many who accepted the
facts of evolutionary transformation, but all kinds of reasons were
brought forth to cast doubt on the adequacy of natural selection to
explain the evolutionary panorama. Under the skirts of Darwin’s
qualified detractors, mystics and metaphysicians flourished. The tide
against Spencer was no less powerful, not against his racism, but
rather for his having dared to encapsulate history in the materialist
principle of the survival of the fittest. Actually, one aspect of the
emphasis upon the idiographic was the escalation of the rhetoric of
nationalism. Neco-Hegelian racist visions of national souls working
their way toward ineffable glories were expressed in the writings of
men like Houston Stewart Chamberlain, Oswald Spengler, Ernst
Troeltsch, Othmar Spann, and other harbingers of fascism.

IDIOGRAPHIC IDEALISM

Boas” turn toward psychophysics; his questioning of the
materialism which had seemed congenial at the outset of his univer-
sity studies; his defense of geography in the idiom of the Geistes-

272

9 Historical Particularism: Boas

wissenschaften; and his ultimate vision of anthropology must all
be seen in relationship to this huge cultural tide. It is clear that al-
though Boas was borne along, he remained far behind the advancing
crest. In others, the idiographic option was seized upon to deprive
science virtually of all claim to knowledge in human affairs. The
English philosopher-historian R. G. Collingwood (1922:445), him-
self one of the more extreme products of this trend, could note:

The chief feature of European philosophy in the last generation
has been that movement of reaction from nineteenth-century
positivism which has tended to degrade science into a false form
of knowledge and to find the true form in history.

Commenting specifically on the contest between history and science,
M. R. Cohen remarked:

The fact that literary historians are generally more interested in
the concrete picture of the events they portray, while scientific
physicists are generally more interested in the laws which physical
phenomena illustrate, has given rise in recent times to the view
that history is nearer to reality, which is always individual, and
that rational or scientific physics is a more or less useful fiction

[1925:121].

Emboldened by the “spirit of the times,” historians such as Croce
could scarcely conceal their contempt for people who were unable
to grasp the essence of history on their own but required the feeble
crutches of science to do so:

Do you wish to understand the true history of a Ligurian or
Sicilian neolithic man? First of all, try if it be possible to make
yourself mentally into a Ligurian or Sicilian neolithic man; and if
it be not possible, or you do not care to do this, content yourself
with describing and classifying and arranging in a series the skulls,
the utensils, and the inscriptions belonging to those neolithic peo-
ples. Do you wish to understand the history of a blade of grass?
First and foremost, try to make yourself into a blade of grass, and
if you do not succeed, content yourself with analysing the parts
and even with disposing them in a kind of imaginative history

[1923:233].

MODERATENESS OF BOAS POSITION

Boas was influenced in a lifelong fashion by the rise of neo-
Kantianism, but it must be stressed, contrary to the impression
one gains from reading White’s scathing manifesto, that he escaped
from its worst consequences. It means something in this context that

273



===== PAGE 142 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Boas continued to insist that the laws governing cultural phenomena
would eventually be discovered. Indeed, on the very heels of his paper
defending the particularist viewpoint in geography, there came an-
other paper, concerned with defining the aims of ethnology. We are
not privileged to dismiss the statements which he makes therein,
affirming that the most important aim of ethnology is the discovery
of scientific laws.

The frequent occurrence of similar phenomena in cultural areas
that have no historical contact suggests that important results may
be derived from their study, for it shows that the human mind
develops everywhere according to the same laws.

The discovery of these is the greatest aim of our science. To
attain it many methods of inquiry and the assistance of many
other sciences will be needed. Up to this time the number of in-
vestigations is small, but the foundations have been laid by the
labors of men like Tylor, Bastian, Morgan and Bachofen
[BoOAS, 1948:637; orig. 1888].

Instead of a frivolous alternation between the nomothetic and
idiographic options, we may now follow Boas’ gradual retreat from
the position which he took in 1887-88 on the relationship be-
tween the collection of facts and the formulation of regularities.
‘We may confidently assign full and typical sobriety to Boas’ insistence
in the midst of his critique of the comparative method that “the
histories of the cultures of diverse tribes . . . [are] not the ultimate aim
of our science” (1948:278-70; orig. 1896b).

We must credit the fact that in its origins, the historical particular-
ist movement was conceived as the handmaiden of a nomothetic
approach to history. Specific cultures were to be studied in their partic-
ular historical context. This was to be done not because the search for
uniformities in history is futile, but because the only way in which
the amount and nature of such uniformity can be appraised is through
a program of inductive historical research. In other words, it was not
Boas’ intention, as he himself repeated on a number of occasions, to
abandon the search for lawful regularities in history. Rather than re-
place the comparative method, it was his hope that historical par-
ticularism would supplement it and facilitate the discovery of the
sought-after laws, which remained the ultimate objective of anthro-
pological inquiry.

When we have cleared up the history of a single culture and un-
derstand the effects of environment and the psychological condi-
tions that are reflected in it we have made a step forward, as we

274

L

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

can then investigate in how far the same causes or other causes
were at work in the development of other cultures. Thus by com-
paring histories of growth general laws may be found. This
method is much safer than the comparative method, as it is usu-
ally practiced, because instead of a hypothesis on the mode of

development, actual history forms the basis of our deductions
[ibid.:279].

The historical method was thus to be harnessed to the service of
the comparative method. By so doing, anthropological theory would
be purged of its puerile amateurism, and a new and sounder basis for
generalization would be established. Both perspectives were neces-
sary, nor were the methodological reforms restricted to the compara-
tive outlook. Simplistic historicism, which assumed a connection
between geographically remote cultural phenomena, without evidence
of how the influence actually could have been transmitted, was
equally to be condemned. If the parallel evolutionists came in for a
worse drubbing than the diffusionists, it was, as I have already sug-
gested, simply because the evolutionists held the field.

WILL THE REAL HISTORIAN PLEASE
STAND UP?

Boas and one of his most famous students, Alfred Kroeber, be-
came involved in a curious controversy concerning which was the more
historicist-minded. As we shall see at greater length in a subsequent
chapter, Kroeber was exposed to trends and reared in a milieu which
moved him far closer to the idiographic extreme. The resulting con-
trast between himself and Boas appeared to him so striking that he
reached conclusions concerning Boas which seem incredible, unless
placed in the context developed in this chapter. As we have already
seen, Kroeber believed that it was Boas’ training in physics which was
the most fateful aspect of his formative years. How did he reconcile
this belief with the main features of Boas’ program? Simply by never
doubting that Boas meant what he said about the relationship be-
tween history and science. But from Kroeber's standpoint this pre-
occupation with science was a symptom, if not a cause, of Boas’
failure to pursue a genuinely idiographic approach. Indeed, incredible
as it may seem, Kroeber went so far as to accuse his mentor of ne-
glecting real history! According to Kroeber, the association of Boas
with a position of historical particularism was nothing but an error

which arose from Boas’ attempt to refute the grandiose schemes of his
predecessors:

275



===== PAGE 143 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

“When he came on the scene, he found anthropology taken up
with schematic interpretations—Morgan’s will serve as a typical
example; and he unhesitatingly proceeded to show that these
schemes secmed valid only as long as the fact was ignored that
they were built up of subjectively selected pieces of evidence torn
out of their historical context, that is, their actual context in the
world of nature. In his insistence that this context may not be
"Violated, Boas may have secmed, possibly even to himself, to be
following historical method. But it was merely historical method
applied as a critical safeguard; the problems with which he con-
cerned himself were not historical except in minor cases, but con-
cerned with process as such [1935:542].

As an example of Boas’ interest in process as opposed to history,
Kroeber mentions his former teacher’s researches into primitive art.
What questions does Boas put to the phenomena of art? Supposedly,
like a physicist with analogous problems, he considered a gamut of
processes: conventionalization, influence of technique, symbolism,
secondary interpretation, virtuosity, and “cursive slovening.” Nowhere,
complains Kroeber, does Boas deal with an art style except as it may
serve as a point of departure for some problem concerned with the
processes of conventionalization, symbolism, etc. He shows no con-
cem for the styles themselves, for “their essential quality.” “The cause
is a lack of interest in factual description for its own sake, in other
words, in phenomena” (ibid.:543). Kroeber goes on to make the
flat accusation that Boas was not an historian. Although he ob-
serves all the methodological safeguards associated with an historical
orientation—the need for context, stress on uniqueness in all phenom-
ena, caution with respect to “generalizations savoring of the universal”
—he still does not “do” history. “In brief, one may define the Boas posi-
tion as basically that of the physical scientist” (ibid.:554). A similar
judgment was rendered by another of Boas’ famous pupils, Paul
Radin (1933:17).

The only products of Boas’ work which were significantly his-
torical in Kroeber’s opinion were his monograph on the Eskimo and
a presidential address to the New York Academy of Science entitled,
“The History of the American Race” (Boas 1948:324-30; orig. 1911).
The Eskimo monograph was historical in spirit, even though it was
almost exclusively synchronic, because of its manifest coherence and
lucidity! Kroeber’s hankering after the essence of history was baffling.
Boas found the whole outburst unintelligible. “If Dr. Kroeber calls
my first piece of ethnological work, “The Central Eskimo,” historical,
I fail to understand him.” Why, wonders Boas, has Kroeber failed to

276

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

mention the years devoted to trying to unravel the historical develop-
ment of social organization, secret societies, the spread of art forms
and of folktales on the northwest coast of America?

Is it that painstaking work of this kind docs not seem to Dr.
Kroeber worth while, but that it requires the flight of an un-
bridled imagination to have his approval? I cannot understand in
any other way his praisc of a public lecture which I gave as Presi-
dent of the New York Academy of Scicnces on “The History of
the American Racc,” guarding my statement, however, at the
very beginning by saying that I should give my fancy freer rein
than I ordinarily permit myself [ibid.:307].

Boas used this occasion to refer back across forty-nine years of his
career to the paper on “The Study of Geography,” thereby confirming
the crucial importance of his rejection of the physicalist model.
Kroeber, who had been influenced by Windelband and Rickert, simply
did not understand Boas’ brand of neo-Kantianism:

In 1887 I tried to dcfine my position in regard to these subjects,
giving expression to my consciousness of the diversity of their
fundamental viewpoints. I aligned myself clearly with those who
are motivated by the affective appeal of a phenomenon that im-
presses us as a unit, although its elements may be irreducible to a
common cause. In other words the problem that attracted me pri-
marily was the intelligent understanding of a complex phenome-
non. When from geography my interest was directed to cthnology,
the same interest prevailed [ibid.:305].

FIRST PHASE OF BOAS’ REJECTION OF
CULTURAL LAWS

White has seized upon the similarity between Boas’ initial
statement of research strategy and the position set forth in the last
phases of his career as evidence of an unchanging outlook with respect
to the question of rcgularities in history. He says, regarding the
earliest and latest of Boas’ statements on laws in history, “it is the
same Boas down to the last detail” (warre 1963:64). This leads to a
view of Boas which suggests a measure of what might almost be
called duplicity, or at the very least, an unusual and totally out of
character frivolity. For, as we have already scen, and as White points
out, at the very moment that Boas adopted the particularist option,
he also affirmed the discovery of laws as the most important aim of
ethnology. There is every reason to supposc that on this subject Boas
meant what he said in 1888, and that between then and his latest

277



===== PAGE 144 =====

m o

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

writings, a definite development in outlook can be traced. It was in
many respects a disastrous kind of development, but it vouches for
the integrity and continuity of Boas’ belief that particularist studies
would lead to the “discovery” of laws.

By accepting Boas’ statements that the ultimate objective of his
reform of the comparative method was generalization, we shall be
able perhaps to state more clearly than White precisely what was
wrong with the Boasian research strategy. The great strategic lessons
which the Boasian period affords must inevitably elude our compre-
hension, if we believe that from the outset this movement had no
interests other than those which Windelband came to identify as
idiographic. Boas, as distinguished from his students, was above all an
empiricist. Like Dilthey, and in contrast to the later Neo-Kantians
who were to influence Kroeber, Sapir, Radin, and Benedict, a priori
insights and conclusions were anathema to him. Nothing would be
further from his temperament than to dogmatize an intuited absence
of historical regularities. What we find instead is a mounting convic-
tion, based upon the accumulation of ethnographic evidence collected
by himself and by other anthropologists, that the search for regular-
ities will end in failure. In his earliest phase as exemplified in “The
Limitations of the Comparative Method,” universal unilinear se-
quences are denied but not to the extent of rejecting more limited
forms of parallel sequences. The search for the laws governing these
uniformities is urged as an important, if not the most important, aim.

SECOND PHASE

By about 1910, Boas had given up the possibility that sig-
nificant developmental uniformities involving whole congeries of insti-
tutions would be found. He continued, however, to stress the
probability that the occurrence of similar institutions throughout the
world reflected something inherent in the human mind. But it was
now his opinion that the expression of this common denominator
did not require a uniform cultural matrix. Indeed, he now stressed
that convergences under the influence of mental laws could occur in
almost any kind of cultural context:

I do not mean to imply that no general laws of development
exist. On the contrary, the analogies that do occur in regions far
apart show that the human mind tends to reach the same results,
not under similar, but under varying circumstances [1948:341; orig.

1910].
278

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

The empirical basis for this shift in emphasis is summarized in Boas’
The Mind of Primitive Man (1911). In this book, the absence of
uniform developmental sequences is for the first time clearly and
explicitly related to an absence of a determinative order between the
various parts of culture and between culture and the natural environ-
ment. He points for example to the various forms of the family
and insists that they cannot be correlated with other institutional
features.

Some very primitive tribes, like the Eskimo and the Indian tribes
of the Northwest plateaus of North America, count relationships
bilaterally . . . other tribes with highly developed culture recog-
nize the maternal line alone, while still others, whose economic
and industrial life is of a simpler type, recognize the paternal line
[BoAs 1938c:182-83; orig. 1911].

Inventions, social order, intellectual and social life all may develop in-
dependently: “There are people, like the Australians, whose material
culture is quite poor, but who have a highly complex social organiza-
tion” (ibid.:197). Similarly, the influence of environment is quite
unpredictable. Proof of the spontaneous creative influence of the
mind is to be found in the great diversity of culture among such
pairs of adjacent peoples as the Eskimo and Chuckchee, the Hotten-
tot and Bushman, and the Negrito and Malay (ibid.:191). The
exploitation of food resources is itself subject to the whim of culture.
“Even among the Eskimo, who have so marvelously well succeeded in
adapting themselves to their geographical environment, customs like
the taboo on the promiscuous use of caribou and seal prevent the
fullest use of the opportunities offered by the country” (ibid.:191-92).
This appeal to sundry ethnographic examples of alleged lack of cor-
relation between the different parts of culture, and hence of the
lack of parallel evolution, was accompanied by one of Boas’ rare
confrontations with economic determinism. Naturally, he saw little
merit in such a position: )

There is no reason to call all other phases of culture a superstruc-
ture on an economic basis, for economic conditions always act on
a preexisting culture and are themselves dependent upon other
aspects of culture. It is no more justifiable to say that social struc-
ture is determined by economic forms than to claim the reverse,
f(_)r a preexisting social structure will influence economic condi-
tions and vice versa, and no people has ever been observed that
has no social structure and that is not subject to economic condi-
tions. The claim that economic stresses preceded every other

279


===== PAGE 145 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

manifestation of cultural life and exerted their influences on a
group without any cultural traits cannot be maintained. Cultural
life is always economically conditioned and economics are always
culturally conditioned [ibid.:193].

We cannot stop here to comment on Boas’ conclusions except to say
that they are unwarranted in fact and theory, but in subsequent chap-
ters we shall examine the relevant ethnographic data. For the moment,
let us proceed at once to the final phase of the development of Boas’
thought on the question of evolutionary laws.

THIRB PHASE

It was toward the end of his career that Boas rcached a
position that was fully compatible with Windelband’s sharp separa-
tion of nomothetic and idiographic studies. This development dates
from the appearance in Boas™ theoretical writings of a new and stri-
dent theme in which it is stated that the scarch for lawful evolutionary
regularities is a chimera; that the aims of anthropology should not
include the discovery of laws; and that no amount of additional re-
search could possibly alter the futility of the nomothetic option in
the phenomena of culture. In this connection, Boas™ dismissal of the
possible relevance of the comparison between cultural development in
the old and new worlds is especially diagnostic. At the very moment
when improved techniques had brought archacology to the verge of
its greatest discoveries, Boas declared: “Although in this case paral-
lelism seems to exist on the two continents, it would be futile to
try to follow out the order in detail” (BoAs 1948:287; orig. 1920a).
There is a double irony in this unfortunate opinion. Not only were
future excavations to prove him wrong, but they were to do
so with stratigraphic techniques which he himself helped to introduce
(see Chap. 23). It was at some point during the decade of the 1920’s
that Boas finally abandoned the heritage of the nineteenth-century
search for developmental uniformities. By 1930 he had taken the
radical step of suggesting that anthropology had become entirely
too wrapped up in the attempt to reconstruct particular historical
sequences. Since it was now apparent that the structure of the human
mind accounted for whatever regularities were manifest in cultural
phenomena, anthropology could no longer remain aloof from the
study of the relationship between the individual psyche and the forms
of culture:

280

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

It should be clearly understood that historical analysis does not
help us in the solution of these questions. . . . An error of
modern anthropology, as I sce it, lies in the overemphasis on his-
torical reconstruction, the importance of which should not be
minimized, as against a penetrating study of the individual under
the stress of the culture in which he lives [ibid.:26g; orig. 1930].

It was in this fashion that Boas sired in his maturity a totally unex-
pected offspring: the field of personality and culture. A more de-
tailed look at this not unmixed blessing must await a separate chapter.
Let it simply be noted here that Boas’ declining interest in historical
reconstruction was accompanied by an increased concern with psy-
chological factors. It was during the twenties that Boas’ most famous
female students reccived their training and were sent out with his
encouragement to probe the neglected relationship between the indi-
vidual and culture. It is not necessary at this point to weigh the
respective contributions of Boas and his students to this new sub-
stantive and theoretical focus. What is essential for the moment is
that Boas was prepared to assume full responsibility for the switch in
emphasis. The new direction was emphatically defined again in 1932:

The problems of the relation of the individual to his culture, to
the society in which he lives have received too little attention.
The standardized anthropological data that inform us of custom-
ary behavior, give no clue to the reaction of the individual to his
culture, nor to an understanding of his influence upon it. Still,
here lie the sources of a true interpretation of human behavior.
It seems a vain effort to search for sociological laws disregarding
what should be called social psychology, namely, the reaction of
the individual to culture. They can be no more than empty
formulas that can be imbued with life only by taking account of
individual behavior in cultural settings [ibid.:258-59; orig. 1932].

Under these circumstances the continued insistence that anthropology
was an historical science assumed a significance it lacked at the outset.
Anthropology must be an historical science, not because the history
of particular cultures is the only way to formulate the lawful ingredi-
ents in cultural phenomena, but rather because there is no viable
alternative to the study of individual phenomena. If this is so, it
follows that the study of the individual human personality is the
highest fulfillment of the particularizing trend. Simultancously with
this turn toward psychology, Boas’ resistance to a nomothetic ap-
proach to history lapsed into dogma. Not only were historical laws

281


===== PAGE 146 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

undiscovered, but they would for all time remain undiscoverable.
His final pronouncement on the subject is contained in an addendum
to his reply to Kroeber’s accusation that he was no historian:

In my opinion a system of social anthropology and “laws” of cul-
tural development as rigid as those of physics are supposed to be
are unattainable in the present stage of our knowledge, and more
important than this: on account of the uniqueness of cultural phe-
nomena and their complexity nothing will ever be found that
deserves the name of a law excepting those psychological, biolog-
ically determined characteristics which are common to all cultures
and appear in a multitude of forms according to the particular cul-
ture in which they manifest themselves [ibid.:311; orig. 1936].

STACKING THE CARDS AGAINST THE
NOMOTHETIC MODE

It is difficult to understand what Boas intended to convey
by means of the phrase, “as rigid as [the laws] of physics are sup-
posed to be.” On the one hand this phrase would seem to indicate
that Boas was aware of the changes which the concept of scientific
law had undergone as a result of relativity theory and quantum me-
chanics. But if this were the case, why should anthropology continue
to be burdened by Newtonian concepts that physics had abandoned?
If probabilities had replaced mechanistic certainties, why should
anthropologists demand that their laws admit no exceptions? Ac-
tually, as we have seen, it never was the intention of those who spoke
of the laws of history in the nineteenth century to obtain anything
other than a description of the most probable sequences. But through-
out the Boasian period, a unique double standard seemed to prevail
against anthropology’s nomothetic aspirations. As one ponders the
way in which Boas and his students used one or two negative in-
stances to deny hypotheses confirmed by hundreds of other instances,
one inevitably becomes impressed by the amount of effort lavished in
proving that chaos was the salient feature of the sociocultural realm.

BOAS’

Boas™ students have attempted to combat the impression that
he was committed to this self-defeating objective. Boas himself in
1920 replied to the accusation that was being made abroad con-
ceming the futility of trying to disprove everything while proving
nothing:

GENERALIZATIONS

282

hall

g. Historical Particularism: Boas

It may seem to the distant observer that American students are
engaged in a mass of detailed investigations without much bear-
ing upon the solution of the ultimate problems of a philosophic
history of human civilization. I think this interpretation of the
American attitude would be unjust because the ultimate ques-
tions are as near to our hearts as they are to those of other
scholars, only we do not hope to be able to solve an intricate his-
torical problem by a formula [1948:283-84; orig. 1920a).

As Boas developed his arguments on behalf of historical and
psychological particularism, he not infrequently drew upon a small
stock of illustrative generalizations. For example, he repeatedly men-
tions the alleged tendency of an enlargement of food production to
give rise to increased population, greater leisure time, and a more
elaborate division of labor. (I say “alleged,” because it is doubtful
that increased productivity in the formative phases of the urban
revolution was translated into a decrease in per capita man-hour
input [cf. HARRIS 1959a].) In offering this generalization, Boas usually
tried to make the point that it would require a great deal of qualifica-
tion in any concrete case. He made similar use of such additional
generalizations as the tendency for activities that begin unconsciously
later to become “the subject of reasoning”; and the tendency of
metallurgy to follow after the invention of pottery, agriculture, and
stone-based industries (BoAs 1948:287-88; orig. 1920a). These gen-
eralizations are treated only as examples, that is, Boas never discussed
them for their own sake. Yet it is on the basis of such snippets of
theory that Lesser (1968) has attempted to prove that Boas “did not
deny the possibility of regularities or ‘laws’ in cultural phenomena.”

It should be noted that neither Boas nor his students were the
originators of these theories—all of them, it will be recalled, were
clearly set forth by Turgot in 1750. Nor did Boas and his students
orient their fieldwork in relation to them, or make sustained compara-
tive field or library studies specifically intended to test their validity
(cf. wAx 1956:65). Boas not infrequently offered his examples of
generalizations in a context that revealed that he held them in con-
tempt. He repeatedly characterized such statements as “necessarily
vague and, we might almost say, so self-evident that they are of
little help to a real understanding” (Boas 1948:258; orig. 1932).

BOAS AS A DETERMINIST

Boas systematically rejected almost every conceivable form of
cultural determinism. Of geographical explanations, he wrote: “It is

283


===== PAGE 147 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

fruitless to try to explain culture in geographical terms” (1948:266;
orig. 1930). Of economic factors: “We do not sec how art styles,
the form of ritual or the special forms of religious belief could possibly
be derived from economic forces” (ibid.:256, orig. 1932; italics
added). Of the relationship between religion and art: “We might
think that religion and art are closely associated, but comparative
study merely shows that art forms may be used to express religious
ideas; a result that is of no particular value” (ibid.:266; orig. 1930).
Of social organization and industrial activitics: “There is no significant
law that would cover all phases of their relations. We have simple
industries and complex organization, or diverse industries and simple
organization” (ibid). His judgment of the relationship between
kinship forms and demographic-economic factors is of special sig-
nificance in view of the strong theoretical interests that have always
centered on these problems: “there is no evidence that density of
population, stability of location, or economic status is necessarily
connected with a particular system of relationship and of behavior
connected with it” (Boas 1938a:680). The overwhelmingly negative
thrust of Boas’ empiricism is mitigated only to the extent that
he never intended to deny that all of the aforementioned factors
were devoid of determinative influence. The point was rather that
all these factors were determinative in unpredictable degrees and in

pattern unique to each ethnographic instance. In theory, therefore,
he Boasian program strongly identified itself with an eclectic outlook
in which “complete descriptions” were to be carried out by “all

vailable techniques,” and explanations were to be provided by em-
jbracing a wide variety of theoretical assumptions. Unfortunately, this
lis the philosophical position with which probably the vast majority
|of practicing Western anthropologists would most like to associate
i themselves.

ECLECTICISM

Fclecticism is certainly the path of least resistance through
the frequently strident polemics of the system-mongerers. Most an-
thropologists simply want to be left in peace to pursue the study of
their “people.” If one keeps technological, economic, social, political,
and ideational factors “in mind,” why should one have to get em-
broiled in the brouhaha of theoretical disputation?

Because of the strong logical affinity between an eclectic and in-
ductive approach, many Boasians have reacted with bewilderment and
impatience to the critical evaluation of Boas’ influence. The frequent
assertion that Boas “founded no school” went along with the belief

284

Daull

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

that the only thing Boas insisted on was higher standards of proof; as
long as it was responsible to the data, any theoretical and substantive
interest was conccivably compatible with the attempt to preserve the
vanishing fragments of primitive languages and cultures.

Eclecticism, however, abounds with hidden dangers. In practice,
it is often little more than a euphemism for confusion, the muddled
acccptance of contradictory theories, the bankruptcy of creative
thought, and the cloak of mediocrity. It bestows upon its practi-
tioners a false sense of security and an unearned reputation for scien-
tific acumen. Science consists of more than responsibility to the
data; the data must be made responsible to theory. Neither one
without the other suffices. It is impossible to be faithful to the facts
and at the same time indifferent to theory.

The history of the Boasian period suggests that the problem of
causality in culture can never be solved through a well-rounded eclectic
approach. It seems likely that in practice eclecticism will always end
by amplifying one’s initial impression of randomness and unpre-
dictability. The very idea of a scientific statement demands that some
balance be struck among the relevant variables, that they be assigned
different weights and values, and that they be segregated into depen-
F{ent and independent relationships. To say that everything is equally
important in every situation is to propose in effect that all situations
should be the same.

One deceptively simple solution is to argue that in certain cases
one set of factors, e.g., religious beliefs, are the independent variable,
while in other cases, another set of factors, e.g., economic organization,
takes its place. But this strategy, closely identified with Max Weber
?nd popular among sociologists as well as Boasian anthropologists, is
incompatible with historical determinism. Unless one can specify the
conditions under which now religion, now art, or then again subsis-
tence comes to the fore, the principles involved will be valid for only
one case at a time, much as if mass and gravitational force were
related in one way on the earth but in a different way on the moon.

A generalization which applies to only one case is a contradiction in
terms. ’

DELIBERATE AVERSION TO
SYSTEMATIZATION

But even if we grant that an eclectic approach is admissable
as. a provisional substitute for a coherent body of theory, we should
still have to confront the fact that, in practice, Boas never approached
a problem by giving full consideration to the entire range of environ-

285


===== PAGE 148 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

mental, technological, economic, social, aesthetic, and ideological
factors. With the exception of his study of the Eskimo, he rarely
considered environmental influences. His flat rejection of the relevance
of economics to art styles has already been cited. Although by no
means adequate for assessing the extent of his neglect of economic
factors, we may accept his own fiat against relating economics to
specific forms of social organization as a temporary estimate. It is
thus very difficult to avoid the conclusion that the proof of historical
disorder was of greater significance in Boas’ mature Weltanschauung
than was the formulation of orderly principles. Even Lowie, Boas’
greatest and most faithful student, was obliged to admit it as “para-
doxical” that Boas never integrated his thousands of pages of de-
scription of the Kwakiutl into a single work and that he had a
“puritanical” resistance to provisional synthesis. “It is this deliberate
aversion to systematization that is the despair of many readers and
precipitates misunderstanding” (LOWIE 1937:151-52). In the words
of Margaret Mead: “No probe must go too far lest it lead to premature
generalization—a development which he feared like the plague and
against which he continually warned us” (1959b:29).

Boas’ achievement of a view of culture in which lawful processes
were so vapid as to be unworthy of formulation is associated with
egregious epistemological, methodological, and factual errors. In the
long run, of course, it will be the errors of fact and of interpretation of
fact that will weigh most heavily in the judgment of future genera-
tions. We shall turn to these in a moment. But it would be a repeti-
tion of Boas’ capital mistake to suppose that these errors were
unrelated to fundamental philosophical misapprehensions.

BASIC PHILOSOPHICAL ERRORS

From the very earliest period, the Boasian program suffered
the embarrassment of a virtue which was at the same time its chief
vice. It was inductive to the point of self-destruction. The proposal
to substitute concrete historical data for speculative deductions about
history needs no defense. On the other hand, to deprive science of
speculation altogether is to deprive it of its very life blood. Yet in
essence, this is what the Boasian program sought to accomplish. In
view of the fragmentary nature of the ecthnographic recerd and in
view of the urgency of obtaining data from fast-disappearing tribal
groups, all theory was deemed speculative. The need of the moment
was fieldwork. As one of Boas’ students has put it, “the only corrective
was to allow conclusions to follow from the data without the intro-

286

[

Dol

o. Historical Particularism: Boas

duction of preconceived philosophical positions” (M. smITH 1959:49).
This “natural history” approach, to which most of Boas' students
would probably subscribe, is further elaborated as follows:

Boas’ emphasis on systematic fieldwork led to the collection of
whatever data became available. If one found an informant to be
particularly well versed in a subject, one concentrated on that
subject, getting everything possible from him and following
through with other informants, obscrvations, and the like, even
though the immediate usefulness of the material might not be
apparent. . . . This exhaustive collection of data which seems at
the time to have little or no connection with any specific problem
is peculiarly a feature of the natural history approach. . . . There
is a fascination in following the details of a subject just for its
intrinsic interest. . . . Masscs of data may therefore be worked
over with no clear knowledge of what is to be gained at the end

[ibid.:54].

In the history of philosophy there is a perfect parallel to Boas' con-
cept of science in the work of Francis Bacon. Reacting to a surfeit of
metaphysical final causes and other scholastic theoretical crutches,
Bacon insisted on the primacy of induction. Like Boas, he felt that
the greatest need of the day was the collection of a corpus of reliable
facts: Heretofore, wrote Bacon, “no search has been made to collect
a store of observation sufficient either in number, kind, or in certainty
to inform the understanding, or in any way adequate.”

The method usually followed by philosophers should be inverted.
Instead of coming down from axioms to particular conclusions, as
in syllogistic deducation, the scientist should go instead from par-
ticular experiments and observations up to axioms—induction, in
other words, should replace deduction [ciLsoN and LANGAN 1963:

37-38].

Science in this view is distinguished by its systematic collection of
facts carefully checked for accuracy. “The essence of his [Boas’]
method was . . . to gather facts, and ever more facts . . . and permit
them to speak for themselves. . . .”(rADIN 1939, quoted in WHITE
1947b:406). If enough facts are collected, the corpus of scientific in-
formation will eventually be ripe for the “discovery” of the laws of
nature. It is evident, however, both from the history of science in
general and from the experience of the social sciences, that a strict
adherence to Baconian induction, even if it were culturologically fea-
sible, would not lead to the discovery of regularities. The trouble is
that a random sampling of any field of observation will prove beyond

287



===== PAGE 149 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the shadow of doubt that nature is chaotic. One has merely to observe
birds flying, smoke rising, clouds drifting, feathers floating, and stones
plummeting to realize that Galileo’s formulation of the laws of
motion could not possibly have resulted from the mere collection of
facts. If one set out to note all the facts about a single grain of sand,
all of the computers in the world could not store the information
which could eventually be collected on that subject. Cultural phe-
nomena, with their dependence upon complex levels of logico-
empirical abstraction, could undoubtedly provide facts in correspond-
ingly higher degrees of infinity. “Complete descriptions” of anything
are impossible. The normal mode of scientific procedure is, therefore,
something quite different from what Bacon supposed. For an authori-
tative opinion in this matter, one can scarcely improve on Einstein

(1936):

There is no inductive method which could lead to the funda-
mental concepts of physics. Failure to understand this fact con-
stituted the basic philosophic error of so many investigators of
the nineteenth century. . . . We now realize with special clarity,
how much in error are those theorists who believe that theory
comes inductively from experience . . . [quoted in WHITE 1947b:
406].

Facts are limitless, but the resources of science, even in the best
endowed branches, are meager by comparison. There are limited
quantities of research manpower, funds, and facilities. Moreover, the
devotion of research effort to the collection of one set of facts means
the neglect of other sets of facts. Under modern laboratory condi-
tions, where funding takes place in relation to competitive proposals,
there is less opportunity to confuse mere induction with science.
The great instruments of observation, the optical and radio tele-
scopes, the high-energy particle generators, and the rocket-borne te-
lemetry packages operate on the strictist of schedules with each
moment of fact collecting justified by thousands of man-hours of
previous thought and experiment. Even in conventional laboratories,
precious research time is never abandoned to an aimless rushing
about from one experiment to another. As Einstein is also reputed to
have said, “You've got to itch to scratch.” To be sure, the richer the
facility, the greater the leeway for relatively unstructured approaches.
Thus in the field of cancer research, hundreds of thousands of sub-
stances are being tested for their possible curative effects without
disturbing the course of more theoretically oriented rescarch. But in
the social sciences, especially in ethnology at the turn of the century,

288

o. Historical Particularism: Boas

only an infinitesimal portion of the social effluent could be diverted.
Every expedition, every minor field trip, every conversation with an
informant was the equivalent of hundreds of hours of time with the
Brookhaven cyclotron or the 200-inch Palomar telescope. In all fields,
not only are some facts collected, but others are not collected. And
the commission and omission stand as a unit within the research
strategy, regardless of whether the research is oriented by a formal
conscious hypothesis.

289



===== PAGE 150 =====

The

Boasian Milieu 10

S
Sl

Regardless of the Baconian urge with which Boas has been invested;
that is, despite his image as the patient collector of facts on all
aspects of culture, neither Boas nor his students conducted their re-
search completely free of hypotheses. These hypotheses were never
overtly formulated. Indeed, they resemble nothing so much as what
in recent ethnosemantic theory is called a “cognitive map.” They
were part of the general mode of Jooking at the phenomena of culture
which middle-class Euro-American academics at the turn of the cen-
tury had acquired through common or parallel enculturation expe-
riences. Only by reference to this milieu can an anthropologically
informed understanding be reached of Boas’ “aversion to systema-
tization” and of the negative thrust of the entire Boasian program
with respect to the formulation of historical regularities.

Anthropologists of all theoretical schools have been strangely lax
in applying their own methods of studying cultural phenomena
to the study of themselves. One might suppose that anthropologists
would not often stand in need of special reminders concerning the
capacity of cultural influences to shape the main substance of an in-

290

10. The Boasian Milieu

dividual’s cognitive world. Yet it is remarkable how slight has been
the attention paid to the relationship between the Boasian program
and the sociocultural milieu in which Boas and his students lived.
Although this task obviously cannot be attempted in anything less
than a major work, we may here at least try to achieve a better defini-
tion of the problem than is currently available.

BOAS NOT A REACTIONARY
ANTIEVOLUTIONIST

Largely under the influence of Leslie White, critics of the
Boasian program have equated its main tenets with “antievolution-
ism.” For White (1949a:110), as we have seen, Boas was the chief
representative of the “reactionary and regressive antievolutionist”
tendency in the United States. Boas’ attack on the comparative
method is seen by White as the turning point in American anthro-
pology from evolutionism to antievolutionism (WHTE 1959a:108).
In White’s analysis of the sociocultural factors responsible for this
reaction, a misleading equivalence is established between the forces
opposed to Spencer’s theories and those opposed to Marx. In White’s
interpretation, the antievolutionary reaction in the United States was
simply an extension of the struggle that had been waged between
Darwinism and the “enemies of evolutionism.” Although largely un-
successful in the biological sciences (with such notable exceptions as
the Scopes trial), the antievolutionist counterattack is said to have
won the field in the social sciences:

The forces of institutionalized Christianity, especially within the
Roman Catholic Church, were arrayed against evolutionism. The
use of evolutionist theory in general and Morgan’s theories in
particular by Karl Marx and the radical socialist labor movement
evoked powerful opposition from the capitalist system. Thus,
antievolutionism becamc a creed for certain sectors of society

- a philosophy in support of the church, private property, the
family, and the capitalist state [ibid.:109)].

White’s analysis is encumbered by an unnecessary and confusing
thetoric. It is very difficult to equate Boas with “reactionary and
regressive” currents. Of course, White was careful to distinguish Boas
the man from Boas the symbol of an intellectual movement, but
there is an inevitable association of one with the other. Anyone at all
familiar with Boas’ carcer knows that he was a prodigious champion of
causes which in the logic of political liberalism are generally ac-

291


===== PAGE 151 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

knowledged as being anything but “reactionary and regressive.” Boas’
lifelong struggle against the notion of a direct feedback between ra-
cial and cultural factors is regressive only to the extent that it repre-
sents a return to the radical doctrines of the French Revolution. If
there is any one theme capable of eliciting an enthusiastic consensus
among contemporary American anthropologists, it is that the racist
premises of Spencerism blocked the further development of the social
sciences. Moreover, Boas had a distinguished record of public protest
against racist bigotry. During the First World War he courageously
maintained a pacifist position despite the virulent nationalism that
had sickened campus life. During the rise of the Nazi race mania,
Boas led the struggle against biological reductionism. In 1931, on the
occasion of the award of an honorary doctorate at the University of
Kiel, he felt it his responsibility to deliver an address on the subject
of race and culture. His papers were circulated by the German under-
ground, and his books were conspicuous in the Nazi bonfires. When
Boas suffered a fatal heart attack on December 21, 1943, during a
luncheon at the Men’s Faculty Club at Columbia University, his last
words concerned the need for eternal vigilance against racism.

EVOLUTIONISM VERSUS
ANTIEVOLUTIONISM

But there is another and more serious defect in White’s
explanation of the Boasian position. It arises from White’s attempt to
discuss the functional significance of the Boasian program in terms
of a worthless dichotomy: evolutionism versus antievolutionism. As
we have seen, if we accept the meaning of evolution to be the trans-
formation of forms, there never has been serious resistance to such an
idea in the social sciences. White himself has defined evolution as
“a temporal sequence of forms” (see Chap. 22), and to this meaning
of evolution, no Boasian could possibly object. Mere transformism,
of course, was not the essence of the evolutionism of the Spencerians
nor of the doctrinaire Marxists. There were three additional ingredi-
ents in the Spencerian version of evolution, and it was to these that
the Boasians objected. One was biological reductionism, the other
was the tendency to regard parallel evolution as dominant over
cither convergent or divergent evolution, and the third was a snob-
bish definition of progress. There was another ingredient in Spencerian
evolutionism with which the Boasians were by and large in com-
plete agreement. This was the conviction, shared by Spencer and
Darwin, that biological as well as sociocultural evolution was explicable

292

10. The Boasian Milieu

in terms of purely “natural” processes. White’s equating of Boas’
antievolutionism with the antievolutionism of supernatural explana-
tions of life and mind has been justly criticized by Lowie:

Thus White’s gloomy picture of most contemporary anthro-
pologists plunged into Cimmerian darkness, unrelieved by a sin-
gle lambent ray of evolution, is preposterous. He ought to realize
that Thurnwald, Radcliffe-Brown, Radin, Lesser, Malinowski are
professed evolutionists, and that even I have spoken kindly
enough of neo-evolutionism.

The questions which worry White, viz., “why Boas and his dis-
ciples have been anti-evolutionists” and what may be “the source
and basis of the anti-evolutionist philosophy of the Boas group,”
automatically disappear. In order to infuse sense into such queries
they must be re-formulated: Why have Boas and his students
attacked not evolution, but Morgan’s and other writers” evolution-
ary schemes [1948a:227]?

White has failed to address himself constructively to this query. The
Boasians have done so at length, and we already know their answer:
the “schemes” were based on shoddy standards of proof. Like White,
I reject this explanation. It fails to explain why the normal interplay
between theory and research was so drastically restricted; why in the
words of Kluckhohn (1939:333), it got to be that “to suggest that
something is ‘theoretical’ is to suggest that it is slightly indecent.” To
be sure, White is not the originator of the misleading equation be-
tween the essence of the Boasian position and a clumsy use of the
phrase “antievolution.” In his rejoinder to Lowie, White quite
properly stressed that some of the Boasians themselves had led the
way to misunderstanding by crude expressions of hostility to “evo-
lution.” The most splendid example of this debauchery in the ranks
of the higher empiricists is that of Berthold Laufer. I quote in extenso,
because it represents the nadir of the negativism and antiscientism
which was associated with historical particularism.

The theory of cultural evolution, to my mind the most inane,
sterile, and pernicious theory ever conceived in the history of
science (a cheap toy for the amusement of big children), is duly
disparaged. . . . Culture cannot be forced into the straitjacket
of any thcory whatever it may be, nor can it be reduced to chemi-
cal or mathematical formulae. Nature has no laws, so culture
has none. It is as vast and as free as the ocean, throwing its waves
and currents in all directions. . . . All that the practical in-
vestigator can hope for, at least for the present, is to study each
cultural phenomenon as exactly as possible in its geographical

293



===== PAGE 152 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

distribution, its historical development and its relation or associa-
tion with other kindred ideas. The more theories will be smashed,
the more new facts will be established, the better for the progress
of our science [LAUFER 1918:90].

White (1947b:402ff.) has shown that Ruth Benedict, Ruth Bunzel,
Edward Sapir, Paul Radin, and Alexander Goldenweiser all must
share the onus of setting up the false dichotomy between Boas™ pro-
gram and “evolution.” But it is clear from the context in which
“antievolutionary” statements occur that there is very little White has
ever said about evolution per se to which the majority of Boasians
would want to raise any objections.

White summarizes evolutionary doctrine in his “Energy and the
Evolution of Culture,” laying down propositions which Boasians
may find trite and futile, but which do not arouse the Bryanesque
ardor imputed to them when evolution is propounded. Boasians
do not deny that man requires food, controls his environment
with the aid of tools, improves his control by invention and dis-
covery, and alters social structure as a result of technological
evolution [LOWIE 1946:416].

DARWIN NOT ATTACKED BY BOASIANS

Nonetheless, we must not fail to take into account the ap-
parent similarity of the “anticvolutionary” lapses with the continuing
struggle within biology and philosophy between the Darwinists and
the special creationists, vitalists, and other varieties of antimaterialists.
As was seen earlier, these forces did indeed stage a strong comeback
toward the end of the nineteenth century. The vogue of historical
particularism corresponded in time with the influence of Henri Berg-
son in France and William James in the United States, both of whom
were concerned to salvage as much as possible of the badly damaged
theist position. In Germany, the influence of Windelband and
Rickert was reaching its peak. At the same time, despite his many
staunch defenders, such as Ernst Haeckel (the hero of Lowie’s youth),
A. Weissman, F. A. Lange, and E. Krause, there was strong political
pressure against the dissemination of Darwin’s views: “the theory
became entangled with the theories of the Social Democrats and
soon assumed a materialistic aspect which the state considcred to be
so anti-social as to deprecate its teaching in the schools” (FOTHERGILL
1952:121). Within biology, the attack was carried on by the vitalist
Hans Driesch (1go8) in Germany and by St. George Mivart (1871)
in England. In Germany, the historian E. Radl (1930:388) could
triumphantly declare in 1910, “Darwinism . . . is dead.”

294

I

10. The Boasian Milieu

This complete domination of contemporary thought by the Dar-
winian point of view did not last long. After the eighties one
realm after another was lost to it, until finally it reigned supreme
only in the field of biology [ibid.:372].

Radl’s sketch of the return to theism and orthodoxy leaves no room
for doubting that the Boasian movement was part of a widespread
cultural phenomenon:

Interest in religion revives. Scientific attacks on the literal ac-
curacy of the bible are out of date . . . we speak again of the
necessity for religion. . . . There came a reaction, too, against
the evolutionary view of history. Some workers still believe that
science should formulate the empirical laws that govern past
events. But the attempts initiated by Buckle and Taine to write
history around these laws has long been abandoned [ibid.:373].

Like White, Radl equates cultural antievolutionism with anti-Dar-
winism. But this was an error common to all those who sought to
bolster up their own investment in the religious counterattack with
references to the opposition that the theory of natural selection was
encountering within biology. Radl of course was ridiculously optimis-
tic about the demise of Darwinism within biology. At the very
moment of its alleged death, Darwinism, united with the rediscovered
Mendelian principles, was on the verge of its greatest victories. The
entire field of experimental and paleontological biology was about to
fall under its sway. By the twenties, it was vitalism and entelechism
which were dead, while the new Synthetic Theory was in full com-
mand. This victory proves the essential continuity of evolutionary
theory within the discipline of biology. At the height of the reaction,
even under men like Hans Driesch, Thomas Hunt Morgan, and
Jacques Loeb, all mentioned by Lowie as influential in his own
outlook, there was never any question that the doctrine of descent
with modification was about to be abandoned. The great issue of the
day was whether natural selection was adequate for an explanation of
the phenomena of adaptation. As Lowie says, just as these critics of
Darwinism did not reject evolution per se, “neither did anthro-
po}ogists reject all cultural evolution” (LowIE 1956b:1006). But even
Fhls is a drawing of false battle lines. Boas did not reject evolutionism
In any degree whatsoever. What he rejected was (1) biological re-
ductionism, (2) cultural parallelism, and (3) universal standards of
progress. At no point did Boas and his students, most of whom were
athgists or agnostics, embrace a theistic interpretation of either bio-
logical or cultural evolution. As a matter of fact, the Boasian model of
endlessly divergent cultural transformations is closer to the Darwinian

295


===== PAGE 153 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

model of the “tree of life,” than is White’s highly abstract notion of
a universal cultural sequence. (We will have more to say about this in
Chap. 22.) But at no point either, did the Boasians make the slight-
est headway toward formulating the general principles—the equiva-
lent of the theory of natural selection—which would account for
micro- and macro-evolutionary transformations.

Now in regard to the attack upon parallelism and racism, it is of
paramount importance to express without rhetoric the fact that the
Boasians rejected all coherent (ie., noneclectic) explanations of socio-
cultural differences which made any appeal to any deterministic prin-
ciple whatsoever, with rather marked indifference to whether they
were inspired by materialist, idealist, or theist doctrines. This means
that if we seek to understand the sociology of knowledge of the Boas-
ian period, we must concentrate on the functional contribution of
the rejection of all formulable determinisms.

THE PROBLEM OF SPENCERISM

But there is a minor dilemma that stands in the way. If
cultural forces are presumed to be decisive in the unfolding of the
Boasian epoch, how is it that Spencerism, so eminently suited to the
ideological nceds of competitive industrial and international capitalism,
was able to be driven out of anthropology by the Boasians? This is
the question White is unable to confront because of his inability to rec-
oncile the alleged “reactionary” and regressive antievolutionism with
Boas’ “progressive” antiracism.

It should not be concluded that Spencerism had to be abandoned
because it embraced a determinist view of history. On the contrary,
Spencerism was a perfect expression of all individualistic, spontaneous,
competitive, and unpredictable impulses. If it was chaos that was
needed, the doctrine of the survival of the fittest was beautifully
adapted to the wildest surges in Laufer's ocean. The interaction of
the sociocultural and biological models of evolution all during the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in no way produced a decisive
adherence to determinist principles. Spencer was a materialist and a
determinist. But others could read in the triumph of biological
evolutionism a new vindication of the limitless nature of human
destiny. Indeed, this was one of the options taken by an influential
sector of learned opinion both in Europe and the United States.

That very theory of evolution which had at first sight appeared to
prove the mechanical method afresh, and to give it a new weapon
wherewith to subdue the rebel world of life, helped rather to de-

296

10. The Boasian Milieu

preciate its value and to shake its foundations. Regarded in the
light of evolution, was the world what the mechanical theory had
held it to be, an eternal persistence of unchangeable substances,
an cternal repetition of necessary movements subject to unchange-
able laws; or was it rather a perennial becoming, an incessant
renewal of forms which cannot be foreseen, and which cannot
therefore be subject to the rigid necessity of determinism? Is not
variability, that is to say, the possibility of the new, presupposed
in all evolution? Can the new be confined within the limits of
any mathematical formula? How can mechanics, the science of
eternal types, mirror the transient life of the real? It is not to the
motionless ideas of reason that we must turn if we would sound
the depths of being and grasp it in the productive moment of its
generation, but rather to the free creations of imagination and
energy [ALIOTTA 1914:xxi].

In the same vein, the wildly exciting effect that evolutionism had
upon Nietzsche, with his uncontrollable “blond beast,” is also de-
serving of note. It is clear, therefore, that the struggle against Social
Darwinism by the Boasians is not to be taken for granted. If other
aspects of the Boasian program are rooted in cultural forces, one
cannot deny a similar derivation of the element of antiracism.

THE CULTURAL SOURCE OF THE
ATTACK ON SPENCERISM

The attack on racist theories coincided in the United States
with a period of strong democratic countercurrents. Boas was a
member of an immigrant minority, who as an individual was ob-
viously unprepared to concede the superiority of the dominant white
Anglo-Saxon Protestant intellectual and business elites. Nonetheless,
he was no superman; without supporting currents powerfully im-
pelled by the conditions of his adopted social milieu, racism might
very well have survived and triumphed in American, as it did in
German and Italian, anthropology. But the antiracist countercurrents
in the United States were nourished by the vast influx of Poles,
Russians, and Ttalians, whose Catholicism or Judaism was not easily
worked up into a master-race complex. These immigrant groups par-
ticipated in the political and ideological struggle to break the pattern
of unrestricted competition, which marks the beginnings of United
States welfare capitalism. They provided the pressure for antitrust,
pro-labor, and progressive income tax legislation prior to the outbreak
of the First World War—the war “to Make the World Safe for

297



===== PAGE 154 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Democracy.” In other words, the functional basis for the Boasian attack
upon Spencerism had nothing whatsoever to do with the dark reaction-
ary forces summoned up by White. The inappropriateness of the reac-
tionary and regressive label is underscored as soon as we remind
ourselves, although this scarcely seems necessary, that Spencerism may
be dead in anthropology, but it is still a very conspicuous element in
the ideological armamentarium of the American right, the Birchers,
Dixiecrats, and right-wing Republicans. Richard Hofstadter's (1944)
theory that Social Darwinism has passed out of existence in American
life can be sustained only if we regard a belief in the essentials of the
doctrine as synonymous with an awareness of who Herbert Spencer
was.

In many ways the Boasian program corresponds rather closely with
the fundamental ideological outlook associated with left-of-center
political liberalism. The belief in multiracial democracy, relativity of
custom, maximum freedom for the individual, the importance of ma-
terial comfort, but the ultimately greater strength of the rational
mind, and hence, the ultimate openness of society and history—all
these themes are faithfully mirrored in the work of Boas and his
pupils. In fact, there is only one point at which the Boasian program
can be said to enter into serious conflict with the ideological manifesta-
tions of democratized liberalism: the culture concept. This concept,
so vital to the destruction of racism, is potentially, if not inherently,
deterministic and antidemocratic in its own right.

THE PARADOX OF
DETERMINISM

CULTURAL

If the enculturation experience determines for life how the
individual is to conduct the entire pattern of his affairs, from sex to
art, what then becomes of the vaunted freedom of the individual? To
push to the furthest wall at once, if culture determines how we
behave, then what difference is there between a democratic and
totalitarian regime other than the illusion to which the actors in the
democratic milieu have been enculturated that they are “freer” to
choose their individual and collective destinies? It is no accident that
Leslie White, the most outspoken critic of the Boasian program, has
driven the concept of culture almost to this very extreme. It is not
widely shared, although there are many anthropologists, including
myself, who would agree that the association of freedom with political
democracy is much more of an illusion than the average well-en-
culturated ideologue is willing to grant.

298

B _

10.

The Boasian Milieu

Among the Boasians, with one conspicuous exception, namely
Alfred Kroeber, the relationship between culture and freedom has
been treated in a diametrically opposite fashion. In essence, the
Boasian program has pressed forward to a vision of the absolute
maximum amount of individual freedom compatible with the con-
tinued serviceability of the culture concept. In other words, arguments
against historical determinism have stopped just short of destroying
cultural determinism.

There are two main routes to this position: (1) by emphasizing
the creative role of the individual in cultural change, and (2) by
stressing the variability and nonconformity of individuals with respect
to culture patterns. The transport of the cultural-determinist position
along these paths had a definite chronology. Boas set 1910 as the
date which divided the period in which he stressed historical recon-
struction from that in which he tumed to “the interaction between
individual and society” (Boas 1948:311; orig. 1936). As I have already
indicated, it was this concern which led to the development of culture
and personality studies during the twenties.

Earlier there was the famous exchange between Sapir and Kroeber
(to which we shall turn again in Chap. 12) when Sapir (1917:443)
remarked: “I fail to see how we can deny a determining, and in some
cases even extraordinarily determining, cultural influence to a large
number of outstanding personalities.” The culmination of this em-
phasis on the individual was embodied in the work of Paul Radin,
one of Boas’ students who shared with Kroeber the belief that Boas
didn’t really “do history.” Radin’s prescription for fulfilling the
tole of historian, however, was diametrically opposed to Krocber's. To
do history properly, one must study individuals. Radin’s Crashing
Thunder: The Autobiography of a Winnebago Indian (1926) repre-
sented the ultimate narrowing down of history to a single individual.
(Actually, as The Nature of Cultural Things [HARRIS: 1964a] dem-
onstrates, there are micro-focused options that even Radin over-
looked.) Later, Radin explained his approach as follows:

'I_'hc [historical] task, let me insist, is always the same: a descrip-
tion of a specific period. . . . This can be done only by an in-
tensive and continuous study of a particular tribe, a thorough
knowledge of the language and an adequate body of texts and this
can be accomplished only if we realize, once and for all, that we
are dealing with specific, not generalized, men and women, and
with specific, not generalized events. But the recognition of
specific men and women should bring with it the realization that
there are all types of individuals and that it is not, for instance, a

299


===== PAGE 155 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Crow Indian who has made such and such a statement, uttered
such and such a prayer, but a particular Crow Indian. It is this
particularity that is the essence of all history [RApIN 1 933:184-85].

The most perfect congruence between the culture concept and
that of individual freedom has been achieved by David Bidney. Al
though not a Boasian, Bidney’s position is entirely at the mercy of the
factual critique that the Boasians employed to demonstrate the open-
ness of history. “Ultimately,” insists Bidney (1963:34), “human cul-
ture is the product of man’s potentiality for freedom of creativity
and freedom of choice.” But it was not necessary for the Boasians to
have moved as far as Bidney toward the reductio ad absurdum of
cultural indeterminism. The important thing is that the Boasians re-
mained well within the culturally tolerable limits of the ideology of
freedom. Even Kroeber, as we shall see, professed and delighted in
the unpredictability of cultural evolution. The crucial issue, however,
is the probability of parallel and convergent development, informed
by an understanding of the causal processes of cultural evolution.

The facts happen to be very much against the kind of situation that
Bidney imagines to be the hallmark of humanity. The Boasian treat-
ment of the facts was heavily weighted in favor of making it possible for
ideologues to convince a wider public that the doctrines of political
liberalism rest on a firm scientific foundation. I hasten to add, how-
ever, that in removing that foundation, post-Boasians have no inten-
tion of depriving anyone of his illusion of freedom. Rather it is our
intention to help clear the way for an objective measurement of the
degree of historical freedom that cultures and individuals possess.
Any other formulation of the problem constitutes a philosophical
disputation unworthy of modern anthropology.

300

The Ethnographic
Basis of

Particularism

11

Becausc of the heavy emphasis that the Boasians placed on achieving
higher standards of evidence in ethnography, they have exposed
t!lcmsclvcs to captious and vindictive criticism, based on a re-evalua-
tion of old, or the presentation of new, ethnographic data. Leslie
White, the chief architect of the attack on Boas, has generated a
considerable amount of resentment within the anthropological fra-
ternity by his sometimes petty innuendos concerning the competence
of Boas as a fieldworker. White claims Boas was excessively puritanical
and prudish and that the amount of time he actually spent in the
field has been inflated. White has also demanded to know why Boas,
who was being honored by his students “as the world’s éreatest
anthropologist,” could not have formulated the concept of ambi-
lateral descent, which has subsequently turned out to be the key to
t!le understanding of Kwakiutl social organization. “The facts lay
tight before his eyes,” says White (1963:67). Needless to say, one
does not criticize Newton for failing to be Einstein. )

Furthermore, it is unjust to impugn Boas’ performance as a field-
worker in view of the absence of objective standards for measuring

301



===== PAGE 156 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the performance of anthropologists in the field. It is of course a
commonplace within the fraternity that certain anthropologists will
acquire a reputation for being “good” or “bad” fieldworkers and that
this judgment will be maintained independently of the evaluation of
the substantive and theoretical product that issues from their field or
library research. But this kind of thing rarely rises above the level of
gossip. It seems unquestionable that Boas functioned quite well in
terms of rapport, acceptance, and opportunities for participation and
observation; his data-recording techniques were superb; and if one
can judge from George Hunt and Henry Tate, whom Boas trained as
assistants, no anthropologist has ever had better informants (cf.
ROHNER 1966). The defective portions of Boas’ ethnography have little
to do with Boas’ capacities as a fieldworker but are entirely a product
of the theoretical prospectus of the Boasian program. It therefore
remains an essential task, to which White has made important contri-
butions, that the errors involved be publicized and their deleterious
consequences upon cultural theory be traced. We must do this not in
order to diminish Boas™ stature, but rather in order to carry forward
the perfection of the discipline to which he dedicated his life.

THE KWAKIUTL

As formulated by Boas, presented to his students, dissem-
inated within anthropology, and diffused beyond to adjacent disci-
plines, Boas’ Northwest Coast cthnography was the main factual
armory for the assault on cultural materialism and historical de-
terminism. For those who were interested in proving that the paral-
lelists had grossly exaggerated the amount of order in cultural phe-
nomena, the Northwest Coast Indian tribes were an inexhaustible
source of appatent chaos. The Kwakiut]l of Vancouver Island, who
were the focus of Boas' field interests over a period of almost forty-
five years, inhabited an area of great ecological complexity, distin-
guished by its rain forests, its migratory fish, and its large maritime
mammalian species. The Kwakiutl, like the rest of the Northwest Coast
peoples, exploited this environment through numerous hunting, fish-
ing, and gathering techniques, but they practiced no agriculture. This
mode of existence exposed them to the fluctuations in the size and
location of the fish and animal populations, which could be abun-
dant or scarce in conformity with a complex series of environmental
circumstances. At the time of Boas’ first visit in 1886, however, the
Kwakiut! had already been in contact with Europeans for over nincty
years. From 1849 on, they had been engaged in intensive trade with

302

hall

'

11.

The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

the Hudson’s Bay Company, and the groups with whom Boas worked
had in fact drastically modified their way of life in order to take up
residence adjacent to the trading post at Fort Rupert. Toward the
end of the nineteenth century, the Kwakiutl and the rest of the
Northwest Coast groups were the object of visits by a steady stream
of tourists, and their direct or indirect involvement with the events
responsible for the development of the Pacific Northwest was steadily
intensified all during the years of Boas’ research.

The abuse of Kwakiutl ethnography centers on two major issues.
At an early point in his study of their social organization in relation-
ship to that of the surrounding tribes, Boas came to believe that the
Kwakiutl were undergoing a matrilineal to patrilineal change in de-
scent, contrary to that which the generalists of the nineteenth century
had claimed to be the normal sequence. In addition, Boas became
fascinated by the occurrence of destructive give-away feasts, or pot-
latches, which he insisted were beyond explanation involving eco-
nomic causality. Both of these issues are related, since in sum, they
involved a misunderstanding of the basic Kwakiutl residence and
descent groups, the numaym, and the relationship between that

group and the techno-environmental conditions under which the
Kwakiutl lived during pre-contact times.

KWAKIUTL DESCENT

Boas (1897) presented his view of Kwakiutl social structure
under the title, The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the
Kwak_iutl Indians. Tt was based upon his belief that the Kwakiutl had
kinship groups, originally identified as gens or clans but later simply
termed numaym, in which membership and privileges were dependent
upon a variety of matrilineal descent.

Here the woman brings as a dower her father’s position and privi-
leges to her husband, who however is not allowed to use them
himself, but acquires them for the use of his son. As the woman’s
father on his part has acquired his privileges in the same manner
through his mother, a purely female law of descent is secured,
although only through the medium of the husband [1897:334-35].

Tl?is description was the reverse of Boas’ earlier opinion that “The
child does not belong by birth to the gens of his father or
mother, but may be made a member of any gens to which his father,
mother, grandparents, or great-grandparents belonged” (18g1a:609).
I.n conformity with his announced interest in historical reconstruc-
tion, Boas speculated concerning the nature of the earlier phases of

303



===== PAGE 157 =====

B o

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

Kwakiutl social organization. Initially, he seemed to have been
convinced that the Kwakiutl had at one time been matrilineal and
that they were in transition to the expected patrilineal stage: “The
marriage ceremonies of the Kwakiutl seem to show that originally
matriarchate prevailed also among them” (quoted in WHITE 1963:52).
Within a few years, however, Boas fell victim to the demon of dis-
order. In 1895 he reversed his thinking, defied the prevailing evolu-
tionary scheme, and argued that the transition that had taken
place was in the opposite direction, and that the “organization must
have been at one time a purely paternal one” (1897:334-35); hence,
the transition had gone from patriliny to matriliny.

His reasoning follows a most tendentious path, which of course is
all the more painful with benefit of hindsight. The evidence con-
sisted mainly of the absence of the kinds of survival that should
have been found had the former stage been matrilineal. Thus, there
was “No trace left of an inheritance from the wives’ brothers,”
matrilocality was absent, and there were no legends or myths which
traced the origins of the groups to matrilineal ancestors. There were,
however, some legends that mentioned patrilineal ancestors. As for
the latter:

It is true that these traditions are probably not very old and have
been modified with the changing social life of the pecople; but
from what we know of the development of myths we should ex-
pect to find in them traces at least of the old maternal institu-
tions; but the fact that they are invariably and always are
explained by geneaologies seems to my mind conclusive proof
that the paternal organization of the tribe preceded the present
one [ibid.:335].

With the development of the concept of nonunilinear descent
through the work of Goodenough (1956) and Davenport (1959), it
has become obvious that Boas was trying to force the Kwakiutl
numaym into one of two categories, both of which were inappropri-
ate. The salient feature of the numaym is precisely the fact that
there is no rigid adherence to one or the other unilineal principle,
but that individuals may make use of ambiguous and flexible principles
in aligning themselves and their offspring with various residential and
descent groupings.

Actually, by 1920 Boas had once again changed his emphasis and
had recognized that something was wrong. Regarding the system of
matrilineal descent through a man’s daughter’s husband’s daughter,
he now said, “I believe this does not quite correspond to the actual

304

conditions.” His analysis, however, secems to have remained in a
state of provisional formulation, since it contained contradictory
statements. On the one hand, and in conformity with the ultimate
solution reached by other analysts, he noted that “The transmission
from individual to individual through marriage is most arbitrary.” On
the other hand, he also maintained that “the numayms are based on
descent with a preference for the paternal line” (1948b:362; orig. 1920).
Despite his evident inability to offer anything like a coherent picture
of the observed system, Boas continued to insist upon the validity of
the now more than ever tenuous reconstruction: “I do not see any
reason for a change of my opinion in regard to the relative antiquity of
the transfer of names and privileges through the male or female
line” (ibid.: 366). It should be noted that in context there are a
number of provisos which indicate the speculative quality of this
conclusion. But the extreme interest in Boas” handling of the numaym
stems from the fashion in which he and his students seized upon this
case to destroy the supposed universal tendency for patrilineality to
follow matrilineality and at the same time to discredit the entire
historical determinist position.

On the basis of this one drastically deficient case, there gradually
diffused out of Schermerhorn Hall at Columbia, through lecture,
word of mouth, article, and text, the unquestioned dogma that Boas
had proved that it was just as likely that patrilineality succeeded
matrilineality as the reverse. When the case was cited in the general
textbook that Boas had edited, Gladys Reichard (1938:425) referred
to it as “more convincing” than the other possible instance among
the Trobrianders (also highly dubious, however) because “the details
of its cause are more positive.” Boas’ speculations concerning a
patrilineal to matrilineal development among the Kwakiutl actually
gave rise to an attempt to show that this sequence was the normal
one. Thus, John Swanton (1gos) tried to demonstrate that it was
precisely the matrilineally organized tribes, such as the Haida of
the Northwest, the Zuni and Hopi among the Pueblos, and the Creck
and Natchez of the Southeast, who were the culturally most advanced
peoples, while the groups that were organized on a patrilineal and a
bilateral basis were deemed to be more primitive. Lowie (1920:150-
55), Kroeber (1923:355-58), and Goldenweiser (1914:436) all fell
for this curiously involuted parallelism. As Murdock (1949:189) has
shown: “This inverted evolutionistic scheme of a bilateral-patrilineal-
matrilineal succession in the forms of social organization became an
established dogma in American anthropology.” Tt is clear, therefore,
that neither Boas nor his students approached the facts of Kwakiutl

305



===== PAGE 158 =====

11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

social organization free of rather sweeping hypotheses. The pity of it is
that their hypotheses were not clearly phrased and that even had
they been correct, they would still not have been suitable substitutes
for the determinist systems to whose overthrow they were dedicated.
For what after all was the explanation of the alleged patrilineal-to-
matrilineal shift among the Kwakiutl? Nothing but the proximity of
the more northerly tribes who were matrilineal. That is, the func-
tional interpretation of Kwakiutl social structure was left to the mercy
of the postulated diffusionary influence.

A MODERN INTERPRETATION OF THE
NUMAYM

It was only long after Boas™ death that there began to emerge
the lineaments of a functional explanation of the numaym which at
once eclipses and renders superfluous attempts to derive its non-
unilinear character from speculative diffusionary impulses. Thomas
Hazard (1960) has suggested how the bilateral claims of descent were
probably utilized by individuals to associate themselves with chieftains
who were best able to provide safety and sustenance. During the
sharp population decline brought about by the stresses of the contact
period, the ability of a local group to exploit its hereditary fishing
and hunting resources depended upon the ability to recruit ade-
quate personnel through all descent lines. Boas’ genealogies actually
showed the complete scrambling of descent lines as all sorts of
claims were pressed and all sorts of exceptions to the allegedly pre-
ferred arrangements took place, but he did not attempt a functional
analysis of these phenomena. The real force of Hazard’s interpreta-
tion is that it links the nonunilinear nature of the numaym to the
Northwest Coast technology, economy, and habitat and, in so doing,
at once provides an insight into the situation on Vancouver Island,
which, however tentatively offered, opens vistas of fruitful inquiry.

THE POTLATCH

In order to appreciate the advance that this represents over
the Boasian position, we must take up that second and by far more
influential focus of Boas’ ficldwork, the Kwakiutl potlatch. As has
already been suggested, if one wished to demonstrate the lawlessness
of culture, the Northwest Coast was one of the best places to do it.
At the time of Boas' first visit, and probably for several decades
prior to that date, the Kwakiutl were practicing a form of feasting

306

that scems to defy any sort of techno-environmental or techno-eco-
nomic explanation. Here was a whole people caught up in an exchange
system that conferred greatest prestige on the individual who gave
away the greatest amount of the most valuable goods. Since previous
analyses of economic behavior had stressed the importance of hus-
banding the products of labor and of rationally apportioning work
effort in relation to needs and consumption patterns, the Kwakiutl
material was in effect the death-knell of homo economicus, conceived
either in the capitalist or socialist image. Moreover, it was not merely
that goods were given away, but that on occasion, so overwhelming
was this passion for self-glorification, that blankets were ripped to
shreds, valuable fish oil set on fire, whole villages burned, and “slaves”
thrown into the sea to drown. Boas’ account of the potlatch has
probably been the single most influential ethnographic description
ever published. It set in motion a series of concentric effects which
have yet to lose their strength, centering first among anthropologists,
but steadily advancing into adjacent domains and out to a vast edu-
cated public.

The continuing pertinence of the potlatch data derives from the
fact that Boas” Kwakiutl material was picked up by his student Ruth
Benedict and woven into Patterns of Culture, probably the most
widely read anthropological book of all time. The purport of this
book, to which we shall return in a later chapter, was to draw psy-
chological portraits of three different cultures representing three
different portions of the spectrum of cultural patterning. In this
endeavor, the Zuni were Apollonian, the Dobuans were paranoid,
and the Kwakiutl were Dionysians touched with megalomania.

The object of all Kwakiutl enterprises was to show oneself su-
perior to one’s rivals. This will to superiority they exhibited in the
most uninhibited fashion. It found expression in uncensored self-
glorification and ridicule of all comers. Judged by the standards
of other cultures the speeches of their chicfs . . . are unabashed
megalomania [BENEDICT 1959:16g; orig. 1934).

Looking at the potlatch as seen through the eyes of its participants,
especially of its chiefly contestants, the facts that stood out for Boas
and his students were the boasting of greatness, the announced in-
tentions of shaming one’s rivals, and the compulsion which a man
who had been shamed felt to retaliate against his rival by holding
an even more lavish give-away. Under Benedict’s skillful literary
handling, the facts of potlatch took on the appearance of an ultimate
mania, without rhyme or reason except the inflated egos of the chiefs

307


===== PAGE 159 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and their reckless desire to hold on to or to augment their hereditary
claims to prestige. Everything in Kwakiutl life was affected by this
strange custom.

The whole economic system of the Northwest Coast was bent to
the service of this obsession. There were two means by which a
chief could achieve the victory he sought. One was by shaming his
rival by presenting him with more property than he could return
with the required interest. The other was by destroying property.
In both cases the offering called for return, though in the first
case the giver's wealth was augmented, and in the second he
stripped himself of goods. The consequences of the two methods
seem to us at the opposite poles. To the Kwakiutl they were
merely complementary means of subduing a rival, and the highest
glory of life was the act of complete destruction [ibid.:172].

During the past fifteen years a drastic reinterpretation of the pot-
latch has been put forward by a number of Northwest Coast special-
ists. This new synthesis has been achieved by combining historical and
ecological interests and by linking the peculiarities of Kwakiutl ethnog-
raphy to more general types of phenomena.

THE POTLATCH IN HISTORICAL
PERSPECTIVE

Helen Codere’s Fighting with Property (1950) was the first
attempt to see the potlatch in relationship to the Euro-American
development of the modern Northwest. It is readily established
through Boas’ and Hunt's family histories and through the records of
the trading post and Indian agents, that aboriginal patterns of pot-
latch bore only a faint resemblance to those observed toward the end
of the century. The Kwakiut], like all other tribal peoples in the path
of the Furo-American expansion, were the victims of excruciating
ecological and sociocultural pressures, beginning from the moment of
the appearance of the first Europeans in the region. These pressures
led dramatically and inevitably to the extinction of their aboriginal
patterns and to the virtual extinction of the Kwakiutl as a viable
breeding population. Even before the explorer Vancouver contacted
them in 1792, they were already trading in muskets obtained from
the neighboring Nootka and had begun to experience the first effects
of European diseases. During the early part of the nineteenth cen-
tury, a slow increase in trade was accompanied by a drastic decrease
in population, brought about by epidemics of smallpox and respiratory
diseases to which, like all Amerindians, they lacked immunity. Be-

308

D

11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

tween 1836 and 1853 their population fell from 23,000 to about 7,000.
In 1849 the establishment of the Hudson Bay trading post at Fort Ru-
pert further intensified both the trade with Europeans and the effect
of disease. Then in 1858, 25,000 to 30,000 Euro-American males set
out for the British Columbia goldfields, making nearby Victoria their
jumping-off place. Kwakiutl women in large numbers began to serve
these men as prostitutes, and venereal diseases now accelerated the
trend toward depopulation. By the eighties, the great Northwest
canning industry was in full production with 6,000 boats on the Fraser
River alone, and many Kwakiutl responded to the demand for factory
workers. At about the same time, lumbering, which during the decade
1870-80 had already produced 350 million board feet, also sought
to attract the Kwakiutl. By the time of Boas™ first visit, the whole
Kwakiutl population had sunk below 2,000!

With the establishment of the Hudson Bay Company trading
post, Codere shows how the potlatch involved a preponderance of
European trade goods, especially blankets, and hence, how it re-
flected the new, prodigiously expansive industrial and commercial
economy. Another consequence of the Euro-American presence was
the prohibition of warfare, and Codere attempts to draw a con-
nection between the cessation of warfare and the development of the
flamboyant patterns of hostile potlatching in the late period. Accord-
ing to Codere, when the Indians could no longer wage war, they
fought with property, which had become available on an unprece-
dented scale.

Inasmuch as Codere’s book was written as a doctoral thesis under
Ruth Benedict’s supervision, one scarcely expects it to contain a
sustained criticism of the Boasian position. The historical perspective
did, however, prepare the way for more penetrating appraisals.

Codere’s theory that competitive potlatch substituted for war-
fare does not by itself involve anything other than a kind of “force of
tmt_iition" explanation for the strange phenomena observed by Boas.
This may ultimately prove to be a viable perspective, although there
are two reasons for withholding judgment. First, the same theory has
been used to explain the migratory development of labor patterns to
the Rand mines in South Africa but with a noteworthy absence of
success (cf. marris 1959b). Second, Codere (1956) herself later
Went on to show that there was a more “amiable” and “playful” side
to Kwakiutl life, especially among ordinary people as dist(inguishcd
from the chiefs, in which the furious competitiveness associated with
th.e great contests of the late nineteenth-century was nowhere in
evidence.

As T have said, Codere’s modification of the Benedict-Boas ver-

309



===== PAGE 160 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

sion of the potlatch was not intended to lead the way toward a major
break with the traditional view. Indeed, in pointing to the amiable
side of the Kwakiutl, Codere represented herself as merely elaborating
on the caution that Boas had belatedly advised concerning the one-
sidedness of Benedict’s portrait:

The amiable qualities that appear in intimate family life are easily
overlooked. These are not by any means absent. In contrast to the
jealousy with which prerogatives are guarded, everyone within the
family circle belittles his position. Husband and wife address each
other as “You whose slave I am,” or “You whose dog I am”
[BoAS 1938a:685].

REVOLT OF THE NORTHWEST
SPECIALISTS

By the middle of the fifties a ground swell of dissatisfaction
with Boas’ Kwakiut] material had set in among other Northwest Coast
specialists. The above quote figured prominently in the rear-guard
battle that was waged to protect Boas” image. Verne Ray (1955:140)
set off a lively exchange in the American Anthropologist by demand-
ing to know why Melville Herskovits” biography of Boas had not
mentioned the fact that the master had failed to “speak out in cor-
rection of the errors of his students, such as Benedict [with] the result
that the ethnographic picture for the Northwest Coast as visualized,
taught, and accepted by many anthropologists is that which in fact
applies only to the nobility of the southern Kwakiutl.” Rushing to
defend Boas, Lowie (1956a:162) pointed out that it was Boas him-
self who had indicated the need for mentioning the Kwakiutl’s more
homely virtues. In his rejoinder, Ray (1956) stressed the omission by
Boas of any direct reference to Benedict and of the small amount of
space that Boas had devoted to this crucial point.

It is hard for me to see how this can be considered an adequate
answer to, and correction for, the misinterpretations in a book
(Benedict 1934) which has sold 600,000 copies. . . . Ruth Ben-
edict’s book had appeared four years carlier. But Boas does not
mention her or her “Dionysian” formulation in his article and
does not list the book in his bibliographical footnotes. I should
add that I do not consider that it was mandatory that Boas correct
Benedict, but I wish that he had [ray 1956:167-68].

Ray, in criticizing Herskovits, had elicited sharp rebuttals from both
Lowie and Kroeber, thereby entangling himself all at once with three
of the most influential living anthropologists (not to mention the

310

-

31. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

spirits of Boas and Benedict). This alone seems to provide a clue as
to why Ray failed to mention the fact that Boas was indeed under a
special obligation to correct whatever Lowie, Kroeber, and Herskovits
conceded was wrong in Patterns of Culture: Boas had signed his
name to the book’s Introduction (about which, more later).

The reformulation of Kwakiutl ethnography by Codere and others
(cf. DRUCKER 1939:955) failed to cut through the skein of particular-
ism with which Boas had surrounded his description. The Kwakiutl
material remained cut off from the world of theory. Nonetheless, the
Fort Rupert potlatch could now be seen as a definite product of the
contact situation, thereby defeating at once all attempts to prove by
means of Boas’ data that its explanation was governed by causative
factors too complex for nomothetic formulation. The population
decline, introduction of wage labor, sudden abundance of goods, re-
pression of warfare, and the earlier pattern of communal feasting
taken together indicate that a highly determinate set of factors
were at work upon the Kwakiutl. If one objects that the adaptation
achieved was rather unique, there remains the obviously predictable
fact that their adjustment was not viable, and therefore scarcely the
kind of diachronic trajectory with which one would want to con-
struct the laws of history.

THE MYTH OF THE NORTHWEST EDEN

Actually, there is a good chance that we shall eventually be
able to make further sense out of the run-away aspects of the
Kwakiut] system by taking into consideration the contrasting com-
parative material characteristic of other contact phenomena. In this
regard, the fact that the Kwakiutl resource base was not menaced by
Fhe whites and that an attempt was made to lure the Kwakiutl
Into wage labor and cash trade under free market conditions in a
booming economy, without the usual coercive subterfuges, may
provide the missing ingredient.

. In the meantime, a promising beginning has been made toward
Interpreting the pre-contact potlatch in conformity with nomothetic
ecological principles. Andrew Vayda (1961c) and Wayne Suttles
(1960) are responsible for formulating the issues upon which the
description and explanation of the aboriginal patterns now seem to
depend. From Boas’ descriptions, from the accounts of Indian agents,
and from superficial acquaintance with the ecology of the Northwest
littoral, a deep-seated conviction had developed that the bountiful-
ness of nature in this area was so great that vast surpluses of food
Wwere guaranteed to the human population on the basis of a minimum

311



===== PAGE 161 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

productive effort. Codere pictured the Kwakiutl as having a “fantas-
tic” surplus economy (1950:63) and bases her entire thesis on its
unquestioned veracity. In the reformulations of Suttles and Vayda,
however, this view is discredited. The salmon and the other river-
spawning and offshore migratory fish, upon which the main sub-
sistence load depended, did not present themselves for harvest in the
abundance and with the regularity claimed for them. On the basis
of impressionistic accounts of single runs, when salmon “in a solid
black mass in aggregate motion” choked a stream from bank to bank,
it is possible to exaggerate the long-range harvest potential of de-
limited portions of the region. Annual variability, both of a general
as well as of more localized scope, has been demonstrated not only
for fish but for supplemental land products as well. These considera-
tions have been elaborated by Piddocke (1965) specifically for the
Kwakiutl. There is evidence that under aboriginal conditions the
Kwakiutl were probably the frequent victims of serious food shortages
caused by variations in weather and climate, by shifting patterns of
migrations, and by uncontrollable variations in the rate of reproduc-
tion of the flora and fauna upon which they depended.

But what then are we to make of the abundance that obviously
did exist during the period of maximum potlatch? That the
remnant Kwakiutl groups toward the close of the nineteenth century
were indeed producing what has been called a “superfluous” surplus—
food or the means for obtaining food in quantities far beyond ability
to consume over a longrange period—is not to be doubted. But
one of the theoretical requirements for such a condition is a stable or
declining population. With their rapid decrease in numbers, the Kwa-
kiutl certainly could afford to burn their fish oil, destroy their blankets,
or ruin their houses. They were a society celebrating its own funeral.
And the funeral rites could be all the more lavish because simultaneous
with the drop in population there came a vast improvement in
the technological repertory for exploiting their environment—guns,
iron for harpoons, hooks, and possibly most important, the modern
European carpentry kit with which they were able to perfect the
construction of their canoes.

THE POTLATCH AND THE NUMAYM

Thus, as soon as we put the Kwakiutl back into nature and
proceed on the assumption that their way of life represents an adap-
tive response to a given techno-economic equation, a whole new
panorama of ethnographic comparisons opens before us. To explain

312

the potlatch, we are no longer dependent on the Digger Indian myth
with which Benedict lulled her readers into innocence: “In the be-
ginning God gave ecach people its cup to drink from.” For now we
see that the bilateral character of the numaym as presented in Haz-
ard’s analysis is precisely the kind of arrangement that one would
expect if the aboriginal potlatch had functioned not to maintain an
incomprehensibly self-destructive nobility in the state of bloated ego-
satisfaction, but rather a precariously balanced human population in
maximum fitness with respect to a bountiful but unpredictable en-
vironment. Following Vayda and Suttles, we begin to sce the potlatch
as a functional response to the problem of minimizing the effects of
seasonal and long-term fluctuations in the productivity of the local
groups. This was accomplished by the relatively frequent collection
of a numaym’s economic surplus under the auspices of its chief and
by its redistribution again under the auspices of the chief to temporar-
ily disadvantaged numaym who inhabited different portions of the
tribal area. Like the explanation offered by Codere and the Boasians,
this new ecological approach emphasizes the importance of the pres-
tige which the numaym potlatch leaders derive from giving gifts of
food and other valuables to members of neighboring groups. But
whereas this prestige has nothing but a completely inexplicable and
unqualified penchant for self-glorification at its base in Benedict’s
account, we now sce that the entire prestige system was probably in
definite and controlled articulation with aboriginal techno-environ-
mental and techno-economic conditions vital to the maintenance of
individual and collective life. In other words, we sce a system, expli-
cable in scientific terms, where previously there was nothing but
the unintelligible ravings of megalomaniacs. Under aboriginal condi-
tions, the Kwakiutl potlatch must have been one of the varieties of
redistributive systems by which incipiently stratified social systems
maintained their productivity levels and maximized their social co-
hesion. This concept, introduced first by the economist Karl Polanyi,
ushered in a new era in Polynesian ethnography, when Marshall Sah-
lins (1958) showed how it could account for variations in social strati-
fication among Pacific Island groups. The same concept has helped to
identify the causal factors responsible for many of the remarkable
parallelisms between the evolutionary trajectories of Old and New
World civilizations.

It seems highly probable that within the next generation many of
the features of primitive cultures that appeared as intractable enigmas
to the Boasians will yicld their secrets to comparative cultural ecology.
This is not to say that we are on the verge of returning to a scheme of

313


===== PAGE 162 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

universal parallel evolution, but rather that we have within our grasp
the ability to formulate the general principles by which both parallel
and divergent sequences occur.

BoAS’ ETHNOGRAPHIC STRATEGY

In this context it is relevant to return once again to the
cardinal inadequacy of the Boasian program—its unadmitted, but
nonetheless present, and unfortunately false or inadequate, hypotheses.
Under the Boasian program, ethnography was dedicated to the syste-
matic collection of the wrong facts, that is, to the facts about which it
could have been declared at the outset that they were precisely those
least likely to contribute to an understanding of sociocultural systems.
It is for this reason, and not for vindictiveness, that we are obliged to
pay full heed to the analysis that White and others have rendered of the
nature of the materials with which Boas filled his 5,000 pages of
Kwakiutl publications. By far the overwhelming bulk of this labor
was concerned with folk tales, mythology, religion, art, ceremony, and
mechanical aspects of technology and technique (so-called material
culture). Large amounts of space are devoted to food about
which we can no longer accept Victor Bamouw’s (1949:252) dry
optimism:

When Franz Boas published page after page of blueberry-pie
recipes in Kwakiutl, the old man probably knew what he was
after; but when his students did the same kind of thing, they
often lacked the driving central purpose which animated Boas
[1949, quoted in MEAD 1959b:32].

Codere, who has made greater use of Boas' materials than anyone
else, has tried to save the day with the conclusion that “Boas’ Kwakiutl
materials are ready to work with; an important part of his legacy is
that the understanding of the Kwakiutl is already far advanced”
(1959:73). If this statement refers at all to nomothetic understand-
ing, it is valid only to the extent that we are able to use the Kwakiutl
material in spite of having to labor under the dead weight of an
enormous amount of relative trivia. Granted that one can never tell
from which direction the angel of light will descend, we share the
obligation of making ourselves responsible for strategic guesses. Boas
consistently guessed wrong. How clse shall we explain Codere’s own
admission that the 5,000 pages of Kwakiutl ethnography are an inade-
quate basis for a general treatment of the culture? “It is not possible
to present a synthesized account of Kwakiutl culture based upon

314

11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

Boas’ works” (ibid.:66). For reasons previously stated, I cannot agree
with Murdock, when in a choleric outburst over not being able to use
the Kwakiutl for his World Ethnographic sample, he denounced
the “extravagantly overrated” Boas and insisted that “He was not even
a good ficldworker” (MURDOCK 1949:xiv). But Murdock’s pique is well
justified if “Despite Boas’ ‘five-foot shelf of monographs on the
Kwakiutl, this tribe falls into the quartile of those whose social struc-
ture and related practices are least adequately described among the
250 covered in this study” (ibid.). Boas may have been a good
fieldworker, but he was good about the wrong things.

EMIC AND ETIC ECONOMICS

The evaluation of Boas’ ethnographic product and the reason
why it was doomed from the outset not to yield insights into the
nomothetic principles which govern human history can best be
stated by making use of the distinction between emic and etic re-
search strategies. When Ray first gave public utterance to “the cocktail
room discussions” of dissatisfaction with Boas’ ethnographic mono-
graphs, he cited among other inadequacies the lack of economic data.
Lowie, with his usual on-the-spot aptitude for citing chapter and
verse, flatly denied this accusation:

Nor were economic phenomena “neglected” by him. In the ear-
lier monograph on the Eskimo he describes their economic life
with associated techniques, gives an account of land utilization,
and discusses trading (Boas 1888:419-561). Conceivably he might
have gathered much more of relevant information on the North-
west Coast, but if property, inheritance, and potlatches are eco-
nomic phenomena, they were not neglected [LOWIE 1956a:161].

Similarly, although admitting that Boas was largely concerned with
“symbolic” aspects of culture (mythology, language, and art in that
order) Codere (1959:61) insists that he did not slight other types of
description and analysis. She forthwith begins to total up the number
of Boas’ publications in which “non-symbolic” interests are indulged.
But both Boas’ supporters and his detractors have by and large
missed the essential point here. As we shall see in the case of Lowie’s
own ethnographic interest in things economic, the decision to study
“economics” is not at all what is needed if one is to begin to hope
that his data may contribute to the formulation of lawful principles.
This is because there are emic cconomics and etic cconomics. In

315



===== PAGE 163 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the former instance, one studies the potlatch as it appears to the pot-
latchers; in the latter instance, one studies potlatch as it appears
within the frame of cross-culturally valid analytical and quantitative
categories, such as calories, man-hour in-put, redistribution, stratifi-
cation with respect to access to resources, and so forth.

EMICS AND THE BOASIAN PROGRAM

In the strategically most decisive sense, the significance of
Boas’ turn to ethnography from physics and of his selection of the
historical method as opposed to the method of science was that
thereafter the definitive test of a good ethnography was whether or
not it faithfully mirrored the world of the natives as the natives saw it.
I am not aware of any sustained exception to this viewpoint anywhere
in Boas’ ethnographic product. Certainly we shall find no exception
throughout all of the thousands of pages of texts collected by himself
or his two trained informants, Hunt and Tate. The essence of such
texts is precisely their unswerving fidelity to what the native said or
thought.

To view Boas” fundamental ethnographic strategy in terms of the
emic-etic option permits us to see at once the unbroken development
that links his initial period of historical reconstruction with the ap-
parently anomalous concern for culture and personality to which it
ultimately gave birth. When White accuses Boas of psychological
reductionism, and when Boas himself refers to the importance of
psychological principles, there is at bottom the issue that divides
emics from etics, not that which divides psychology from culture. It
is not as a psychologist that Boas turns to his descriptions of potlatch
protocol and raven myth elements; it is rather as an ethnographer
with an overwhelming bias in favor of emic interpretations. It is as an
emicist that he clings to the remnants of Bastian’s elementary ideas,
gives to his general book the title The Mind of Primitive Man,
and repeatedly insists that two culture clements are not the same if
they mean different things to the people who possess them. Margaret
Mead’s comments on her apprenticeship under Boas seem to confirm
this point:

To get the depth of understanding he required meant submerg-
ing his thinking in that of another. It meant learning to think in
another’s terms and to view the world through another’s eyes.
The most intimate knowledge of an informant’s thought proc-
esses was mandatory and could only be obtained by intensive work
over a long period. Important concepts and strange viewpoints
had to be checked with other material and with a number of in-

316

T

11.

The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

formants; supplementary information had to be obtained else-
where. But Boas conceived of his main task as the adoption of an
informant’s mode of thought while retaining full use of his own
critical faculties [1959b:58].

Mead associates Boas™ interest in the single informant and his indiffer-
ence or even hostility to statistical treatments of cultural phenomena
(despite his skillful use of statistics in physical anthropology) with
this same penchant for the natives’ point of view. Further confirma-
tion of the saliency of this option in the outlook of Boas and his
students may be found in Frederica de Laguna’s (1960:792) insis-
tence that the rejection of mechanical or biological analogies as a
means of interpreting the world of culture is the most distinctive
feature of American cultural anthropology:

While cultures themselves and their inherent values have become
recognized in one sense as phenomena of the natural order, they
are not to be understood through mechanical or biological anal-
ogies or through an analysis which the scientist can make from
outside by confidently appealing to alleged sociological or psy-
chological laws. Rather, this inner world is to be entered with hu-
mility, the passport a readiness to listen while the native himself
speaks.

For at last we have come full circle, and the savages who first
gave us anthropology itself are those through whose eyes and
hearts we are to discover not simply the worlds and minds of
primitive men, but, in so doing, what it is to be human.

And Boas himself, in one of his last works, forcefully advocated the
necessity for interpreting the native’s behavior in terms of the na-
tive’s categories:

In natural sciences we are accustomed to demand a classifica-
tion of phenomena expressed in a concise and unambiguous
terminology. The same term should have the same meaning
everywhere. We should like to see the same in anthropology. As
long as we do not overstep the limits of one culture we are able to
classify its features in a clear and definite terminology. We know
what we mean by the terms family, state, government, etc. As
soon as we overstep the limits of one culture we do not know in
how far these may correspond to equivalent concepts. If we
choose to apply our classification to alien cultures we may com-
bine forms that do not belong together. The very rigidity of
definition may lead to a misunderstanding of the essential prob-
lems involved. . . . If it is our serious purpose to understand the
thoughts of a people the whole analysis of experience must be
based on their concepts, not ours [1943:314].

317



===== PAGE 164 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

As Codere (1959:72) remarks, “Boas’ Kwakiutl work is the product of
a consistent, monumental, and unfinished plan motivated by the
desire to understand a people.” He saw that “desire as understanding
the ‘mental life’ of a people as reflected in their culture.”
I take strong exception when Codere goes on to state that “no
new anthropological aim” has come along to replace Boas’ aim of
understanding the mental life of a culture. There has always been
the option of secking to understand a culture in its emic and etic b
manifestations in terms of the lawful processes governing the genera- rO e er
tion of similarities and differences in human history. Such an option
can only be fulfilled by systematic separation of emics and etics and

by the study of both under the guidance of operationalized concepts
and overt hypotheses. The error of trying to study culture “without

theoretical bias” is laid to rest when we realize that neither Boas nor
his students admitted the validity of the logic-empirical procedures

that are essential to the study of history, if such a study is to yield
nomothetic results. &%

Tw first of Boas’ students to receive a doctorate at Columbia Uni-
versity was Alfred Lewis Kroeber. By the time Kroeber came under
Boas’ influence, he had already earned a Master of Arts degree in
English and was teaching as a lecturer in that subject. He later ex-
plained the difference between himself and Boas in terms of this
background:

My education included some contacts with experimental science
which T found highly stimulating, but consisted primarily of
generalized activity in the linguistic-literary-historical field, re-
maining rather undifferentiated until I settled upon anthropology
as definitive profession [KROEBER 1935:566].

Heightened sensitivity to aesthetic patterns, concern with nuances of
style, and a reliance upon intuitive judgments heavily outweighed
Krocber's aspirations toward social science. He never seriously be-
lieved that anthropology could become anything other than one of
the humanities. But the vast scope of his scholarly erudition, his
| Olympian geniality, and omnivorous intellect were universally ad-

318 319



===== PAGE 165 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

mired among anthropologists and by important segments of the
larger academic community. After his “guru’s” death, Kroeber became
the undisputed “grand old man” of the profession, an image richly
reflected by undiminished scholarly activity to the last moments of
his eighty-fifth year. I shall leave to his biographers the task of balanc-
ing theoretical critique against the erudition and charm of his scholar-
ship. For the present, what seems most relevant is that Kroeber
began his career with certain neo-Kantian assumptions concerning
history, which were never thrown off and which preserved him in all
fundamentals as an historical particularist throughout his life.

VULNERABILITY TO IDEOLOGICAL
CURRENTS

Kroeber was fond of saying that he had not really become
interested in theoretical issues until he had reached middle age, and
he advised others to follow suit. Like Boas, he urged that theory
should result from fieldwork conducted as far as possible without
theoretical preconceptions. Turning to his earliest anthropological
publications, however, one finds an already well-formed theoretical
prospectus modeled after Boas’ views. Following publications con-
cerned with the folklore of the Smith Sound Eskimo and of the
Cheyenne, Kroeber submitted his doctoral thesis, Decorative Sym-
bolism of the Arapaho (1go1), in which he attempted to show that
both decorative and symbolic art forms could occur simultaneously,
thus easily defeating Alfred C. Haddon’s (1895) notions of a uniform
progression of art styles. But neither his brief field exposure prior to
1901 nor his equally brief acquaintance with the literature of the
social sciences up to that point furnished a sound basis for his more
general conclusion: “. . . all search for origin in anthropology can
lead to nothing but false results” (XKROEBER 19o1:332). This was a
large conclusion to reach at age twenty-five at the end of a dissertation
whose twenty-cight pages are mainly devoted to the art forms of one
badly mauled American Indian society. But as Julian Steward has
remarked, “The thesis . . . on Arapaho art . .. clearly set forth
Kroeber’s basic and life-long point of view” (1961:1043).

The conditions of Kroeber’s first employment as an anthropologist
illustrate the effective nature of the linkage between the nco-Kantian
perspective and the larger milieu in which the Boasian movement un-
folded. Starting in 1go1, Kroeber began a lifelong involvement with
the Department of Anthropology at Berkeley, which, like Boas at
Columbia, he was obliged to build practically from scratch. During

320

Do

12. Kroeber

the first five years of Kroeber's employment his salary came directly
from Mrs. Phoebe Hearst, William Randolph Hearst’s mother (sTEw-
ARD 1961:1044-45). Under these circumstances, it is difficult to ima-
gine how someone from the left end of the intellectual spectrum
could personally have achieved a strong institutional base, much less
how he could have advanced a whole new branch of learning against
its many competitors. The main difficulty that Boas’ students con-
fronted may have been a lack of comparative perspective. The milieu
in which they operated had so successfully prevented the growth of
university-based radical opinion, that in attacking the foundations of
nineteenth-century historical determinism, they were exposed only
to fundamentally sympathetic critics. Among themselves, the Boasians
created an illusion of dialectic exchange, as when Kroeber imagined
himself and Boas at opposite sides of the history-science dichotomy,
or when Kroeber and Sapir clashed over the need for a concept of the
superorganic. But in reality, only a very small part of the spectrum of
social-science tradition had achieved academic representation. It can-
not be said too often that the progress of intellectual life requires
confrontation between the widest possible variety of theories and
hypotheses. The penalty of provincialism is always the same: errors
are piled on errors, because everyone is tolerant of similar faults.

THE ATTACK AGAINST MORGAN

Laboring under this handicap, Kroeber attempted to en-
large upon the element of randomness that he had exposed in the
study of Arapaho art. At approximately the same time that Boas and
John Swanton were attacking Lewis Henry Morgan’s notions con-
cerning the priority of matrilineal descent, Krocber turned his at-
tention to Morgan’s treatment of descriptive and classificatory kinship
terminologies. Kroeber's attack on Morgan, unlike Lowie’s, as we
shall sec in the next chapter, did not arise out of a careful study of
Morgan’s contribution. It is even possible that Kroeber’s knowledge of
Morgan was acquired secondhand, or at least he never seems to have
taken Morgan seriously, as Lowie was ultimately obliged to do. Kroeber's
approach to Morgan was not characterized by the genial toleration he
so readily manifested during his maturity on behalf of less qualified
contributions, e.g. “leaving room for David Bidney to have God and
prayer in his interpretation of culture” (KROEBER 1952:115). By at-
tflcking Morgan in a famous article, “Classificatory Systems of Rela-
tionship” (19og), Kroeber misled a generation of anthropologists into
contempt for Morgan’s most enduring contribution. But it was Kroe-

321



