===== PAGE 166 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 12. Kroeber

—_—

ber’s view of the relationship between kinship terminology and social
structure that subsequently proved to be incorrect and impoverished.

Morgan, it will be recalled, believed that classificatory terminologies
were associated with the evolutionary emergence of unilinear descent
groups, that they reflected the great sway of kinship institutions
during most of human history, and that they were replaced by de-
scriptive terminologies during the transition from kinship to state-
organized societies. Krocber's attack followed the strategy that had
proved successful in his thesis. It was the same strategy that Boas
himself was about to sum up in The Mind of Primitive Man, namely,
an attempt to demonstrate that the allegedly sequential elements
can actually be found existing together in the same society at the
same time. Thus, Kroeber argued that the kinship terminologies of
all cultures, primitive or civilized, consisted of a mixture of classifica-
tory and descriptive tendencies. There was no general rule by which
one or the other form could be correlated with social structure. One
has only to consider the classificatory nature of such English terms as
“uncle” and “cousin” to realize that Morgan must have been carried
away by his schemes to have supposed that such practices were con-
fined to cultures on the clan level of organization. But Kroeber was
not content to restrict his attack to just this one point; his interest
lay in the “toppling” of Morgan’s whole developmental scheme. As
he explained much later when he wrote a preface for the publication
of his collected essays:

As an anthropologist in the face of Morgan, I could not well stop
there; both because his primary segregation into classificatory and
descriptive types did not hold water, and because it was easy to
show that internal conceptual logic, such as of reciprocity, anal-
ogy, and consistency, was sufficiently frequent and strong to pre-
vent sets of kinship terms being construed as mere reflections or
indices of marriage or other social institutions. Therewith the
whole of Morgan’s speculative schema of origin and development
of society seemed to me impaired or toppled. I continue to think
so until today [1952:172].

Kroeber eventually regretted his dogmatic refusal to accept the prin-
ciple that kin terminologies reflect social institutions. When the
English anthropologist W. H. R. Rivers challenged Kroeber’s stand,
Kroeber says about himself that he became “intransigent in rebuttal”
and that it was this which had led him to declare: “Terms of rela-
tionship reflect psychology, not sociology” (KROEBER 1952:181; orig.
190g). It would have been better to say, he admitted in 1952, “that as

322

part of language, kin term systems reflect unconscious logic and
conceptual patterning as well as social institutions” (KROEBER 1g52:
172).

Kroeber had previously proposed several substantial modifications
of the obiter dictum in question (1917b; 1917¢; 1934). Nonetheless,
he continued to reject any remnant of a causal relationship between
social organization and terminology. By 1919, he was willing to
admit that “institutions and terminologies unquestionably parallel or
reflect each other at least to the degree that a marked discrepancy of
plan is rare,” but in obedience to his basic philosophy of history,
and by means of fancy footwork, he continued to hedge on the
question of cause:

Institutions probably shape terminologies causally, but in the
main by influencing or permitting a logical scheme. In a sense,
this logical scheme underlies both institution and terminology, so
that the correlation between them, although actual, can be con-
ceived of as indirect [1952:189; orig. 1919b].

This position, with its emphasis on a “logical scheme” underlying
both terminology and social structure, led Kroeber in the direction
of an increasing concern with cultural “patterns” as the units of
cultural description. In the post-Boasian period, the search for the
underlying scheme or plan has been taken up by the “new ethnog-
raphy” in the guise of ethnosemantic analysis. The debt of this
movement to Kroeber's attack on Morgan will be duly noted in
subsequent chapters.

MORGAN VINDICATED

The irony in all this is that Kroeber’s original attack on the
distinction between classificatory and descriptive systems was based
on a false rendering of Morgan’s meaning. Morgan was aware of the
“lumping” characteristics of such terms as “cousin” and “uncle.” For
Morgan, descriptive terminologies are those in which terms applied
to lineal kinsmen are never applied to collaterals. This distinction
does serve to separate most primitive kinship terminologies from the
systems employed by most literate state societies. It does have evolu-
tionary significance, and it is basic to an understanding of the differ-
ential functions of kinship in stratified as opposed to egalitarian
social structures.

_As White (1959b) indicates, a long list of prominent anthropolo-
gists, including Goldenweiser, Tozzer, Stern, Penniman, Gillin,

323



===== PAGE 167 =====

?‘ B

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 12. Kroeber

Hoebel, Murdock, and Lowie, accepted Kroeber’s denial of the evolu-
tionary significance of the classificatory-descriptive dichotomy. Fortu-
nately, few anthropologists, even among the Boasians, agreed with
Kroeber’s “intransigent” insistence that kin-terminological systems
and social structure exhibited no orderly relationship. British social
anthropologists not only ignored Kroeber in this respect but even
managed to preserve Morgan’s original sense of the classificatory-
descriptive distinction. Thus, A. R. Radcliffe-Brown preceded White
by many years in suggesting that the reason for the confusion of
Kroeber and other American anthropologists concerning Morgan's
meaning was that Morgan had ceased to be consulted in the original.
“What Morgan meant by this term is quite clear from his writings
... but his definition is often ignored, perhaps because people no
longer bother to read him” (RADCLIFFE-BROWN, quoted in WHITE
1959b:385). Morgan’s approach to kinship terms and kinship groups
has been vindicated by scholars who remain as hostile to Morgan’s evo-
lutionary schema as Kroeber was back in 19og and again in 1952. With
the publication of George Peter Murdock’s Social Structure, Morgan’s
contribution to kinship analysis was re-established as a permanent
foundation of contemporary anthropology.

The scientific significance of kinship systems was first appreciated
by Morgan in what is perhaps the most original and brilliant
single achievement in the history of anthropology. That many
of Morgan’s particular interpretations are no longer acceptable
docs not diminish the luster of his work [MURDOCK 1949:91].

MISPLACED EUPHORIA

Murdock’s study owes to Morgan precisely what Kroeber
sought to topple, namely, the proposal to search for causal cross-cultural
correlations between kin-terminologies, social groupings, and mar-
riage patterns. It is surprising, therefore, to read in the preface to the
very volume just quoted that “. . . Krocber kept American anthro-
pology alive through an ineffectual generation by his originality, his
concern with vital issues, and his analytic insight” (MURDOCK 1949:xv)!
On the basis of Kroeber’s halting concessions to causality, which 1
have already cited, Murdock strains to achieve a sense of common
purpose, declaring, further along in the same book, that he “finds
himself in substantial agreement with practically all Kroeber's theo-
retical statements, save for a few obiter dicta.” Apparently, Kroeber
was not willing to pay the price of Murdock’s praise. In 1952, without
the slightest acknowledgment of Murdock’s attempt to develop a

324

scientific approach to social structure on the basis first proposed in
Morgan’s Systems (1870), Kroeber once again denied that such an
approach was feasible:

Morgan and Rivers had singled out particular terminological fea-
tures as caused by specific usages. This difference between them
and myself I continue to hold to as fundamental in the under-
standing of cultural manifestations. The causality that is involved
in culture has normally accumulated so long and so intricately
that on the whole very little of it can be specifically unraveled
with authenticity. Boas was big enough to realize this. But the
pioneers like Morgan, the men trained in laboratories like Rivers,
the ruck of social scientists hoping somehow to imitate physics,
kept and keep trying; and yet they achieve either only bits or
constructs that are mainly unreal. It is the pattern rather than
precise causation that is the meaningful result by and large
achievable in the study of culture—as the history of linguistics
should long ago have sufficed to teach us [KROEBER 1952:173].

It is not known if Kroeber specifically intended to include Murdock
among the “ruck,” but there is no doubt that Murdock was prac-
ticing social science on the physicalist model or as close as he could
get to it when he wrote Social Structure (see Chap. 21).

I dwell on this point because Kroeber inspired his colleagues to
feel that their irreconcilable theoretical positions were just on the edge
of euphoric harmony. The most remarkable instance occurred between
him and Leslie White on the issue of the “superorganic,” a case to
which we shall shortly return. Doctrinaire Marxists have emerged
from discussions with Kroeber convinced that if they could only

have gone on for a few more minutes, all the differences between
them would have evaporated.

KROEBER'S CREDO

Kroeber must have derived a special delight from these en-
counters, for there was nothing in his writings that justified the wide-
spread confusion surrounding his views on the great issues in social
science. The onus for this confusion certainly does not rest with
Krocber, in view of the forthright credo he delivered in his thirty-
ninth year under the title “The Eighteen Professions” (1915). This
article seems to have suffered an undeserved oblivion. I shall quote or
par?phrasc all eighteen “professions,” since they amount to the best
available summary of Kroeber’s version of historical particularism.

325

————— e e e e e et


===== PAGE 168 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

[1] The aim of history is to know the relations of social facts to the
whole of civilization . . . . Relation is actual connection, not cause.

[2] The material studied by history is not man, but his works, i.e., the
results of his deeds.

[3] Civilization, though carried by men and existing thrpugh icm,
is an entity in itself, and of another order from life. . . . History is not
concerned with the agencies producing civilization, but with civilization as
such. The causes are the business of the psychologist.

[4] A certain mental constitution must be assumed by the historian,
but may not be used by him as a resolution of social phenomena.

[5] True instincts lie at the bottom and origin of social phenomena,
but cannot be considered or dealt with by history.

[6] The personal or individual has no historical value, save as illustra-

tion.

[7] Geography, or physical environment, is material made use of by

civilization, not a factor shaping or explaining civilization.

[8] The absolute equality and identity of all human races must be

assumed by the historian.

[9] Heredity cannot be allowed as a significant factor in history.

10] Heredity by acquirement is a monstrosity. .

[11] Selection and other factors of organic evolution cannot be admitted

as affecting civilization.

12] The so-called savage is no transition between the animal and the

scientifically educated man. . . . All men are totally civilized. . . . There

is no higher and no lower in civilization for the historian.

13] There are no social species or standard cultural types or stages. . ..

A stage in civilization is merely a preconception made plausible by arbitrarily

sclected facts.

14] There is no ethnic mind, but only civilization. .

[15] There are no laws in history similar to the laws of physico-

chemical science. All asserted civilizational laws are at most tendencies. . . .

History does not deny them and may have to recognize them, but their

formulation is not its end.

16] History deals with conditions sine qua non, not with causes. The

relations between civilizational phenomena are relations of sequence, not

of effect.

17] The causality of history is teleological . ... this does not suggest

theology to those who are frce from theology. )
[18] In fine, the determinations and methods of biological, psychological,

or natural science do not exist for history.

THE SUPERORGANIC

In all essentials save one, Kroeber's “professions” faithfully
mirror Boas” influence. The exception is found in number six, Tht’:
personal or individual has no historical value, save as illustration.

326

B

12. Kroeber

Whereas Boas™ idiography led him increasingly in the direction of
interactive problems of personality and culture, Kroeber took the
culture concept in the opposite direction and argued for the complete
subordination of the individual to his cultural milieu. It was this
de-emphasis of the individual, elaborated at greater length in “The
Superorganic” (1917a) two years later, which convinced everybody
that Kroeber had departed from the Boasian fold. His “culturological”
remarks aroused great uneasiness among the Boasians, possibly be-
cause of the resemblance to exhortations of soap-box historical de-
terminists against the “great man” theory of history.

In “The Superorganic,” Kroeber made extensive appeal to the
“principle of the simultaneity of invention” to show that history
was determined by cultural patterns, not by individuals. There were
those who saw in the simultaneous rediscovery of Mendel’s principles
by DeVries, Correns, and Tschermak a “meaningless play of capri-
cious fortuitousness.” But to Kroeber, this kind of event revealed

. a great and inspiring inevitability which rises as far above
the accidents of personality as the march of the heavens tran-
scends the wavering contacts of random footprints on clods of
carth. Wipe out the perception of DeVries, Correns, and Tscher-
mak, and it is yet certain that before another year had rolled
around, the principles of Mendeclian heredity would have been
proclaimed to an according world, and by six rather than three
discerning minds [KROEBER 1917a:199].

Kroeber went on to claim that the subordination of the individual
to the culture pattern held true in all cultures, that everywhere the

individual (to return to Hegel) was the mere agent of culturological
forces:

Ericsson or Galvani eight thousand years ago would have polished
or bored the first stone; and in turn the hand and mind whose
operation set in inception the neolithic age of human culture,
would, if held in its infancy in unchanging catalepsy from that
time until today, now be devising wireless telephones and nitro-
gen extractors [ibid.:201].

THE CONTROVERSY WITH SAPIR

A reply to this heresy was issued at once by Edward Sapir,
who in addition to setting the pattern of anthropological linguistics,
maintained a lifelong interest in the field of personality and culture.
Sapir argued that it would require a belief in “social determinism
amounting to religion” to accept Kroeber’s viewpoint. Although he

327



===== PAGE 169 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

admitted that the “average historian” tended to exaggerate the deter-
mining influence of specific personalities, this was no reason to elim-
inate the individual from all consideration as a cultural factor. Sapir
then threw out a challenge which goes a long way toward explaining
the main thread of Kroeber's career. Kroeber was finding his superor-
ganic forces by a kind of trick:

Shrewdly enough Dr. Kroeber chooses his examples from the
realm of inventions and scientific theories. Here it is relatively
easy to justify a sweeping social determinism in view of a certain
general inevitability in the course of the acquirement of knowl-
edge. This inevitability, however, does not altogether reside, as
Dr. Kroeber seems to imply, in a social “force” but, to a very
large extent, in the fixity, conceptually speaking, of the objective
world. This fixity forms the sharpest of predetermined grooves
for the unfolding of man’s knowledge. Had he occupied himself
more with the religious, philosophic, aesthetic, and crudely voli-
tional activities and tendencies of man, I believe that Dr. Kroe-
ber’s case for the non-cultural significance of the individual would
have been a far more difficult one to make. , . . One has only to
think seriously of what such personalities as Aristotle, Jesus,
Mahomet, Shakespeare, Goethe, Beethoven mean in the history
of culture to hesitate to commit oneself to a completely non-indi-
vidualistic interpretation of history [SAPIR 1917:442-43]-

PATTERNS

Kroeber spent the rest of his career doing something very
similar to what Sapir had said could not be done: showing how pat-
terns of art, religion, philosophy, as well as of technology and science,
waxed and waned, acquired their characteristic content and kept roll-
ing majestically along, quite independently of particular individuals.
Among American Indians as well as the ancient Greeks, it is the cul-
tural pattern which summons forth geniuses in appropriate numbers,
whenever the time is ripe, be they Edisons or Christs.

As a matter of fact, it was Kroeber's special delight to pick out as-
pects of culture which seemed most vulnerable to the effect of indi-
vidual fancy and to demonstrate the existence of patterns unknown
to the culture carriers. His study of dress fashions, going back to an
inspiration first felt in 19og, was an impressive accomplishment along
these lines. By 1919 he had measured enough changes of evening gown
styles to identify regular pulsations in the width and length of skirt
and area of decolletage. There is a note of triumph in his conclusions:

328

12. Kroeber

We are all in the habit of talking glibly of how this year’s fashion
upsets that of last year. Details, trimmings, pleats, and ruffles,
perhaps colors and materials—all the conspicuous externalities
of dress—do undoubtedly alter fairly rapidly; and it is in the very
nature of fashion to bring these to the fore. They are driven into
our attention, and soon leave a blurred but overwhelming impres-
sion of incalculably chaotic fluctuations, of reversals that arc at
once bewildering and meaningless, of a sort of lightninglike
prestidigitation to which we bow in dumb rccognition of its un-
controllability. But underneath this glittering maze, the major
proportions of dress change rather with a slow majesty, in periods
often cxceeding the duration of human life . . . [KROEBER 1952:336;

orig. 1919a].

In 1940, collaborating with Jane Richardson, he published a statistical
study which covered three hundred years of fashion changes. The ex-
istence of unsuspected periodicities was confirmed, short-run “modes”
of style distinguished from the long-run patterns, and the role of the
haute couture designer explicitly assimilated to that of the genius in
biology or physics:

It is evident that the basic features of style as distinct from
more rapidly fluctuating mode, being taken for granted at any
given moment, are largely unconscious in the sense that they are
felt as axiomatic and derivations arc made from them, but they are
not tampered with, except again unconsciously. ’

This in turn scems to imply that the role of particular indi-
viduals in molding basic dress style is slight. The influence of
creative or important individuals is perhaps largely exerted on
the accessories of transient mode [ibid.:370; orig. 1940].

Kroeber maintained this diachronic and superorganic orientation right
.through the period of anthropology’s greatest retreat into psycholog-
ical reductionism and synchronic functionalism. During the twenties
and thirtics, the unconscious patterns which sct the limits for the “in”
look in social science and which governed the intellectual behavior of
the profession’s Christian Diors and Balenciagas cast Krocber in the
f‘ole of a potential if not actual wild-eyed radical. It definitely strained
bourgeois” anthropology to the limits of its patterns to insist history
could be studicd without becoming involved in individual biographies.
Even his “gurn” becamc alarmed and felt obliged to call for a purge of
thle mystical patterns that Krocber claimed were the decisive forces of
history: “It has been claimed,” wrote Boas, “that human culture is
something superorganic, that it follows laws that are not willed by any
individual participating in the culture, but that are inherent in the

329

e e


===== PAGE 170 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

culture itself. . . .” This was too much for Boas’ no-nonsense em-
piricism: “It seems hardly necessary to consider culture a mystic entity
that exists outside the society of its individual carriers, and that moves
by its own force” (Boas 1928:245).

CONFIGURATIONS

Kroeber’s fascination with the superorganic culminated in the
publication of the singularly monumental Configurations of Culture
Growth (1944). His wife, Theodora, has said that this book was the
product of seven years of labor, during which “every summer, every
holiday and free hour” (. krOEBER 1963:xviii) were devoted to it. Tt
was intended as a magnum opus. The task he assigned himself was no
less than that of discovering “the common features in the growth” of
philology, sculpture, painting, drama, literature, and music in Egypt,
Mesopotamia, India, Japan, Greece, Rome, Europe, and China. Al-
though he “cheerfully renounces search for causes” (1944:7), he does
ask the question, have civilizations been alike or unlike in producing
their “highest manifestations”?

Despite the prodigious research effort expended upon this task,
Configurations was a failure. Kroeber was able to discover no similari-
ties whatsoever in the abstract growth curves of different civilizations.
He did find everywhere the mysterious “patterns” exemplified by sud-
den simultaneous bursts of creative energy in one or several of the
aesthetic domains, but the climaxes were sometimes multiple, some-
times singular, sometimes confined to one or two domains, elsewhere
“across the board.” At a time when people like Sorokin, Spengler,
Toynbee, and other universal historians were propounding all sorts of
grand neo-Hegelian national destinies, Kroeber could find nothing but
unpredictable culture growths: “In reviewing the ground covered, I
wish to say at the outset that T see no evidence of any true law in
the phenomena dealt with; nothing cyclical, regularly repetitive, or
necessary” (KROEBER 1944:761).

METHODOLOGICAL ABUSES

Added to the painful disappointment of this labor, whose
fruit is nothing other than the elaboration of the concept of the super-
organic, is the diminishing resistance which Kroeber displays toward
reliance upon idiosyncratic and ethnocentric intuitions. Few anthro-
pologists would wish to accompany Kroeber in his self-assigned task,

330

12. Kroeber

essential to the methodology of Configurations, of evaluating the
worth of the aesthetic productions of different civilizations and differ-
ent phases of the same civilization: how far they tend to be “success-
ful” in their several activities simultaneously (ibid.:6). We are
evidently in the prescnce of a substantial retreat from the higher
standards of evidence demanded by Boas, when the assertion is made
that there was no growth of philosophy in Egypt, Mesopotamia,
Rome, and Japan; or when we are told that painting did not undergo
any significant development in Mesopotamia (ibid.:778). Anthropol-
ogists, having spent a good part of their lives with peasants and tribes-
men, tend to be a rather crusty and skeptical crew. It is disappointing
that their “grand old man” could have authored judgments which
relied so heavily upon the effete standards of salon gossip:

In occidental sculpture, Italy holds preeminence—Michelangelo
is considered as marking the culmination. But can we be certain
that he was inherently by his native gifts, a greater sculptor than
Ghiberti, Donatello, Bernini or Canova? . . . We rate Bernini
much lower. But can we be at all sure that in his imagination,
sense of form, technical skill, he was inferior to Michelangelo?
His themes, his invoking of emotions, and perhaps his taste were
on a lower level; but they were the emotions and taste of his age.
The same holds for Canova. For sculptural ability we cannot
with certainty rate him one notch below the highest; it is the
tepid neoclassicism of his period which we rate below Renais-
sance intensity [ibid.:14].

Can one seriously propose that “Good sculpture was produced in
Dynasties 1, IV, V, XII, XVIII, XXVI” (ibid.:241), or that “Japanese
sculpture was a great art from 600 to 1300,” or that “England, which
had real music until 1700, has had none since! According to Steward
(1961:1055), “Kroeber always remained a relativist. . . .” Indeed,
Kroeber himself reacted with pique to the suggestion by Dorothy
Gregg and Elgin Williams (1948) that overt value positions should
replace the covert values embodied in the “Dismal Science of Func-
tionalism” (sce p. 534). Asserting that this point of view would
“quickly undermine and destroy science,” Kroeber formulated three
professions which were not included in his 1915 article:

[1] The method of science is to begin with questions, not with answers,
least of all with value judgments.

[2] Science is dispassionate inquiry and therefore cannot take over out-
right any ideologies “already formulated in everyday life,” since these are

themselves inevitably traditional and normally tinged with emotional prej-
udice.

331



===== PAGE 171 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

[3] Sweeping all-or-none, black-or-white judgments are characteristic of
totalitarian attitudes and have no place in science, whose very nature is
inferential and judicial.

[KROEBER 1949:319].

If one admits that this affirmation of relativism is an appropriate re-
joinder to Gregg and Williams, it certainly merits application to much
of the substance and method of Configurations.

Although Configurations failed to identify any cross-cultural regu-
larities, Kroeber evidently drew satisfaction from demonstrating the
cluster effect of patterns upon the appearance of geniuses. This posi-
tion continued to attract the criticism of Boas and his students. Thus,
Ruth Benedict in Patterns of Culture (1934:231) accused Kroeber of
expressing himself in “mystical phraseology” by calling in “the super-
organic to account for cultural process.” In 1944 the philosopher David
Bidney joined the attack by accusing Kroeber of participating in the
“culturalistic fallacy” as shown in the

tendency to hypostasize culture and to conceive it as a tran-
scendental, superorganic, or superpsychic force which alone deter-
mines human historical destiny . . . with . . . the assumption
that culture is a force that may make and develop itself
[BIDNEY 1944:42, quoted in KROEBER 1948c:407].

Strongest support for Kroeber’s superorganic came from an unlikely
quarter. In Leslie White’s “The Fxpansion of the Scope of Science”
Kroeber is portrayed as one of the few anthropologists who “have
undertaken to formulate the philosophy of a science of culture”
(WHITE 19492:90; orig. 1947). It has of course been clear at least since
Hegel that a scientific approach to sociocultural phenomena must
proceed on the assumption that individual choices are the products
of and not the originators of social forces. Hence, the first step toward
a science of culture is nece.sarily the one which Kroeber had taken in
the “Superorganic.” But Kroeber took just that one step and then no
more. It is a curious commentary on White’s isolation as an histor-
ical determinist that he should have felt obliged to enlist Kroeber
among the standard-bearers of his “science of culture.” Kroeber, while
expressing a high regard for White, never missed an opportunity to
dissociate himself from that larger enterprise. He and White merely
shared the belief that culture is a distinct level of phenomena which,
although reducible to lower levels in theory, cannot in practice be so
reduced without diminishing our chances of understanding it. But
beyond this reaffirmation of the value of the superorganic concept on
exclusively heuristic grounds, Kroeber made certain epistemological
concessions to his critics which produced harmony at the expense of

332

12. Kroeber

enlightenment: “I take this opportunity of formally and publicly re-
canting,” wrote Kroeber, “any extravagances and overstatements of

which I may have been guilty through overardor of conviction, in my
‘Superorganic.””

As of 1948 it scems to me both unnecessary and productive of
new difficulties, if, in order to account for the phenomena of
culture, one assumes any entity, substance, kind of being,
or set of scparate, autonomous and wholly self-sufficient forces

[1948c:407-8].

For my part I am ready to concede that culture exists only in

persons in the sense that it resides, has its locus, only in them
[ibid.:408].

As part of this same recantation, Kroeber modified the stand he had
taken concerning the relationship between culture and individual be-
havior. Acknowledging a debt to Bidney, he proposed that Aristotle’s
distinction between “efficient” and “formal” cause is relevant. Indi-
viduals are the efficient causes; culture is the formal cause. But Kroe-
ber further assures us that a formal cause is nothing like the kind of
cause with which science is concerned. And indeed it is not. For the
only meaning to be derived from Kroeber’s proposal that culture is a
“formal” cause, in the context of his explicit hostility to historical de-
terminism, is that culture is culture. His new position follows: “So
far as the latter (mechanicalscientific causes) are concerned, the
prospect seems to me that they will continue to reside in the psychic
or psychosomatic level” (ibid.:412). But this is precisely the position
set forth in Profession Number 3, in 1915, and corresponds exactly to
Boas’ final conclusion concerning the possibility of formulating cul-
tural laws. The futility of the entire exchange between Bidney, White,
and Krocber is its most salient feature. As far as the epistemological
problem of the nature of culture is concerned, Kroeber's retreat to an
Aristotelian deus ex machina merely intensified the lack of clarity
which had characterized his earlier enthusiasm for the Superorganic.
His “recantation” helped not one bit to set the matter straight and
indeed was nothing more than an unnecessary and irrelevant reas-
surance that he did not believe in ghosts.

THE REALITY OF CULTURAL THINGS

A kindly historian, Philip Bagby, was the first to place Kroe-
ber § recantation in proper perspective. Starting from the position
that if culture was anything worth talking about, it was an abstraction

333



===== PAGE 172 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

built up from the observation of behavior, Bagby disposed at once of
the question of the “reality” of cultural things:

The regularities which the anthropologist studies are just as real
as the subjects of the other sciences or indeed as the objects of
ordinary discourse. If we had defined culture in terms of some
such hypothetical construct as values we should be on shaky
ground, but we have defined it in terms of behavior and no one
doubts the reality of behavior. . . . Of course, it is true that cul-
ture has no substance; it is composed of forms and nothing more.
But in the view of almost all modern philosophers, idealists as
well as positivists, this is equally true of everything else. There
was no need for Kroeber to make his famous recantation . . . to
object to the reification of culture is to object to talking about it
at all [BAGBY 1953:541].

Bagby here pointed the way to the attempt to solve the question of
“reductionism” by showing precisely how, starting with the smallest
idiosyncratic bits of behavior, it is possible to construct a data lan-
guage of progressively higher-order abstractions (cf. HARRIS 1964a).
None of the people who were engaged with Krocber in arguing the
“reality” of cultural things had made themselves face the issue of how
one observes such entities in the first place. When this question, the
question of operational procedures, is squarely faced, the problem
turns out to be not how to reduce cultural entities to psychological
phenomena, but rather how to move from the facts of individual be-
havior to constructs such as “patrisib,” “matrilateral cross-cousin mar-
riage,” and “Oriental despotism.”

STYLES AND SUPER-STYLES

After Configurations, Kroeber's substantive contributions be-
came more frankly intuitive and aesthetic. As his wife, Theodora, ex-
plains in the introduction to his posthumous An Anthropologist Looks
at History:

‘When Configurations was at last behind him, Kroeber came out
literally on the sunny side of it, somehow free at last as he had not
felt before, to add his sensibility to form, styles, values, and aes-
thetic truths to his other approaches to the always fascinating
phenomena of culture. This sensibility should have been given
fuller expression in a book on the arts [T. KROEBER 1963:xviii].

Kroeber’s inclination during the last two decades of his life was to
deal with the question of growths of civilizations without bothering
with the encyclopedic inventories which had given Configurations its

334

12. Kroeber

saving claim as an inductive product. Instead, the free play of intuition
characteristic of the more lurid judgments in Configurations was now
explicitly defended. Each civilization is to be characterized by a
multiplicity of patterns whose common denominators added up to its
particular style or “super-style.” Kroeber himself suggested the com-
parison between these “super-styles” and the kind of pattern portraits
which Ruth Benedict had achieved. The comparisons reveal the fun-
damental connectedness of Benedict and Kroeber within the historical-
particularistic tradition. Although Benedict's patterns are described
in a psychological idiom, this is a superficial difference. As far as Kroe-
ber was concerned, the only important distinction between his ap-
proach and Benedict’s was that his portraits were to be dynamic,
covering the early as well as mature phases of style growths (1963:72—
74). Thus, the approach Kroeber now favored was that of pluralistic
and diachronic formulations, exemplified in Toynbee, Spengler, and
Danilevsky (ibid.:77-83). His styles are like organic growths, unfold-
ing through time in an irreversible but inexplicable process.

Although Kroeber reaffirmed his belief that “successful insight into
the nature and history of human civilizations or cultures will be made
via an empirical route, by means of something akin to natural his-
tory” (ibid.:83), his method for identifying “super-styles” scarcely
conformed to empiricist models. “The mental processes called for in
dealing with styles are somewhat different from those ordinarily used
by the historian or scientist” (ibid.:71). What is needed is the kind of
faculty we call on when we identify individuals or identify organisms
as members of this or that species. It is a “total, immediate and final
judgment,” and it “is neither inductive nor deductive.” Artists and
biologists seem to best represent the necessary qualities.

The creative artist undoubtedly is highly sensitive in his ability
to recognize both particular and patterned or stylistic identity in
the field of his creativity. However, this faculty is one which is
ordinarily not called for to any notable degree in the prosecution
of scientific research, especially of the laboratory type. It does en-
ter into many aspects of humanistic scholarship. In science it is
perhaps most called for in the basic natural history aspects of
biology—the accumulation of a broad organized body of under-
lying knowledge on which the remainder of biologic science
largely rests, and which is often designated as systematic or
taxonomic biology [ibid.:71]

Kroeber in thus comparing artist to biologist neglected to take into
account the relationship between species identification and the for-
mulation of the principles of natural selection and other lawful bio-

335



===== PAGE 173 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 12. Kroeber

logical processes. It is the fact that species differences have proven
useful in the formulation of these principles that establishes their
scientific worth. There is thus a fundamental difference between the
paintings hanging on the walls of an art museum and the taxonomies
developed within the science of life. One makes possible the system-
atic exploration of hypotheses concerning the recurrent processes of
nature, and the other does not. Kroeber’s proposal to classify civi-
lizations on the basis of intuited styles shows little promise of making
such a contribution. Indeed, Kroeber himself repeatedly rejected the
possibility that anything like a theory of natural selection would ever
be achieved by social science.

ANTISCIENCE

The point here is not that room is lacking in anthropology
for the kind of artistic empathizing which Kroeber regarded as the
central part of his professional legacy. To be against empathy is after
all something like being opposed to motherhood or baseball. The ob-
jections arise not from one’s wish to cut off the approach, but rather
in reaction to Kroeber's aggressive opposition to research strategies
which could conceivably have led to the formulation of lawful dia-
chronic and synchronic processes. This opposition, because it began as
a full-fledged dogma, because it was frequently repeated, and because it
often disguised itself in a reflective rhetoric that gave the impression
of an open mind, is an onus which all of the historical particularists
must shoulder.

Kroeber rejected the possibility of a scientific approach to history
in his 1901 thesis on Arapaho art; he repeated the objection in the
1915 “Professions,” the 1917 “Superorganic,” the 1919 and 1940 dress
design papers, and the 1944 Configurations. He declared in 1920:
“There are in short no causal explanations” (1920b:380). He insisted
that parallel evolution was a rarity and he even doubted if “the ten-
dency of agriculture to be followed by town life,” constitutes an ac-
ceptable example (1923:238). In 1943 he doubted that the patterns
of Old and New World agriculture provided a valid basis for cross-
cultural comparison (1952:89-91). In 1938 he declared, “the findings
of history can never be substantiated like proofs of natural science”
(ibid.:79). He consistently belittled the nomothetic approach and
followed Boas to the conclusion that all generalizations would neces-
sarily be vapid: “Allegations of regular recurrences in culture refer to
shadowy, large resemblances which are only dubiously substantiable

336

because they are not precisely definable” (ibid.:132). He thought the
concepts of the clan and feudalism among others were quite useless

because actual cultural content of such general concepts has been

acquired . . . during . . . historical development, which is al-

ways complex and always tending toward the unique as historians

have long ago learned to take for granted [ibid.:134; italics added].

Krocber was entitled to his empathy, but he was not justified in

flicking away two centuries of social science by asserting in 1957 of

civilizations: “we know as good as nothing of what produced their
wholes” (1957:79).

KROEBER AND STEWARD

There is an increasingly ironic quality in Kroeber’s denial of
the possibility of a scientific understanding of historical processes.
During the forties and fifties a generation of his own students were
already pioneering in the renaissance of the comparative method and
the quest for historical causal sequences. In Kroeber's festschrift,
presented to him on his sixticth birthday, Julian Steward proposed
“that every cultural phenomenon is the product of some definite
cause or causes.” Kroeber seems to have ignored Steward’s ecological
explanation of hunting and gathering bands, a decisive event in the
history of anthropological theory (see p. 666).

At the momentous 1947 Viking Fund conference on Peruvian
archaeology, held in New York, Kroeber presided as William Duncan
Strong, Pedro Armillas, Gordon Willey, and Julian Steward delivered
papers which demonstrated the central influence of techno-environ-
mental factors in the evolution of new world civilizations, and thereby
flung wide the door to precisely the kind of scientific explanations
that Kroeber had scorned. Steward, in particular, acquired from this
conference the boldness to propose that “agricultural proficiency, pop-
ulation density, settlement patterns, sociological complexity, and craft
technologies were functionally related” and that there were probably
“certain regularities in the development of these features in the dif-
ferent arcas of native American high cultures” (STEWARD 1048:103).
Krocber’s response to these suggestions which have come to dominate
contemporary archacological research and which show promise of

achieving a similar degree of importance in ethnology (sce Chap. 23)
was uncomprehending as well as patronizing:

) The archacologist, of course, cannot commence with considera-
tions as remote from evidence as these. He has to begin with ob-
jects which are material and which . . . show style. . . . Not

337



===== PAGE 174 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

having worked at first hand in the Peruvian field, [Steward’s] de-
sire to convert the stylistic period-concepts into economic-politi-
cal ones is natural—espccially in view of his previous correlations
of ccological with socio-political factors. On the other hand, those
like Bennet who have been active in Peruvian prehistory for
twenty years, and with whom it has been the main specific field of
study, are likely to go somewhat more slowly. . . . This is not in
the way of a slur, because Steward has had half a dozen years of
editing the great South American Handbook. But his knowledge
is synthetic and tends therefore to be strong precisely on perspec-
tive. It is fortunate that we should have here participants like him,
pushing eagerly and perhaps straining interpretation to the ut-
most [KROEBER 1948b:115].

Steward’s ideas were interesting baubles. They appear to have been
incapable of deflecting Kroeber’s determination to regard each civi-
lization as a fundamentally unique stylistic growth. In Kroeber’'s own
approach the cards remained stacked against nomothetic explanations
of the Peruvian sequence by avoiding questions concerning the nature
of productive and distributive systems in relation to social stratifi-
cation, political organization, warfare, demography, and settlement
patterns. None of these had received sustained treatment in Con-
figurations.

Kroeber's rather frigid reception of Steward’s ideas reposes at a
sharp angle against Steward’s own steady respect for his former teacher.
Oddly enough, Steward does not appear to be overly uncomfortable
with Kroeber’s rejection of cultural ecology as a method for the solution
of the great questions which Kroeber’s own approach so conspicuously
failed to achieve. It is of course unlikely that an obituary article would
contain strong criticism of a beloved colleague and mentor, but there
is one circumstance yet to be discussed which requires us to believe
that Steward did not feel as intellectually removed from Kroeber as
the surface content of their positions might at first suggest:

In spite of my views, which differ in some ways from Kroeber's,
I am deeply convinced that Kroeber’s five hundred odd publica-
tions are, and will be for many decades, an almost inexhaustible
mine not only of information but of problems, concepts, and hy-
potheses which have not yet made sufficient impact upon the
world of scholarship. 1 have tried to indicate that Krocber fre-
quently touched, with deep insights, many problems that searchers
for causes might well heed. Some of his syntheses and inter-
pretations could readily be classed as “hard science” [STEWARD

1961:1059)].
338

12. Kroeber

KROEBER AS ECOLOGIST

Kroeber’s early interest in regional surveys of aboriginal cul-
tures, as exemplified in his Handbook of the Indians of Cadlifornia
(1925), gave priority of treatment to religion and ideology. Later, he
approached the construction of culture areas by means of increasingly
elaborate statistical manipulations of disjointed trait-clement lists
consisting of as many as six thousand items (see Chap. 14). But when
it came to the formulation of his definitive 1939 statement, Cultural
and Natural Areas of Native North America, he departed from these
earlier methods and followed instead the example set by Clark Wissler
(1926) and Otis T. Mason (1894b:148). Kroeber now set up his basic
regional categories to reflect modes of subsistence and population
density. These in turn he saw as closely related in most cases to the
potentialities of the natural habitat. His position with respect to the
culture-environment equations was typically eclectic along the lines
being proposed by C. Daryll Forde (1934) (see p. 664) and based on
the assumption

. . that on the one hand culture can be understood primarily
only in terms of cultural factors, but that on the other hand no
culture is wholly intelligible without reference to the noncul-
tural or so-called environmental factors with which it is in relation
and which condition it [KROEBER 1939:205].

There are, however, very few regularities, if any, to be derived from
this relationship.

. . the interactions of culture and environment become ex-
ceedingly complex when followed out. And this complexity makes
generalization unprofitable, on the whole. In each situation or
area different natural factors are likely to be impinging on cul-
ture with different intensity [ibid.].

Thus although Kroeber systematically explored North American
environment-culture interrelationships, mapping limits of natural
floral and faunal provinces against the distribution of cultigens, and
evaluating the best estimates of precontact human population, he was
far from achieving a consistent ecological approach. For example, in
attempting to explain the low population density of the Eastern
Woodlands, he quickly retreated to the position that the underlying
factor was the absence of the “idea of the state” (1939:149). The
theoretical viewpoint harked back to Friedrich Ratzel; Kroeber did not

339

|


===== PAGE 175 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

see in the techno-environmental equation much beyond that of a
vaguely restrictive or permissive parameter. The creative aspects of
the cultural traditions which come to be identified with particular nat-
ural provinces are never predictable in any but a negative sense from
the environmental givens. He certainly never went so far as to suggest,
as Steward had already begun to do, that a similar techno-environmen-
tal core would tend to be causally and functionally related to similar
social structures. Nonetheless, given Steward’s own tendency to with-
draw from—or at least to vacillate around—the definition of culture
core from which ideology is sometimes excluded and sometimes in-
cluded (see p. 661), Kroeber’s Cultural and Natural Areas must be
reckoned as an accomplishment that anticipates many of Steward’s
own interests, especially as expressed in the initial treatment of culture
areas in the Handbook of the South American Indians. As we shall
sec later on (Chap. 23), Steward shifted his approach to culture
areas in the middle of editing and writing the Handbook’s six vol-
umes. Nonetheless, there was enough cultural ecology in Kroeber’s
treatment of North American culture areas to establish a close affin-
ity between it and both the initial and subsequent treatments in the
Handbook. Steward’s debt to Kroeber is thus more than that of
sentiment.

But there is a final irony in the relationship between these two men.
Cultural and Natural Areas was actually the prelude to Kroeber’s fas-
cination with civilizational growths conceived as far as possible with-
out regard to their techno-environmental-economic bases or cores.

CLIMAX AREA AND THE ROAD TO
CONFIGURATIONS

Kroeber certainly gave no indication that he regarded the
ecological aspects of Cultural and Natural Areas as a central theoret-
ical contribution. Instead, he chose to regard the refinements of
culture areas by means of the concepts of “cultural intensity” and
“climax” as the most important basis for his future work. According
to Kroeber, each of the six major North American areas, with the
exception of the Eskimo, contained a climax subarea which exhibited
the “highest intensity” of the area’s patterns. In addition each of the
areas relative to each other was depicted as possessing a particular level
of intensity on a scale of one to seven. Kroeber admitted that his
identification of the climax areas and of their relative intensities was
for the time being “no more than a personal estimate” (1939:223).

340

12. Kroeber

It is of course symptomatic of Kroeber’s inflexible theoretical position
that he did not attempt to define intensity and climax in terms of the
eminently measurable factors of population density, total population
involved in a common production and distribution network, size and
duration of armies and concentrated corvée labor, or other factors re-
lated to general evolutionary processes. No one has ever taken up his
suggestion to measure intensity and climax by counting fragmented
trait lists. This procedure would be a waste of time since as long as
each trait is weighted evenly and as long as there is no agreement on
how to count them, a canoe paddle might count as much as a twenty-
million-cubic-foot pyramid.

Comparison of culture arcas from the point of view of levels of in-
tensity can be achieved with greater objectivity and theoretical signif-
icance by employing Steward’s concept of “levels of socio-cultural
integration” (see p. 377). Once again, there is the shadowy anticipation
of the approach Steward was to develop; but Kroeber was in reality
traveling along a rapidly diverging track. He was off on the road to
configurations, to the subtleties of unique stylistic growths:

Parallels with historic civilizations suggest themselves. Wherever
one of these attained a clearly recognizable culmination, this
seems to have corresponded essentially with a period of successful
organization of culture content—organization in part into a con-
scious system of ideas, but especially into an integrated nexus of
styles, standards and values [KROEBER 1939:225].

The relationship between Kroeber’s treatment of culture areas and
Configurations has been correctly understood by Milton Singer:

It is noteworthy that he developed this concept of “climax” when
he was finishing his book Cultural and Natural Areas of Native
North America, just before he turned to a serious study of civi-
lizations. His theory of civilizations is thus continuous with his
theory of preliterate cultures and his work on archacology. The
findings of the Configurations of Culture Growth in any case give
support to the general conclusions of the Culture Areas study on
the relations of growth culminations to degree and intensity of
organization of culture content: namely, that the growth peak of
a civilization tends to coincide with a period of successful organi-
zation of culture content—that is, the organization of ideas,
styles, and standards. Kroeber sees cultural creativity and assimila-
tion running ahead of organization before the culmination, and
running behind it after, as the organization tends more and more
to repetition and rigidity [1963:vi].

341



===== PAGE 176 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE DETERMINIST ILLUSION

Singer’s theoretical position, it is interesting to note, is ideal-
ist and antideterminist, providing not the slightest opening for recon-
ciliation with that of Steward. Yet Singer has no difficulty in
wholeheartedly embracing Kroeber’s contributions, even the super-
organic. Singer’s version of Kroeber’s theoretical position is much more
aceurate than that of Steward. Singer points out three features of
Kroeber’s theory of culture which have contributed to “an impression

of determinism.”

(1) Because culture patterns abstract from the events of history
and from the concrete acts of particular individuals the impres-
sion arises that individuals and their choices and actions do not
count. (2) This impression is reinforced by the fact that, in the
long view of history which Kroeber takes, particular individuals are
rarely visible or known. (3) Finally, the descriptions of patterns
are apt to be read as laws of general application [ibid.:vii].

These impressions, continues Singer, are misleading. ‘What seems like
deterministic laws are merely the patterned way people have of acting,
thinking, and doing things. Kroeber’s “repression” of individuals is
merely a methodological procedure for holding psychological and other
noncultural factors constant in order to permit the study of the
“quality and sequences” of cultural forms. Kroeber was not concerned
to investigate the relationship of these forms to individual personality
just as he was not interested in their relationship to social structure,
social organization, “and many other factors” (among which presum-
ably Singer was referring to environment, technology, demography,
production, and distribution). These other things “were problems to
be investigated by others.” “Kroeber's theory of culture does not
necessarily imply any strict determinism or causality, cultural or oth-
erwise” (ibid.).

The attempt by Steward, Murdock, White, and others to identify
Kroeber with neo-evolutionism and scientific varieties of determinism
is unfounded and wholly misses the point of Kroeber's anthropological
style, which in every respect remained well within the Boasian pro-
gram, inheriting all of its initial limitations of theory and method,
adding to them only in ways appropriate to a frank denial of scientific
pretense.

342

——_—_———Yﬁ

§

Lowie

At least as erudite as Kroeber (without the charisma), probably to
this day.unsurpusssd in his knowledge of primitive ethnography, Rob-
ert Lowie was by far the most sophisticated advocate of, and lat’er the
most effective defender of, the historical-particularist position. In
LOW.IE, the Boasian program came closest to achieving that most es-
sential of all scientific standards, the capacity to sustain a continuous
and self-correcting expansion of knowledge. Unlike Kroeber, Lowie’s
underst?nding of cultural theory matured along empirically viable and
thForetlcally productive lines. It is Lowie who provides the safest
bridge across the abyss of particularist no-nothingism back to the
master builders of the nineteenth century. However, despite the clar-
I;Iy and honcstyvof the personal vision to which his work was devoted
there were barriers to the perfection of his understanding of cultumi
processes over which he could not rise and which maintained him
perpetually within the Boasian mold.
mg:(lilkhe] mamyt of his contemporaries, Lowie’s dedication to Boas was
fooed | th:anal tempt to appraise the precise epistemological implica-

oasian program with respect to the main currents of un-

343


===== PAGE 177 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

folding Western philosophies. He possessed a capacity unique among
his contemporaries, to represent that program as the embodiment of
the finest flowering of empiricism, by which anthropology could win
and hold a proud position among the natural sciences. Intuited visions
of art and myth triumphantly veiling the inner mysteries of human life
had little appeal for him. Unlike Kroeber, he did not for long
propose the futility of science applied to history. Indeed, in most re-
spects, Lowie’s conception of scientific method as exemplified in his
own programmatic pronouncements is unimpeachable. Whereas Kroe-
ber’s errors are clearly the result of imperfect method, of a premature
hardening against a nomothetic approach, Lowie’s most serious lapses
are of a totally different nature. In the long run, one has the impres-
sion that he was led astray, not by a faulty model of social science,
but by his failure to apply the model he espoused. Lowie is be-
trayed by facts—by false facts collected to an astonishing degree as
part of the Boasian program. But there is no denying that Lowie
was also the victim of the antimaterialist current that swirled around
him and whose strength he drastically underestimated. In the final
analysis these currents impaired the fiber of his skepticism, lowered
his resistance to hearsay, and prevented him from challenging the
prevailing views of primitive economic life. Exasperatingly rigorous
in everything else, he willingly permitted himself to be guided by a
pack of veritable old wives” tales whenever he was obliged to consider
the claims of cultural materialism.

Initially, there was, by Lowie’s own admission, a powerful influence
exerted over his own work by the “Southwest German” school of phi-
losophy—Dilthey, Windelband, and Rickert. Thus, Lowie speaks of
himself as having been led by the “idiographic conception of history”
to “deprecate Schurtz’s and Webster’s ‘belief in a law of social evo-
lution’ as ‘unhistorical’ ” (LowIE 1956b:1008). This influence however,
became progressively more diluted. Before mid-carcer it was distinctly
less important in shaping Lowie’s outlook than was the influence of
Emst Mach, to whom we return in a moment. Lowie was too firmly
committed to the exposure and combat of premature generalizations
to permit himself to dogmatize the idiographic proposals that Kroeber
incorporated into the “Eighteen Professions.” Indeed, Lowie eventu-
ally came to regard the dogma that scientific causes could not be found
in history as a “pusillanimous” subterfuge:

The ficld of culture, then, is not a region of complete lawlessness.
Like causes produce like effects here as clsewhere, though the
complex conditions with which we are grappling require unusual

344

13. Lowie

caution in definitely correlating phenomena. It is true that Ameri-
can ethnologists have shown that in several instances like phe-
nomena can be traced to diverse causes; that, in short, unlike
antecedents converge to the same point. However, at the risk of
being anathematized as a person of utterly unhistorical mentality,
I must register my belicf that this point has been overdone and
that the continued insistence on it by Americanists is itself an
illustration of cultural inertia. . . . Nevertheless, in contradis-
tinction to some of my colleagues and to the position I myself
once shared, T now believe that it is pusillanimous to shirk the
real problem involved, and that in so far as any explanation ad-
mits the problem, any explanation is preferable to the flaunting
of fine phrases about the unique character of cultural phenomena
[1929:88-90].

INFLUENCE OF ERNST MACH

The pedigree that Lowie sought to establish for Boasian an-
thropology was not the neo-Kantianism of Dilthey, Rickert, and Win-
delband, but that of the hardest of hardheaded pragmatists, Ernst
Mach. The relationship between Mach and Lowie was a prolonged
one based upon personal acquaintance and an informal correspon-
dence. Apparently, Lowie’s interest in Mach developed out of the
discussions of the philosophy of science among the members of a
group called the “Pearson Circle.” This was a club established by
Lowie and other Columbia University graduate students whose mem-
bers studied the implication of Karl Pearson’s portrayal of science as an
ethic and a “calling,” for their own disciplinary careers. By 1911 Low-
ie’s enthusiasm for Mach had advanced to a point of consummate
devotion: In that year, it was he who proposed Mach to honorary
membership in the New York Academy of Science.

In presenting to your notice the name of Ernst Mach, I propose
not merely the greatest historian of physics, not only an original
experimenter and thinker in the field of psychology and a keen
logician of scientific method, but the founder and leader of a new
and genuine scientific liberalism [1947:65n].

Tt will not be possible here to digress into a study of Mach’s major
contributions to philosophy. In main outline however, it can be said
that Mach was committed to the rooting out of all vestiges of meta-
Physics from every branch of science. These vestiges he saw as linger-
g on especially in the mechanistic categories of space, time, matter,
and of causality attributed to mechanical “forces.” Radically empiri-

345

—————es e et et tme e


===== PAGE 178 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

cist in all of his thinking, Mach also showed strong positivist affinities.
Like Comte, he stressed the irrelevance of explanation via metaphys-
ical constructs. The business of science is to describe the functional
relations between phenomena, not to explain them.

Suffice it to say that one has not the slightest difficulty in accepting
Mach’s views as a basis for scientific methodology. According to
Lowie, Mach was to be admired for his “tough mindedness,” and who
could object to such a posture? “He abhorred systems, he eliminated
the supernatural, he looked askance upon the use of hypotheses, de-
manding description rather than explanation” (1916a:335). It should
not be concluded from the disparagement of hypothesis, that Lowie,
following Mach, intended to deprive the scientific method of the
interplay between hypothesis and experiment; rather, the emphasis
is upon eliminating the nonempirical metaphysical and hypothetical
residues from the descriptive end-product:

Ernst Mach’s denial of hypothesis is a denial of the existential
character of the conditions or things, supposed in the proposition
which are purely imaginative or drawn from analogy, or beyond
empirical proof. This is simply a reiteration in slightly varied
form, of Mach’s . . . thesis that description and not explanation
is the business of science [WEINBERG 1937:44].

Lowie certainly did not shy away from making hypotheses concerning
sociocultural processes; on the contrary, his writings are rich in for-
mulations concerning the origin and functioning of sodalities, kinship
groups, and kinship rules. What he objected to was any weakening of
the empiricist standards on behalf of preserving poorly studied or
imaginary entities as part of the description of a particular domain.
This objection is rendered explicit in the enthusiastic exegesis that he
performed on Goldenweiser's study of totemism. The latter had
cleared away an accretion of fanciful hypotheses associated with such
luminaries as Frazer, Freud, and Durkheim by showing that the entity,
“totemism,” consisted of a number of elements assumed to be in sta-
ble association but which in reality were sometimes absent or com-
bined in markedly different ways.

What was at first supposed to be a neccssary connection is re-
duced to a mere conjunction of elements. Thought is no longer
arrested by a contemplation of the mystic underlying units and
their relations with the observed elements; to determine the na-
ture and interrelations of those elements themselves becomes
the highest, nay the only possible, goal of investigation
[LowIE 19114, in DU BOIS 1960:306].

346

13. Lowie

There is no doubt that Lowie pictured Boas as the man whose mission
it had become to impose Mach’s program upon anthropology. Lowie’s
perspective on Boas was thus always somewhat in the nature of a
double image in which Boas and Mach blurred into a single heroic
figure:

In the domain of physical science, a critical reformation of this
type has been, within recent decades, effected by Professor Ernst
Mach. In ethnology, the school which has set itself a correspond-
ing aim, which endeavors to supplant the traditional belief in
mystic ethnological complexes with a deeper, though, it may be,
still only proximate, analysis into provisional elements, is the
school headed by Professor Franz Boas [ibid.].

From this perspective, the negative, picayune, and dilettantish as-
pects of the Boasian movement take on a bright new clean look. We
can accept Lowie’s reminiscences about turn-of-the-century anthro-
pology with wholehearted approval. When he writes that the Boasian
movement was not the concoction of isolationists, nor the creation of
people who abhorred generalization, and whose intellectual aspirations
rose no higher than the question of whether the Plains Indians put up

tepees on four or five poles, there is certainly no reason to doubt his
memory:

The point is that by 1900 the intellectual climate had changed.
- .. What had figured as the quintessence of scientific insight
suddenly shrank into a farrago of dubious hypotheses. . . . Criti-

cal votaries . . . had simply arrived at higher standards of proof
[LowE 1956b:1006].

The only question is whether Lowie and his fellow Boasians were
willing or able to apply these higher standards of proof when the is-

sues before them related to the validity of cultural materialism and
historical determinism.

CRITIQUE OF MORGAN

In 1920, Lowie published the singularly most important and
most exasperating book in the historical-particularist tradition. Com-
mencing with its corrective title, Primitive Society (with the emphasis
upon Primitive), this work served the function of introducing a wide
auc!ience to the major flaws in Lewis Henry Morgan’s Ancient Society
(with the emphasis upon Ancient). After the publication of Lowie’s
book, no one who proposed to make use of anthropological findings
could cite Morgan without running the risk of being caught in with-

347



===== PAGE 179 =====

The Risc of Anthropological Theory

ering error. Yet, as we look back upon this achievement, across half a
century of new evidence and new perspectives, we may detect in
Lowie’s arguments just about as much chaff as he was able to find in
his predecessor. To spell out all that is right and all that is wrong in
Primitive Society would require a book in itself. It is a pity, but
symptomatic of contemporary anthropology’s bootless, headlong
plunge away from its past, that no one has seen fit or found the time
to write that book. Yet no understanding of contemporary anthro-
pological theory is admissable which does not begin by righting the
balance between Lowie and Morgan. Only the briefest of summaries
can be attempted here.

First, on the positive side, we may dispense with the notion that
Primitive Society was an “antievolutionary” treatise. As we have seen,
Lowie rightly objected to Leslic White’s characterization of the Boas-
ians as being guilty of a “reactionary philosophy of antievolution.”
This is a complete misrepresentation of the problem, not only for
the Boasians but also for all the other major schools of contemporary
anthropology. To confuse Lowic’s position with the kind of anti-
evolutionism that the proponents of degeneration theory, such as De
Maistre, had offered before Spencer and Darwin swept the field is a
grave injustice.

LOWIE'S EVOLUTIONISM

Primitive Society is nothing if it is not a major contribution
to the theory of cultural evolution. It is such a contribution because
time and again in its pages Morgan’s view of the sequence of the
emergence of specific institutions on both a worldwide and more lo-
calized basis are examined, criticized, and reformulated with the
positing of a new sequence. Thus Lowie correctly rejects the notion,
shared by Morgan, Lubbock, McLennan, and many other nineteenth-
century theorists that the earliest form of marriage was group promis-
cuity. He does so, not because of antievolutionism but because there
is insufficient evidence to establish such a condition. He further rejects
Morgan’s notion of a succeeding stage of group marriage involving a
set of brothers and a set of sisters. He rejects this not because he
rejects evolution, but because Morgan’s interpretation of Hawaiian
kinship terminology as a survival of the time when all fathers and
mothers were also brothers and sisters had become utterly untenable
in relationship to standard ethnographic knowledge of Polynesia. In the
light of such knowledge nothing could be more absurd than to propose
that the Hawaiians (who arc nowadays seen as having had an incipient

348

Rl

13.

Lowie
form of Oriental despotism) were on the lowest levels of “Savag-
ery.” Since almost all contemporary primitives present some form of
nuclear family, Lowie comes to the conclusion that the family is a
primeval human grouping. This conclusion may run counter to Marx-
ist evolutionary dogma, but it does not constitute, in Lowie’s han-
dling of it, a refutation of evolutionary theory in general. On the
contrary, he is mainly concerned to show that Morgan was wrong in
attempting to demonstrate that sibs (gens in Morgan’s terminology)
evolved before the monogamous family. Lowie insists that the sequence
should be reversed.

Thus, in the chapter entitled “History of the Sib,” Lowie pursues
the question of the origin of the sib in a manner that is thoroughly
compatible with Morgan’s own evolutionary approach. To be sure, he
substitutes the word history for evolution, but this is a bit of word
magic. Since John Swanton had pointed out that virtually all of the
“ruder Indian cultures” lacked the sib, a fact unknown to Morgan,
there remained little by way of evidence to support its evolutionary
priority. Few anthropologists of the neo-evolutionary persuasion
would argue the point.

But Lowic’s treatment of the origin of the sib is much more than a
mere reversal of Morgan’s evolutionary scheme. It also happens to be
one of the strongest cases ever made for parallel and convergent
evolutionary processes. In this respect Lowie’s explanation of the
origin of the sib far out-Morganned Morgan. To Morgan, as we have
seen, the idea of unilinear descent seemed so ingenious that he pos-
tulated a single origin for its invention and a subsequent worldwide
dispersal on the basis of migration and “blood descent.” By com-
paring the distribution of sibs and the associated elements in the way
that Goldenweiser had done for totemism, Lowie came to the con-
clusion that the sib had been indcpendently invented four and possibly
five times in North America alone. This is “evolutionism” with a
vengeance! Rejecting Morgan’s explanation of the spread of the sib in
terms of the psychophysical advantages connected with exogamy,
]_:owie suggested his own causal mechanisms. The factors he empha-
Sizes—transmission of property rights, mode of residence after mar-
nage, and cooperative association in economic activities—are by
neo-evolutionist theories closer to the truth than Morgan’s notions of
the deleterious effects of inbreeding (LowE 1920:157-60).

Lowie also partially rejects Morgan’s sequence for the origin of bi-
furcate merging (Iroquoian or Dakota) kinship terminologies. Whereas
Morgan saw this system as a direct product of the invention of the
gens, Lowie viewed it as a product of both the gens and the syste-

349

i
i


===== PAGE 180 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

matic application of the levirate and sororate. Because these marriage
forms have a wider distribution than unilinear kinship groupings,
Lowie insisted that they were evolutionarily prior to the sib (ibid.:
163).

Lowie then proceeded to clear up in a definitive fashion the hoary
problem of which came first, matrilineal or patrilineal sibs. His rejec-
tion of a universal matrilineal phase prior to the appearance of patri-
lineal descent corresponds to one of the basic cornerstones of modern
ethnology. But Lowic once again does mot leave the situation in
complete disarray. Instead he carefully examines E. Hahn’s (1905)
suggestion that plow agriculture, which he admits as being later, is
frequently associated with patrilineal descent, while hoe gardening,
being women’s work, and more primordial, is associated with matri-
lineal descent. Lowie concludes, however, that there are too many
exceptions to make the sequence stick on a universal basis, and this
once again is a viewpoint that corresponds to the best modern opinion
on the subject.

Lowie’s evolutionary contribution is again conspicuously in evidence
in his treatment of sodalities and the origin of the territorial as op-
posed to the kinship principle of achieving political organization. “The
soundness of Morgan’s and Maine’s position,” writes Lowie, “in
drawing a sharp distinction between kinship (tribal) and territorial
(political) organization is beyond cavil” (1920:391). Lowie, however,
was unwilling to posit the priority of kinship relations over territorial
relations, except perhaps in the most distant past. For the most part,
he secks to emphasize that both kin and non-kin forms of groupings,
including those with a territorial ingredient, are present “even in very
humble cultural levels” (ibid.:395). However, he does try to prove that
the state form of organization arises on the basis of the prior evolution
of clubs, age grades, and other sodalities which had been neglected
by Morgan, but emphasized by H. Schurtz (1goz). “It is indeed one
of Schurtz’s most signal services to have explained the early origin of
political society in Morgan’s sense without recourse to any deliberate
legal enactment” (LOWIE 1920:394-95). Lowie follows this up not
only with an evolutionary sequence but one which stands on a foun-
dation of rather classic lack of evidence:

Even at a very early time and in a very lowly environment there
was no necessity for disrupting the ties of kinship in order to
found a political state. For concomitantly with the family and the

sib there have existed for untold centuries such associations as
the men’s clubs, age classes and secret organizations, all of them

350

13. Lowie

indql)elndent of kinship . . . and all of them capable of readily
acquiring political character if not invested with it from their in-
ception [ibid.:395-96).

For confirmation of the intemperate nature of this speculative foray
into the evolutionary origins of political institutions, no less an au-
thority than Lowie himself bears witness. In his The Origin of the
State (1927), Lowie spurns Schurtz’s contribution and turns instead
to processes associated with military conquest. “Obviously, then,” he
admitted, “associations do not play the preponderant role in political
development which T was at one time inclined to ascribe to them”
(LowIE 1927:111). Summing up the situation later in his article on
social organization in the Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, he
added: “Although local contiguity creates union among pre-literate
peoples, the tie of kinship unquestionably eclipses it” (1933a:142).
In this instance, by his honest commitment to hardheaded empiri-
cism, Lowie corrected himself right back to Morgan’s and Maine's
insistence that kinship systems of solidarity preceded the state on a

worldwide basis. It is, of course, the only acceptable view of the
matter.

LOWIE'S DEBT TO MORGAN

At the risk of digressing somewhat, let me here emphasize
that between Kroeber and Lowie nothing is more revealing of their
differences than their respective treatments of Morgan. There is
scarcely a single paper on social organization written by Lowie that
does not implicitly or explicitly begin where Morgan had left off. It is
clear that he had read Morgan and that he had returned to “Systems”
and Ancient Society throughout his maturity. Lowie, for example, did
not share Kroeber’s confusion concerning Morgan’s distinction be-
tween classificatory and descriptive kinship systems:

Morgan’s earliest expressions on the subject indicate that it was
the merging of lineal and collateral relatives—the use of a single
term, e.g., for mother and mother’s sister, for father and father’s
brother—that impressed this pioneer investigator, and this is the
feature that actually characterizes the classificatory systems of all
the regions of the globe [Lowie 1915:347].

Ilndeed, in this same article, Lowie not only accepts Morgan’s distinc-
tion, but follows Morgan, Tylor, and Rivers in relating the occurrence
of classificatory systems to the development of exogamous, unilinear
descent groups. While Kroeber sought to undermine Morgan’s classi-

351

i e


===== PAGE 181 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

fication of kinship terminologies and thereby topple the whole
“speculative scheme,” Lowie accepted and made use of the basic
premises of Morgan’s comparative method. Lowie chose the occasion
of the celebration of Kroeber's sixtieth birthday to praise Morgan’s
“magnificent and valid” pioneering efforts and to vindicate Morgan’s
major postulate that “kinship terminologies in some measure cor-
respond to social facts.” He even went so far on that occasion as to
uphold the use which Morgan and most of the pre-Boasians had made
of terminological “survivals” as a method of reconstructing earlier
phases of social organization:

Trained to view “survival” arguments with suspicion, I have be-
come convinced that the avowed skepticism on this point har-
bors as much cant as the evolutionary zeal of our predecessors.
Indubitably cultural changes proceed with uneven velocity, hence
certain elements lag while others spurt ahead; further, linguistic
phenomena are markedly conservative. These accepted facts war-
rant the assumption that a terminological feature in harmony
with a certain custom may survive that custom. The only question
is whether the social factor is the only possible determinant,
whether the really vital factor is not rather one of its correlates,
whether the same result may not be effected by a different cause.
But when due allowance is made for this, Morgan’s principle of
survivals remains a valuable procedure [LowrE 1936:180].

In this connection it is relevant to point out that Lowie went much
further than any of the other Boasians in maintaining the legitimacy
of the search for regularities, of which kinship and social organizational
correlations are the most conspicuous. Denying that there were “ab-
solute laws” he nonetheless insisted that the phenomena of social
science point toward certain regularities, and that it is our duty to as-
certain these as rigorously as possible. Consistent with this view and in
extreme opposition to Kroeber, Lowie held Tylor in highest esteem,
not for the tempering of evolutionary sequence with diffusion, but
rather for Tylor’s suggestions concerning method. Indeed, Lowie com-
pletely anticipates Murdock’s evaluation of the great “On a Method of
Investigating the Development of Institutions Applied to Laws of
Marriage and Descent.” He might have been a “super-Lang or a super-
Frazer,” wrote Lowie in 1917, “but the paper on Method raises him
at once into an entirely different kind of being” (1917a:266).

All of these considerations make it manifestly unfair to represent
Lowic as a typical member of the Boasian school as far as historical
determinism and idiographic historicism are concerned. True, there
are some unkind words for Morgan, as in his contribution to Kroe-
ber’s birthday volume and repeated in The History of Ethnological

352

I

13

Lowie

Theory: There’s no better example of Darwin’s saying, “It’s dogged
does it.” But in the main, Lowie, at least on his own behalf, was
perfectly justified in berating Leslic White for claiming that M(;rg;m
]-lnad been ignored. “What precisely does White expect?” he inquires.
“An academic muezzin at every center of learning who shall lead an-
thropglogists in daily Rochester-ward obeisances and genuflections?”
-(Lowlle }960:412). Similarly one may find in Culture and Ethnology,
in Primitive Society, and elsewhere statements which seem to be sav‘—
ing that historical explanations are the only admissable explanations in
the.social sciences, as for example when Lowie notes that “the expla-
nation of a cultural phenomenon will consist in referring it back to
the particular circumstances that preceded it” (1917b:82). Or as
wheq he rashly asserts: “One fact, however, encountered at every stage
ar}d in every phase of society, by itself lays the axe to any t]xéory of
historical laws—the extensive occurrence of diffusion” (see p- 174)

THE SHREDS AND PATCHES INCIDENT

The famous rodomontade of “shreds and patches” a i
S ears
the last paragraph of Primitive Society: P PP "

To that planless hodgepodge, that thing of shreds and patches
called civilization, its historian can no longer yield superstitious
reverence. He will realize better than others the obstacles to in-
fusing design into the amorphous product; but in thought at
least he will not grovel before it in fatalistic acquiescence but
dream of a rational scheme to supplant the chaotic jumble
[LowIE 1920:441].

This statement was widely interpreted as a declaration of an anti-
fungtlonalist point of view (p. 520). But no one argued more per-
sgasnv_cly than Lowie for the functional interrelationships between
kmshxp. terminologies and social organization. There is no doubt that
the main import of Lowie’s substantive work cancels out the extreme
lmphca.tmns of his shreds-and-patches remark, and there are plenty of
thcoreh?al proposals which counterbalance his more extreme prmmﬁcia—
mentos in favor of diffusionist and particularist interpretations:

Ethnology is simply science grappling with the phenomena segre-
gated fwn} the remainder of the universe as “cultural.” It is a
wholly objective discipline, whether it deals with subjective atti-
tud_cs or not, for its function is the determination of reality in
Vcnﬁ_:lhl(; terms. It coordinates it data spatially, in so far forth
duplicating the procedure of geography. It coordinates its data
chronologically to that extent sharing the logic of geology, paleon-

353

]

|
]
!

f
|



===== PAGE 182 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 13. Lowie

tology, historical astronomy, and political history; the particular
techniques employed must vary with the problem, as in other
branches of learning. Finally, it coordinates in terms of causality
as the concept has been epistemologically purified; and by the
demonstration of functional relationships it may attain the de-
gree of generalization consistent with its own section of the uni-

verse [LOWIE 1960:410].

ATTACK AGAINST CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

These and many other positive scientific and evolutionary
contributions emanate from Primitive Society. A complete review is
not needed for the point at issue. To accuse Lowie of antievolution-
ism or antiscientism is absurd. On the other hand, Lowie does prove
himself to be an implacable opponent of cultural materialism. Again
and again Lowie drives home the point that schemes cannot substi-
tute for history; that catchwords and catch phrases must be driven
out of respectable discourse; that entities like the sib or exogamy
must be resolved into their components, and each of these carefully
compared in their reallife context before judgments concerning their
similarity or difference can be rendered. And yet in vast domains of
social life, wherever social structural and ideological features articulate
with the organization of labor, with the production and distribution
of goods, and with the other material conditions of human existence,
Lowic abandons the hardheaded ethnographic empiricism for which
he is otherwise so greatly admired. The most consistent theme in
Primitive Society is not antievolutionism, but anti-cultural materialism.

What Lowie attacked was a scarecrow of economic determinism, an
effigy which no economic determinist would recognize. These attacks
occur at points too numerous to permit a case by case examination,
but a similar pattern of error characterizes each one. First, a proposi-
tion advanced by Morgan or some other evolutionist establishing a
relationship between economic factors and social organization is pre-
sented. Second, a handful of exceptions to the rule are brought forth.
Third, the puerility of economic determinism is proclaimed. His treat-
ment of the economic interpretation of slavery may be taken as an
example of this routine.

THE CASE OF SLAVERY

Lowie vehemently attacked the notion (rooted in the En-
lightenment) that slavery must have originated at an advanced level
of productivity associated with substantial food surpluses:

354

Slavery did not commence as Morgan fancied, in communitics
conversant with the smelting of iron, the domestication of cattle
or the use of imrigation and stone architecture. It occurs in the far
ruder stage represented by the Neolithic Polynesians and the
non-agricultural Nootka, as does the scgmcntatibn of society into
castes and gradations of rank [1920:356].

At once Lowie’s distaste for metaphysical entities evaporates. Where
P{C\’IOUSIY he has poked at, pushed, and pulled apart into a half dozen
picces such concepts as “totemism,” the “sib,” and “exogamy,” now
suddenly we have sLAVERY, singular and unfractionable. It is tn,lc that
many pre-state societies have emic actor-types (role positions), the
native terms for which ultimately get ‘glosscd into Englisil as
“slaves.” But the practices behind this word bear no structural re-
s;rl?l_)lan.ce to the slavery that existed among the Oriental hydraulic
cxv1!1zafcmns or among the Greeks and Romans or among New World
capitalist plantation agriculturalists. In the case of the Samoan
“slaves” (his example from Polynesia), Lowie himself notes that they
were war captives, that “their lot was not one of material degrada-
tion,” a‘l"nd that “the poorer men of the tribe often married slave
‘v‘vomen. _Contrary to Lowic’s view, there is little to indicate that the
Slaves'i in Samoa constituted a social stratum which played a distinc-
tive or important economic function in Samoan society. On the other
hand, that the Samoans had a highly stratified social order is not to
b'e doubted. However, again contrary to Lowic’s picture of the situa-
tion, the techno-economic-environmental basis upon which that sys-
tem had been reared was perfectly compatible with a gcne}al
correlation between productivity and degree of social stratification in
.Po.lynesia. In Sahlins’ (1958) synthesis of Polynesian social structure,
it is demonstrated that Samoa belongs in the same category as Ha—’
waii, Tflhiti, and Tonga, the most economically advanced of the
Polynesian systems. For Lowie to identify the Samoans as Neolithic
on the basis of the absence of metallurgy is as objectionable as for
Morgan to have put the Hawaiians in Savagery on the basis of their
lack of the bow and arrow.
] Equally inappropriate is the use made of the occurrence of so-called
slaves among the quixotic “nonagricultural Nootka.” Enough has al-
YCCady been said of the failure of Boas and other students of Northwest
f[:::t;u]turcs to identify the extensive changes which had resulted
iy N.uropean contact, depopulation, and intensive trade relations.
h e Nootka ;m.d other Northwest groups took war prisoners, set them
0 work at menial tasks, and exercised continuing life and death power
over them. We shall not here be able to follow the labyrinthine argu-

355



===== PAGE 183 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ments surrounding the interpretation of the economic functions of
these low-ranking strata. The essential point, however, is that the
existence of slavelike statuses among the postcontact Northwest
Coast peoples is again perfectly compatible with an economic inter-
pretation of the development of slavery. The only way that Lowie can
make it out to be otherwise is by engaging in a bit of typological
legerdemain which is even more metaphysical than his slavery con-
cept. Although these socicties did not practice agriculture, they did
produce large annual “harvest” surpluses based upon the exploitation
of unusually favorable riverine and maritime resources. In addition,
they maintained extensive trading relations with Furopean companies
which greatly increased their ability to produce nonfood types of sur-
pluses. No more inappropriate ethnographic examples can be found
for disproving the general relationship between techno-environmental
conditions and features of social organization. After trotting forth these
two examples (which even if they were not ethnographically some-
thing quite different from what Lowic intends them to be would still
not have the power to destroy a generalization based on hundreds of
contrary cases), Lowie prepares to administer the coup de grdce upon
the economic interpretation of history:

Still another point merits attention. How far do the facts cited
harmonize with that economic interpretation of history which we
have had occasion to scrutinize once before? It must be confessed,
very indifferently. When a Tsimshian chief murders a slave to
retrieve the prestige his daughter has lost by a wound or when a
Kwakiutl in a paroxysm of vainglory confounds a social rival by
destroying a canoe and breaking a copper plate valued at a thou-
sand blankets, the motive is manifestly as far removed from the

economic as it can well be [1920:356].

Since the Tsimshian slave is killed for the psychological uplift it brings
his owner, Lowie concludes that the institution of slavery does not
have economic significance. But if Tsimshian slavery is not an econom-
ically significant institution, should it be treated as slavery? Over and
above such contradictions, it should be pointed out that the psycho-
logical motivations which animate the production or destruction of
property and people have nothing to do with the question of whether
such phenomena are amenable to economic interpretations. If it were
otherwise, the annual destruction of several million American automo-
biles would emerge as the world’s most inscrutable custom. When
an American junks his four-year-old car (a vehicle which a taxicab
driver in Brazil would give four years of his wages to own), his desire

356

13 Lowie

to kcep. up with the Joneses scarcely eliminates the fact that the
under}yllig determinants of his behavior reside in the structure of the
American economy.

THE CASE OF COMMUNAL HUNTING
TERRITORIES

To evolutionists like Morgan, Maine, Marx, and even as far
back as Turgot, it had secemed a wellestablished principle that
groups which depended upon the hunting of animals for their food
supply would not possess strongly individualized proprictary rights
over hunting territories and that the land-owning group would tend to
correspond to the maximum effective social group. This would seem
to be an eminently reasonable deduction in view of the fact that there
is no conceivable way to get wild animals to stick to one part of a
territory—except by domestication, of course! By 1920, an overwhelm-
ing m‘lmbcr of ethnographic instances confirming the correctness of
this view had accumulated. Lowie accepted the prevalence of family
or clan joint ownership of land which had so strongly impressed Sir
Henry Maine, but he refused to see joint tenure as being more
notably a characteristic of the most primitive hunting and gathering
groups. As for the widely accepted relationship between true com-
ml.mal tenure and the hunting and gathering mode of existence, the
evidence, Lowie claimed, was all to the contrary:

It is often assumed that when peoples support themselves by the
chase there is of necessity communal ownership of the huhling
grounds. This proposition, however, has not only been seriously
shaken but invalidated by testimony from a number of distinct
Tegions [1920:211].

Llowie fchcn relentlessly follows out the above-mentioned pattern for
filSCl’Cdlting economic-determinist interpetations. Three nonconform-
Ing cases, the Vedda, the Algonkians, and the aborigines of Queens-
land are brought forth. In each case he concludes that less than
communal tenure is characteristic of the aboriginal patterns. Among
the ._A]gonkians and the Vedda, there is even evidence for private own-
ership of land in association with the rudest level of cultural develop-
ment. Lowie ends his argument with the memorable challenge:

Th_c burden of the proof surely rests with those who believe in a
universal stage of communal ownership antecedent to individual
tenure of land. Let them advance evidence to show that land was
once communally owned in the Torres Straits; that the Algon-

357

|
|
§
|



===== PAGE 184 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

kians at some definite period failed to recognize the individual
hunter’s domain; that separate ownership was unknown to the
Vedda of some specified period [ibid.:231].

One might take up this challenge by inquiring why the burden of
proof rests with those who have dozens of cases of band-level socicties
in which there is an unequivocal correlation between the hunting
mode of existence and communal tenure. Given the fact that the three
cases advanced by Lowie appear to be aberrant, would it not be more
in keeping with the Machian temper to seck the reasons for this de-
parture from the norm than to throw doubt upon the entire general-
ization? If smoke rises, are the laws of motion less valid? But the
matter is much more serious. One would suppose that for Lowie to
have issued such an audacious challenge, he must have been arguing
from a position of great empirical strength. One can almost see
“Fortress Lowie,” a wall of impregnable facts. Alas, it now appears
that the strength of his position lay exclusively in the improbability
that any of his colleagues or students would think it worth their while
to call his bluff. All three cases are spurious. Not one of them stands
up to careful scrutiny.

CHALLENGE ACCEPTED: THE
ALGONKIANS

For the Algonkians we have the ethnographic and ethnohis-
torical restudy carried out among the Montagnais Naskapi by Eleanor
Leacock. This study was specifically dedicated to the examination of
the conclusions reached by Lowie’s chief source, Frank G. Speck
(1915). Leacock denies the existence of individually owned beaver
trapping territories (a conclusion toward which Speck’s later writings
also tended), confirms the existence of joint family tracts, but strongly
opposes the contention that such patterns were aboriginal. The intro-
duction of family tracts closely followed the movements of the
geographical and chronological centers of the fur trade. She attributes
the breakdown in communal tenure to the shift from dependence upon
caribou hunting to beaver trapping and beaver-skin trading. Her
explanation of the social change consequent upon the shift from
hunting to trapping is as follows:

Owing to the uncertainty of the hunt, several families were
necessarily dependent upon each other, thus providing a kind of
subsistence insurance or greater security than indivic 1al families
could achieve. With production for trade, however, the individu-

358

13. Lowie

al’s most important ties, economically speaking, were transferred
from within the band to without, and his objective relation to
other band members changed from the cooperative to the com-
petitive. With storable, transportable, and individually acquired
supplies—principally flour and lard—as staple foods, the indi-
vidual family becomes self-sufficient, and larger group living is
not only superfluous in the struggle for existence but a positive
hindrance to the personal acquisition of furs [LEACOCK 1954:7].

A second and independent study of the Canadian Indian tenure
system has been carried out by Rolf Knight in the East James Bay area
of Labrador. Knight’s conclusions are even more devastating than Lea-
cock’s for he doubts that family territories even with the fur trade
could have been a viable adaptation for more than a small part of the
population for any prolonged period. Knight insists that until the early
1940’s hunting and fishing continued to supply the bulk of the food
consumed by the Indians but that . . . any hunting-trapping group
that was forced to remain on a particular ‘hunting territory’ sized
tract would probably starve to death, at one time or another, within a
generation” (RNIGHT 1965:33).

CHALLENGE ACCEPTED: THE VEDDA

The Vedda, known to Lowie through C. G. Seligman’s 1911
monograph, inhabit a small portion of the eastern side of the island
of Ceylon. Since the Vedda have been surrounded on all sides by
highly stratified kingdoms for at least two thousand years, they imme-
diately strike us as being an unlikely fount of information concerning
paleolithic social organization. Seligman tells us that the Mahayangana,
the oldest Buddhist shrine on Ceylon, is immediately adjacent to
Vedda country. We learn further that there are two kinds of Vedda:
village-dwelling farmers and those who are “wild” and live from hunt-
ing. Yet Knox, an early traveler, writing in 1681, establishes the fact
that even the “wild” Vedda have been in constant contact with the
Sinhalese, who constitute the majority of the island’s population. Ac-
cording to this early authority, the hunting groups regularly sold
smoked venison to their sedentary neighbors, from whom in return
they received iron arrowheads. In times of crises, the kings of Ceylon
employed both “wild” and “tame” Vedda as archers in their armies
and they “fought in the service of the king against the Dutch”
(quoted in SELIGMAN 1911:7). Seligman further remarks that by 1911
there were very few Vedda living in the forests and that their territory
had been encroached upon by the Sinhalese “who are inveterate poach-

359

¢


===== PAGE 185 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ers” (ibid.:35). Against this unpromising background Seligman intro-
duces undeniably convincing evidence that the Vedda with whom he
had come in contact not only had band territories but that they had
in addition family and individual ownership of smaller tracts. As Lowie
says, “Dr. Seligman was able to map the territories of distinct Hene-
bedda [i.e., Henebedda band] families.” And among the Sitala Wan-
niya band, as Lowie once again quotes from Seligman, “A man would
not hunt even on his brother’s land without permission” (SELIGMAN
1911:111). Indeed, for the Sitala Wanniya, Seligman not only provides
a map of individual territories but cites five specific transfers of land
ownership that had occurred in the memory of his informants. But
who are the Henebedda and the Sitala Wanniya? Are they the “wild”
Vedda or the “tame” ones? Are they hunters and gatherers or village
farmers?

The Henebedda
These people make chenas [i.e., practice slash-and-burn agricul-
ture] on which they live temporarily in bark-covered huts . . .
several of them possess guns . . . and some of them rear cattle
for the Sinhalese villagers [SELIGMAN 1911:36].

The Sitala Wanniya

After visiting so many decaying or degenerate communities a re-
freshing state of affairs was found at Sitala Wanniya. Here there
were at least four families who were living the life their fore-
fathers had lived. . . .They still found game, honey and yams in
quantities sufficient not only to support life, but to leave a
surplus to barter with the Moormen on their annual visit, or to
take into the nearest Sinhalese village to exchange for iron, cloth,
pots, and occasional rice and coconuts [ibid.:44].

It is clear that Lowie had no right to include the Henebedda in a
discussion of tenure among hunters and gatherers. As for the Sitala
Wanniya, although there is some ambiguity concerning their status as
farmers, there is none concerning their close relations with nearby
village communities. Every one of the specific private transfers cited
by Seligman involved honey spots, a condition which would at once
render intelligible the individualized tenure. No one had ever sug-
gested that a group which can earn its livelihood by trading or selling
honey would derive an adaptive advantage from maintaining commu-
nal hunting grounds. The false pretense under which this group
also appears in Lowic’s argument is made even more painful if one
inspects the chart which Seligman presents to sum up the extent to

360

. il

13. Lowie

which the Vedda bands had surrendered a purely hunting and gather-
ing mode of life. Of the nine nonvillage bands listed, the Sitala
Wanniya is the only one said to have no agriculture. However, in the
adjacent “remarks,” we learn that “The older men of this community
had never made chena.” This carries with it the unavoidable con-
clusion that at the time of Seligman’s visit, the young men at least
were making gardens (ibid.:58)!

CHALLENGE ACCEPTED: QUEENSLAND

For the Queensland-Torres Straits family hunting territories,
Lowie relied on the report of Walter E. Roth, the Australian govern-
ment’s “Chief Protector of Aboriginals” in Queensland. Exactly
twenty-seven lines of this report are devoted to the matter at hand.
The Cape Bedford, Bloomfield River, and Cairns hinterland groups are
said to have the usual band-owned territories. In addition and “inde-
pendently” of this larger area, there are smaller tracts of named por-
tions of the country controlled by families rather than by the band as a
whole. The economic significance of these tracts, however, is dis-
cussed neither by Lowie nor Roth. We are not told what portion of a
family’s product comes from the communal territory and what portion
from the family’s own tract. Whatever may be the answer to that
question, however, it is clear that trespass on the family property by
fellow band members does not result in very serious consequences.
Indeed, among the Bloomfield River groups, trespass produces “a
slanging match, with both parties indulging in epithets” (rorm
1905:8). But Roth assures us that such intraband trespass is sel-
dom committed because “when one family experiences a super-
abundance of food of any description, its friends and neighbors are
generally invited to come and partake of it” (ibid.). Roth offers no
specific instances of such trespass, and we are left unenlightened
concerning the reallife (etic) significance of the jural ideals that he
identifies. It is certain that if we wish to speak of these family lands
as being “owned,” it must be in a sense that is totally different from
tenure, which is associated with politically enforced laws of trespass.
What is critical for us to know beyond this point is whether family
groups within the band generally refuse or generally grant requests by
their fellow band members to utilize each other’s family territories
(in the event that such territories do indeed contain significant stra-
tegic resources). Roth’s account thus fails to provide a safe basis for
any kind of ethnographic conclusion. Least of all does it- provide the

361

|
i


===== PAGE 186 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

basis for destroying a generalization which is supported by hundreds
of independent observers and dozens of monographs.

Lowie’s notion of the quintessence of scientific insight thus shrinks
into its own “farrago of dubious hypotheses.”

LOWIE'S IDEOLOGICAL BIAS

We have seen that in proposing limited parallelisms and in
supporting the possibility of identifying repetitive causal sequences,
Lowie contended that the more conservative Boasian outlook was it-
self an “illustration of cultural inertia.” In response to Lesliec White’s
attacks against the supposed antievolutionism of the Boasians, Lowie
thus could and repeatedly did demolish the point of view that he and
his colleagues were the victims of reactionary antievolutionistic cur-
rents allegedly endemic to the intellectual milieu in which they oper-
ated. But there is another charge to be brought against the Boasians,
the charge of entrenched dogmatic antimaterialism. As Buettner-
Janusch (1957:322) has put it, we must recognize that “a powerful
ideology against materialism and naturalism” had found spokesmen in
the new anthropology. Lowie was quick to take up this challenge in his
characteristically peppery idiom by recounting the story of how he
helped to vindicate Morgan concerning the existence of clans among
the Crow:

In 1906 I found no such tribal subdivisions among the Lemni
Shoshone; my predecessors and successors had the same experi-
ence among the Ute and Paiute. On the Plains, investigators dis-
covered no clans among the Arapaho, Kiowa, and Comanche,
whence sprang the dogma that Morgan had mistakenly credited
the institution to the Crow, Hidatsa, and Mandan. In 1907, as a
callow novice, I could not help stumbling upon the Crow clan
system and so reported. Was I the unwitting tool of reactionary
ideologies in 1906 and the unwitting spokesman of enlightenment
in 1907? Obviously the idea is preposterous: it was field work,
and nothing but field work that corrected Morgan regarding
Shoshoneans and vindicated him regarding the Crow (also the
Hidatsa and Mandan [1957:884; italics added].

But Lowie missed the point. To “stumble” upon an ethnographic
fact is one thing; to deliberately set out to look for it is another.
Leacock and Knight did not stumble upon the reinterpretation of
Algonkian land tenure. They were able to correct Speck because there
existed an established body of scientific theory which Speck’s descrip-
tions seemed to falsify, thereby demanding that every aspect of his

362

13. Lowie

evidence be gone over with the greatest possible skepticism. In order
for Lowie to establish his method as free from the ideological biases of
his milieu, he must show that his skepticism is not evenly dispersed,
but that it is concentrated precisely upon those critical empirical tests
upon whose outcome whole universes of theory were being dashed to
smithereens. This Lowie failed to do, not in relation to evolutionism,
not in relation to Morgan’s and Tylor’s theories, for both of whom he
had the greatest of respect, but rather in relation to cultural material-
ism and the theoretical prospectus which like it or not had at the
beginning of the century been furthest advanced by Marx and Engels.

Over a span of more than thirty years, Lowie published numerous
articles and books in which the same tenuous ethnographic material
was brought forth repeatedly to show how a bowdlerized version of
economic determinism could be destroyed by the advent of fieldwork
and “higher standards of proof.” The most important theme running
through this span is that the relationship between human populations
and their natural habitats is mediated by ideologies and cultural tradi-
tions which lead to such wasteful, quixotic, irrational, and useless
sorts of relationships as permanently to baffle the creation of general-
ized “economic” theories of culture history.

The presence of these numerous, powerful, inscrutible, and ca-
pricious features of cultures did not disturb Lowie’s empiricist pos-
ture. He seemed willing to abandon the attempt to achieve a
nomothetic understanding of an indefinitely large number of appar-
ently inscrutable patterns because, following Mach, he believed that
“there are phenomena which we are obliged to accept as realities
without the possibility of further analysis” (LOWIE 1929:96). But it is
one thing to accept ignorance in preference to metaphysical forces and
essences, and another to vevel in it and propound it as a faith. If this
sounds uncharitable, how else explain Lowie’s dogmatic insistence
that an economic explanation could not be found for certain other-
wise never-to-be-explained phenomena? As, for example, “among the
Toda the cause of female infanticide is obscure, but we know posi-
tively that it bears no relation to economic life” (LOWIE 1920:48).

ETHNOGRAPHIC BASIS OF I.OWIE’S

CRITIQUE OF ECONOMIC DETERMINISM
Let us look a little more closely at the ethnographic basis

for Lowie’s rejection of economic explanations. Three great domains

of allegedly inscrutable and capricious phenomena provided Lowie
with the bulk of his arguments. First, he was convinced that in the

363



===== PAGE 187 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

elaboration of primitive hierarchical systems, the drive for “prestige”
was strong enough to efface the adaptive and utilitarian aspects of
ranking and stratification. Second, primitive warfare, he believed, for
the most part was also a kind of prestige-motivated sport. Third, he
pointed over and over again to the way in which religious or other
ideological factors prevented many cultures from managing their pro-
ductive resources in conformity with objective utilitarian standards.
Space does not permit the exposure of Lowie’s ethnographic blunders
in the detail which is merited. For his mistaken notions concerning
the unrelatedness of specific techno-environmental conditions and
specific hierarchical structures, he was greatly indebted to Boas’ North-
west Coast ethnography, some of whose errors have already been
discussed. With our heightened understanding of redistributive eco-
nomic forms, not only the Northwest Coast but many other hierar-
chical systems, especially in Oceania, which appeared inscrutable to
Lowie, now appear eminently intelligible (cf. saHLINS 1958; OLIVER
1955). As we have seen above (p. 356), Lowie claimed in Primitive
Society that the motive for the potlatch was far removed from econom-
ics. Insofar as this opinion confuses individual psychological motiva-
tion with the supra-individual nature of cultural adaptations it is
irrelevant; insofar as it blocks research into the material conditions
responsible for the aboriginal potlatch patterns and their peculiar in-
tensification under acculturative pressures, it is obscurantist and has
been condemned to oblivion.

AN EMIC VIEW OF WARFARE

For the interpretation of warfare, Lowie was not the victim
of other people’s ethnographic biases. He had himself to blame,
largely as a result of the peculiar methods of research which he was
obliged to maintain in his study of the Crow. In Primitive Society,
Lowie also claimed that

the Plains Indian fought not for territorial aggrandizement nor for
the victor’s spoils, but above all because fighting was a game
worth while because of the social recognition it brought when
played according to the rules. True, the stealing of horses was one
of the principal factors in warfare. But why did a Crow risk his
neck to cut loose a picketed horse in the midst of the hostile camp
when he could easily have driven off a whole herd from the out-
skirts? And what was the point in granting distinction not to the
warrior who had killed or wounded the foeman but to him who,
however lightly, touched his body [1920:356]?

364

B ol

13. Lowie

Aside from the confusion between an individual’s motivation in car-
rying out culturally prescribed patterns of action and the nomothetic
conditions responsible for the presence of those patterns, we must
here consider another and more cutting defect. Lowie was the world’s
greatest authority on Crow warfare, religion, and social organization.
But he appears not to have ever attempted a serious study of Crow
economy. Turning to his monograph on the Crow, we search in vain
for a chapter in which there is a discussion of the possible links be-
tween the vainglory of counting coup and the material conditions of
a hunting, marauding, stealing, horse-adapted way of life. Indeed,
in the book’s six-page double-columned index, the entry “economics”
does not appear! In the chapter on warfare, there is scarcely a para-
graph dealing with the relationship of the Crow’s constant preoccupa-
tion with bravery, horsemanship, and martial skills and the means by
which the Crow earned their livelihood, protected themselves from
the encroachment of the whites and other Plains Indians, and made
the best of what with the advent of the horse, rifle, and plow was
probably one of the world’s most rapidly evolving ecosystems.

It was of course very convenient for Lowie who had to learn about
Crow warfare and Crow economics exclusively through the memories
of aged informants to adopt the principle that his actors’ view of
things was the most important ethnographic product. Indeed, it is
not for me to detract from the vitality and interest of the mono-
graph in question. But when such material is harnessed to the task
of baffling our understanding, we shirk our responsibility if we do not
attempt to expose its limitations.

Thus, like all the Boasians, Lowie suffered from a failure to separate
emic from ctic data. He believed that in the final analysis, the most
important kind of data for identifying cross-cultural similarities are
the psychological matrix in which etic events unfold:

The field worker’s business is always and everywhere to under-
stand the true inwardness of the beliefs and practices of the
people he studies. He is not content to record that infants are
suffocated, aged parents abandoned, or enemies eaten. Unless he
can also recover the accompanying sentiments, he has failed in his
task [LOwIE 1963:534].

This is a defensible option as long as it is not permitted to deteriorate
into a rationalization for the omission of the etic context. Yet this is
what seems to have happened in Lowie’s treatment of the economics
of Plains warfare. How else explain the absence of any hard data
concerning the role warfare played in spacing out the Plains’ popula-
tion, maintenance of territory, provision of subsistence, distribution

365



===== PAGE 188 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of food and nonfood energy rations, regulation of population growth,
articulation with the natural biota, and dozens of other crucial “eco-
nomic questions.” And yet we find him asserting with great convic-
tion:

It is possible to turn the tables on economic determinism and to
show how largely economic life is affected by considerations that
although irrelevant from our point of view, are of the utmost im-
portance to the people concerned [LowIE 1938:320].

This is surely an attitude about which we may from our own experi-
ence with warfare be profoundly skeptical. There is no more self-evi-
dent truth than that the politicians who have been the most eager
fomentors of our own wars are usually least capable of explaining
why they have done so.

In recent years, dramatic contradictions of Lowie’s conclusions con-
cerning the “motivations” of primitive warfare have been achieved
by ethnographers who had adopted a consistent etic approach. Andrew
P. Vayda for example has suggested that there are commonalities in
the ecosystems underlying the warfare patterns of the Maori, Iban,
Mundurucu, Tiv, and other swidden agriculturalists (vaypa 1956,
1960, 1961a, 1961b, 1961c). Roy Rappaport (1966) has shown how
an apparently chaotic series of patterns involving warfare, sweet po-
tatoes, pigs, human populations, and magical plants among the
Maring of New Guinea fit together to form an ecologically adaptive
syndrome. This brilliant tour de force is distinguished by its quanti-
tative richness and its awareness of the demographic, nutritional,
caloric, edaphic, medical, and climatological parameters, all of which
must be considered before judgments concerning the anti-economic
functions of particular institutions can safely be rendered.

MISMANAGEMENT OF RESOURCES

This brings us to the third of Lowie’s pet areas of chaos: the
alleged mismanagement of resources as a result of historical quirks
and ideological idiosyncracies. One thread of this argument is especially
long and influential. Tt is the notion that capricious food taboos and
similar ideological quirks frequently prevent the utilization or effective
exploitation of potentially significant food sources, especially of certain
animal foods. Thus, in Culture and Ethnology Lowie attaches con-
siderable significance to the fact that “The Chinaman will not milk
his cattle; while the Zulu’s diet consists largely of milk” (1966:82;

orig. 1917).
366

Dol

'y

13. Lowie

Most startling of all perhaps is the different attitude assumed in
different countries towards cattle. To us nothing secems more
obvious than that cattle should be kept both for meat and dairy
products. This, however, is by no means a universal practice. The
Zulu and other Bantu tribes of South Africa use milk extensively
but hardly ever slaughter their animals except on festive occa-
sions. On the other hand, we have the even more astonishing fact
that Eastern Asiatics, such as the Chinese, Japanese, Koreans, and
Indo-Chinese, have an inveterate aversion to the use of milk

[ibid.:57].

In 1938, in his article on subsistence in the textbook edited by Boas,
Lowie elaborated on this theme in the context of a direct attack on
economic determinism. Wrote Lowie, “it should be once more empha-
sized that even where practical considerations play a dominant role,
capricious irrationality checks the full and rationalistic exploitation
of domestic beasts” (1938:306). As examples, Lowie mentions our
failure to milk mares, the Egyptian taboos against pork, the “Negro
stockbreeders” lack of cheese, the way the Bantu “spurn” beef, and
the Chinese failure to “have conceived the idea of milking their
cows” (ibid.:306~7). Among Lowie’s manuscripts there was found a
paper, assumed by Cora DuBois to have been written in 1939 or 1940,
which has been published under the title, “Economic Factors and
Culture.” Once again the same refrain:

One main objection to the economic interpretations of culture
that have hitherto been offered is that they fail to come to grips
with those problems that obtrude themselves spontaneously on
any unprejudiced observer of the data. The theorists of this school
ignore even so obvious a fact as the irrational ingredients of
economic activity, a fact so convincingly established by the late
Eduard Hahn and so overwhelmingly corroborated by later in-
quiry. To take a single example, East Africans are enthusiastic
stock-breeders; but is their animal husbandry to be gauged by our
standards? Far from it. A Shilluk keeps hundreds of cattle, yet
slaughters them so rarely that he is obliged to maintain his hunt-
ing techniques for an adequate supply of meat. His small cows
yield but little milk, his oxen normally serve no purpose at all.
But these Negroes, who have failed to perfect their dairying in-
dustry and who eschew a beef diet, expend enormous effort on
massaging the humps of their beasts and twisting their horns into
grotesque shapes [LOWIE 1960:242].

Again in 1942 he drew attention to the mismanagement of pigs.

367

i
i



===== PAGE 189 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Throughout Melanesia the pig greatly affects social prestige with-
out noticeably adding to mass subsistence. Such examples deter
us from over-emphasizing rationalistic considerations in recon-
structing an undocumented past [LOWIE 1942:541].

CHINESE AVERSION TO MILK

Fach of these examples represents an abuse of the comparative
method, wrenching out of functional context, comparison of non-
comparables, obedience to metaphysical entities, and a serious de-
parture from empirical standards of proof. Consider the Chinese
“aversion” to milk as opposed to our own lactic complex. To regard
this contrast as capricious is to ignore the basic differences in the food
production systems of the two societies. China, with its great de-
pendence upon intensive irrigated rice production, traditionally main-
tained only as many bovines and buffalos as were needed for draft and
draft-breeding requirements. Animal protein and fat were supplied by
pigs, more efficient scavengers than cattle. Morton Fried (personal
communication) offers a simple explanation for why the Chinese in the
village he studied in 1949 would not milk their cows: there weren’t
any worth milking. The breeds which develop from centuries of
adaptive response to the prime requirements of rice agriculture are
not going to be Holsteins and Jerseys. Furthermore, to convert a
portion of irrigated farmland to dairy pasture under pre-industrial
conditions would lower rather than raise the carrying capacity of the
ecosystem. Under these circumstances, failure to develop a dairy
industry is scarcely an example of a flagrant mismanagement of re-
sources. The density of the Chinese population should have in itself
warned Lowie of any such simplistic conclusion. Indeed, it could well
be argued that the national “aversion” to cow’s milk among the
Chinese points to a “rational” adjustment between food tastes and
China’s basic mode of food production.

THE MYTH OF THE SILLY BANTU

Lowie’s case against the Fastern and Southern Bantu fares
even worse. The myth of the silly African dairymen had become
enshrined by Melville Herskovits as the principle diagnostic of the
East African culture area and as such was disseminated among hun-
dreds of Africanists, administrators, and connoisseurs of African
exotica. Here the question has been amply explored by Harold
Schneider (1957). Among the Pakot, as among the other groups

368

v

13. Lowie

"

mentioned by Lowie, there is a great love of cattle and much care is
lavished upon them. And why not? The animals represent a walking
bank account, the living embodiment of surplus production, the best
defense against famine, and the next best thing to a woman, if one
intends to lead the local dolce vita. As for taboos against slaughter,
once again the emics of the matter led Lowie to disaster. In Fast
Africa, cattle are killed and they are eaten in relation to ceremonial
occasions. As Lowie says, “they do not slaughter except on festive
occasions.” But how often do these occasions occur? The answer
according to Schneider is that they occur often enough to lead to a
constant culling of the herds at a level suited to the carrying capacity
of the native ranges. In this connection, care must be taken to eval-
uate the widespread belief in overstocking and overgrazing among
modern Bantu populations. It must be remembered that popula-
tion increase and the conversion of aboriginal ranges to Furopean-
dominated cash-crop agriculture has drastically altered the entire eco-
system.

SACRED COWS, PIGS, AND HORSES

The rebuttal of Lowie’s cattle mismanagement argument
should also include an analysis of the role of cattle in India. The case
is too complex for a bricf treatment. Suffice it to say that the relation-
ship between Indian cattle and human populations is demonstrably
symbiotic. Cattle and people derive their calorie ration from separate
spheres of the eccosystem; cattle are India’s prime scavengers; their
dung is essential for fuel and fertilizer; their traction contribution
is indispensable under the prevailing techno-environmental conditions
of agriculturc. Dairying is carried out to maximum limits compatible
with traction and good planting requirements, while Hindu taboos
against slaughter and consumption of beef do not prevent culling of
herds nor consumption of beef by low castes and Moslems. There is
no evidence that these taboos under present-day techno-environ-
mental conditions adversely affect the welfare of the rural populations.
Indeed, insofar as there is a severe shortage of cattle in India, such
beliefs may be regarded as an adaption by which the exploitation of
cattle, especially during famine, is kept within safe limits (cf. HARRIS
1966a).

Similar kinds of analysis have been proposed for the role of Mela-
nesian and New Guinea pigs, another of Lowie’s examples (VAYDA,
LEEDS, and sMITH 1961). Emic, short-run, and impressionistic data
have produced many cases of sensational mismanagement of pig-

369

§
i


===== PAGE 190 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

raising. Few ethnographers have hitherto concerned themsclves to
assess the nutritional importance of relatively small amounts of animal
fat and protein in diets which consist of root crops (cf. RAPPAPORT
1966). Similarly, judgments concerning the economic nature of pigs
and other animal raising practices have seldom properly weighed
long against short-run needs, especially as these may relate to Liebig’s
law of the minimum; i.e. that adaptations are made not to average,
but to extreme, conditions.

Lowie’s mention of the failure to milk mares pertains to another
set of misunderstood cases in which belong the reluctance to ecat
insects, dogs, and snails. When alternative sources of nutritional values
are available, cultural ecological theory predicts that in the long run,
the most efficient will be utilized. It does not predict that all of the
techno-environmental possibilities will be realized to an equal de-
gree. Why should Western European agriculturalists milk mares? To
make any substantial difference in the average calorie, protein, and
calcium rations, mares would have to replace cows. Under the techno-
environmental conditions which gave rise to the European mixed
farming tradition, that would indeed have been grist for Lowie’s
chaos mill.

In these and the remaining cases that Lowie brings forth (e.g., the
Moslem resistance to pork), the burden of proof is quite different
from what Lowie said it was. We have every good logico-empirical
reason to suppose that most human populations reach an adaptive
equilibrium within their ecosystem. If a particular culturally induced
practice appears to contravene that generalization, it is unequivocally
the burden of those who present such cases to make certain that they
have carefully examined the allegedly capricious traits in a reasonably
real-life functional context. Failure to do this is in essence what the
Boasians had charged was the chief defect of their evolutionist prede-
cessors. In post-Boasian ethnography, standards of a reasonably com-
plete reallife functional context, however, were completely overridden
by a preference for emic data, even when, as seldom happened, full
scale studies of techno-environmental systems were attempted.

CONCLUSION

I do not wish to create the impression that Lowie’s view of
economic determinism exhibits no signs of development throughout
his career. On the contrary, there are clear indications of a later
tendency to give more and more weight to economic factors. In his
last major book-length publication, Social Organization, Lowie de-
clares in the preface,

370

13. Lowie

I have pointed out the potency of economic forces, not in ab-
stract, which is hardly necessary nowadays, but by suggesting that
certain specific changes in economic life have led to specific modi-
fications in the social life, even affecting sentimental attitudes
[1948a:v].

Of course, such daring admissions are carefully hedged by assurances
that, come what may, he will never admit any affinity to the devilish
proposals made by Marx and Engels. Instead, one should turn to less
influential but saner figures, such as Henri Sée:

As the eminent I'rench scholar Henri Sée has remarked, it is
difficult “to unravel the tangle of causes and effects” in history;
but “in the infinite sea of historical events economic determinism
has helped to furnish us with a guiding thread which keeps us
from being lost” [ibid.:24].

One must also take note of Lowie’s rather pathetic citation of
Henry Maine as a guarantor of orthodoxy for economic interpretations:
“Any of the material alterations in aboriginal life may, as Maine
recognized decades ago, produce far-reaching changes in ideology”
(LowIE 1942:541). We must conclude, however, that Lowie never
rose above the restraints of his Boasian heritage to a clear under-
standing of the cultural-materialist option. He never fully recovered
from the historically intelligible but logico-empirically indefensible
prejudice that the burden of proof rested upon those who offered
“economic” explanations. Immediately after insisting upon the im-
portance of the influence of Potosi silver mining upon Andean
culture patterns, of woolen industries upon the urbanization of
Er)g]and, of the introduction of the horse upon the Bannock, and of
reindeer among the Chuckchee he lapses back into the glorification
of what, for all we know, are some more old wives' tales. Thus, the
South American aborigines gain their livelihood in basically similar
ways—yet their matrimonial arrangements are far from uniform.
Chuckchee old men are respected, Lapp old men are pitiable, yet
both ;apps and Chuckchee depend upon reindeers. “The difference
must lie in the prior norms of Lapps and Chuckchee,” declares Lowie,
and those norms thus codetermine the observed treatment of old
people” (1948a:36). The “guiding thread” seems to cut Lowie’s
hands; he remains all too eager to chase the first “will-o™-the-wisp.”
And why? Surely not because it can safely be said that the matrilineal
as opposed to the patrilineal tropical forest groups in Brazil really
have no important techno-environmental differences; nor because
the Lapps and Chuckchee are identical in their basic material com-
plexes. And for what? To show that culture really is after all in-

371



===== PAGE 191 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

scrutable? No doubt that is so in the ultimate balancing of human

intelligence against the infinity of unknowns in nature. But to be

faithful to Mach and the empiricist vision is to postpone such ad-

missions to an indefinite future. What Mach had not foreseen, nor

Lowie grasped, is that metaphysical residues maintain themselves in

both positive and negative guise. A man is known not only by what

he declares true and false, but also by what he fails to declare either

true or false. Lowie committed few errors of a positive sort; the '
errors he exposed are legion; but there were many falsehoods he

tolerated for no better reason than that they were fashionable.

Diffusionism 14

S
B3

As the idiographic trend engulfed European and American scholar-
ship, it brought into prominence within anthropology explanatory
sch‘cmes founded on the nonprinciple of “diffusion.” The use to
which this concept was put in the Boasian critique of nineteenth-
century evolutionism and the falseness of the dichotomies between
1n4€pcxldent invention and diffusion and parallel and convergent evo-
lution has already been discussed (see Chap. 6). It remains for us to
take brief note of the way in which diffusion was actually employed
as an explanatory principle characteristic of the idiographic pcrifodA i
. In the United States diffusionist thinking culminated in the elabora- !
tion of the concept of culture areas, relatively small geographical
units based on the contiguous distribution of cultural elements. In
Europe, the same trend gave rise to the notion of Kulturkreise, or
Culture-Circles, large complexes of traits which had lost their for;ner
geographical unity and were now dispersed throughout the world.

372 373



===== PAGE 192 =====

I

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ORIGIN OF THE CULTURE-AREA
CONCEPT

The culture-area concept had its origin in the practical exi-
gencies of American ethnographic research, as a heuristic device for
mapping and classifying the tribal groups of North and South Amer-
ica. The development of ethnographic collections at the American
Museum of Natural History and the Chicago Field Museum in par-
ticular, coinciding with the trend against evolutionary typologies,
fostered the development of geographical categories as display units
implicit in the names of sections or halls. In reviewing the history of
the concept, Kroeber (1931:250) gave passing credit to Otis T. Ma-
son, referring to a 1go7 article in the Handbook of the American
Indian North of Mexico, in which Mason listed twelve “ethnic en-
vironments.” Kroeber was apparently unaware that Mason had ac-
tually employed the term “culture area” in an 1895 article in the
Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution, entitled “Influence of
Environment upon Human Industries or Arts.” In this article, Mason
(18952:646) identified cighteen “American Indian environments or
culture areas: Arctic, Athabascan, Algonkian, Iroquoian, Muskhogean,
Plains of the Great West, North Pacific Coast, Columbia Drainage, In-
terior Basin, California-Oregon, Pueblo, Middle American, Andean,
Andean Atlantic Slope, Fastern Brazilian, Central Brazilian, Argentine-
Patagonian, Fuegian. In 1899, Mason produced a modified list which
went as follows: Arctic, Canadian, Louisiana or Gulf, Plains, Southeast
Alaska, Columbian, Interior Basin, California, Pueblo, Middle Ameri-
can, Antillean, Cordilleran, Upper Amazon, Eastern Brazil, Matto
Grosso, Argentine-Patagonian, Feugian. Mason’s areas were subse-
quently refined by G. Holmes (1914) and made the basis for a land-
mark treatment of American Indian ethnology by Clark Wissler (1917)
and by Kroeber himself in his Cultural and Natural Areas (1939). De-
spite Mason’s clear priority, there is no need to dispute Kroeber's
(1931:250) observation that the culture-area concept was “a commun-
ity product of nearly the whole school of American anthropologists.”
This follows from the extreme simplicity of the concept. Nothing is
more obvious than the prospective utility of an ethnographic map
which groups tribal entities in relationship to some geographically
delineated aspect of the environment. It is quite another matter,
however, to suppose that this geographical grouping in and of itself
contributes to an understanding of cultural differences and similarities.

374

14. Diffusionism

WEAKNESS OF THE CULTURE-AREA
CONCEPT

As an explanatory device, the culture area was impaled at the
outset on the horns of a dilemma: if too much emphasis is given to
t]lE natural geographical substratum, the mapper falls victim to a
naive f91n1 of geographical determinism; if simple contiguity is
emp?]gmzed, the “cause” of each assemblage appears to be wholly
capricious and the question of boundaries becomes insuperable. The
first “horn” hurts because similar natural environments in diéerent
parts of the world are obviously inhabited by peoples with widel
different cultures. For example, the tropical rain forests of the Ne\z
World were inhabited at different times or in different regions b
temple-building  agriculturalists; village horticulturalists; and semi}i
nomadic hunters, fishers, and collectors. The prime fact(;r which dis-
turbs the explanatory usefulness of a straightforward arrangement of
cultures })y natural environmental areas is that it is the techno-environ-
rnelntal interaction which is decisive, not merely the environment
This aspect of the dilemma is well illustrated in Wissler's (191 )
attempt to base his culture areas on “food areas,” as follows: 77

Food Areas Culture Areas

Caribou Eskimo, Mackenzie (and north part of
Eastern Woodland)

lS3ison Plains

almon Ni aci 2

Wild Seed C:lritflr:r:ilcmc oty Platean

Eastern Maize Southeast, Eastern Woodland
(except north nonagricultural

) portion)

Intensive Agriculture Southwest, Nahua-Mexico, Chibcha
Inca-Peru ’

Manioc Amazon, Antilles

Guanaco Guanaco

Not.c that three of these “food” areas—Eastern Maize, Intensive
Agriculture, and Manioc—refer to domesticated species, WilﬂC all the
Iefst refer to natural resources. There arises from this pzirtial inclusion
;)hetglcmteclmologlcal aspect of the. techno-environmental equation
e fu her anomaly that t]u? area singled out as “Intensive Agricul-
ure” is divided into three discontinuous sub areas, each of which is
several thousand miles away from the others. The existence of two or

375



===== PAGE 193 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

three widely separated areas of native high civilization in the Americas
thus raises at once the question of to what extent mere propin-
quity may be advanced as an explanation of resemblance.

CENTERS, CLIMAXES, AND THE LAW
OF DIFFUSION

Despite these evident anomalies, the American schools con-
tinued throughout the twenties and thirties to lavish a great deal of
effort on the attempt to make the culture-area concept shoulder the
burden for explaining cultural differences and similarities. Wissler
sought to overcome some of the difficulties by attributing the charac-
teristic features of each area to a “culture center” from which the
assemblage of traits had diffused outward. From the beginning, the
concept of this “center” exhibited the full-scale effects of the basic
dilemma: how to combine the environmental conditions with the
apparently capricious freedom of culture. Hence, Wissler's vague
references to “ethnic factors and historic accident”:

The origin of a culture center seems due to ethnic factors more
than to geographical ones. The location of these centers is largely
a matter of historic accident, but once located and the adjust-
ments made, the stability of the environment doubtless tends to
hold each particular type of culture to its initial locality, even in
the face of many changes in blood and language [1926:372].

FElaborating further on the notion of “culture center,” Wissler (ibid.:
183) set forth a “law of diffusion,” to wit, “that anthropological traits
tend to diffuse in all directions from their centers of origin.” This
law constitutes the basis of the “agearea principle,” which is a
method for inferring the relative age of culture traits from their
geographical distribution: the most widely distributed traits around
2 center would be the oldest, if the direction of diffusion were
always from the center outwards. Needless to say, the “law of diffu-
sion” is a highly unreliable guide to actual historical cvents and can
be applied only with the greatest caution. Were we to regard it un-
skeptically, we should soon find ourselves arguing that Coca-Cola
must have been bottled long before the invention of the coup de
poing.

Much to Kroeber's credit, an attempt was initiated during the
twenties to define culture areas in terms of comprehensive lists of
items. These lists were used to establish coefficients of similarity.
The logical extreme of this approach was reached with the Univer-
sity of California clement list surveys which compared Indian groups

376

14. Diffusionism

west of the Rockies on the basis of some 3,000 to 6,000 items (KROEBER
and DRIVER 1932). Extension of this method to other areas has been
blocked, however, by the difficulties encountered in defining unit
_clcmcnts. Thus, even 6,000 traits might be inadequate for measur-
ing overall similarity if the traits utilized were not svstematic;lll

identified on the same level of detail. (Polygyny mig];t count fo};
one trait, while the bow and arrow might count for four or five.)
After the rather inconclusive experience with massive trait lists Kro.e—
ber turned increasingly to impressionistic interpretations of th:? “cul-
ture center,” or as he called it, the “culture climax,” with ultimate
consequences which have been previously discussed.

STEWARD'S CRITIQUE

Although culture-area classifications may be regarded as
essential at the initial fact-gathering and fact-orderiﬁg levels of ethnog-
raphy, the concept has been as much of a deterrent to the growth of
nf)mothetic theory as it has been an asset. Steward (1955:82) has
d1§cussed the consequences of a reliance upon culture-area typologies
w¥th respect to three problems: (1) center and boundary change
with passage of time;  (2) culture within the area may c’hangc S0
thatAlt resembles cultures in different areas at different times; (3)
portions of the area may be regarded as containing radically diéferent
cultU{cs despite sharing of many features. All of these problems are
wgll illustrated in the case of Kroeber's Greater Southwest Area
Fll’S‘t, archaeological studies of the Southwest do not confirm the'
notion of a single stable center, nor a small number of climaxes. Sec-
ond, there are known to be at least two principal developmental
sequences: one, the Hohokam sequence, running from the hunting
and gathering Cochise through the agricultural but pre-historic Ho-
hokam; the other, the Anasazi sequence, connecting pre-ceramic Bas-
kgt Maker peoples with the modern Pueblos. Third, the area despite
Wldespread similarities in culture “content,” was inhabited in7 historic
times by peoples whose social organization was as widely contrastive

as that of the sedentary Pueblos, tl N:
oot jolig y , the pastoral Navaho, and the ma-

STERILITY OF THE CONCEPT OF
DIFFUSION

These objections to the culture-area
bj 2 concept expose the
fur:ida{ne_nta_l.stenhty of the attempt to explain cultural differences
and similarities by appealing to the nonprinciple of diffusion. Al-

377

i



===== PAGE 194 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

though it is true, as Driver (1966) has shown, that geographical-
historical propinquity is often a better predictor of traits than
psychofunctional causality, under no circumstances can geographical-
historical propinquity constitute a valid explanation of cultural differ-
ences and similarities. First of all, diffusion is admittedly incapable of
accounting for the origin of a given trait, except by “passing the buck”
back through an infinite regression: A «— B «— C «—...7
As soon as we admit, as the archaeology of the New World now
compels, that independent invention has occurred on a massive
scale, diffusion is by definition not only superfluous, but the very
incarnation of antiscience. But even if we obstinately cling to the
assumption that independent invention is a rarity, nothing is more
obvious than the fact that there is no simple relationship between
distance and cultural type. Indeed, all diffusionists would agree that
there is differential receptivity to cultural influences independent of
distance. If this is so, then we must inevitably find ourselves involved
in the consideration of all the factors of environment, technology,
economy, social organization, and ideology which concern those who
seek to explain sociocultural differences and similarities in terms of
nomothetic principles. Such principles deal with the general classes of
conditions under which classes of institutions become more probable.
True enough, the specific form in which these institutions are mani-
fested is usually related to whether they are introduced as a result of
invention or diffusion. Diffused innovations tend to show greater
cross-cultural resemblances in finer detail than independently invented
innovations. The focus of nomothetic explanations is not, however,
on the fine detail, but on the general structural and functional cate-
gory of which a particular institution or trait is an example. A
diffused innovation, no less than an independently invented one, must
withstand the selective pressures of the social system if it is to be-
come a part of the cultural repertory. In this larger sense, the adoption
of diffused and independently invented innovations must be viewed
as part of a single process. The sterility of the purely historical ap-
proach resides ultimately in the fact that nomothetic principles are
adequate only to the extent that they can explain specific instances of
independent invention and of diffusion. Diffusion, however, cannot,
by definition, explain independent invention.

If it could be proved, however, that independent invention was
indeed an insignificant and rare event and that all of the important
inventions in world history had been discovered once and only once,
then the need for nomothetic explanations could be challenged in a
way that was inadmissible to the Boasians. Given the premium re-

378

. ol

14. Diffusionism

wards on disproving the nomothetic position, it is not altogether
remarkable that precisely this interpretation was fostered and not
once but twice—almost simultaneously—in Germany and England.

EXTREME DIFFUSIONISM

The German diffusionists, dominated by members of the
Catholic clergy, were responsible for one last grandiose attempt to
reconcile anthropological prehistory and cultural evolution with the
Book of Genesis. The English school, smaller and less influential,
concerned itself with proving that almost all the sociocultural traits
of interest to anthropologists had been invented once and only once
in Egypt, from whence they had spread to the rest of the world. Both
of these movements were palpably bankrupt by mid-century; they
require our attention today only as evidence of the international
extent of the tide that was running against nomothetic principles.
Toward one of the schools—the British “diffusionists”—the Boasians
were openly contemptuous. Toward the adherents of the other—the
Vienna-based Kulturkreis, or “Culture-Circle,” approach—the Boas-
ians were critical but not unsympathetic. It can be shown, however,
that the English and Germans matched each other very neatly in the
extent to which they sought to return the science of history to the
study of accidents and miracles.

Both schools have been conventionally categorized as stressing
diffusion and therefore as necessarily opposing evolution. The wholly
fabricated nature of this dichotomy has already been discussed in
relation to the views of the ninetecnth-century evolutionists. It was
the English idiographers who fostered the error that Morgan and
Tylor were unaware of the importance of contact and migration in
the spread of cultural innovation (cf. Lowe 1938:172). And it was
both the German and British idiographers, who by virtue of their
tepeated attacks on “evolutionism,” had only themselves to blame
for their identification as “antievolutionists.” This muddled situation
h_as survived Lowie’s attempts to draw attention to the Germans’
d1§tincti0n between “evolution” and “evolutionism.” But even Lowie
failed to do justice to the extent to which the Kulturkreis school
was d.cpendent upon evolutionary theories and methods, while the
evolutionary component in the British schemes has gone virtually
unnoticed. This muddle will only be resolved when we freely and
emph:gtically proclaim both the British and the German idiographers as
evolutionists. Their distinctive contribution, never quite adequately
defined by Lowie, was their denial of Jawful regularities in history.

379

|
E
j
E
!


===== PAGE 195 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

BRITISH DIFFUSIONISM

The most prominent British “diffusionists” were W. H. R.
Rivers, Grafton Elliot Smith and W. J. Perry. Rivers, the founder of
the trend, converted to diffusionism during the writing of his The
History of Melanesian Society. Thwarted in his attempt to organize
the ethnography of Oceania on the basis of nomothetic principles,
Rivers sought the explanation of contrasts among Melanesian and
Polynesian cultures in terms of original complexes which had allegedly
been spread by successive waves of migrants. For these postulated
diffusionary effects to account for the known distribution of Oceanic
traits, Rivers had to assume that nonconforming cases had either
been brought about by the accidental disappearance of characteristic
features of the original complex, or by the advent of small boatloads
of migrants whose physical presence could no longer be detected.
Insofar as Rivers mainly confined his historical reconstructions to
Oceania, he resembled the Boasians more than the remainder of
the British school. It was Rivers (1911), however, who first raised
the hue and cry against “evolutionism,” claiming that anthropology
“was wholly under the domination of a crude evolutionary stand-
point.” Rivers falsely attributed to the evolutionists the view that
“after the original dispersal of mankind . . . large portions of the
earth had been cut off from intercourse with others, so that the
process of evolution had taken place in them independently” (RIVERS,
quoted in PERRY 1923:468).

Under G. Elliot Smith and Rivers’ pupil, W. J. Perry, the strategy
of explaining cultural differences and similarities by appealing to
convenient combinations of migrations, additions, losses, and mixings
of trait complexes was applied on a worldwide scale. Smith de-
veloped the idée fixe that practically the entire inventory of world
culture had evolved in Egypt. He and Perry believed that this de-
velopment had begun about 6,000 years ago. Prior to that time, the
carth was inhabited by “Natural Man,” who not only lacked do-
mesticated animals, agriculture, houses, clothing, but religion, social
organization, hereditary chiefs, and formal laws or ceremonies of
marriage or burial (sMiTH 1928:22). In approximately 4000 B.C. the
inhabitants of the Nile Valley “appreciated the fortunate chance
provided them” by a “natural crop” of barley and adopted a settled
mode of life (ibid.:32). Henceforth, in rapid succession they invented
pottery, basketry, matting, houses, and flax; learned to domesticate
animals; built towns; and began to bury their dead in cemcteries
and to develop notions of deity. As the Egyptians progressed in

380

Rl

14. Diffusionism

civilization, they set about journeying by land and sea over great
distances in search of precious metals and other raw materials. And in
so doing, they rapidly spread, through diffusion and colonization,
varieties of the original archaic civilization, which had been founded
on the banks of the Nile. While many of the new centers of archaic
civilization survived and prospered, others, like the New World
Maya, declined or died out. Many cultures of contemporary primitive
groups thus represent a decline from archaic civilized status rather
than an advance from the condition of “natural man”; other primi-
tive cultures represent the mixture of “natural man” and degenerated
cultures; while still others represent mixtures of different varieties of
degenerated cultures. Despite this emphasis upon degeneration, it is
clear that Smith’s stages of Fgyptian culture history are merely lo-
calized versions of conventional ecighteenth- and nineteenth-century
evolutionary sequences. Even the familiar leisure time and surplus
theories of civilization and social stratification are present in Smith’s
explanation of the Egyptian events:

It was the agricultural mode of life that furnished the favorable
conditions of settled existence, conditions which brought with
them the need for such things as represent the material founda-
tion of civilization [ibid.].

Smith’s account of the evolution of archaic civilization in Egypt and
its subsequent spread to other parts of the world greatly resembled
the Biblical version of world history, which we have previously treated
as folk precedent for the scientific doctrines of cultural evolution.
Culture evolves in the scheme of Perry and Smith, no less than it
does in Genesis. The problem in both cases is that the explanation of
thlc course it takes cannot be rendered in terms of nomothetic
principles. Since the essentials of the Egyptian sequence are alleged
to have'occuned only once, there can be no correlation analyses, much
1e5§ assignment of causal priorities. Indeed, the entire weight of the
British and German diffusionist schools was bent toward the denial of
the possibility that the main sequence of events at the originating
center or centers could have been repeated anywhere else.

HISTORY NEVER REPEATS ITSELF

) Since Smith and Perry were convinced that the evolution of
Eg}jptlan culture was eminently intelligible once the adoption of
agrl_culture was granted, we may very well regard it as puzzling that
similar sequences could not have occurred elsewhere. To the charge
that the cvents attributed exclusively to the Nile Valley were simple

381



===== PAGE 196 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

enough to have been reenacted many times over in similar river
valleys, Smith and Perry replied with the dogma that man was by
nature “uninventive’’:

Those field-workers who have acquired an intimate acquaintance
with relatively uncultured people have repeatedly called attention
to the lack of that inventiveness which the theorists are so fond of
taking for granted, or rather to their failure to appreciate the need
for inventing devices that we regard as obvious and essential in
character [ibid.:20].

It was nothing but a “fashionable fallacy” which had led anthro-
pologists since the time of William Robertson (described as a “Carte-
sian scholar”) to assume that the ingredients of civilization were
obvious and inevitable things for man to have invented. “If there were
any truth in this opinion, why did men wait all those hundreds of
thousands, perhaps millions, of years before any of them took such
a so-called obvious and inevitable step?” (Ibid.:25.) Not only did
Smith believe that the circumstances which led to the development of
civilization were “arbitrary” (ibid.:20), but he also asserted that
“the distinctive fact in human behavior is the impossibility of pre-
dicting the nature of the response to any set of circumstances . . .”
(ibid.:19). All this adds up to the classic reductio ad absurdum of the
extreme historicist position: “history does not repeat itself.” This
position, as we have previously admitted, is unassailable. No one
who deliberately secks to enlarge the apparent chaos of events shall
be denied the fruit of his ambition.

From the perspective of the English diffusionists, it would almost
appear as if the evolution of culture beyond the hunting and gathering
level was a miracle. Although Smith and Perry refrained from any such
conclusion, the German diffusionists, under Father Wilhelm Schmidt,
did assert that anthropology would get nowhere as long as it at-
tempted to deprive history of its miraculous foundations.

ORIGIN OF THE GERMAN CULTURE-
HISTORICAL METHOD

The Kulturkreis school traced itself to the inspiration of
Friedrich Ratzel, the founder of anthropogeography. Ratzel had criti-
cized his contemporaries, especially Adolf Bastian, for relying too
heavily on explanations in terms of psychic unity and independent
invention. He had insisted that possible migration or other contact
phenomena be ruled out in each particular case before cross-cultural
similarities could be attributed to independent invention. “We must

382

- w

14. Diffusionism

beware of thinking even simple inventions necessary,” warned Ratzel
(1896:79). “It seems far more correct to credit the intellect of
‘natural’ races with great sterility in all that does not touch the most
immediate objects of life.” Ratzel was not only impressed by the
frequency of migration and other diffusionary processes, but he was
at a loss to explain their general principles. Intergroup contacts ap-
peared to him to be “very capricious,” and he insisted that “human
will takes a hand in the game which, not without caprice, indolently
declines some things and all the more readily accepts others” (ibid.).
For all of his encouragement to the extreme diffusionists, Ratzel
may properly be described only as an eclectic. Certainly the difference
between Ratzel and Tylor was not so great as to prevent the latter
from recommending the English translation of Ratzel’s The History of
Mankind (1896) as “a solid foundation in anthropological study.”

On the basis of a study of the .imilarities in the cross section of
the bow shaft, the material and fastening of the bow string, and the
feathering of the arrow, Ratzel had concluded that the bow and
arrow of Indonesia and West Africa were related. Ratzel’s pupil, Leo
Frobenius, went further and drew attention to similarities between
masks, houses, drums, clothing, and shiclds in Melanesia, Indonesia,

arlld West Africa. According to Wilhelm Schmidt (1939:26), Frobe-
nius

thus proved that similarities existed not only between single
elements of culture, but also between whole culture complexes
and even whole culture circles, so that we have here to reckon not
only with migrations of mere individual culture elements but
even of entire culture circles.

) It was this suggestion of whole large complexes of culture elements,
involving all of the categories of the universal pattern, which in 1904
stimulated Fritz Graebner and his fellow assistant, B. Ankermann, at
the Berlin Ethnological Museum to write respectively about the cul-
ture circles and culture strata in Oceania and the culture circles and
culture strata in Africa. In 1906, Graebner went on to apply the
culture-circle and culture-strata idea on a worldwide basis. At about
the same time, Father Wilhelm Schmidt declared himself a follower
nf Gracebner, founded the journal Anthropos, and began to elaborate
his own version of the Kulturkreise.

CRITERIA OF FORM AND QUANTITY

) The l}igh point of Graebner’s career came with the publica-
tion of his Die Methode der Ethnologie (1911), noteworthy for its
attempt to elaborate criteria for identifying affinities and chronologies.

383



===== PAGE 197 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

The two basic rules were simple enough and were accepted by both
Graebner and Schmidt. The first, called by Graebner the “Criterion
of Form” and by Schmidt the “Criterion of Quality,” states that
similarities between two culture clements which do not automatically
arise out of the nature, material, or purpose of the traits or objects
should be interpreted as resulting from diffusion, regardless of the
distance which scparates the two instances. The second, called by both
the “Criterion of Quantity,” states that the probability of historical
relationship between two items increases as the number of additional
items showing similarities increases; ie., “several similarities prove
more than a single one” (scHMIDT 1939:150). It is interesting to note
that the Criterion of Form, whose discovery Schmidt (1939:143)
attributes to Ratzel (cf. PENNIMAN 1965:178), had actually been
formulated by William Robertson (see p. 34), the very same eigh-
teenth-century “evolutionist” whom G. Elliot Smith proposed as the
fountainhead of all “Cartesian” nonsense. This fact serves to
strengthen one’s suspicion that the two “Criteria” cannot form part
of a bona fide “method” and that they are “criteria” only in a purely
scholastic sense. How does one distinguish culture elements which
arise out of the nature, material, or purpose of a trait or object from
elements that are arbitrary? Is patrilineality an arbitrary or inherent
aspect of patrilocality? In order to separate the arbitrary from the in-
herent aspects of culture elements, one must be able to specify the no-
mothetic conditions under which traits occur—precisely the task which
the Kulturkreis movement sought to avoid. It should be noted in this
regard that there are some very interesting resemblances between
the Criterion of Form and the Boasian doctrine known as the “prin-
ciple of limited possibilities” (scc p. 624). By supposing that similari-
ties occurred simply because there was no other way to do certain
things (e.g, canoe paddle blades must have broad surfaces), Boas,
Lowie, and Goldenweiser vainly sought to eliminate large classes of
cross-cultural similarities as evidence for either diffusion or independent
invention.

SCHMIDT S SCHEME

By applying their spurious culture-historical method to the
known distribution of contemporary culture traits, Gracbner and
Schmidt claimed to be able to reconstruct a limited number of
original culture circles. All of world history was thus to be under-
stood as the diffusion of these Kreise out of the regions in which
they were supposed to have evolved. Bearing in mind that there

384

B <t

14. Diffusionism

were many points of disagreement among the members of the
§chool, we may take Father Schmidt’s list of Kreise as the most
Lnﬂuentxal example. Schmidt distinguished four major phases or
‘gmdcs”lofl culture circles: Primitive, Primary, Secondary, and Ter-
tiary. V.Vlt.h.m each of these grades there were several Kreis,e. Thus in
the Primitive or hunting and gathering grade we find: (1) the
cen.tral or exogamous Kreis, corresponding to the Pygmy i:eoples of
Africa and Asia, distinguished by their exogamous hordes and their
monogamous families; (2) the Arctic Kreis (Samoyeds, Eskimo,
Alggnklzms, etc.), exogamous with sexual equality; and (;)’ the Antj
arctic Kreis (Southeastern Australians, Bushmen: Tasmanians, etc.)
exogamous with sex totems. In the next or Primary grade th’ere alrey
also three culture circles: (1) patriarchical cattlé—raising nomads;
(2) exogamous patrilineal totemic higher hunters; (3) exogamou;

matrilineal, village-dwelling horticulturalists. Th ini
and their Kreise are as follows: . ¢ remaining grades

B III. Secondary grade.
Fre'e patrilineal systems (Poly- Free matrilineal systems
nesia, the Sudan, India, western (southern China, Indo-China
Asia, southern Europe, etc.). Melanesia, northeastern South'
America, etc.).
) ) IV. Tertiary grade.
Earliest higher civilization of Asia, Europe, and America.

[scrmMIpT 1939:104)

The ‘most striking feature of this scheme is its evolutionism. The
succession ofl"grades" is nothing less than the familiar sequen‘ce of
stages” leading from hunting and gathering types of sociocultural
systems thfo‘u‘gh horticultural and pastoral types and on to complex
stratified civilizations. The evolutionary signiﬂcance of the Kreise is
further strengthened by the fact that Schmidt attempted to associate

the sequence of i i
he grades with the main Europe i i
visons of prehiatory. pean archaeological di-

Wx_th the numerous parallels in points of detail between prehis-
toric cultures and ethnological spheres of culture, we may estab-
lish a twofold parallelism in the classification of Yﬂlcsc two series
of results: (1) the ethnological division into primitive and
primary cuI_tu_rcs is in fairly complete agreement with the pre-
historical division into the earlier and later paleolithic penPOd‘
(2) the ethnological division into primitive and primary cultures
on the one hand and secondary and tertiary cultures on the other,
corresponds with the prehistoric division into the paleolithic andy
the neolithic periods [ibid.:104-5].

385



===== PAGE 198 =====

14. Diffusionism

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Schmidt’s evolutionism was by no means confined merely to the
generalities of the hunting, gathering civilization sequence. His no-
tion of a matrilineal-horticultural Kreis was hcavily in dcbt to the
evolutionary logic of Bachofen, Morgan, and Eduard Hahn. Accord-
ing to Schmidt, during the hunting and gathering stage, women
specialized in the collection of wild plants. This led women to invent
horticulture and thus to become the owners of the products of the
soil and of the land itself. On the basis of their economic ascen-
dancy, women insisted on matrilocal residence and matrilineal de-
scent. The supreme deity was given feminine attributes, girls” puberty
rites were stressed, and the couvade instituted: full gynecocracy
reigned. Schmidt (1935:253) called this the “classical phase of
mother-right.” Since this phase is no longer found in existence,
Schmidt had to explain what had happened to it. Gradually, he
claimed, the brothers of the ruling women began to take over “duties
and tasks which could be better performed by men than by women”
(ibid.:254). This trend eventually resulted in the usurpation of fe
male rights, with males administering the family property and passing
their authority on to their sisters” sons—what Schmidt called a “mas-
culinized mother-right.” Thus, despite the absence of examples of
the “classic phase,” there is no reason, Schmidt argued, for “the
astounding conclusion that matriarchy nowhere exists, merely mother-
right” (ibid.:255).

Tt is true that Schmidt made no attempt to arrange the three
Kreise of the Primary Stage in an evolutionary order; ie., he did not
propose that the matrilineal Kreis had evolved before the two patri-
lineal Kreise. All three Kreise of the Primary Stage apparently existed
side by side, having evolved out of the Primitive hunting-gathering
stage along separate lines. Nonectheless, the evolutionary sequence
which Schmidt outlined for the matrilineal-horticultural Kreis covered
an extensive series of transformations. Property rights, for example,
were supposed to have gone from equality in the Primitive stage, to
female-dominated in classic mother-right, to male-dominated under
masculine mother-right. The highly speculative nature of these re-
constructions did not fail to impress Lowie with their close resem-
blance to Morgan’s privileged insights into sociocultural systems
which no one had ever seen. Said Lowie (1933b:290) of Schmidt: “His
discussion of the matrilineal Kulturkreis . . . is wholly evolutionistic,
schematic, unhistorical, and full of a priori psychologizing.” Ac-
tually, the only difference between Morgan’s and Schmidt’s evolu-
tionistic schemes is that Schmidt’s main sequence was supposed to

386

have happened only once, whereas aspects of Morgan’s sequence
were supposed to have happened over and over again. Yet, as Lowie
wus“qumk‘t(,) grasp, as soon as Schmidt began to argue that there was
an “organic” (ie., causal) relationship between farming and mother-
rxgl?t, the claim that the sequence had happened only once became
ludicrous. Since agriculture was supposed to have been invented
only once, its appearance all over the world had to be a result of

diffusion. What happened, Lowie wanted to know, if it diffused
before mother-right had evolved?

Let women invent horticulture in tribe A. What prevents its
spread to B, C, D, before any matriarchal institutions have time
to d_cvelop in A? Evidently nothing whatsoever. Now, ex hypo-
thesi, feminine ascendancy results from feminine tillage. Hence,

in each recipient tribe adoption of the latter sets up a parallel
sequence of maternal descent, girls’ puberty rites, female

deities, . . - There would still be a single origin for farming,
but- th.c social corrclates would arise independently over and over
again in parallel series [LOWIE 1933b:291].

Schn}idt answered this charge with memorable élan. Noting that
Lowie had taunted him with being an evolutionist, he expressed his
regrets at not being able to afford his critics any such consolation.
His sequence of mother-right is not to be confused with evolutionism
bgcau.se it is “one of the most firmly established results of modem)
hlxstnncal_ctlmology” (scuMIDT 1935:250). Evolutionism is aprioris-
th,. and its sequences are unnatural and illogical. The culture-his-
torical method, however, deals with “logical” and “natural” sequences.
The male response to female dominance was “to such a degree a
nvatulral, almost an inevitable one, that it is not aprioristic evolu-
tionism, but quite logical deduction from the very nature of things
and men, to armange them in a certain series of phases of develop-
ment” (ibid.). This was, of course, precisely the defense given by

the nineteenth-century evolutionists on behalf of their own recon-
struction of evolutionary sequences.

USE OF THE COMPARATIVE METHOD

) Lven Lowie failed to grasp the full extent of Schmidt's com-
mitment to ecvolutionary schema. Lowie apparently regarded the
sequence of the matrilincal Kreis as some sort of anomaly. He
seemc_d to believe that “in general tendency Father Wilhelm
Schmidt’s position s unquestionably  anti-evolutionary”  (Lowrr

387



===== PAGE 199 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

1933b:2g0). But exactly the contrary is true, for both Schmidt and
Graebner were fundamentally and inextricably dependent upon the
central feature of nineteenth-century evolutionism: the comparative
method. Tt was not the vaunted criteria of form and quantity, but
the comparative method, upon which the German “historical” school
rested. For their task was precisely the same as that of the evolu-
tionists: they sought to derive from an inspection of contemporary
peoples a knowledge of origins and of the successive modifications
which cultures had experienced. The Kreise were not only “Circles”
but they were “Strata”—a part of a universal chronological scheme,
which rested entirely on the assumption that contemporary cultures
could be arranged according to degree of primitiveness. Schmidt
made no attempt to conceal his dependence on the comparative
method. Indeed, he called it the “crown” of ethnology and attributed
its discovery to Pére Lafitau, an association which no doubt enhanced
its appeal to the faithful. Criticizing the tendency among ethnologists
and sociologists in Britain and America who limit themselves to a
purely synchronic interest, Schmidt (1933:9-10) wrote:

I think that such a scholar would deprive ethnology of its crown
by his disbelief in the axiom established already by Pere Lafitau
in his famous work Moeurs des sauvages américains comparées
aux moeurs des premiers temps (Paris, 1724), that primitive peo-
ples are stages of the past of humanity and living witnesses of
them. And if ethnology should despair of establishing objectively
and trustworthily the succession of these stages, it seems to me
that it would abdicate its prerogative to be our guide into those
first ages of humanity from which sprang the deepest roots of all
its institutions, of religion and of ethics, of the family and the
state.

Tt is clear that the culture-historical method was as remote from
the methodological reforms of the historical particularists as were
Lubbock and McLennan. Yet Lowie (1938:193), for all of his tren-
chant criticism, went out of his way to declare that in the “final bal-
ancing of the books,” the German diffusionists are left “with very
considerable assets.” Lowie was undoubtedly prepared to go to greater
lengths to find words of praise for Gracbner and Schmidt than he was
willing to do for Morgan. He asserted that the diffusionists were “by
no means so intransigent” as might appear from some of their writ-
ings, and that “a reconciliation with the views of many contemporary
and supposedly hostile colleagues is not at all barred” (ibid.:191).

388

e

14. Diffusionism

SCHMIDT'S AMERICAN DEFENDERS

The Kulturkreis school received even higher grades from
Clyde Kluckhohn, who was for a time one of Schmidt’s students
Kluckhohn lauded Schmidt for his attempt to grasp the archaeologicai
'fmd ethnological facts of the whole world at a time when, under the
influence of Boas, American anthropologists were content to “collect
and to cull” on a piecemeal basis.

The followers of the Kulturkreislehre have at least resolutely de-
voted themselves to the true task of scholars: they have endeav-
ored to ferret out and establish unperceived relationships between
facts, and we will be unwise to condemn them too austerely if the
relations they think to have discovered are not always approved in
detail by their fellow scholars [kLUCKHOHN 1936:19‘6].

The most intriguing aspect of the relationship between the Ameri-
can historical school and its German counterpart was the genial
acceptance of Schmidt’s split allegiance to anthropology and religion.
Let me make it perfectly clear that anthropology cannot be repre-
sented as opposing this or that article of faith. It is not the business
of science to go about intruding into and damaging the private
beliefs of religiously orthodox individuals. On the other hand, it
cannot be denied that there are certain doctrines of political ;nd
rf:hglous inspiration which seck to intrude and to damage the integ-
rity of the scientific process. When it becomes certain that religious or
political dogmas have set themselves the task of dominating the re-
search strategy of a particular discipline, those who believe in science
can scarcely afford to be indifferent. Both Lowie and Kluckhohn were
of the opinion that Schmidt’s theories were in no way compromised or
even seriously influenced by his priestly role. This broad-minded toler-
ance of Schmidt’s ulterior purpose is itself a revealing commentary
on "the drift of the times. Evidently, neither Kluckhohn nor Lowie
believed strongly enough in the possibility of a science of man to
fecl threatened by Schmidt’s attempt to return the discussion of
cultural evolution to its pre-Enlightenment premises. Kluckhohn
(1936:»17;) himself painted Schmidt’s intellectual heritage in the
‘f(ollowmg terms: rationalistic, deductive logic, “trained theologian,”
steeped in the dialectical subtleties of Thomas Aquinas and Albe;t
Magnus,” as a priest “almost compelled to reject Evolutionismus . . .
as based upon the assumption that human beings are subject to the

389

|
i
i
|



===== PAGE 200 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

rigid determinism which seems to prevail in nature generally.” He
also admitted that “some of Schmidt’s . . . observations upon
anthropological matters . . . seem to have a direct ulterior relation
to certain tenets of the Roman Catholic Church . . .” and that “one
also rather often gets a sense of their lack of detachment in viewing
certain questions” (ibid.:173-74). Kluckhohn did not shrink from
admitting that “the writers of the Kulturkreislehre reject the physico-
mathematical notion of causality as meaningless in culture-historical
phenomena . . .” (ibid.:172). Despite this rather unpromising set of
preconceptions, Kluckhohn insisted that there was no reason to ac-
cord the Kulturkreis school any less respectful a hearing than that
which was given to the other schools of anthropology.

Kant was surely right in maintaining that cognition is impossible
without the application of interpretative principles—and those
underlying the metaphysics of the Roman Catholic Church are
as intellectually respectable as any others in the present state of
our knowledge about man and the universe. We must, I think,
rigorously avoid the temptation to dismiss the Kulturkreislehre
as founded upon a “bias” [ibid.:173].

Although Kluckhohn was perfectly correct to point out that ob-
servation must be carried out in the context of theoretical bias, his
defense of Schmidt’s bias is inadmissible. The particular bias which
declares that physico-mathematical causality is “meaningless in cul-
ture-historical phenomena” cannot be tolerated by those who profess
themselves interested in a science of human history. To declare in
advance that the physico-mathematical model cannot be applied and
then to refrain from attempting to apply it is to proceed in a fashion
exactly contrary to that which every bona fide scientific strategy
requires as an initial condition of research. It is no circumstance other
than this intolerable bias which accounts for Schmidt’s insistence on
the uniqueness of the evolutionary experience of each Kreis. The
idiographic ingredient in these ideas could not but appeal to Lowie,
even though he himself accepted the possibility of “limited paral-
lelism.” Evidently this served as enough of a common bond to hold
Lowic’s sympathy despite the additional consequences which flowed
from Schmidt’s theological commitment.

SCHMIDT’S SUPERNATURALISM

Not only was Schmidt, like Boas, opposed to a nomothetic
explanation of history, but he was also opposed even to a naturalistic
explanation. In his reconstruction of cultural evolution, Schmidt was

390

-

14. Diffusionism

dominated by the necessity of reconciling the findings of anthro-
pology with scriptural precedent. The areas of fact in which specific
theological dogmas exerted their most damaging influence concerned,
as one might imagine, the origin of religious beliefs themselves.
Here Schmidt, like Archbishop Whately, De Bonald, and De Maistre,
was an unyielding “degenerationist.” His immense, twelve-volume
Der Ursprung der Gottesidee (Origin of the Idea of God) was wholly
given over to the proof that those cultures most nearly approximating
the condition of the primitive hunting and gathering Kreis possessed
a purer and more ethical understanding of the nature of God. As
culture evolved, perfection in science and technology was accom-
panied by a degeneration in the religious sphere. The most perfect
phase of religion existed at the very outset of prehistory, for religion
was given to man by God in a revelation, the memory of which
became more and more distorted and confused as time wore on;
moreover, by “revelation,” Schmidt insisted that he meant a literal,
personal appearance such as is described in Genesis. He explicitly
denied that this revelation could have been “a merely subjective
process” or a “purely impersonal, common experience”:

Noj; it must have been a tremendous, mighty personality that pre-
sented itself to them: capable of captivating their intellect with
luminous truths, of binding their will by high and noble moral
commands, and of winning their hearts through ravishing beauty
and goodness. Moreover, this personality cannot have been a
merely internal image of the mind and imagination; for such an
image could by no means have possessed the power of awakening
those effects which we note in that oldest religion. Rather, it must
have been really and truly a personality that presented itself to
them from without, and that precisely by the power of its reality
convinced and overwhelmed them [scHMIDT 1939:183].

Schmidt went even further in antiscientism and made it plain that he
considered it a matter essential to his conscience to support the
teachings of his faith in this matter:

It is Catholic teaching, binding in conscience and founded on
Scripture and the fathers, together with various declarations of
the Church, that the very first human beings were not in a merely
natural state but were possessed of the supernatural gift of divine
sonship and destined to the supernatural end of the immediate
vision of God. Men thus endowed entered upon a relationship

with God that is properly characterized as supernatural religion
[ibid.].

391



===== PAGE 201 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

When Leslie White (see p. 291) attacked Boas, along with the
writers of the Kulturkreis school, as reactionary antievolutionists,

L]
Lowie rejoined by claiming that not only Boas but Father Schmidt ‘ lt d P 1 t
were evolutionists in White’s sense of the term. I concur that neither u ure an ersona 1
Boas nor Schmidt was an antievolutionist, but it cannot be said of

Schmidt that he was uninfluenced by what are usually referred to as
reactionary doctrines harking back to the early part of the nineteenth

.
century. The misunderstanding alluded to in the following excerpt Pre —Freudlan 15

from Lowie’s (1960:423; orig. 1946) rejoinder is not confined to
White:

Leslie White misunderstands the status of the problem. It is false |
that any reputable anthropologist nowadays professes an anti- }
evolutionist philosophy in the sense alleged. The “anti-evolution- i
ism” of the Boasians and of the Kulturkreislehre has nothing to i
do with, say, the degeneration theory of de Maistre.

The lack of connection between Boas and De Maistre is certainly
well founded; but nothing could be more inappropriate than to

deny Schmidt’s affinities with De Maistre’s degenerationism. %ﬁ

Dlring the interval between the two world wars, the individualizing
trend in historical particularism met with and interacted with the
doctrines of Sigmund Freud. On the face of it, psychoanalysis and
Boasian anthropology seemed to have very little in common. Freud ;
» was essentially a nineteenth-century leftover. His theory was a grand
scale, evolutionist, materialist, and determinist scheme of precisely
the sort most condemned in Boas’ attack on the comparative method.
Yet there was one overriding favorable predisposition in the Boasian
approach. Boas had for long maintained the proposition that cul-
tural anthropology had to be the study of man’s “mental life,” and
no one could deny that Freud had shown more ways of penetrating
into man’s mind than anyone else before him. Anthropology’s drive
toward mentalism and the study of the individual eventually was to
prove stronger than the taint of Freud’s grandiose physicalism, but
not before both schools underwent drastic changes: the Freudians
gave up their evolutionism and their instinctive universal complexes
for cultural relativism; while the Boasians for their part gave up their
emphasis upon history and diffusion. The result was the American
version of synchronic functionalism: culture and personality.

i

392 393


===== PAGE 202 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

EPISTEMOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Care should be taken to extricate this movement, with its
specifically Freudian and Boasian inspiration, from the much older
and more pervasive occurrence of psychologically oriented ethnology.
Psychocultural analyses, carried out in the idiom of mentalistic
and ideational data languages and concepts, antedate the modern
culture and personality movement by thousands of years. A brief
digression into some relevant epistemological issues should make
this clear.

Cultural entities are logico-empirical constructs built up out of the
observation of the verbal or nonverbal behavior of individual human
actors. The scientific vocabulary for the description of these entities
is still in a very primitive state. Operationally valid definitions have
yet to be achieved for even the most commonly employed terms.
Attempts to develop data languages for cultural descriptions have
invariably followed the intuitive path of combining etic responses with
their emotional and cognitive concomitants.

It is very widely accepted that the statement of psychologically
meaningful “goals” and “purposes” is a minimum requirement of
ethnographic description. This is obviously true of all the members of
the culture and personality movement per se. We have already seen
how important the mentalistic or “emic” point of view was in the
development of Boas’ mature orientation to the theoretical prospects
of cultural anthropology. There were many convergences from other
backgrounds toward a similar elaboration of mentalistic premises.
Ralph Linton, one of the key figures in the neo-Freudian culture and
personality movement, defined all cultural traits in a mentalistic idiom.
A trait, in Linton’s (1936) influential formulation, consisted not only
of a particular form and substance with its sociocultural function, but
of the meaning of such an entity to the people who manifested or used
it. Clyde Kluckhohn, another central figure in the history of per-
sonality and culture studies, shared a similar epistemological position
(see p. 597). In British social anthropology, Malinowski, an important
contributor to the refinement of Freudian and other psychological
concepts in anthropology, was also explicit concerning the epistemo-
logical and methodological necessity of emic categories.

But most of the anthropologists, such as Boas himself, his student
Robert Lowie, and the influential English theoretician S. F. Nadel,
who stress the importance of an emic perspective have not been
associated with culture and personality research. For this reason, the

394

Bl

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

historical significance of the emic/etic option is discussed in a
separate chapter in connection with the so-called New Ethnography.
But it must be made clear at the outset that whoever operates with
a strong implicit or explicit bias in favor of emics is committed to
an cpistemological tradition shared by the culture and personality
school.

THE PERVASIVENESS OF EMIC AND
PSYCHOLOGICAL CATEGORIES

The most obvious diagnostic of this commonality is the
occurrence within the average ethnographic monograph of numerous
terms and concepts which are derived from vernacular or scientific
lexicons devoted to expressing the mental and emotional condition of
individual human actors. Actually, from the earliest recorded de-
scriptions of cultural phenomena to the advent of modern anthro-
pology, most ethnographic descriptions have consisted of a melange
of data-language concepts drawn partially from a psychological and
partially from a sociocultural idiom. Tacitus, writing in the first cen-
tury ap., described the marriage arrangements, rules of chastity,
weaponry, mode of punishment, military organization, divinatory
practices, and many other sociocultural features of the Germanic
tribes. He also availed himself of a psychological idiom and attributed
to the Germans an ability to endure hard work, a slight capacity for
withstanding hunger and cold, and “a taste for peace”; furthermore,
he said they were “pleasantly courteous,” “neither canny nor cunning,”
and “devoid of self-control when they drink.”

As a modern example of the same practice, one of the monographs
of Raymond Firth, whose main theoretical affiliation is with Brit-
ish social anthropology, and certainly not with the culture and
personality movement, may serve as an example. Opening We, the
Tikopia at random, we encounter the following typical description
of household patterns:

A married couple are expected by custom to share such things
as areca nut and tobacco, and refusal or evasion is apt to cause a
quarrel. Conduct in such matters depends of course upon the
temperament of individuals. Food, too, should be shared, though
some latitude is given to the claims of differential appetitc. The
effect of this rule is seen most clearly outside the household.
Whenever a visitor calls at another house he is usually offered
food, and at meal time such an invitation is never omitted. A
close kinsman may eat, but another man, if married, will com-

395



