

===== PAGE 1 (index-1_1.jpg) =====
,}s‘%@%‘gﬁ’{' INVERSVE |

O

S S| *ﬂ PO (@ @@

- e L

g e ) |
PR

+ BARRY CUNLIFFE + ® |


===== PAGE 2 (index-3_1.jpg) =====
THE
ANCIENT
CELTS

BARRY CUNLIFFE

PENGUIN BOOKS


===== PAGE 3 (index-4_1.jpg) =====
PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Pengsin Gros
Penguin Books 134, 37 Wrights Lane, London wh sz, England
Penguin Putnam Inc.. 175 Hodson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Books Australia Lid, Rimgwood, Victoria, Australia
Pergiin Books Canads L, 30 Aliorn Avenue, Toroaso, Ontaria, Canads M4y 4w3
Penguin Books (NZ) Lid, Private Bag 10200z, NSMC, Auckland, New Zealand

Pengain Books 114, Regiviered Offices: Harmandseorth, Middlescx, England

First published by the Oxford Universiey Fress 1997
135290k 4

Copyright © Barry Cunliffe. 1997
Al rights reserved

“The moral right of the suther bas been ssseeted
Printed in Haly by Printer Trento SRL

Except i the United States of America, this book is sold st
80 the condition that it shall sct, by way of trade or otherwise, be Jent.
re-sold, hired out. or otherwise cisculsted without the pablsher’s
prior consent in amy form of hinding or cover other thas that in
which it is published and withowt 2 vimiar condition including this
wadition being imposed on the wineguent parchaser


===== PAGE 4 (index-5_1.jpg) =====
Preface

For two and a half thousand years the Celts have continued to fascinate those
who have come into contact with them. For the Greeks and Romans the fas-
cination was tinged with fear tempered with a degree of respect for Celtic
prowess in battle. Later generations, further removed from the reality of the
barbarian Celts of the first millennium 5C, generated their own myths and
stereotypes about the past, recreating Celtic ancestors for themselves in the
image of the day designed to explain their own attitudes and aspirations and
to provide a legitimacy for actions. The study of the Celts and of our chang-
ing visions of them offer an incomparable insight into the human need to
establish an identity—and of the difficulties which this poses to archaeolo-
gists, who, by their best endeavours, attempt to remain objective.

It could be argued that biased historical anecdotes, ill-understood patterns
of early language development, and hard archacological ‘facts™—the artefacts,
ecofacts, and structures of the past recovered through excavation—should
not, and indeed cannot, be brought together to create a coherent picture of
the past. The position is firmly taken by some and encrgetically argued; it is
not one with which I have much sympathy. Given an array of disparate evi-
dence, we would, I believe, be failing if we were to fight shy of the challenges
posed by using every available scrap in our attempt to construct a European
protohistory. In doing so we will, inevitably, be drawn into simplification and
generalization, laying ourselves open to criticism from the purists, but better
the attempt to create a whole, however imperfect, than to be satisfied with the
minute examination of only a part.

In writing this book, within the entirely reasonable constraints suggested by
the publishers, I have found it impossible to go into areas of detail which 1
would like to have covered, while at the same time being drawn into the wider
themes of European pre- and protohistory. Rather than adhere to the precon-
ceptions of my original plan, I have allowed myself to be led by the subject.
What emerges is much less an "archacology’ than it might have been.

My other indulgence is to have written the text during a sabbatical term liv-
ing in a house on the north coast of Brittany, overlooking a narrow bay to the
headland of Le Yaudet beyond. In the Late Iron Age, the promontory was
defended by a massive rampart, and it is quite conceivable, though yet
unproven, that it was one of the communities attacked by Caesar in 56 B,
Living here in Brittany has provided a constant reminder of the Celtic world.
In the nearby church at Loguivy-lés-Lannion we attended a musical celebra-
tion for the pardon of St Ivy. The long address of welcome was in Breton,


===== PAGE 5 (index-6_1.jpg) =====
Then followed music and singing dominated by bagpipes and bombardes
identical to those played by the shepherds in the Adoration depicted on the
seventeenth-century altarpiece above. Two months later, in July, the local féte
folkloric was held within the promontory fort of Le Yaudet. The event is an
entirely new creation only some ten years old, but it is fast becoming a focus
for the community. The displays of old farm machinery and ancient crafts are
as fascinating to the local population as they are to the tourists, and in the
evening, as dinner in the open air proceeds, old and young alike join in the
singing of Breton songs and the dancing, and listen to the telling of stories. It
is, of course, a conscious recreation of a past, but a past not long gone and
one which offers a much-needed sense of identity and continuity in a fast
changing world.

The archacology of Le Yaudet, the Breton language still spoken, and the
underlying sense of a Celtic ethnicity are aspects of the phenomenon of the
Celts: in their coherence and disparity they provide a leitmotiv for the book
to follow.

Finally a few acknowledgements: to the editorial and design departments
of Oxford University Press for their help and advice throughout; to the many
individuals and institutions who provided photographs; to Alison Wilkins for
producing a new series of line drawings; to Lynda Smithson for preparing the
text; and to my family for their forbearance and understanding with my mild
obsession.

Pont Roux B.W.C
January 1996


===== PAGE 6 (index-7_1.jpg) =====
Contents

List of Colour Plates
List of Maps

. Visions of the Celts
. The Reality of the Celts

. The Migrations: 400-200

. Warfare and Society

. The Arts of the Migration Period

. Iberia and the Celtiberians

The Communities of the Atlantic Fagade
. The Communities of the Eastern Fringes
10. Religious Systems

1. The Developed Celtic World

12. The Celts in Retreat

[ R SV R ]

13. Celtic Survival
14. Retrospect

A Guide to Further Reading
Chronological Tables

Map Section

Nlustration Sources

Index

. Barbarian Europe and the Mediterranean: 1300-400 B¢

133
145
168
183
n
235
258
268

275
285
289
315
nz7


===== PAGE 7 (index-9_1.jpg) =====
la

b

1

Ha

b

Wa

Vb

Ve

v

Vi

vil

Viila

Viith

List of Colour Plates

facing page

Statue of a Celtic warrior from Saint-Maur-en-

Chausée, Oise, France

Musée Départemental de 1'Oise, Beauvais/Picro Baguzzi

Fragment of a stone fricze showing two fleeing Celts from
Civitalba, Marches, Italy

Museo Nazionale Archeologico della Marche, Ancona/Picro Baguzzi,
courtesy Bompiani Editore S.p.a, Milan

Sculpture of the suicide of a Celtic warrior by the body

of his dead wife

Museo Nazionale delle Terme, Rome/Scala

Aerial view of the site of Hallstatt, Austria

Dr Lothar Bekel, Salzburg

Recent view of the site of La Tene, Neuchdtel, Switzerland
AKG London/Eric Lessing

Iron helmet, decorated with bronze and coral, from Canosa
di Puglia, Bari, Italy

Staatliche Museen Antikensammlung Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin/
Ingrid Geske

Gold stater of Verica

British Museum/Werner Forman Archive

Gold stater of Tasciovanus

British Muscum/Werner Forman Archive

Shield found in the River Thames at Battersea, London
British Museum/Werner Forman Archive

Statue of a Gaulish chief in chain mail, from Vacheres, Basses-
Alpes, France

Musée Calvet, Avignon

Statue of a Gaul with shield of Celtic type from Mondragon,
Vaucluse, France

Musée Calvet, Avignon

Stone head of a Celtic deity from Msecké Zehrovice, Czech
Republic

Nirodni Muzeum, Prague

Bronze boar figurines from Hounslow, Middlesex

British Muscum/Werner Forman Archive

Wine flagon from Basse-Yutz, Moselle, France

British Museum

Bronze shield found in the River Witham, Lincolnshire,
British Muscum/Werner Forman Archive

20

21

37

37

37

84

8s

85

ne

ny


===== PAGE 8 (index-10_1.jpg) =====
XI

Xir

Xiila

XIib

X

Xv

XVI

XVlla

XVIlb

Xvin

XIX

XXa

XXb

XXlla

XX1s

XX

XXIV

The Gunderstrup Cauldron found near Roevemosen, Aars,

Denmark 132
Nationalmuseet, Copenhagen

A pair of limestone heads from Roquepertuse, Bouches-du-
Rhones, France 133

Musée d'Archéologic Méditerranéenne, Marseilles

Open-work cup from Schwarzenbach, Rhineland, Germany 148
Staatliche Muscen Antikensammlung Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin

Iron and bronze helmet from Agris, Charante, France 148
Musée de la Société Archéologique et Historique de la Charante,
Angouléme/Visual Arts Library

Bronze helmet from Berru, Marne, France 149
Musée d'Antiquités Nationale, Saint-Germain-en-Laye/RMN

Acrial view of the hill fort of Las Cogotas near Avila, Spain 180
Paisajes Espanoles

Aerial view of the Celtiberian hill fort of Numantia in the Ebro
valley, Spain 181
Muséo Numantino, Soria; courtesy Junta de Castilla y Léon/

Paisajes Espanoles

Aerial view of the fort of Dun Aengus, Aran, Ireland 196
Werner Forman Archive
Chevaux de frise at the fort of Dun Aengus, Aran, Ireland 196

Prof. Barry Cunliffe

Shield boss from the River Thames at Wandsworth, London, 197
British Muscum/Werner Forman Archive

Aerial view of the Acropolis at Pergamum, Turkey 228
Sonia Halliday Photas

The Roman triumphal arch at Carpentras, Vaucluse, France 229
Prof. Barry Cunliffe

‘Cliff-castle” at Lostmac’h, Finisteére, France 229
Prof. Barry Cunliffe

Carved wooden stags from Fellbach-Schminden, Baden-
Witrttemberg, Germany 244
Wiirttembergisches Landesmuseum, Stuttgart

Princely grave-goods from Goeblingen-Nospelt,

Luxembourg 245
Musée Nationale d'Histoire et d'Art, Luxembourg

Deposits of gold and silver torcs in excavation pit at

Snettisham, Norfolk 245
British Museum
Settlement at Chysauster, Cornwall 260

English Heritage/Skyscan
Stela from Croas-Men at Lampaul-Ploudalmézeau, Finistére,

France 261
Werner Forman Archive


===== PAGE 9 (index-11_1.jpg) =====
List of Maps

1. Europe, 1300-700 BC
2. The spread or iron

3 & 4. The distribution of long swords of iron and bronze in the

seventh century nc
. Wagon graves of the seventh and sixth centuries sc
. Greeks in the Mediterrancan
. Phoenicians in the Mediterranean
. Etruscans in the Mediterranean
. Rhodian flagons
10. Massilliot wine amphorae

e | N v

1 &12. Attic black- and red-figured pottery
13 & 14. Etruscan bronze stamnoi and beaked flagons

15. Gold

16. Centres of power

17. Golasecca and Este cultures

18. Bronze situlac

19. Europe in the fifth century sc

20. Major regional concentrations of La Téne burials
21. La Tene finds in south-eastern Europe

22. Celtic finds in the northern Pontic Steppe

23. Double pyramidal ingots of iron

24. La Tene stamped pottery

25. Vehicle burials of the middle and late La Téne period
26. Oppida in Europe

27. Rectangular ditched enclosures of ritual type

28, Dressel 1 amphorae

29. The movements of the Cimbri and Teutones

30. Europe in the middle of the first century nc

308

310

34


===== PAGE 10 (index-13_1.jpg) =====
1
Visions of the Celts

WitnouT thedescriptions and speculations of Greek and Roman writers, our
understanding of the Iron Age communities of central and western Europe—
the traditional homeland of the Celts—would be very different. Alone, the
mute archacological evidence would allow us to sketch a warrior society
focused in west central Europe whose aristocracy demonstrated its prowess
through elaborately equipped burials. Over the period from the eighth to the
fifth centuries different ways of displaying status were introduced. We would be
able to recognize growing links with classical cultures of the west Medi-
terranean, reaching a new intensity in the period from the mid-sixth century to
the mid-fifth 8¢, after which local schools of fine metalwork, using concepts
and techniques learned from the Mediterranean world, developed to serve the
élite,

The archacological evidence would amply demonstrate the emergence of a
more warlike socicty by the fourth century whose values and technology, repre-
sented largely in the material culture recovered from cemeteries, spread across
much of Europe, from northern France to Romania and from Poland to the Po
Valley. Without the classical sources as a guide, there would be much learned
speculation about the meaning of this phenomenon. Towards the end of the
second century and throughout the first, in the decades preceding the Roman
Conquest, we would observe an intensification in production and exchange
over much of the central area, focusing on large nucleated settlements, many of
them defended, which were beginning to appear at this time.

If we stood back and took a broader geographical perspective, it would
become immediately clear that at any one time there was considerable cultural
variation from one area to another: we would be able to identify core zones of
innovation and intensification, and peripheries in which these developments
were reflected with decreasing clarity as distance from the core grew.

What we would not be able to appreciate with any degree of certainty is the


===== PAGE 11 (index-14_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

long period of conflict between the Celtic communities of the Po Valley and the
Roman world; and we would be entirely ignorant of the violent raids of the
Celts deep into Greece in the third century and of the large-scale migrations of
communities from the Middle Danube into the heart of Asia Minor which fol-
lowed. Nor would we have in our minds visions of white robed Druids cutting
mistletoe with golden sickles when the moon was just at the right stage of its
cycle, or of harsh-voiced warrior queens with waist-length golden hair, or of
feasting warriors slurping their wine through drooping moustaches while
boasting outrageously of their prowess, The classical sources provide a story-
line and colour. They offer us a range of characters, with a large supporting cast.
There is a real excitement in following their achievements and their failures.

Whilst the purist archacologist might argue that one should study the Iron
Age communities of Europe only through the archaeological data, since the
classical sources by their inherent partiality and deliberate manipulation dis-
tortour understanding, to reject such a rich vein of anecdote would be defeatist:
it would admit to an inability to treat the sources critically.

The Greek and Roman authors have provided us with their own vision of the
Celts—a vision born of contemporary or near contemporary experience. That
vision has pervaded Celtic studies for 2,000 years and cannot be ignored.

The Graeco-Roman Vision

The peoples who we may now recognize collectively as the Continental Celtsare
referred to by a variety of names in the classical sources. The Roman historians
writing of the migrations from north of the Alps to the Po Valley and beyond
called them Galli, and this tradition was followed by Polybius, to whom they
were Galatae, a name also commonly used in other Greek sources. Most of the
first-century se writers, however, realized that these names were interchange-
able with the Greek Keltorand Latin Celtae. Indeed Caesar, writing of the inhab-
itants of central Gaul, specifically says: ‘we call [them] Gauls, though in their
own language they are called Celts. The second-century ap Greek writer
Pausanius also stresses that Keltoi is a more long-established term than Galli.
The simplest way to explain this apparent confusion would be to accept that
Celtael Keltoi was the general name by which the broad sweep of peoples
stretching from north of the Alps to Iberia were known to the classical world,
and knew themselves, and that Gallif Galatae was a specific term applied to
those tribes who chose to migrate to the south and south-east. Caesar’s phrase
‘we call them Gauls’may be thought to take with it the implication that the term
had a Mediterranean origin, One possibility is that it comes from an Indo-
European word meaning ‘stranger’ or ‘enemy), in which case it can hardly be an
ethnonym.

Knowledge of the Celts grew slowly before the fourth century s, One of the
carliest references, which may contain material going back to the sixth century,
is provided in the rather florid and style-conscious poem Ora Maritima written


===== PAGE 12 (index-15_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

by Rufus Festus Avienus at the end of the fourth century ap in which the poet
sets out to display his considerable learning by quoting from authors, many of
whose texts no longer exist. Among them was an early sailing manual referred
to most conveniently as the Massilliot Periplus. On internal evidence this lost
work is thought to date to about 600 Bc. The importance of the source is the
information it gives about the Atlantic sea-ways and the tin-producing regions.
Avienus makes only one direct reference to the Celts when he mentions that
beyond the tin-producing Oestrymnides was a land now occupied by the Celts,
who took it from the Ligurians. The vague nature of the reference and the lack
of geographical or chronological precision rob it of much significance except
the existence of the name at a supposedly carly date. Rather more interest
attaches to his naming of Britain as Albion and of Ireland as lerné (whence Old
Irish Erinand modern Fire). Both names are widely accepted to be in an early
form of Celtic,

The geographer Hecataeus of Miletus, who wrote at the end of the sixth cen-
tury B, also had access to some knowledge of the Celts. He was aware that the
Greek colony of Massalia, founded about 600 B¢, lay in the land of the
Ligurians, which was near the territory of the Celts, and that the settlement at
Narbo (Narbonne) was Celtic. Elsewhere he mentions Nyraxasa Celtic city. No
certain identification can be offered, but Noreia in Austria has been favoured by
some commentators. Hecataeus, then, firmly establishes the presence of Celts
in southern Gaul in the late sixth century.

Herodotus of Halicarnassus, writing in the early fifth century sc, makes ref-
erence to Celts in his Histories, though he admits that his information about the
west is imperfect. He provides three geographical ‘facts’: that the source of the
Danube is in the land of the Celts; that it rises near the Celtic city of Pyrene; and
that the Celts lived west of the ‘Pillars of Hercules' (Straits of Gibraltar) next to
the Cynetoi, who were the westernmost peoples of Europe. Thus Herodotus
informants seem to have provided him with information about Celts living in
south-west Iberia and central Europe. The mention of Pyrene being near the
source of the Danube does, however, present some difficulty if it is assumed to
be related geographically to the Pyrenees and much scholarly effort has been
spent in trying to explain this insoluble confusion.

By the fourth century the Greeks had come to accept that the Celts occupied
a large swath of western Europe from Iberia to the Upper Danube. Ephorus
(€.405-330), in regarding them as one of the four great barbarian peoples of the
world, along with the Scythians, Persians, and Libyans, was reflecting the broad
general model which helped the Greeks to explain the nature of the periphery
beyond the civilized Mediterranean core.

It was during the fourth century that information about the Celtic peoples
began to accumulate, when Celtic bands became involved in the politics and
military affairs of the Mediterranean as settlers, raiders, and mercenaries.
Knowledge of the large-scale migration of Celts from north of the Alps to the Po
Valley c.400, and their subsequent raids southwards against Rome and beyond

3


===== PAGE 13 (index-16_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

beginning in ¢.390, soon reached the Greek world, which gained first-hand
experience of Celtic warriors, who, along with Iberians, were employed as mer-
cenary troops in the war between the Spartans and Thebes in 367 sc. Thus,
when Plato (429-347) in his Lawsdescribes the Celts as warlike and hard-drink-
ing, he may have been doing so on a basis of fact rather than repeating a stereo-
type of ‘barbarians’.

Aristotle (384-322) clearly had access to a number of sources on which to base
his generalized comments about Celtic peoples and he was certainly aware of
the attack on Rome. For him the Celts were a hardy northern people: they
exposed their children to their harsh climate with little clothing to toughen
them, and excessive obesity among men was punished. They were warlike and
ferocious and fearless to the point of irrationality, they took little notice of their
women and rather preferred male company, and they had strict rules of hospi-
tality especially to strangers. A lost text, Magicus, sometimes ascribed to
Aristotle, is said to mention the existence of Druids and holy men among the
Celts and Galatae. The Aristotelian stereotype is a compound of anecdotal
scraps presented within a vision of how barbarians ought to be. The balance of
fact and prejudice is difficult to assess, but the range of information available
from first-hand observation had greatly increased during the fourth century
and it would be surprising if Aristotle had not used it with some judgementand
discretion.

While the intrusion of Celtic peoples into the Mediterranean world in-
creased familiarity of them, expeditions, like that undertaken by Pytheas of
Massalia, c.320-10, will have broadened the knowledge base still further.
Pytheas sailed extensively along the Atlantic sea-ways in a voyage of discovery,
no doubt underpinned by sound economic motives, exploring the tin-
producing peninsulas of the west, and the south and east coasts of Britain, and
even venturing still further north. For him the British Isles lay north of the land
of the Celts and were known as the Pretanic islands. There is no suggestion in
the surviving quotations about his voyage that he regarded the Pretanias Celtic.

In parallel with the scientific discoveries of men like Pytheas and the philo-
sophical considerations of Aristotle, Greek mythology expanded to take
account of the Celts. According to Timaceus, they were descended cither from
the union of Polyphemus and Galatea or from the giant Keltos. Another version
sees the Galatians as the descendants of Galatos, the son of Cyclops and Galatea.
A different tradition assigns the fatherhood of Galatos or Keltos to Heracles,
who, during his wanderings in the west, was seduced by Keltine, the beautiful
daughter of King Bretannos. Unable to resist her charms, and her refusal to
retrieve the cattle of Geryon, he felt impelled to sleep with her,

The Celts were brought into much sharper focus for the Romans and the
Greeks during the fourth and third centuries B¢, as hordes of warriors, some-
times accompanied by migrating communities, thrust into Italy, Greece, and
Asia Minor, For Rome the dangerous conflict lasted from the initial advance
southwards towards Rome soon after 400 Bc to the decisive battle of Telamon in

4


===== PAGE 14 (index-17_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

225. The Greek confrontation was shorter lived, focusing around the invasion of
28078, which culminated in an attack on Delphi. In Asia Minor the Hellenistic
and Roman armies were to confront Galatians throughout the century or so
after the initial migration from Europe in the aftermath of their Greek expedi-
tion.

It was during these two centuries that the Celtic stereotype was to acquire its
familiar form. They were wild fearless warriors, irrationally brave in the first
onslaught but prone to wild despair when the battle turned against them.

5

+ The acropolis of
Pergamum in western
Turkey was the focus of
Pergamene power in the
third and second centurices
ne. The twa religious
precinets, the temple of
Athena and the altar of Zeus,
were focal points for the dis-
play of sculptural compasi-
tions celebrating Pergamene
victories over the Celtic
raiders, Through these
monuments the kings of
Pergamum were baying
claims to be the saviouss of
Hellenism,


===== PAGE 15 (index-18_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

Unpredictableand unreliable as allies, who could be too drunk or too paralysed

by superstitious fear to fight, they were a people otherwise easily aroused to bat

tle fury. And above all they were barbarians—people of alien behaviour, cruel,

and prone to such savagery as human sacrifice and even cannibalism. It is casy

to see in this broad sketch—a sketch which any Greek or Roman schoolboy

might have been expected to turn out—a standard, almost timeless, description

ation lie

of ‘the enemy from without) and yet beneath its simplistic exa
some elements of the truth learned by the bitter experience of two centuries of

confrontation and conflict

The historians of Greece and Rome, writers like Polybius (c204-c.

ate second century An), were all atten

Livy (59 sc-Ap17), and Pausanias

ing

tions of the

to project particular images of history. Their individual presents

Celt were necessarily conditioned by this, but the common thread which &

¢s from

wished to communicate was of their own systems triumphing over

without—the rational, civilized order of state control contrasted with the wild

savage, chaos of the primitive barbarians. It is, therefore, the antitheses to the

ideals of Gracco-Roman civilization that were emphasized in the classical

accounts of the Celts. To point up the classical ach

ievement, hy

rless in battle and with

enemy had also to be presented as a worthy opponent
a savage nobility that made his defeat the more remarkable.

These attitudes come together in the dramatic visual reality of contemporary

antly

sculpture. The savagery and chaos of the Gauls looting a temple are bril

portrayed in a sculptured frieze of the second century sc from Civitalba

6


===== PAGE 16 (index-19_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

Ancona (PL Ib), but the power and nobility of the Celt is
nowhere better captured than on the victory monuments
erected by the Attalid kings at Pergamum and at Athens in
the third and second centuries se. The acropolis monu-
ment at Pergamum, commissioned by Attalus 1 in the
2205, is known to us only from later Roman marble copies,
including the famous Dying Gaul, the Gaulish warrior
with his dead wife committing suicide (PL 11), and the
head of abearded Gaul. Together they convey the vision of
an enemy one would have been proud to have defeated.
The theme of the Pergamene kingdom as the saviour of
Hellenism was displayed in an even more dramatic form
ina victory monument erected on the acropolis of Athens
after the final defeat of the Gauls between 168 and 166 Bc.
, the Pergamene defeat of the

Here, according to Pausan
Gauls in Asia Minor was presented in parallel with the
Greek victory over the Persians at Marathon and both
were balanced with mythological battles, the Greeks
mplication, the ancestors of

against the Amazons and, by

the Pergamenes against the Giants. The claim of the
Attalids is, thus, blatant: they, like the Greeks, have
throughout time been the saviours of civilization against
the external forces of chaos and destruction. The allusion
dy there in the Hymn to Delos, written by Callimachus, who lived at the
cltic attack on Delphi, in which the Celts are likened to*Latter-day

was alre:
time of the €
Titans’

A similar message was conveyed in a great frieze around the altar at Perga-
mum in which Zeus and Athena defeat the Giants while the Attalids defeat the
Gauls. Of the many Gauls who would have been depicted, five survive in Roman
marble copies (one in the Louvre in Paris, one in Naples, and three in Venice),
all caught at their moment of defeat cowed by the might of their conquerors.

In these remarkable survivals the classical vision of the Celts, as it was per-

ceived by those with the power to purvey their own version of history and its
messages, stands out in sharp focus. Once created it has remained in the con-
sciousness of all subsequent observers.

As the threat of the Celts asa force for destruction receded in the second cen-
somewhat different metaphor of them began to develop. The most infor-
mative source, from the modern viewpoint, is the work of Poseidonius, a Syr
k from Apamaca (c.135-c50 8¢). Poseidonius wrote a s of Histories

n
fifty-two books beginning in the mid-second century to follow on from the
Histories of Polybius. Book 23 contained an ethnographical introduction about
the Celts as a background to the Roman conquest of Transalpina completed in
121 8¢, For this he had access 1o a variety of earlier sources augmented by travels
of his own in Gaul. The information at his disposal, then, comprised much

~

3 Marble relie f
sanctuary of Athena

the

mum,

gamon
museum, Berlin. The relief
gives an accurate impression
of Celtic armour of the late
third century e showing a
tunic of chain mail, shickds,
aspear, and an animal
headed carnyx (war
trumpet



===== PAGE 17 (index-20_1.jpg) =====
4 The'round monument’,
only the base of which
remains in the sanctuary of
Athena at Pergamum, is
thought by some scholars to
have been the focus for the
display of statues of the
defeated Celts. Marble
copies of these works were
taken to Maly, where several
have survived. This
insaginative reconstruction
by A. Schober was published
in 1952,

VISIONS OF THE CELTS

[ \
anecdotal material reflecting earlier times, which he was able to present against
his own more systematic observations. The Histories are no longer extant but
were extensively used, sometimes with direct acknowledgement, by three later
writers, Strabo (¢.64 Bc-ap 21), Diodorus Siculus (who wrote ¢.60-30 s¢),and
Athenacus (. Ap 200), and may also have been used by Julius Caesar as a source
for the ethnographic descriptions in his Commentariesin Book V1 of the Gallic
War. Poseidonius was a Stoic philosopher, and, as Athenaeus tells us, in describ-
ing the many customs of many peoples he composed his work ‘in accordance
with his philosophical convictions, In essence Poscidonius believed that con-
temporary barbarian peoples reflected a condition closer to the Golden Age
than civilized societies, and that in that Golden Age society was ruled by the
wise. To this extent his account of the Celts has something of a rosy glow about
it. Thus he approves of their bravery and of their honouring of the brave, and
comments favourably upon their hospitality to strangers. He excuses their
fondness for war and their impetuous nature by saying that they were a
straightforward people and not of evil character: he even came to terms with
the idea of Celtic headhunting. They were, in fact, only like boisterous school-
children. "To the frankness and high-spiritedness of their temperament must be
added the traits of childish boastfulness and love of decoration.’ But they were
ruled by wisdom because among those specially honoured and given authority
were the Druids, who were the natural and moral philosophers and men of sci-
ence. ‘They are believed to be the most just of men.’ In his Celtic ethnography
Poseidonius can fairly be accused, as modern commentators have suggested, of
being a‘soft primitivist’ who shielded himself and his readers from the realities

8


===== PAGE 18 (index-21_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF TME CELTS

of Celtic societies. This same attitude is evident in the works of the Alexandrian
school from the first century Ap onwards which, using written sources rather
than field observation, present Celtic religion and Druidism as on a par with
Pythagorean systems.

A new sense of reality was instilled, from the middle of the first century Bc, by
writers such as Caesar, Lucan, and Tacitus, who reported on the conquest of the
Gauls and the Britons. Although there was some recourse to the old stereotypes
for the standard ethnographic introductions, much of the sense of the political
turmoil among the Celtic peoples comes over. Thus Caesar: ‘In Gaul there are
factions not only in every state and village and party but practically even inindi-
vidual households’; and Tacitus: ‘Once they owed obedience to kings: now they
are distracted between the warring factions of rival chiefs.” Implicit in com-
ments of this kind is the justification for conquest, for not only could Rome not
tolerate such instability on her borders but conquest and romanization brought
peace to the barbarians. The point is explicitly made in a set-piece speech which
Tacitus attributes to Petilius Cerialis in Ap 69, though in all probability it is the
historian speaking:

Throughout the whole of Gaul there were always despots and wars until you passed
under our control. We ourselves, despite many provocations, imposed upon you by
right of conquest only such additional burdens as were necessary for preserving peace.
Stability between nations cannot be maintained without armies, nor armies without
pay, nor pay without taxation. Everything else is shared equally between us. (Hist. 4.73)

Tacitus takes a rather more realistic view when he puts into the mouth of the
British war leader Calgacus, facing the Roman army in northern Scotland in ap
84,a damning indictment of Rome: ‘Pillagers of the world, they have exhausted
the land by their indiscriminate plunder . . . to robbery, butchery, and rapine,
they give the lying name of “government”; they create a desolation and call it
peace’ (Agricola 30).

While Caesar has a specific political agenda to achieve through his presenta-
tion of the Gauls, Tacitus uses the Britons and Germans as part of a general
tirade against his perception of the shortcomings of the Roman leadership.
Modern decadence and indiscipline and the loss of individual liberty are his
themes, and the Britons and Germans provide convenient characters through
which to purvey these views. The Celts are no longer a serious threat to Rome;
it is the danger from within that is more insidious. For Tacitus, then, the Celts
provide the allegory.

From the end of the first century Ap barbarians other than the Celts provid-
ed the raw material for invective and polemic, and attitudes began to mellow as
second- and third-generation Gauls and Britons became creative and influ-
ential citizens of the empire. Martial, born at Bilbilis in Ap 40, several times pro-
claimed his pride in his Celtiberian origins—'we who are descended from Celts
and Iberians’—and both Iberia and Gaul produced men of real literary talent.
Only in occasional disparaging references to the northern Britons—such as

9


===== PAGE 19 (index-22_1.jpg) =====
5 A seventeenth-century
vision of an Ancient Briton
awoodcut from Joha
Speed's Historic, published
in 1611, The ultimate source
seems 10 be a watercolour
drawing by John White dat
ing to about 1588,
Nakedness, body-painting,
long hair, neck tores, and
head-hunting are all charac
teristics of the generalized
Celt' derived from classical
sources, which were becom-
ing available in printed form
atabout this time.

VISIONS OF THE CELTS

Ausonius’ epigram, that 'matus’ (drunk) rather than ‘bonus’ (good) is a more
appropriate description for a Briton—can we see the old Celtic stereotype
recurring.

Oblivion and Awakening: c.1500-1700

From the fourth century until the sixteenth century Ap the world cared little for
Celts. The classical texts were largely forgotten and lost, and the universal
appeal of Christianity, with its own texts, mythologies, and stercotypes, provid-
ed all the models that were required to order behaviour and to invent ¢
myths and protohistories, Yet it was Ch ty that kept alive a knowledge of
the Celts in the manuscript copies of the classical sources preserved in monas-
tic libraries.

In the sixteenth century many of these texts began to become more widely
available in printed form. The manuscript of Tacitus’ Agricola reached Rome
about 1470 and was published in Milan five to ten years later, while Caesar's
Gallic War was published in Venice in 1511, By
the beginning of the seventeenth century most
of the major texts were available in their origi-
nal languagesand in translation. This coincided
with a general awakening in western Europe of
the need to create national prehistories based
on fact rather than myth. In Britain scholars like
John Leland (1503-52) began avidly to collect
data, while at the end of the century William
Camden (1551-1623) produced the first serious
attempt at explaining the early origins of
Britain in his Britannia, first published in 1586.
In France the Celts were beginning to come to
the fore in such works as Jean Le Fevre's Les
Fleurs etantiquites des Gaules, published in 1532,
and particular attention was beginning to be
paid to the practices and philosophy of the
Druids throughout the sixteenth and seven-
teenth centuries.

The discovery of the New World with its star-
tling range of ‘primitive peoples’ each living in
their own distinctive ethnographic present,and
the beginning of the exploration of Africa and
the Fast, provi
for those writing about the prehistory of Euro-
pean society. Samuel Daniel could liken the
tribal warfare of pre-Roman Britain to that of
the American Indians, while John White could

ed ample comparative material


===== PAGE 20 (index-23_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

6 Raphael Holinshed's
vision of Queen Boudica
(Boadiccea as she was then

tribe, the Ieni, who in ap 60
Jod a rebellion against the
Romans. IHustrated in his
Chronicles (1578). The
similarity to Queen
Elizabeth | reviewing her
troops is unmistakable.

use his field drawings of Virginian Indians as models for Picts and Britons.
What was beginning to emerge throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies was the concept of the Celts, Gauls, and Britons as Noble Savages, not
donius, though frequently they
were displayed in contemporary dress. It was a trend which was to develop still
further in the
South Seas enlivened the European consciousness.

unlike the soft-primitivist approach of Pos

shteenth century after an awareness of the islanders of the

Celtomania and Nationalism: c.1i700-1870

By the beginning of the eighteenth century the antiquarians concerned with
early Europe had access to the principal classical texts, a varied array of ethno-
logical analogi
artefacts of their countrie

and a growing knowledge of the prehistoric monuments and

he three elements were combined, particularly in
France and Britain, to create a vision of the past peopled by sand Druids. In
Britain the movement was led by William Stukeley (1687-1765), who began, in
1723, to write a History of the Ancient Celts in four parts. The work was never
completed, but his two volumes on Stonehenge and Avebury, published in 1740
and 1743, ascribed both monuments to the 'British Druids’ In the wake of
Stukeley's energetic proselytizing, virtually all the megalithic monuments of
Britain—tombs, circles, and alignments—uwere considered to be the preserve of

Druids, while the hill forts were seen as ‘Ancient British’ strongholds or as the
camps of Caesar built during his expeditions in 55 and 54 8C.

In France the same enthusiasms prevailed. In 1703 Paul-Yves Pezron pub-
lished his L'Antiquité de la nation et la langue des Celtes, autrement appelez
Gaulois. By the end of the century the belief that the megaliths were Celtic was


===== PAGE 21 (index-24_1.jpg) =====
7 ADruid seen through the
vivid imagination of
William Stukeley. From his
volume Stonehenge,
published in 1740. The axe
in the belt is of Bronze Age
type. but such details were
unappreciated in Stukeley's
ti

9 Queen Boudica
35 she appears resphendent

in her chariot on the
Thames Embankment
facing the Houses of

Parliament. The statue,
erected in 1902, shows the
British queen as in the
model of late Victorian regal
nobility

VISIONS OF THE CELTS

firmly entrenched in such works as Malo Corret de la
Tour-d'Auvergne’s Origines gauloises (1796) and Jacques
Cambry's Monuments celtiques (1805), which assigned
all the Breton megaliths to the Celts.

Another pursuit of those caught up in the romance of
Celtomania was to ‘discover’ Celtic literary traditions
still extant in the folk memory of peasants living in
remote areas, The most blatant case of invention came
from Scotland, where James Macpherson created single-
handed the poems of Ossian, which he published
between 1760 and 1763. They were to have a profound
effect throughout Europe in the fight for national iden-
tity: Ossian features large in the freedom poetry of the
Hungarian Sandor Petofi (1823-49). In Brittany similar
‘discoveries’ were being made by Vicomte Hersart de la
Villemarqué, whose Barzaz-Breiz (Songs of Brittany)
was first published in 1838, at the time when the French
pe out Breton culture
and language. Nor were the Welsh free from romantic

government was attempting to wi

invention. In 1792 the ceremony of Maen Gorsedd was

created. It was held on the autumn equinox and involved
Welsh bards in an extended performance of pompous
ritual heavy with symbolism, requiring for its props an
altar and a circle of stones. The entire pastiche of an
‘ancient tradition’ was the invention of Welsh stonema-
son Edward Williams, who preferred to be known by his
bardic name lolo Morganwy. By managing to have the
Gorsedd attached to the more ancient and respectable
ceremony of the Welsh Eisteddfod in 1819, Williams
ensured the survival of his nonsensical Celtic creation.

with its
in the history of scholarship. It wasa

The C
mixture of facts and fantasies, has its place

eltomania of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centurie:

stage through which west European antiquarianism, almost inevitably, had to
pass, since it provided the first faltering attempts in bringing together classical

sources, the study of antiquitie: te a

oral traditions, and language to cre.
European past. What is more surprising is that much of the romantic nonsense
of this phase still persists.

The French archaeologist Salomon Reinach, looking back over the outpour
ings of Les Celtomanes, could characterize their beliefs somewhat wryly

The Celtsare the oldest people in the world; their language is preserved practically intact
in Bas-Breton; they were profound philosophers whose inspired doctrines have been
handed down by the Welsh Bardic Schools; dolmens are their altars, where their priests
the Druids offered human sacrifice; stone alignments were their astronomical observa

tories,


===== PAGE 22 (index-25_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

He could afford to be scathingly dismissive, for after 1870 the results of archs
ological activity throughout western Europe were casting an entirely new light
on the culture of the Iron Age (see Chapter 2),

Beneath the romantic Celtism of the eighteenth century lay an undercurrent
of nationalism which intensified and became more explicit in the nineteenth
al sources provided a galaxy of national heroes—Boudica in

Britain, Vercingetorix in France, Ambiorix in Belgium, Viriathus in Iberia—all
of whom could be used as symbols of national identity and freedom when

set up on the Thames Embankment in London in 1902, and Ambiorix depicted
in heroic guise at Tongres in Belgium were there to provide much-needed inspi-
ration of nationhood in the tumultuous century between the end of the
Napoleonic War and the outbreak of the First World War.

In much of this, France took the lead. The famous statue of the Dying Gaul,
bought at great expense by the French monarchy in 1737, was eventually trans-
ferred to France by Napoleon Bonaparte, on whom the potency of the image
will not have been lost. Bonaparte established the Académie Celtique in Paris in
1805, but it was left to Napoleon's nephew, Louis Napoleon, to initiate what
be the carliest planned research programme in Iron Age archae-
ology. Returning to France aftera period in exile, he was elected President of the
Second Republic in 1848, seizing further power four years later to become
Emperor, thereafter styling himself Napoleon [11. France had been through a
ng Prussian mili-
as being a politician and skilfully com-

long period of upheaval and was facing the threat of increa

tarism. Napoleon was a scholar as wel
bined his personal academic inclination with the need to boost French morale
by sponsoring a spectacular campaign of fieldwork and excavation to provide

archacological data for his projected work, the Histoire de Jules César. The
fieldwork was undertaken between 1860 and

1865 by Colonel E. Stoffel with the aid of up to ‘

300 assistants and labourers. The colonel’s task
was to research the topography of Caesar's
campaigns and to identify the battlefields, an
assignment completed with varying degrees of
success, the highlight being the excavation of

the siege works and a battleground of Alesia,
where the war leader Vercingetorix made his last
heroic stand against Rome. To provide further

Celtic background to these events, Napoleon
initiated the large-scale excavation of the prin-
cipal oppidum of the Aedui at Bibracte (Mont
Beuvray)—a task which he entrusted to J. G.
Bulliot. Of the three projected volumes of the
Histoire, two were published, in 1865 and 1866.
The foundation of La Musée des Antiq

8 Statue of Vercingetorix.
the Gaulish resistance leader
who confronted Cacsar at
Alesia in 52 ne. The statue,
which dominates the plateau
of Alesia, was erected at the
instigation of the Emperor
Napokeon 111 in 1865,
Napokon organized a
detailed field study of
Cassar's campaigns. There
is a certain stylized resem
Blance between the emperor
and the statue.



===== PAGE 23 (index-26_1.jpg) =====
10 Napoleon I}, emperor of
France from 1852 until s870,
ated and
mans at

when he was de
captused by the G
Sedan, During the Second
Emypire, largely as a result of
Napaleon's scholarly inter
ests, the archacology of fron
Age Gaul flourished

VISIONS OF THE CELTS

11 Colonel Stoffed, in his quest to discover details of Cacsar’s military
installations, cut trial trenches to test the existence and form of buricd
ditches and pits. This careful work enabled him to produce plans
Cacsar’s forts and associated defensive works. The illustratic
from Napoleon 111's Histoire de Jules César (1865
the outer circumvall,

Cacsar's camps « designed 1o restrain the

army of Vercingetorix at Alesia.

Nationales in Paris in 1863 er
uities, complete with models and reconstructions, would become readily acces-
sible to the general public.

There can be little doubt that in intensifying, and possibly even creating,
public awareness of the Gauls and of their heroic resistance to the outside
lapoleon 111 was deliberately

ured that his growing collection of Celtic antig-

aggressor, Rome, setting out to inculcate a nat-
ional spirit. His attitude to Caesar was ambivalent. Caesar confronted Gaulish
opposition, but he did so, he claimed, because otherwise the country would
have been overrun by Germans—the parallels would not have needed stressing
to the French public in the 1860s, The conquest also had the advantage of unify-
ing Gaul in along period of peace in a way never before or after achieved. When
in1870 Napoleon rode out at Sedan to lead the French army in disastrous defeat
at the hands of the Germans, one wonders whether it was Vercingetorix or

Caesar that provided his role model.

he Romantic movement which had gripped Europe in the eighteenth and
carly nineteenth centuries provided a major stimulus to Celtomania in those
regions which could claim to be Celtic. The ‘discovery’ of poetic traditions like
the Ossian epic invented by Macpherson and La Villemarqué's Barzaz-Breiz
(recently shown to be based on genuine folk traditions) and the nonsenses
which sprang from the fertile imagination of lolo Morganwy should not detract
from more serious work, such as Evan Evans's Some Specimens from the Poetry
of the Ancient Welsh Bards published in 1764, or, for that matter, the literary

14


===== PAGE 24 (index-27_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

based on fic]

excavat

genius of Sir Walter Scott, whose novels and poems gave a new nobility to the
Highlander at the moment when all things Celtic were being proscribed in
Scotland. Out of this ferment of literary and folkloric outpourings more solid

structures began to crystallize: the foundation of the Society of Cymmrodorion
15 A model of Cacsar's
circumvallation of Al

in 1751 and the Cambrian Archacological Association in 1848 provided a sound

academic framework for Wales, while in Scotland the Socicty of Antiquaries of
Scotland was instituted in 1780.

‘he Royal Institution of Cornwall emerged in
s 3 tions undertaken by Ce
1818 and in Ireland the Royal Irish Academy came into being in 1785, Stoffel in the 1860s.



===== PAGE 25 (index-28_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

For the most part these organizations provided structured fora where the
like-minded could research and celebrate their past, but inevitably such soci-
eties provided, often unwittingly, an underpinning for nationalist sentiments,
and the perceived shared ‘Celtic’ ancestry offered a degree of unity. This was
particularly developed in Brittany, where, in 1867, La Villemarqué set up the first
of a series of Interceltic Congresses to which were invited ‘kith and kin' from
Wales, ‘brothers' from Cornwall, and ‘cousins’ from Ireland and Scotland. It was
from these roots that the Breton separatist movement Breiz Atao (‘Brittany for
Ever') was to grow in the interwar years. Pan-Celticism provided strength, it
also offered an identity of otherness: wethe Celts as opposed to them the French
and English. It is a powerful metaphor which is still very much alive.

The Contribution of Archaeology: 1870-1970

The growing awareness of the material culture of the pre-Roman Iron Age in
the middle of the nineteenth century began to instil a new sense of realism into
the study of late prehistoric Europe, but it was not until 1871, with the recogni-
tion that the cultural assemblages found in the graves of the Champagne and
the lake-side site of La Tene in Switzerland were closely matched by those asso-
ciated with a series of burials inserted into the ruins of the Etruscan town of
Marzabotto, that the historic Celts could confidently be identified (see Chapter
2). Thereafter the belief that the movements of people could be traced in the
archacological record gained wide acceptance, and the invasionist model
became central to much archaeological writing.

Material of La Téne type found throughout central and eastern Europe was
directly related to the historic expansion of the Celts, though the extreme pauci-
ty of La Téne material in Greece and Asia Minor, where the Celts were known to
have been active, wasa salutary warning of the adage that absence of evidence is
not evidence of absence.

In the west the situation was more complex. The study of ancient European
languages had shown that forms of Celtic were spoken over much of the Iberian
Peninsula, the British Isles, and Ireland, and yet there was no historical record of
Celtic migrations into these areas. It was, therefore, left to archacologists and
linguists to construct models of invasion from their two disparate viewpoints.
Since each relied heavily on the other, a considerable degree of circularity devel-
oped in the arguments. In Iberia the classical sources indicated a Celtic presence
by the sixth century ¢, and this was supported by linguistic arguments that
suggested that the Celtic spoken in the Peninsula was more ancient than that
recorded in Gaul. Thus it was incumbent on archacologists to ‘discover’ evi-
dence for the Celtic migration from west central Europe through the Pyrenees
in the material culture of the Late Bronze Age. This approach was most influ-
entially propounded by P. Bosch-Gimpera in his famous paper “Two Celtic
Waves in Spain’ published in 1939 in the Proceedings of the British Academy. In
Britain and Ireland invasionist theories were summed up in the elegant formu-

16


===== PAGE 26 (index-29_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

lation of Christopher Hawkes, presented in a paper entitled ‘Hillforts’ pub-
lished in the journal Antiquityin 193y, in which a series of migratory

aves were
envisaged.

Simple invasionist theories of this kind were in common use until the 1960s
and are still found from time to time in the more popular literature. Their mod-
elling was based partly on the classical accounts of Celtic movements, but also
derived inspiration from an awareness of the migrations of the late Roman and
carly medieval periods. Behind itall lay the knowledge, gleaned from recent his-
tory, of the dramatic cultural changes, linguistic and material, that had been
brought about by west European imperial expansion. This strengthened the
implicit belief that cultural change was most simply to be explained as the result
of folk movement.

The ‘Celts’ that emerged during this period still retained the image of the
warrior intent upon feasting and raiding—in other words the classical vision
but, in a century dominated by recurring war, much of it resulting from

German militarism, a new image began to develop in which the ‘Celt’ was given

a more homely, creative appearance in contrast to other barbarians, in particu-

lar the‘warlike Germans': in other words the ‘Celt’ was becoming domesticated. 14 Celtic domesticity as
imagined by A. |

estier in

This was subtly, and perhaps unconsciously, done by putting increased empk

f 1911, based
sis on artistic and technical achievements and on the ‘hearth-and-home’ asp-  on the excavated evidence

derived from the examina.
t
developed in Britain, where the creative originality of Celtic art had long been ¢

ects of the archacological record. Such an approach was particularly well

the lake village of

tonbury, Somerset.



===== PAGE 27 (index-30_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

recognized, largely because the extreme paucity of cemeteries producing war-
rior equipment forced archaeological activity to focus on settlement sites and
on the productive systems which maintained them,

The first recognizable ordering of the British agrarian landscape became
known as ‘Celtic field systems), and the term was readily, if inappropriately,
adopted in the Low Countries and Denmark, where isolated Celtic elements of
material culture have tended to be given particular emphasis in contrast to the
Germanic.

The Celt of the period 1870-1970 is, therefore, a complex creation. In the
image of the nineteenth-century imperialists, he was prepared to fight his way
into new territories, taking his women and children with him, but there to set-
tledown tottill the soil while the womenfolk spun, weaved, and ground the corn.
His love of art was well developed and he was served by craftsmen of great orig-
inality and skill. Even his wife could add to the artistic ambience of the home by
making pleasantly decorated pots. He was not unduly aggressive but would
fiercely protect his family and home if danger threatened. The discovery of a
‘war cemetery”at the gate of the hill fort of Maiden Castle, in Dorset, attributed
to the gallant Celts defending their settlement against Roman invaders, provid-
ed a potent image which caught the grim public mood in the late 19305, and, by
the time that the excavation report was finally published in the depths of the
Second World War, the ‘war-mad’ Celt of the Poseidonian tradition had become
celticus domesticus!

In France, too, opportunity for allegory was not lost, In the aftermath of the
war, in 1949, a monument was erected on the plain of Les Laumes below Alesia.
It records that

On this plain 2,000 years ago Gaul saved her honour pitting, at Vercingetorix” call, her
peoples against Caesar's legions. After her reversal upon the battlefield, reconciled with
the victor, united, defended against the invasions of the Germans, open to the enlight-
enment of Greece and Rome, she knew three centuries of peace.

Celts at the End of the Millennium

Since 1970 there has been a subtle change in the vision of the Celt, with an
increasing emphasis on the economic systems which underpinned society and
the use of “world-systems” models. The development of coinage and the emer-
gence of oppida, which are widely believed to be of urban character, are areas
upon which much research has recently focused. These developments are, in
part, the result of a more widespread interest in economic structures among
archacologists, which can be related 1o a much broader awareness of economics
among the public at large. This, in some considerable measure, is a reflection of
modern European politics, with its concern for the development of the more
unified European Community. The pan-European image of the Celts is highly
appropriate to this political imperative.

The mounting of the spectacular exhibition “The Celts, the Origins of Eur-

8


===== PAGE 28 (index-31_1.jpg) =====
VISIONS OF THE CELTS

ope'in Venice in 1991, under the auspices of Palazzo Grassi and sponsored by the
multinational Fiat company, is an example of the current use to which the Celts
are being put. The point was explicitly made by the President of Palazzo Grassi
in his introduction to the exhibition catalogue The Celts:

This exhibition is a tribute both to the new Europe which cannot come into fruition
without a comprehensive awareness of its unity, and to the fact that, in addition to its
Roman and Christian sources, today’s Europe traces its roots from the Celtic heritage,
which is there for all to see.

Itis in the light of this vision that one can best understand the initiative of
President Mitterrand in providing lavish funds from the French state to sup-
port a new programme of multinational excavations at the Aeduian capital of
Bibracte. In doing so he was echoing the gesture of Napoleon 111, though for
rather different political motives,

Jacquetta Hawkes summed it all up in the memorable thought that cach gen-
cration gets the archacology it deserves. Put another way, it is difficult, indeed
impossible, to study the past without our understanding being encumbered
and perverted by the impediment of the social mores in which we live and the
transient values of the moment. At best, by attempting to understand the dis-
tortions of the past, we can be more on guard against introducing distortions of
our own and accepting those forced on us by our political leaders.

There are currently two extreme perceptions of the Celts: the New Celto-
mania, which provides a vision of a European past to comfort us at a time when
cthnic divisions are becoming a painful and disturbing reality, and a politically
correct view, which argues that the term is so abused as to be useless except to
those who wish to increase the sales of their books, Both views contain some
threads of value but in their extremity they are sterile. There were, in Europe
and beyond, peoples who were known as Celts, whose movements and behav-
iour are reflected in contemporary sources. They spoke a language which
spread over a huge area, versions of which are still spoken and taught today in
the western fringes of the former territory. Some of these ancient Celtic com-
munities developed a unique art and a distinctive material culture, which
spread throughout Europe, and in the remote west, in Ireland, echoes of their
society come down to us through the written versions of a long-extinct oral tra-
dition. These threads are real and are worthy of our attention.

19


===== PAGE 29 (index-32_1.jpg) =====
¥
The Reality of the Celts

Tue concept of the Celts has many realities born of different disciplines. The
carliest awareness to break upon the academic world was the vision provided by
the Greek and Roman authors, a vision which, as we have seen, was moulded
through closely circumscribed historical traditions to produce a range of famil-
iar metaphors. These were translated into visual form through Hellenistic stat-
uary, which in turn became widely known through Roman copies. Together
these sources produced a ‘classical reality’, the great and lasting advantage of
which is that it gives the Celts a place in history endowing them with motives,
passions, names, and a fearsome alien character. Through the eyes of the classi-
cal world, the Celts, though familiar in some ways, were sufficiently foreign to
send a frisson of fear down the spine whenever their name arose.

This clearly sculpted model began to take on a more complex character in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries through a growing understanding of the
intricacies of the Celtic language, further to be enlivened by the great vernacu-
lar literature of the Insular Celts of Ireland and Wales, which offered a quite
different insight into the “Celtic character”. The crisply defined Celts of Roman
sculptors and Greek and Roman historians became worryingly distorted by the
unreality of magic and shape-shifting.

Archacological advances in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries provided
a new reality through the discovery first of the weapons and artefacts used by
Celtic peoples and later of the settlements in which they had lived and the detri-
tus of the economies which had sustained them, Finally, in the 1930s and 1940s,
the art of the Celts came to be recognized as a subject worthy of study, making
it possible to bridge the gap between the classical vision, the vernacular mys-
tery, and the harsh, if somewhat mundane, archacological reality. The excite-
ment of the subject is that it can be approached from these very different
directions, all of which have a validity within their own academic parameters,
and yet what emerges presents an altogether different set of images.

20


===== PAGE 30 (index-33_1.jpg) =====
B N N
N A\ T’in:
i e Vel


===== PAGE 31 (index-34_1.jpg) =====
Ho, ety

AT -~ S AR

g@"‘»’f* . E' b 5 9?'
2 \ s


===== PAGE 32 (index-35_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE

Inthe previous chapter we considered the classical model and its evolution in
broad outline, Here it is necessary to explore in more detail the main classes of
evidence which help to expand and modify that model.

The Celtic Language

Celtic belongs to the family of Indo-European languages. It is closest to the
Italic languages, to such an extent that some linguists have postulated a com-
mon Italo-Celtic origin for both. This hypothetical group is believed to be
broadly equivalent to two other European families, one from which the Baltic,
Slav, and Germanic languages were to evolve and the other ancestral to Greek.
The point at which Celtic began to be distinguished is much debated. On one
extreme it has been suggested that the main Celtic-speaking groups were in
place using their distinctive tongue as early as 3000 8¢, but the more conven-
tional view accepts that Italic and Celtic separated and developed in the regions
in which they were to flourish during the period 1300-800 8¢, before outward
migration of the Celts and the Latins.

Celtic languages are spoken now only in the extreme Atlantic periphery of
Europe, but originally they extended in a broad swath from south-western
Iberia, through Gaul and the Alpine region, into the Middle Danube, and one
group of settlers, the Galatians, introduced Celtic into central Asia Minor,
where, according to St Jerome, it was still recognizable in the fourth century ap.

The different types of recorded Celtic may be divided into two broad groups:
Continental and Insular. Continental Celtic is known from the evidence of
place names and personal names recorded by classical historians, on coins, and
from a comparatively small number of inscriptions, Using this evidence it is
possible to distinguish three, possibly four, Continental Celtic languages. In
Iberia, Celtiberian was spoken over much of the centre, west, and north of the
Peninsula. The carliest inscriptions date to the third century s, but, as we have
seen, the Greek writers show that Celts were to be identified in the region at least
two centuries earlier. In Gaul, the Gaulish language was spoken extensively in
the first century sc and is well represented in a hun-
dred or so inscriptions. South of the Alps in the north-
western part of the Po Valley a distinctive form of
Celtic known as Lepontic has been identified in about
seventy inscriptions. That the earliest of these date
back to the sixth century nc raises a number of impor-
tant questions which will be introduced later (see
p. 70). Finally, in the Middle Danube Valley place
names and personal names indicate that the Celtic
spoken here differed from the western Celtic lan-
guages, but little is known of its structure or date
except that many of the names are no later than the
first century sc.

n

Il Facing: A Celtic warrior
committing suicide in defeat
by the body of his dead wife.
The group, now in the
Museo Nazionale defle
Terme, Rome, is probably a
marble copy of an original
which once adorned the
Temple of Athena
Nikephoros at Pergamum
commissioned by Attalus |
a1 the end of the third centu-
rync.

15 Stone slab from Vaison
Ia-Romaine, Vauchuse,
France, inscribed in Gracco-
Gaulish, It probably dates to
the middle of the first
century sC and records the
ift of land to the goddess
Belesma by Segomaros, son
of Villonas, citizen of
Nemauso (Nimes). Musée
Calvet, Avignon.



===== PAGE 33 (index-36_1.jpg) =====
16 Abilingual inscription in
Latin and Ceitic from Todi,
Italy, dating to the second
century B¢, Musco
Gregoriano Vaticano,
Rome.

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

uﬁw& '

The Insular Celtic languages were spoken in Great Britain, Ireland, and Brit-
tany. It is conventional to divide them into two groups: Q-Celtic, or Goidelic,
spoken in Ireland, the Isle of Man, and western Scotland, and P-Celtic, or
Brythonic, which forms the basis of modern Welsh, Cornish, and Breton. The
long-established belief has been that Q-Celtic was the older form and was
adopted by the Atlantic communities at an carly date but was overtaken in
Great Britain by the more recently evolved P-Celtic, which was the basis of
Gaulish. It was further believed that Q-Celtic was reintroduced in Scotland and
the Isle of Man by invaders from Ireland in the third and fourth centuries Ap
and that P-Celtic was reintroduced to Brittany by settlers from south-west
Britain arriving in the fifth century Ap. Recent work has, however, suggested
that this model is probably a considerable oversimplification. It has been noted
that P-Celtic place names are recorded in Ireland, though they may be translit-
erations of Q-Celtic names by P-Celtic speakers reporting them to the geogra-
phers of the classical world. The introduction of the Breton language poses
more problems and it is probably more in keeping with reality to interpret it as
native Armorican P-Celtic, surviving beneath an overlay of Latin, reinvigorat-
ed by the similar language of the British settlers. A further factor to bear in mind
is that the division between the two types of Celtic may be less significant than
was originally believed.

Awareness of the character of the Insular Celtic languages emerged in the late
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, inspired by the researches of the
Oxford scholar Edward Lhuyd, Assistant Keeper at the Ashmolean Museum
from 1687 and its Keeper from 1691 until his death in 1709. As a true polymath,
Lhuyd had many interests and skills, but it was in the field of comparative Celtic



===== PAGE 34 (index-37_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

linguistics that he made his most lasting contribution. In 1695 he presented a
prospectus for an ambitious publication to be entitled Archacologia Britannica,
which was to contain a comparison of Welsh with other European languages,
especially Greek, Latin, Irish, Cornish, and Armorican. After extensive travel in
the Celtic West, he retired to Oxford in 1701 to begin writing. The first volume
of Archaeologia contains grammars and vocabularies of Irish, Breton, and
Cornish, with supporting discussions and etymologies. He noted the close rela-
tionship between Gaulish, Irish, and British, and the similarities between
Welsh, Cornish, and Breton, but he did not systematize it as a Q/P distinction.

In the Welsh preface to Archacologia, as well as in correspondence, he used
his linguistic studies to put forward a scheme to explain the “colonization’ of
Britain, suggesting that the Irish Britons were a colonial movement from Gaul
settling first in the British Isles. They were pushed out into the north of Britain
and to Ireland by a second wave of Gaulish settlers. In attempting to relate lan-
guage, through the careful study of etymology, to people and migrations,
Lhuyd was opening up a huge area of study which has occupied many scholars
ever since.

Lhuyd was working in one corner of the web of European languages.
Already, a century before, Joseph Scaliger (1540-1609) had divided the Euro-
pean languages into four groups (characterized by their word for God).
Subsequently various attempts were made to trace the European and related
languages back to a common ancestor. In 1796 Sir William Jones, Chief Justice
of India, suggested, in a lecture, that language groups as disparate as Celtic,
Gotbhic, Sanskrit, and Old Persian might belong to the same family, and it was
from this stream of scholarship that the concept of a common Indo-European
language began to develop, to be systematized, in the middle of the nineteenth
century, by Augustus Schicicher (1821-68). Schleicher developed the notion of
the tree-like growth of languages. Beginning with a primeval Indo-European
language, groups diverged until seven ‘fundamentals’ emerged, one of which
was Celtic; this in turn split still further, giving rise to the individual branches of
Celtic such as Cornish, Welsh, and so on. The model was a convenient way of
ordering the data then available and formed a significant stage in the develop-
ment of Indo-European studies.

BC AD 1900
|
i

Brithonic

Gadic

17 Diagram toillustrate the
possible development of the
Celtic language group.


===== PAGE 35 (index-38_1.jpg) =====
18 Part of a stone relief from
Bormio, Sondrio, ltaly.

he fifth century
nc. The warriors appear to
be equipped with Celtic
style arms. Recent work on
the Lepontic language of
this area suggests that Celtic
was spoken here as carly as
the sixth-fifth centuries e
before the historic
migrations began. Museo
Civico Arqueslogico Giov
Como,

dating

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

As the broad study of the Indo-European languages advanced, so too did the
analysis of the Celtic languages. Theories about Insular Celtic centred around
the questions of folk movement. The most influential work in this field was
published by Sir John Rhys, holder of the Chair of Celtic at Oxford University,
in a wide-ranging book Early Britain: Celtic Britain published in 1882. In it he
developed Lhuyd'’s ideas by putting forward the view that the Goidelic Celts
from the Continent first overcame southern Britain and thence spread to
Ireland. Thereafter there was an invasion of Brythonic Celtic spe:
from the European mainland, who forced the Goidelic settlers into western
areas of Britain, some taking ship to join their distant relations in Ireland. This
simple hypothesis provided a convenient basis around which linguists and
archaeologists have built and argued ever since.

Continental Celtic poses a rather different array of questions, since the lan-
guages nowhere survive in spoken form (with the possible exception of Breton)

kers, also

and are known only from comparatively few texts, augmented by a scattering of
place names and proper names.
In Iberia, Celtic language studies were given a major boost by the decipher

bed on a bronze tablet found at Botorri

ment of a long text ins

, near
Saragossa, announced in 1971. This, together with the work of Antonio Tovar
and others, has greatly advanced our understanding of the languages of the
Peninsula. Indigenous non-Indo-European languages survived into classical
times in the south-cast, as Iberian, and possibly in Tartessus, while in the north
Basque is also the remnant of a separate and once more-extensive non-Indo-
European group. On this basis it is argued that Celtiberian was intrusive, arriv-
th century.
The primary focus of Celtic lay in the north-castern central zone, whence the
language spread to the north, west, and south-
west. The mechanisms by which €
duced into Iberia and the processes by which it

ing some time before the earliest mention of Celts in [beria in the

Itic was intro

expanded are subjects of much current debate.

It has long been recognized that Lepontic,
focused around the lakes of Lombardy, was a
Celtic language and that a distinctive Lepontic
alphabet was used in the second and first cen-
turies B¢, but the demonstration that the Lepon-
tic language dates back to the sixth century scand
possibly a century carlier raises a most interesting
range of questions, since these early examples
significantly pre-date the migration of Celts from
north of the Alps in the early fourth century Bc.

Gaulish Celtic has benefited from a long and
distinguished tradition of scholarly study based
on the hundred or so inscriptions and the wealth

of place and proper name evidence. Major sur-



===== PAGE 36 (index-39_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

veys by David Ellis Evans (1967) and Joshua Whatmough (1970) have provided
full catalogues and discussions, the overriding view being that beneath a variety
of dialects Gaulish is broadly Brythonic, though some doubt has been placed on
the classificatory value of the term.

Standing back from the complex and highly incomplete picture created from
these linguistic scraps, one may distinguish a central Celtic linguistic zone com-
prising Gaul, the British Isles, and possibly the eastern Celtic province, beyond
which, in Ireland, Iberia, and the Lepontic region, was a periphery where some-
what different versions of the Celtic language were spoken. Two of these
‘peripheral’ areas were Celtic-speaking by the sixth century Bc, and there isa
strong possibility that the third, Ireland, was as well. The importance of lin-
guistic studies for an understanding of Celtic culture is considerable, especially
if it is accepted that a Celt was one who spoke Celtic. At its very simplest, it
enables the uncoupling of ‘Celt’ from the archaeologically defined La Téne cul-
ture, by demonstrating that the Celtic language was spoken considerably earli-
er than the development of La Téne culture and over a more extensive area.

The Insular Tradition of Vernacular Literature

It is reasonable 1o assume that the warrior aristocracy of the Celts, like other
warrior aristocracies throughout the pre-modern world, created and transmit-
ted in ever-changing form a rich oral history in cycles of epic narrative, In suit-
able gatherings these epics would be recounted by storytellers to an audience
keen to hear the deeds of their ancestors unfold and the nature of their gods
familiarized through stories of them interfering in the lives of ordinary mortals.
Such traditions were important in giving the community its roots and provid-
ing models of behaviour: above all they created a sense of identity.

The survival of such epics, if they survive at all, is a matter of chance. From
continental Europe and Britain little remains of what must have been a richand
vivid corpus of tradition, except for obscure and partial allusions in Celtic art,
difficult now for us to interpret. But in Ireland, where Celtic culture survived
untouched by the heavy hand of romanization, a selection of this narrative tra-
dition was committed to writing and in this form has been transmitted to us
across the ages.

The most extensive of the vernacular sources is the Ulster Cycle, comprising
about eighty individual stories of which the most complete and by far the
longest is the Cattle Raid of Cooley ( Tdin Bo Cuailnge). The rest of the corpus is
made up of stories which set the scene for the central drama or expand upon the
lives of the main characters.

The entire corpus is contained in ten separate manuscripts, overlapping in
content. The oldest extant version of the Tiin, known as Recension I, survives
in two separate manuscripts each providing part of the story, The Book of the
Dun Cow, dating to the eleventh century, and The Yellow Book of Lecan, com-
piled in the fourteenth century. A fuller and more coherent version, Recension

5


===== PAGE 37 (index-40_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

11, occurs in the late-twelfth-century Book of Leinster. Recension [ is probably
based on two lost ninth-century manuscripts, and it is possible that even earli-
er versions, going back to the seventh century, once existed.

The Tdin must be read to be appreciated, but the essential action focuses
around a cattle raid mounted by the people of Connacht against the people of
Ulster at the urging of Queen Medb—a strong-willed, promiscuous woman
who is part mortal and part a goddess of the land and therefore prone to test the
virility of male heroes. The army of Connacht is opposed by a company of aris-
tocratic warriors, the young and vital Cii Chulainn, the more mature and expe-
rienced Ferghus mai Roich and Conall Cernach, the wise Sencha mai Ailella,
and the two-faced scheming Bricriu the ‘Poison-tongue’, who sets men against
cach other to advance his own interests, As the story unfolds, we are introduced
to many scenes and actions reflecting behaviour familiar through the ethno-
graphic works of Poseidonius and Caesar: feasting and the hero's portion, char-
iot warfare, single combat, severed heads, joint dowries of husbands and wives,
fosterage, and above all the ethics and motivations of a warrior aristocracy for
whom raiding was a commonplace.

The similarities have long been recognized and commented upon. The most
influential work has been Kenneth Jackson's The Oldest Irish Tradition: A
Window on the Iron Age, published in 1964, in which he argued that the Ulster
tales reflected an Irish ethnographic present of the fourth century Ap, which in
turn gave direct access to an earlier Celtic society. The situation is, however,
more complex. The Ulster Cycle undoubtedly contains elements of an ancient
folk tradition, but it was composed in its final form by Christian monks with a
considerable knowledge of Greek and Roman literature as well as the Scriptures
and other Christian writings. Thus, while it might be tempting to argue that
similarities to the Homeric epics reflect a common European origin, it may be
more reasonable to suppose that the Homeric allusions were inserted by the
highly educated medieval redactors. There are, therefore, real dangers of being
led astray by false archaisms.

A detailed study of the ‘material culture’ represented in the Ulster Cycle has
led James Mallory to the indisputable conclusions that the constant reference
tosilveramong the prestigious items depicted must bea reflection of the broad-
er world experience of Ireland in the sixth to ninth centuries Ap and has no
bearing at all on the culture of the La Téne period. In his words, “The material
culture of the Ulster Cycle is essentially a “Window on the Dark Ages”."

Given, then, that the medieval Christian redactors were responsible for cre-
ating the text which comes down to us, by presenting an epic tradition in the
light of their own scholarly erudition and a desire to preserve a memory of the
splendours of their more recent past, how much of the pre-Christian tradition
survives? Itis tempting to take the easy way out and to argue that the basic mate-
rial that was moulded, redecorated, and to some extent repackaged by the suc-
cession of saga tellers and saga writers throughout the first millennium ap does
belong to the European Celtic tradition of the first millennium pc—the same

26


===== PAGE 38 (index-41_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

tradition that is visible in dismembered scraps in the surviving writings of the
classical historians and geographers.

There is, however, a slightly unnerving disparity between the archacological
record in Ireland and aspects of warfare which must be regarded as central to
the action of the epic. Two items in particular stand out: the sword and the
chariot. In the Ulster Cycle the heroes use massive slashing swords and are dri-
ven to battle on light war chariots; cavalry is not mentioned at all. All of this
would be quite acceptable in parts of continental Europe in the fourth or third
century Bc, but the archacological record of Ireland has produced no large
slashing sword of this type, and no chariot fittings, such as terret rings, strap fas-
teners, linch pins, hub rings, and iron tires, of the types which commonly recur
in Britain and the Continent. The word constantly employed for the vehicle
used in the hero tales is carpat, which elsewhere is used to describe transport or
travelling vehicles with two wooden seats, one for the driver, the other for the
passenger. From brief textual references it would seem that this was an indige-
nous vehicle totally different from the war chariot of Britain and Gaul. It
remains, therefore, a strong possibility that the core of the epics, deeply embed-
ded within the Ulster Cycle, lies in a Continental European tradition which was
transmitted at some stage to Ireland, there to be woven into a network of
indigenous folk tales in a local geographical and technological setting to which
was added a sprinkling of real history, Thereafter, the tales were constantly
modified, in each retelling taking on some new aspect, material or oral, gleaned
from the contemporary world, until their final editing for Christian consump-
tion in the medieval period.

This said, the Ulster Cycle is a remarkable survival providing a tantalizing
glimpse of the rich epic tradition of Celtic Europe which would otherwise be
totally inaccessible,

Another source of considerable interestare the Old Irish law texts, the major-
ity of which originate in the seventh and eighth centuries ap and come down to
us in varying states of corruption or incompleteness in documents of late
medieval date. From these it is possible to gain an intimate insight into the
working of society—rank, kin groupings, personal relationships, property,
offences and punishment, contracts and pledges, and the teaching and mainte-
nance of the law itself. No doubt, embedded within all this, are rules of behav-
iour which date back to the time of the earlier Celtic populations of Ireland, but
to tease out these early threads is an uncertain, perhaps impossible, task. At best
the law tracts may be enjoyed as a distant and distorted echo of a past era.

Archacology

The contribution ofarchacology to the study of the Celts has been considerable.
From the sixteenth century large numbers of antiquities have been published
and variously ascribed as *British’, ‘Gaulish’, or ‘Celtic’. Many were indeed of
Iron Age date, but at first correct designations were achieved more by luck than

27


===== PAGE 39 (index-42_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

through knowledge. Systematization began early in the nineteenth century
with the work of the Danish archacologist C. J. Thomsen (1788-1865), who is
credited with the creation of the Three Age model through his arrangement of
the collections of the Danish National Museum into items of Stone, Bronze,
and Iron, which he presented as three developmental stages applicable to the
prehistory of the whole of Europe. Thomsen's work was further elaborated by
his assistant J. J. A, Worsaae (1821-85), who, by stratigraphical excavations, was
able to demonstrate its general validity. By the 1840s it was possible to make a
broad correlation between the material culture of the Iron Age and that of the
Celts in those areas of Europe where the classical sources indicated the Celts to
have lived. Thus, when Johann Georg Ramsauer began to excavate an extensive
cemetery at Hallstatt in Austria in 1846 (PL 111a), he was simply following con-
cavations at Hallstatt contin-

vention by calling the graves he found ‘Celtic”. E
ued until 1863, by which time about 1,000 graves had been opened and
meticulously recorded in a series of fine watercolour sketches drawn by the
excavator. For the most part the graves, both cremations and inhumations,
were well furnished with artefacts, including an array of weapons, bronze and
ceramic vessels, and personal equipment and jewellery.
tion, together with well-preserved organic material, such as clothing and
wooden tools, recovered from the neighbouring salt mines, provided the
archaeological world with a detailed insight into the material culture of the cen-
tral European Iron Age. Most of the Hallstatt graves belonged to the period

his enormous collec-

19 Abowe: Georg Ramsatser, a government
director of mining. who, in 1846, discovered
the lron Age cemetery at Hallstatt in Austria
and continued excavating it until 1863,

10 Right: The location of the settbement and
salt mines of Hallstatt, Austria.



===== PAGE 40 (index-43_1.jpg) =====
21 Left: Georg Ramsauer conducted the exca
vations at the ¢
skill, record
plete
watercolours, of which th
Library of the Saciety of

netery at Hallstatt with some
du.

burial com.

sly detailed

23 Abowe A rucksack made from leather «
a wooden frame preserved in the salt
Hallstatt, Austria, dati
The sack was probably u

carry rock salt, Naturhistorisches Museum,
Vienna


===== PAGE 41 (index-44_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

2 9 N

AT
SN

23 The location of the site of
La Téne on Lake Neuchitel, |

Switzer This is Paul [
Vouga's plan published in

Prefargier

1923

NE U

cnireEus

1, Switzerland, in
ieth century,

30


===== PAGE 42 (index-45_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE

1s

spanning the seventh and sixth centuries sc with a few continuing into the early
fifth. Thereafter the importance of Hallstatt declined rapidly, as the salt depo-
sits at Diirrnberg began to be developed.

In 1857, at the north-western corner of Lake Neuchitel in Switzerland, a local
collector Hansli Kopp discovered a series of wooden piles and in groping in the
mud between them located about forty iron weapons. Thus began the explo-
ration of the famous site of La Tene, which continued sporadically until 1917
(PL [11D). La Tene is a puzzling site which has variously been interpreted asa
pile dwelling, a fortified oppidum, a bridge overwhelmed in a catastrophe, and
a platform from which ritual depositions were made. Its fame lies in the
extremely large collection of artefacts which have accumulated asa result of the
various excavations. The assemblage is particularly rich in weapons—swords,
spears, and shiclds—butalso includes a number of smaller personal items, such
as fibulac, belt clasps, and razors, as well as bronze vessels, iron ingots, and parts
of vehicles. The finds became widely known in the 1860s, largely as a result of

n

2 Plan of the timber strusc
ture and votive deposits
uncarthed at La Tene. Based
part of Paul Vouga's
original excavation plan,
published in 1923.



===== PAGE 43 (index-46_1.jpg) =====
16 Aselection of the
decorated sword scabbards
discovered at La Tene and
lustrated in the excavation
report, La Tene, by Paul
Vouga, published in 1921

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

Ferdinand Keller’s publication, in which he presented La Téne as a lake village
of the Celtic period. It was soon realized that they differed markedly in form
and therefore age from the material which had been recovered on the other side
of the Alps at Hallstatt, but were similar to other finds coming to light in ceme-
tery excavations in northern France.

In 1871 the International Congress of Prehistoric Anthropology and Archae-
ology was held at Bologna. Among the delegates were Gabriel de Mortillet from
France and Emile Desor from Switzerland; both had a detailed knowledge of
Iron Age material, de Mortillet having worked with finds from cemeteries in
Champagne and Desor at Neuchitel. During the congress they were able to
view material recovered from a cemetery recently excavated towards the edge of
the Etruscan city of Marzabotto. The finds were closely similar to those with
which they were familiar and left the two men in no doubt that the Marzabotto
burials were of Celts who had crossed the Alps to settle in the Po Valley, just as
Livy and Polybius had described. The recognition meant that, from then on,
archacological finds of La Téne type came to be regarded as the material culture
of the Celts. Moreover, the correlation provided a convenient dating horizon,
assuming the chronology of the classical sources to be correct.

In1872, the year following the Bologna conference, the Swedish archacologist
Hans Hildebrant proposed systematizing the Iron Age by dividing it into two
parts, the earlier characterized by the finds from the Hallstatt cemetery, and the
later by those from La Tene. Henceforth the concepts of a Hallstatt culture and
a La Tene culture came widely into use, with the La Téne culture being regard-
ed as the archacological expression of the Celts.

Subsequently the scheme was modified by subdivision. In 1881 Otto Tischler
divided the Hallstatt period into two phases, Early and Late, and then turned
his attention to the La Téne material, in 1885 proposing a threefold division into
Early, Middle, and Late, or I, 11, and 111, following the discovery of the votive
deposit at Duchcov in 1882. The Early phase was characterized by fibulae whose
recurved feet simply touched the bow; the contemporary swords were short
with the scabbard chapes perforated. In the Middle phase the fibulae had devel-
oped so that the foot wrapped around the bow, while the sword sheaths now
had unperforated chapes. The Late phase was characterized by fibulae with
solid catch plates often perforated. The contemporary swords were much
longer with rounded ends.

Tischler's system was widely used, and by the turn of the century firm dates
were being proposed. Thus, for France, Oscar Montelius suggested the La Tene
1 should be dated 400250, 11, 250-150, and 111, 1501 BC. Joseph Déchelette
argued that a period IV should be added to contain the later British material. In
Switzerland the careful excavation of the cemetery at Minsingen and elsewhere
allowed further subdivisions to be made by David Viollier in 1916; La Téne I was
thereafter divided into a, b, and cand La Téne [l intoaand b.

While the Tischler scheme worked well for the Champagne, Switzerland, and
Bohemia, the material from Bavaria posed problems, because here an early

32


===== PAGE 44 (index-47_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CEL

phase of burials, usually under tumuli, was identified. To contain these, in 1902
Paul Reinecke proposed that this assemblage, dating to the fifth century s,
should be recognized as a distinct phase known as La Tene A. Thereafter his La
Tene B, C, and D approximately equated with Tischler's Early, Middle, and
Late. This was a significant amendment in that it gave recognition to the form-
ative phase of the La Tene culture, pre-dating the period of the migration.
Reinecke also su ided the Hallstatt culture, giving specific recognition to its
Bronze Age origins (his Hallstatt A and B), allowing C and D to represent the
two stages of the Early Iron Age. In Britain, throughout the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, Iron Age material was simply designated ‘Late Keltic'
or ‘Early British’ without subdivision, following the suggestion of Augustus
Franks in 1863, though in the first decade of this century some attempts were
made to link the Insular finds to the Continental scheme. Itis the Reinecke sys-
tem of 1902, with many subdivisions, regional variants, and chronological
adjustments, that has underpinned Iron Age studies this century.

The systematizing of the European Iron Age in the late nineteenth century

3

37 Early La Tene metabwork
from the hoard found at
Duchcov in Bohemia in 1882
from the original publica
tion.


===== PAGE 45 (index-48_1.jpg) =====
28 Man of the chiefrain's
burial found at Somme
Marne, France, and
dating to the late fifth cen
The chicftain was
atwo-wheeled vehi
was accomparsied by

his weapons, feast
and horse trapping
excavated in 187

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

was, 1o a large extent, driven by the flood of new material deriving from the
excavation of cemeteries, which provided a favourite focus of activity for col-
lectors and archacologists. In France a lead was provided by Louis Napoleon
(1808-73), who became President of the Second Republic in 1852, assuming the
title of Napoleon 111 after a coup d'érar established the Second Empire a year
later.
him to take an active interest in the casual di
the Champagne when, each summer, he spent time at the military base at
Chalons. From material given to him and bought from the local peasants, and
obtained from excavations which he ordered, he built up a large collection
which was to form the basis of the Musée des Antiquités Nationales,

Among the other collectors inspired by the emperor’s example were Frédéric
Moreau (1798-1898) and Léon Morel (1828-1909). Moreau carried out exten-
si cavations in the Aisne and Marne region from 1873 10 1893, and the
collection of La Tene material which he accumulated, and in part published,
was given to the National Museum in 1899,
Morel's interest in archacology began in
1863, when he became involved in a La
ne cemetery at Somsois, near Vitry-le-
Frangois. Thereafter he continued to exca-
vate in Champagne until his death, ¢
for a brief period (1879-88) when his work
took him to Provence. The collection which
Morel amassed, and published in La Cham-
pagne souterraine in 1898, was second in
quality only to that of The National Mus-
eum at Saint-Germain-en-Laye. When
eventually it was put up for sale in 1901, it
was considered to be 100 expensive by the
French government and was eventually pur-
chased by the British Museum. Among the
mostimportantassemblages is that from the
fifth-century chieftain’s burial at Somme-
Bionne.

The frenetic activity in the Marne, Aisne,
and Ardenne regions between 1865 and 1914,
most of it carried out by peasants on behalf
of local collectors, brought to light many
thousands of graves from hundreds of
cemeteries. This corpus of material inevit-
ably contributed significantly to the under-
standing of the Celts, particularly of their
burial practices. Comparable, though less
intensive, work was underway at this time in

apoleon’s scholarly concern with the campaigns of Julius Caesar led

coveries that were being made in

large

cept

4


===== PAGE 46 (index-49_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

scting excava

ns on [ron Age cen
at Hallstatt and Stitn,
Magdalenska gora, Vinica

and elsewbere,

massing a
collect

artefacts,

other parts of Europe. In Slovenia, for example, in the decade before the First
World War, the Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg was instrumental in encour-
aging the excavation of cemeteries at Magdalenska gora, Sti¢na, and Vinics
ring more than graves, and also at Hallstatt itself in 1907. The
Mecklenburg collection, which was eventually acquired by the Peabody Mus-
cum in Harvard, is among one of the most important for understanding the
in the castern Alps.

uncov:

development of Iron Age societie

Much of the archaeological activity of the last half of the nineteenth century
was directed towards the examination of cemeteries, These were, after all, the
sites that produced collectable artefacts with a market value, but some attention
also being given to settlement sites, in particular to the large oppida. Of
these, Stradonice, in Bohemia, provides one of the most notorious examples.
During the last quarter of the nineteenth century it was dug over at the instiga-
tion of antique dealers, the artefacts being dispersed throughout Europe while
the local peasants found a ready market for the animal bone refuse recovered,

Wi

selling it for the production of bonemeal. The discovery of a hoard of gold coins
in 1877 increased interest still further. In all it is estimated that between 80,000
and 100,000 items were recovered, mostly belonging to the late second and first

centuries Bc. Some fla

cour of the importance of the collection began to dawn

on theacademic world following the publication of some of the material by
Pi¢in1903.

Interest in oppida in France was initiated by Napoleon 111, whose study in the
campaigns of Julius Caesar naturally led him to select for attention Bibracte, the



===== PAGE 47 (index-50_1.jpg) =====
1l Facing, above: Acrial

view of the site of Hallstatt,

Austria. The cemetery and
salt mines lay in the valley

behind the lake-side settle-

ment.

1L Facing. befow: Recent
view of the site of La Tene
on lake Neuchatel,
Switzerdand,

THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

capital of the Aedui, situated on Mont Beuvray near Autun. In 1867 he appoint-
ed Gabriel Bulliot to direct the work, which was eventually published as Fouilles
de Mont Beuvray 1867 a 1895 in 1899. Bulliot was succeeded by his nephew
Joseph Déchelette, who was to become one of Europe’s most influential schol-
ars of the Iron Age before his death in the First World War at the age of 53. By
that time Déchelette had published the two Iron Age volumes of his Manuel, a
work of synthesis which summed up the advances of the great period of discov-
ery 1860-1910 and presented the culture of the oppida, visible through the work
at Stradonice and Mont Beuvray, in its proper context as the culmination of the
Celtic achievement.

The publication of Le Second Age du fer—the third part of the second volume
of Déchelette’s Manuel d'archéologie—in 1914 marks the end of the pioneering
phase of Celtic archacology. Twenty years before, S. Reinach and M. Bertrand
had presented an array of material in their Les Celtes et les Gaulois dans la vallée
du Po et du Danube (1894), but the Manuel provided the first European-wide
synthesis of La Téne material culture, demonstrating the remarkable similari-
ties which could be detected from one side of Europe to the other. It was now
possible for scholars to begin to integrate the textual and archacological data,
providing pan-European syntheses of which the two volumes of Henri Hubert,
Les Celtes et l'expansion celtique jusqu'a l'époque de La Teneand Les Celtes depuis
I'époque de La Téne et la civilization celtique (both 1932), were among the most
ambitious.

Celtic Art

In some ways it is surprising that the awareness of the importance of Celtic art
did not develop further during this formative period, but this may, at least in
part, have been due to the dismissive attitudes of art historians, whose sense of
values was narrowly constrained by the products of the Graeco-Roman world.
The first real appreciation of the distinctive identity of Celtic art appeared in
1863, when Augustus Woolaston Franks (1826-97), who became Keeper of the
Department of British and Medieval Antiquities at the British Museum
(1866-96) after joining the staff in 1851, published a collection of British
masterpieces in John Kemble’s Horae Ferales. These he described as ‘Late
Keltic', offering a consideration of them in their European context. In doing
this he was far in advance of the thinking of his continental contemporaries,
most of whom would have subscribed to the belief that barbarians were inca-
pable of producing significant works of art.

There was, however, a developing awareness of the part played by the classi-
cal world in introducing artistic concepts to the Celtic barbarians north of the
Alps. The importance of the Rhone route, via Massalia, was generally accepted,
and in 1875 Hermann Genthe published a work stressing the significance of the
Alpine passes for the transport of Etruscan goods and ideas to the north. Five
years earlier Ernst Werth had identified Etruscan inspiration in the ‘Gaulish’

36


===== PAGE 48 (index-51_1.jpg) =====
N e s N
B A agi et


===== PAGE 49 (index-52_1.jpg) =====
o e Ry
7 & PN
g ‘ﬁ Giiinmmmn o ‘\vwl\I(\\Ijjm'r;'
5
o |


===== PAGE 50 (index-53_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

metalwork found in the aristocratic burial at Waldalgesheim and in 1889 the
classical archacologist Adolf Furtwingler offered an analysis of the Celtic art
represented in rich grave finds from Schwarzenbach, preferring to see the exot-
icitemsas Massilliot products designed for the barbarian market. This view was
still adhered to by Paul Reinecke in his publication of 1902. It followed the rea-
soning of art historians working on material around the Black Sea interface,
who believed that many of the Scythian masterpieces had been produced in
Greek workshops located in the coastal colonial settlements, specifically for the
Scythian aristocracy.

Meanwhile, in Britain an alternative view was developing which saw Celtic
art not as a pale, ill-mannered, reflection of classical art but as an original cre-
ation. These ideas were elegantly summarized by Sir Arthur Evans in The
Origins of Celtic Art based on a series of lectures given in 1895, Evans's view was
that Celtic art emerged from the interaction of a number of cultural influences.
Heacknowledged the contribution of Etruscan and Grecek ideas but argued that
Hallstatt elements from the eastern Alpine area as well as Scythian motifs from
further east were also integral to what eventually emerged.

Evans’s thesis formed the starting-point of the monumental survey under-
taken by Paul Jacobsthal, Professor of Classical Archacology at Marburg
University (1912-35) and thereafter a scholar at Oxford University. Jacobsthal
began his study of Celtic art in 1921 and published his seminal Early Celtic Art,
the first volume of what he planned to be a three-volume work, in 1944. In it he
recognized three principal continental styles. His ‘Early Style” was an aristo-
cratic art confined to the high status burials of the fifth and early fourth cen-
turies nc. Here he detected native Hallstatt elements as well as the influence of
an eastern nomadic or ‘orientalizing’ trend adding to the more obvious classi-
cal input. His second style, named after the Waldalgesheim burial, used classi-
cal floral patterns as the basis, from which was developed an original treatment
of plant motifs. In the early third century the third style emerged, divided into
two sub-styles, a *Plastic Style’, in which motifs were used in an essentially
three-dimensional mode, and a *Sword Style’, involving inscribing and some
embossing to create two-dimensional patterns,

The importance of Jacobsthal’s work was that it established Celtic art as one
of the great artistic achievements of Europe, with an originality and vitality
which owed little to the formulaic inspiration which the Celtic masters
undoubtedly received from the classical world,

We are told that the Gauls were valiant, quarrelsome, cruel, superstitious, and had the
gift of pointed speech: their art also is full of contrasts, It is attractive and repellent; it is
far from primitiveness and simplicity, is refined in thought and technique; elaborate
and clever; full of paradoxes, restless, puzzlingly ambiguous; rational and irrational;
dark and uncanny——far from the lovable humanity and transparency of Greek art. Yet,
it is a real style, the first great contribution by the barbarians to European arts, the first
great chapter in the everlasting mutual stock-taking of Southern, Northern and Eastern
forces in the life of Europe.

37

Wa Facng Helmet made in
iron partially cased in
repoussé decorated bronze
nlaid with coral: from
Canosa di Puglia, Bari, Italy.
The decoration is typical of
Celtic art of the Vegetal
Style. Second half of fourth
century v, Staatliche
Museen Antikenssmmlung
Preussischer Kulturbesitz,
Berlin,

IVh fuset, left: A gold stater
of Verica who ruled the
Atrebates in central south-
orn Britain in the years lead-
ing up to the Roman
invasion in Ap 43. The
reverse of the coin shows a
mounted warrior armed
with a large shickl and a
spear and wearlng a helmet

Ve Inger, right A gold
stater of Tasciovanus, ruler
of the Catuvellauni in east-
ern Britain about 10 ac. The
horse rider holds aloft a
carnyx, of war trumpet.


===== PAGE 51 (index-54_1.jpg) =====
THE REALITY OF THE CELTS

Although his ‘Styles’ still provide a convenient general model, they are classi-
ficatory rather than explanatory. With a greatly enlarged corpus from which to
work and a deepening understanding of the nature of artistic expression in pre-
modern society, the study of Celtic art promises to become one of the more
lively areas of debate,

Celtic Culture

The publication of Early Celtic Artin 1944 can be regarded as the point at which
the broad range of Celtic studies at last came of age—when the uniqueness of
the Celts was firmly and finally established. The second half of the twentieth
century has seen major advances in all fields but none more than in archae-
ology. It would be impossible to fully review the achievements of this remark-
able period of activity. The sheer quantity of material recovered has increased
the database many hundredfold, but what is more important is the far greater
attention which has been placed on context—the nature of the site itself
whether it be a cemetery or a settlement. There has also been, at least in some
parts of Europe, a concern to see the site as an element in a landscape and to use
this larger geographical concept as the unit of study. Human communities are
only one of the elements of the biome, and to understand these the entire sys-
tem must be studied.

In parallel with all this there is a growing willingness, as the discipline moves
away from its traditional nineteenth-century artefact-based focus, to see the
values and approaches of anthropology as being of relevance to archacology.
The archacologist’s concern now lies with attempting to model and to under-
stand the different systems which make up a society, and by examining the
interactions of these systems to approach the fascinating dynamic of social
change. Increasingly the archaeologist, like the anthropologist, is being drawn
into considerations of communication through symbols, art, language, and
oral traditions. In this way the disparate threads which make up our under-
standing of the Celtic peoples—defined through the disciplines of archacology,
art history, linguistics, and history—are now, at last, being drawn togetherina
single study. It remains to see what will emerge.


===== PAGE 52 (index-55_1.jpg) =====
3
Barbarian Europe and
the Mediterranean
1300-400 BC

To take the broad perspective of European development, it can be said that the
period 1300-1100 BC was a time of major reformation. It marked the end of an
carly cycle of food-producing economies (traditionally the Neolithic to the end
of the Middle Bronze Age), which had culminated in the emergence of the
Aegean-centred Mycenaean-Minoan ‘civilization', and the beginning of a new
cycle which was to see the rise and fall of the broader, Mediterranean-centred,
civilization of the Gracco-Roman world. At its maximum extent, in the third
century Ap, the culminating Roman Empire was to stretch from the desert
fringes of Africa in the south to the forests of the North European Plain and
from the castern deserts to the Atlantic. The collapse of that system in the
fourth and fifth centuries ap created a turmoil from which western European
civilization was to emerge to become, for a briefinterlude from the late fifteenth
to early twentieth centuries, the centre of a world system.

It is within this ‘middle cycle'—1300 sc-ap 4oo—that the communities
speaking a Celtic language and known to contemporary writers as an ethnically
distinctive people called “Celts” or ‘Gauls” emerged and made their dramatic
and lasting impact on the consciousness of their literate neighbours. To under-
stand the origins of the Celts we must begin by considering the world they were
to inhabit.

The Aegean World: 1300-1000 8C

Europe’s first civilization, focused on the island of Crete, began its spectacular
development about 3000 B¢, reaching its peak of energy and influence by the
middle of the second millennium sc, by which time the island had become a
centre for a widely flung exchange network linking the Acgean coasts of Asia
Minor with the mainland of Greece. It was here, centred largely on the Pelo-
ponnese, that a peripheral zone developed whose archacological manifestation

39


===== PAGE 53 (index-56_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

is known as Mycenacan and whose society is dimly reflected in the epic tradi-
tion codified by Homer. By the middle of the second millennium sc Mycen-
aean power had developed to such an extent that over the next two centuries its
influence was to spread not only to the Minoan homeland of Crete but to the
Asia Minor coast and the island of Rhodes in the cast and to southern Italy and
Sicily in the west, some of its distinctive pottery reaching as far west as Anda-
lucia.

The Mycenaean-Minoan civilization created a centralizing focus in the Acg-
ean, which lay at the core of a complex network of exchange contacts drawing
commodities from Egypt in the south, most notably ivory, and from central,
western, and northern Europe, whence came such desirable raw materials as
tin, copper, gold, amber, and probably furs. The relative stability of the system
over the period 1600-1200 B¢ gave time for the networks of exchange to become
consolidated, and those barbarian communities commanding rare resources
or trade routes began to benefit in a variety of ways from these long-distance
exchanges.

During this time, in the heart of Anatolia, the Hittites were reaching a peak of
their development. One of their particular achievements was a knowledge of
iron production, a skill at this stage unknown in the Mediterranean and Eur-
ope. Iron was at first a rare and highly valued commodity which appears to have
been used principally for aristocratic gift exchanges. The iron-bladed dagger in
the tomb of Tutankhamun (1352 B¢) was precisely such a gift. One of the Hittite
texts dating to the thirteenth century gives a fascinating insight into exchanges
at this time. Itisa letter from the Hittite king Hattusilis 111 to the king of Assyria,
responding to a request for iron. He says that no good iron is being made at the
moment, but as soon as some is produced he will send it, meanwhile “Today |
am dispatching an iron dagger blade to you."

The stability of the late-second-millennium world was shaken and eventual-
ly fell apart in a series of convulsions in the twelfth and eleventh centuries Bc—
the period known as the Greek Dark Ages. Many reasons have been suggested
for this complex and ill-understood event—folk movement from the barbarian
north, overpopulation, and plague. Whether there were indeed significant
prime causes or simply a systems-collapse brought about by a number of inter-
acting or self-intensifying factors is difficult to say from the ill-focused archae-
ological evidence. What is clear is that it was a period of folk mobility during
which much of the old order disappeared. Surviving texts refer to the raids of
the ‘Sea People’ who impinged upon coastal Egypt. There were major popula-
tion replacements in Cyprus and the Levant and the Hittite empire collapsed.
In the Peloponnese—the focus of Mycenaean culture—the aristocratic power
centres all but disappeared and a major decline in population is evident.

Itis possible that the ripples of these momentous events were felt in the west-
ern Mediterranean, The settlement of the Shardana in Sardinia is thought to be
one such event. If so, the new settlers were simply following long-established
maritime trading routes to the west.

40


===== PAGE 54 (index-57_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

The impact of the Aegean systems-collapse on the European hinterland was
considerable. Existing exchange systems broke down or were transformed.
Some communities, once part of European-wide networks, found themselves
isolated and new configurations emerged.

The Re-Formation: 1000-800 B¢

The first two centuries of the first millennium sc was a crucial period in the for-
mation of Europe. During this time the principal social and economic group-
ings that were to dominate the scene for over a millennium began to crystallize
out.

In the Aegean, complex movements of Greek-speaking communities led toa
repopulation of some areas of Greece and a reinvigoration of others, whilst
from here some groups moved eastwards across the Aegean, settling the islands
and eventually carving out for themselves a foothold on the peninsulas and
sheltered havens of the Aegean coast of Asia Minor, where three broad
configurations were to emerge—Acolians in the north, lonians in the centre,
and Dorians in the south. No doubt many of these early immigrant communi-
ties mixed with the local populations—the Lycians, the Legians, and the
Carians—to absorb new genes and new cultures. For many, particularly the
lonians, it was a time of experiment and energy from which emerged the carli-
est and most vital manifestations of Greek culture. Significantly, according to
tradition, it was in one of the lonian cities, either Smyrna or Chios, that the
epics with which we associate the name of Homer were first written down.

The Greek enclaves on the coast of Asia Minor provided an interface between
the Acgean and the rising power of the Persians in the east, buffered for a while
by powerful inland states such as the Lydians. They were thus able to benefit
from the culture of their eastern land-locked neighbours, while at the same
time becoming part of the maritime world of the Mediterranean.

The Levantine coast (now Syria, Lebanon, and Israel) also developed a cul-
turally distinctive maritime interface—peopled by communities collectively
knoyvn as Phoenicians whose cities, Byblos, Tyre, and Sidon, became famous in
trading ventures reaching to the Atlantic. To the east of them lay the demand-
ing empires of the Assyrians and Babylonians, who provided the motivation
behind much of the Phoenician commercial enterprise.

Both the castern Greeks and the Phoenicians were to have a significant
impact on barbarian Europe, and the subjugation, in the sixth century sc, of
both coastal interfaces, Greek Asia Minor by the Persians and Phoenicia by the
Babylonians, was further to influence the course of barbarian development.

It was during this period that new cultural configurations were developing
on the Pontic Steppe along the northern shores of the Black Sea. The area
had long been settled by communities who depended upon the horse and
horse-drawn vehicles to enable them to maintain a degree of nomadic mobili-
ty over the huge tracts of steppe which they inhabited. Archacologically these

il


===== PAGE 55 (index-58_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

communities are known, after their favoured burial mode, as the Catacomb
culture.

Inthe eastern hinterland, roughly centred on the middle stretches of the Vol-
ga River, another semi-nomadic group developed, adopting a different burial
rite, a wooden cabin-like grave set in a pit beneath a barrow mound. These
burials typified the Timber Grave culture. The archacological evidence suggests
that the Timber Grave culture expanded westwards during the carly centuries
of the first millennium, eventually taking over much of the Pontic Steppe
region previously occupied by the Catacomb culture. The Histories of Herod-
otus written in the carly fifth century gc describe a group known as the Cim-
merians who originally occupied the northern shores of the Black Sea and were
ousted by Scythians coming from the east. It is tempting to relate the Cim-
merians with the archacologically defined Catacomb culture and the Scythians
with the Timber Grave culture, though the exact chronology of the events, or
whether it was as simple as the literary account suggests, remains unclear. Some
additional support for the turbulent nature of the times is given in Assyrian
tablets which refer to both the Cimmerians and Scythians as hordes of warlike
horsemen serving as mercenaries in the conflicts played out in Asia Minor in
the eighth and seventh centuries.

From the point of view of our present concerns, what is of particular interest
is that there should be evidence of unrest and folk movement among the horse
riders of the Pontic Steppe, building to a peak in the eighth century when some
moved south-cast into Asia Minor. Given the geography of the region and the
fact that the western shores of the Black Sea, including the Lower Danube
region, are really an extension of the Pontic Steppe, it is not unreasonable to
suggest, as many archacologists have done, that there was a parallel movement
of Cimmerians eastwards along the Danube into central Europe, It is a sugges-
tion to which we shall return,

The western fringe of Europe, facing the Atlantic, was altogether different.
Here in a broad arc, stretching from Scotland to south-western Iberia, the
maritime communities were linked in a complex of exchange networks proba-
bly stretching back in time at least to the Neolithic period. By the Bronze Age
metals were among the more important commodities shipped, copper from
Ireland, Wales, and western Iberia, tin from Cornwall, Brittany, and Galicia,
and gold from Ireland, Wales, and north-western Iberia. This metal-rich arc
will have provided much of the bronze and gold circulating in western Europe,
and the enhanced consumption of metal in the Aegean may well have provided
amarket eager for gold and tin from the Atlantic zone. With the collapse of the
Mycenacan-Minoan centre, demand would have slackened, but there is ample
evidence for a still-vigorous zone of contact along the sea-ways. In so far as the
archaeological evidence allows us to estimate, there seems to have been an
intensification of activity in the eighth century, occasioned, as we will suggest,
by developing Phoenician interests in the south-west of Iberia.

In the heart of Europe, stretching from eastern France to Hungary and from

42


===== PAGE 56 (index-59_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

northern Italy to Poland, in the period from about 1300 to 700 8¢, there devel-
oped a considerable degree of cultural uniformity indicative of convergent
development. The period is called the Urnfield period and the broadly defined
culture which it represents shares the name (Map 1). The characteristic which
serves to give the impression of uniformity is the burial rite, which, as the cul-
tural name implies, involves the burial of the cremated remains of the dead in
cinerary urns in well-defined cemeteries. In addition to this the varied array of
cast and beaten bronze-work, normally personal ornaments, tools, and
weapons, shares considerable stylistic similarities over large areas.

Within the broad zone exhibiting these generalized characteristics it is possi-
ble to define regional groupings, and within each subregions can be recognized,
usually on the basis of decorative styles of pottery. Many of the groupings which
first appear at this time retain a degree of identity throughout the Urnfield peri-
odand into the Hallstatt Iron Age which follows. In other words, the social and
economic processes which can first be detected in the period 1300-1000 BC over
much of central Europe create a structure which is largely maintained over the
next half millennium or so, by which time Greek historians have identified
*Celts” as living within this region.

The origin and development of the Urnficld cultural continuum is a much
debated issue. It is probably best to see within the Transalpine core zonean ini-
tial phase of development in the period 1300-1150 B¢, responding to the dis-
locations and reorderings occasioned by the decline and collapse of the
Mycenacan-Minoan world. To what extent the communities of the castern
part of this zone, centred in what is now the territory of Hungary, played an
active role in the events across the Balkan mountains to the south is an impor-
tant but still ill-focused issue. Some similar weapon and armour types are
found in both regions, while alien pottery forms from Bulgaria and the Troad
are highly reminiscent of vessels more normally found further north. Another
observation of some significance is that the long-established tell settlements in
the Middie and Lower Danube region were widely abandoned during this for-
mative period when an entirely new settiement pattern emerged. The evidence
as it comes down to us in its fragmentary form suggests a phase of disruption
and upheaval in the Middle and Lower Danube which must, in some way, be
related to events in the Aegean. To what extent folk movement was involved,
and in what direction populations may have moved, are questions at present
beyond the limits of reasonable conjecture.

Urnfield developments in the Hungarian region preceded those in the
Alpine zone to the west and may indeed have helped to exacerbate changes
amongindigenous groups already setin train as a result of the breakdown of the
older trade routes which had developed to serve the consumer needs of the
Acgean. In this zone there is no direct evidence of major disruption but rather
an internal development linked to an intensification of contact southwards
through the Alps to the Po Valley and beyond, across the Apennines, deep into
peninsular Italy. By 1000 sc Italy, the Alps, and Transalpine Europe from east-

43


===== PAGE 57 (index-60_1.jpg) =====
30 The Late Bronze Age
fortified settlement of
Wittnaver Hom, Aargau,
Switzerland. The site occu-
pieda ridge-end protected
by a massive rampart. The
houses inside were arranged
in a regular fashion around a
central open area.

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

0 %0 100 Meves
ern France to Slovakia were closely interlinked, as similarities in material cul-
ture vividly demonstrate.

Within the Alpine and Transalpine zone of the Urnfield culture the evidence
suggests a degree of social and economic stability. In such conditions it is pos-
sible to understand something of the changes which begin to take place. In sev-
eral areas there appears to have been a marked rise in population, with the
appearance of new settlements closely spaced in an increasingly farmed land-
scape. In parallel with this, copper production intensified, particularly in the
castern Alpine metal-rich zone. Hill forts, quite often spurs cut off by massive
timber-laced ramparts, were constructed in some number, indicating that the
coercive power of some sector of the population was now able to command
surplus labour to aggrandize or protect a chosen settlement. That this power
may have been that of a leading individual or lineage is suggested by the occur-
rence of certain burials more elaborately furnished than others and, in particu-
lar, by the appearance of horse trappings representing the riding horse or
horse-drawn vehicle of the warrior or aristocrat.

The Foundation of the New Order: 800-650 BC

The cighth century sc was a formative period in the history of Europe: in the
Mediterranean it saw the beginnings of the Greek colonial adventure and the
development of the far-flung Phoenician trading system, while in barbarian

44


===== PAGE 58 (index-61_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

Europe the infiltration of Pontic Steppe communities into the Great Hun-
garian Plain made the horse even more readily available to the emerging Hall-
statt aristocracy of central and western Europe. These various threads need to
be explored, for together they provide the essential basis for developments
throughout the rest of the millennium.

Towards the beginning of the century the two lonian city-states of Chalcis
and Eretria on the island of Euboea, at first together and later separately, began
tosail through the Straits of Messina to explore the resources of the coasts of the
Tyrrhenian Sea between the Halian peninsula and the islands of Corsica and
Sardinia (Map 6). In doing so they were echoing journeys made centuries
before by travellers from the Mycenaean world. Among the attractions they
discovered were the rich metal resources of Etruria and the adjacent island of
Elba. By about 770 nc they had founded a colonial settlement at Pithecusae on
theisland of Iscia in the Bay of Naples, admirably sited as a forward post to trade
with the Etruscan metal producers. A little later a new establishment was set up
on the nearby mainland coast at Cumae,

From these early beginnings followed the rapid colonization of Mezzogiorno
and Sicily. Zancle (Messina) was founded on the north-castern extremity of
Sicily, with Rhegion (Reggio) on the opposite Italian coast. Naxos was estab-
lished further down the coast. Soon other Greek city-states joined in. Rhodes
may have been early on the scene, while Megara founded an establishment at
Megara Hyblaca in the mid-cighth century south of Naxos. The primary colo-
nization of the cast coast of Sicily was completed by the Corinthian foundation
of Syracuse, traditionally in 733 sc. In the following two centuries many more
Greek colonies claimed intervening territories, until the region could justify its
name of Magna Graecia.

The establishment of a Greek presence just beyond the southern fringe of
Etruscan territory provided a significant stimulus to the development of
Etruscan culture, but it would be wrong to assume that the colonists were the
sole contact. A more likely scenario is that the foundation of the Greek colonies
encouraged maritime trade to develop rapidly, providing a framework of safe
havens to allow sailors and merchants from many countries to explore and to
trade. In this way Corinth was able to play a significant part in introducing
Greek culture to the Etruscan aristocracy, and in the seventh century, accord-
ing to Pliny, Corinthian artists were well established in Etruria. Along with the
Greek merchants would have come others, including Phoenicians, bringing a
range of exotic goods and ideas from the east Mediterranean in return for iron,
copper,and silver from Elbaand the Colline Metallifere just north of Populonia
and Vetulonia.

The appearance of a range of luxury goods added a stimulus to social devel-
opment in the late Villanovan culture of Etruria. Cities began to grow, provid-
ing an opportunity for the aristocracy to manipulate the newly available
prestige goods and thus to consolidate and enhance the status of themselves
and their lincages. Towards the end of the eighth century sc these ‘orientaliz-

45


===== PAGE 59 (index-62_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

ing' influences were well underway in Etruria. The coastal cities, growing com-
mercially stronger every minute, began to develop maritime interests of their
own, which, in the seventh century, were to expand through the Tyrrhenian Sea
and westwards to the coasts of Gaul and Iberia.

In parallel with the expansion of Greek influence in the western Mediter-
ranean and the rising power of the Etruscans, the Phoenicians of the Levant
were rapidly establishing their own trading enclaves as far west as the Atlantic
(Map 7). Traditionally Phoenicians had already founded a port-of-trade on the
Atlantic island of Cidiz, just off the coast of Andalucia, in 1104 sc. Another
intermediate port was established at Utica on the northern coast of Tunisia at
about the same time and served as a primary port of call until Carthage was set-
tled nearby in 814-13. If these traditional dates are to be believed, little time
elapsed between the end of Mycenacan involvement in the west and the begin-
ning of Phoenician. There are, however, uncertainties about the historical
dates, since there is as yet little reliable archacological evidence to suggest a
Phoenician presence much before the eighth century, though an early Phoen-
ician inscription found at Nora on Sardinia has been dated to the mid-ninth
century by some authorities. Lack of archacological evidence cannot, of course,
be taken as proof of the absence of early Phoenician enterprise in these regions.

Whatever the origin of Phoenician penetration in the west, it is abundantly
clear that the eighth century saw a consolidation of the sea routes, via Tunisia,
western Sicily, and Sardinia to southern Andalucia and Cidiz (Phoenician
Gadir) and a dramatic intensification of trade with the west. The main attrac-
tion appears to have been metals and in particular silver produced in huge
quantity from the metal-rich pyrite zone of the Rio Tinto and Sierra Morena.
This region—the kingdom of Tartessos—developed close links with the
Phoenicians at Cidiz, and the amount of silver exported from there became
legendary. In return, castern goods and craft skills became available to the
Tartessian aristocracy, and Tartessian culture, like that of Etruria, experienced
a rapid phase of ‘orientalization’, most readily apparent in the luxury goods
found in the graves of the local aristocracy in the eighth and seventh centuries.

While the port at Cidiz was admirably sited to exploit Tartessian resources,
by virtue of its Atlantic position it was also able to tap into long-established
Atlantic trade routes along which gold, copper, and, most important, tin were
transported. Phoenician exploitation of these sea-ways, northwards along the
Iberian coast and southwards along the Atlantic shores of Morocco, was to
develop in later centuries, but by building the trading node at Cadiz in the
cighth century the Phoenicians created a new interface between the Mediter-
rancan and Atlantic systems, The effect was to intensify activity along the Atlan-
tic sea-ways in the final stages of the indigenous Bronze Age.

Turning now to the eastern approaches to Europe, we saw how the semi-
nomadic communities of the Pontic Steppe—known to classical writers as the
Cimmerians—were undergoing a phase of turbulence and disruption resulting
in folk movement. The Cimmerian penetration of eastern Europe is a complex

46


===== PAGE 60 (index-63_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

issue which has been much debated in the past. The principal argument for the
presence of a ‘Pontic’ element rests on sets of bronze horse gear—Dbits, side
pieces, and phalarae from the harness found extensively distributed over much
of the territory of Hungary, often in contexts with local material of the eighth
and seventh centuries. The castern (Pontic) inspiration, if not the production,
of this material is clear. Other *eastern’ items, found less frequently, are short
bronze daggers and bird-headed rattles from the tops of ceremonial staffs,
Recent work at Mezocsat and nearby, in the north of the Great Hungarian
Plain, has identified a series of cemeteries which may well belong to immigrant
groups, while similar enclaves in the south of the Plain suggest that settlement
may have been widespread.

Interpretation of this kind of archaeological evidence is not straightforward,
but the simplest explanation would be to see groups of people moving from the
turbulent areas of the Pontic Steppe westwards along the Danube Valley into
the Great Hungarian Plain, an area geographically similar to their homeland,
bringing with them their breeding stock of horses superior in speed and
strength to the west European type. Once established to the east of the Danube,
and maintaining their links with their ancestral homelands, these new neigh-
bours to the Urnfield cultures of central and western Europe would have been
well placed to trade superior horses and their gear to the Hallstatt aristocracies,
introducing at the same time new concepts of horse-riding. Although, as we
have seen, the horse was already a symbol of status among the Urnfield com-
munities, the folk movements of the eighth century established the culture of
the horse and a ready supply of beasts, close to the eastern frontier.

Within the old Urnfield zone of western central Europe, bounded on the
west by the communities of the Atlantic ar¢, on the east by the ‘Pontic’ com-
munities of the Great Hungarian Plain, and on the south by the Alps, significant
changes can be detected after the middle of the eighth century sc. This period,
dating from ¢.750~600 BC, is referred to as the Hallstatt C culture—a general-
ized term which reflects a broad cultural continuum shared by a variety of dis-
tinctive regional groupings. It is at the aristocratic level that the culture is at its
most universal, being reflected in the widespread distribution of warrior gear,
in particular the Hallstatt long sword of iron or bronze (Maps 3 and 4), a dis-
tinctive array of chapes with which the sword sheath terminated, and the trap-
pings for horses both as cavalry beasts and yoked in pairs for pulling vehicles.
The distribution of these various artefacts demonstrates a core area stretching
inabroad zone from central France to Bohemia and Hungary, but with a num-
ber of more isolated finds beyond indicating the huge peripheral territory
linked by systems of exchange to the core.

Within the Hallstatt C cemeteries it is possible to distinguish different sets of
grave goods. Warriors might be accompanied only by a sword and other per-
sonal gear, while a mounted warrior might also have been provided with his
horse's tackle. The highest social level was probably that represented by vehicle
burials, which, in this period, were restricted to a zone stretching from the

47


===== PAGE 61 (index-64_1.jpg) =====
1 Reconstruction of the
wayin which horse trap-
pings of the seventh and
sixth centurics nc were
probably arranged, based on
evidence from graves in
southern Germany.

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

Middle Rhine to Bohemia (Map 5). The vehicles involved were four-wheeled
and comparatively heavy and unwieldy, as would befit a ceremonial or funer-
ary cart. Their spoked wheels, strengthened by iron tires shrunk on and nailed
to the composite wooden felloe, represent a high level of technical achieve-
ment. In some burials, like the Bohemian graves of Hradenin and Lovosice,
wooden yokes studded with decorative bronze nails survive,

The long slashing sword suitable as a cavalry weapon,
horses, ceremonial vehicles, the rite of inhumation, and
the widespread use of iron for weapons mark a distinct
break with traditional Urnfield culture. None of these
characteristics (except for abundant iron (Map 2)) was
entirely unknown earlier, but taken together they demon-
strate a significant change. The élite was now attempting
to distinguish itself by employing exotic modes of burial
adopted from beyond their homeland. The horses and the
style of trappings are essentially eastern in origin, The
inspiration for the vehicle is more difficult to determine,
Vehicle burial was widespread among Pontic communi-
ties, but the technology of the Hallstatt carts with their
spoked wheels and composite felloe is more likely to have
been transmitted from the east via the Mediterranean. Similar vehicle burials
have been discovered at Salamis in Cyprus dating to the late seventh century 8¢
and one likely possibility is that knowledge of the technology spread via Etruria
to the Transalpine communities. A similar route is possible for the introduc-
tion of iron technology, though iron trinkets are also known in the early Pontic-
style graves of the Great Hungarian Plain.

Perhaps a simpler way to view the emergence to archaeological visibility of
the Hallstatt C aristocracy is to see it as an élite eagerly absorbing cultural
influences from the east via the mid-Danube, and from the south, through the
cast Alpine passes, and adapting the ideas and technologies to its own social
needs. It was a time of energy and innovation, The fine iron sword and the iron-
tired wheels can reasonably be regarded as Hallstatt C developments of some
originality. This readiness to adopt new exotic ideas as a means of displaying
¢lite status was to intensify still further in the sixth and carly fifth centuries, as
contact with the Mediterranean systems developed.

The Western Mediterranean: 650-450 BC

Greek and Phoenician interest in the trading potential of the western
Mediterranean was well underway by the seventh century e, as spheres of
commercial activity began to crystallize. At this stage Etruria seems to have
played a leading role in the trans-shipment of goods around the northern part
of the west Mediterranean and some way down the coast of Italy, but in the sec-
ond half of the seventh century certain of the castern Greeks, from the coasts of

48


===== PAGE 62 (index-65_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

Asia Minor, began to explore more widely. One of these adventurers, Kolaios of
Samos, is reputed to have travelled to Tartessos about 630 8¢, finding the mar-
ket ‘untouched'—untouched, that is, by Greeks, That he was said by Herodotus
to have been sailing south for Africa when he was blown off course is not par-
ticularly convincing but may hide a different reality. At the trading station of
Naucratis in the Nile delta, where eastern Greeks as well as Phoenicians regu-
larly met, the Samians may well have learned of the lucrative Phoenician con-
tacts with Tartessos and decided to explore for themselves.

Soon to follow were the Phocacans from the Acolian coast. According to
Herodotus, they set sail in their pentekonters (warships), exploring the Adri-
atic region, Etrunia, Iberia, and Tartessos, establishing friendly relations with
the Tartessian King. Their route almost certainly took them along the north
shores of the west Mediterranean, where they would have become aware of the
Etruscan entrepots along the littoral of Provence and Languedoc, possibly to
the port of Rhode in north-west Spain, which may have been established as
carly as the eighth century. Years of seasonal sailing in these waters would have
fa ized them with the best harbours and landfalls, and in c.600 sc the first

Phocaean colony was founded at Massalia (Marseilles). Others followed: Emp-
orion and Agde in the fifth century and Tauroention, Olbia, and Nice in the
fourth. In this way the Greek presence began to impose itself within the tradi-
tional preserve of the Etruscan cities.

Theattractions of Massalia were many. Not only was it an excellent well-pro-
tected anchorage in the heart of a comparatively productive territory, but it also

49

33 The Greek portof
Massalia (Marseiles) was
founded on the southern
<coast of Gaul about 600 sc
by colonists from Phocaca.
An casily defended
promontory was chosen,
overlooking a large almost
land-locked harbour.
Massalia was well sited 1o
control trade along the
Rhone: it lay conveniently
close to the Rhane mouth
but clear of the marshy
delta,


===== PAGE 63 (index-66_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

lay close to the mouth of the Rhone, which provided access into the barbarian
hinterland, from which a variety of commodities could be obtained. More
significant, at least in the first decades of the colony’s existence, was its conve-
nient location in the centre of the long coastal route linking the productive
Spanish Levant with Etruria and Magna Graecia. The quantity of Etruscan pot-
tery found in early deposits in the city are impressive indications of the impor-
tance of Etruscan-dominated exchanges at this time (Map 8).

Before looking at the impact of the colonization on the Hallstatt communi-
ties of the hinterland, we must continue to consider in outline the history of the
western Mediterranean in so far as it is likely to have had an impact on temper-
ate Europe.

Towards the middle of the sixth century Bc major political events in the east
were to send shock waves throughout the west Mediterranean. In 574 s the
great trading cities of Phoenicia were overrun and incorporated into the
expanding Babylonian empire. The effect was to sever long-established links
between the mother cities of Tyre and Sidon and their overseas trading systems.
Henceforth, with the umbilical cord cut, Carthage became the leading power in
the Phoenician, now Punic, west Mediterranean. A few years later, in 545, Persia
expanded its influence westwards to the Aegean, absorbing into its state system
the castern Greek cities of the coastal zone. The opposition of the Greek states
encouraged the Persians to undertake a further westward advance to the Greek
mainland, where, at Salamis in 480 and Plataea in 479, the Persian forces were
soundly beaten.

Many of the eastern Greek cities accepted Persian sovereignty, but the
Phocaeans, agreeing that subservience was intolerable, decided to migrate en
masse to the west Mediterranean to build upon their maritime enterprises
already well rooted in the colony at Massalia. The site chosen for the migrant
population to settle was Alalia on the eastern coast of Corsica. Such a move was
perceived by the Etruscans to be a direct threat to Etruscan trading enterprises,
and the opposition, led by the city of Caere, amassed a fleet of sixty Etruscan
and sixty Carthaginian vessels to oppose the Phocaeans. The ensuing battle, in
the Sardinian Sea, probably between Sardinia and Corsica, was a Phocaean vic-
tory, but such was the cost that the Phocacans decided to abandon Alalia, even-
tually founding their colony on the Italian mainland at Velia in the territory of
Posidonia.

The Battle of the Sardinian Sea, which took place about 540 BC, was a major
event in west Mediterranean history, in that it significantly changed the politi-
cal geography of the region, isolating Massalia and throwing her far more on
her own resources, leading to the establishment of further colonies along the
southern French coast. The greatly strengthened Etruscan-Carthaginian coali-
tion now began to pose a serious threat to the commercial interests of the Greek
cities of Magna Graecia. The establishment at the Etruscan port of Pyri of a
place sacred to the Phoenician goddess Astarte by the ‘king’ of Caere (recorded
on gold plaques in a bilingual text) is an indication of the close relations which

50


===== PAGE 64 (index-67_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

existed between Carthage and Etruria, a point further emphasized by large vol-
umes of Etruscan goods found at Carthage.

However, the growing power of Magna Graecia began to tell. An Etruscan
expedition against the Greek enclave at Cumae in 525 se failed, thus preventing
Etruscan expansion southwards. The pressure continued, but fifty years later
the destruction of an Etruscan fleet off Cumace in 474 marked the end of Etrus-
can expansionist policies in the south.

Increasing pressure on the Etruscan thalassocracy in the Tyrrhenian Sea
throughout the sixth century was a significant factor in the landward expansion
of Etruscan interests northwards through the Apennines into the southern
reaches of the Po Valley. New cities like Marzabotto and Felsina ( Bologna) were
established on the major routes, and there was a significant Etruscan involve-
ment in the development of the two Adriatic ports of Spina and Adria. By the
middle of the fifth century the northern frontier of Etruscan settlement had
extended to the north bank of the Po and the ports were providing outlets of
growing importance to the Adriatic shipping lanes. In parallel, Etruscan
influence in the Tyrrhenian Sea declined. The Syracusan-led offensive against
coastal Etruria in 454 and 453, though inconclusive, was symptomatic of the
pressures besetting the once-flourishing maritime cities.

The developing Etruscan interests in the Po Valley in the century ¢.550-450
sc brought them into increasingly close contact with native communities
occupying the territory from the Po to the Alps, where two archaeologically
defined cultures can be identified (Map 17): the Este culture in the east, occupy-
ing a broad zone from the sea to Lake Garda in the valley of the Adige, and the
Golasecca culture, the main focus of which lay around Lakes Como, Lugano,
and Maggiore. Both groups were deeply rooted in the indigenous cultures of
the Late Bronze Age and by virtue of their geographical location dominated the
routes through the Alps which linked the Etruscan south with the Hallstatt
north. The development of an urban agglomeration at Como in the fifth centu-
1y, extending to some 150 hectares, must, in part at least, be due to the intensity
of commercial activity and the model of urbanism derived from the Etruscan
zone. As we will see, the Golasecca culture formed a significant bridge between
the Mediterranean states and the changing Hallstatt world.

The Hallstatt World: 650-450 BC

In order to discuss the rapidly developing social, economic, and political sys-
tems of the west central Hallstatt zone in this crucial period it is necessary to
introduce the chronological framework that will be adopted. A great deal has
been written on the subject and there are still areas of debate, but the following
is now widely accepted as a serviceable scheme:

Hallstatt C  ¢.750~¢.600 BC Hallstatt D2~3  ¢.530/520-¢.450/440 BC
Hallstatt D1 c.600-c.530/520 8¢ LaTéne A €.450/440~¢.370/350 BC

51


===== PAGE 65 (index-68_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

13 Right: The barial mound
of b
Heun
late sixth ¢
shown here under excava

tion in 19378, The style of

hmichele, near
dating to the

ptury 8¢, is

The scheme usefully correlates with the princi-
pal events in western Mediterranean history,
with Hallstatt D1 beginning at the time of the
foundation of Massalia and the beginning of
Hallstatt D2~3 coinciding with the turmoil fol-
lowing the Battle of the Sardinian Sea and run
ning parallel with a major phase of Etruscan
expansion northwards,

We have already seen how in the Hallstatt C
period the zone of élite burials, represented by
wagons and horse gear, or harness and yokes
gons, extended in a broad, and dis-
continuous, zone from Bohemia to southern

without wi

Germany, apart from rare exceptions seldom
spreading west of the Rhine (Map 5). At this
time the principal concentration lay in southern
Germany (Baden-Wirttemberg and Bavaria),
where more than ninety élite burials have been
identified. In addition to vehicle and horse-
related accoutrements, élite lifestyle was fre-
quently represented by pottery and bronze
vessels of various kinds related to feasting
accompanying the dead to the Elite buri-
als continued to be found in southern Germany

ave.

34 Aboye, lefi: The great burial mound of Magdalenenberg bei
Villingen, Schwarzwald-Baar-Kreis, Germany
central burial in a log-bailt chambe
century ne. A number of other burials we

mound over the next two

35 Lefr: The barrow of Mag

ected beneath a caien of

2 well-peeserved ti
stoes


===== PAGE 66 (index-69_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

during Hallstatt Dy, but no longer appear in
Bohemia. Some of them, like the barrow buri-
als of Hohmichele near Hundersingen and
Magdalenenberg near Villingen, were colossal
structures requiring much effort in the inter-
ests of monumentalizing the lincage of the
dead aristocrats, and the Chinese silk used to
embroider the dress of the woman buried at
Hohmichele indicates the ability of the élite to
acquire rare trade goods,

To what extent the foundation of Massalia
about 600 Be influenced the growing power of
the west Hallstatt chieftains is difficult to say.
Certainly some exotic products, such as the
hydria found at Grichwil, ‘Rhodian’ flagons
(Map 9), and bead-edged bronze basins from
Magna Gracecia, were becoming available as
grave goods, and these may well ha
transported via Massalia and the Rhone corri-
dor to add a touch of the exotic to the Hallstatt
feast enhanced by Massilliot wine (Map 10).

That Greek ideas were being readily accep-
ted is vividly demonstrated by the hill fort of
Heuneburg overlooking the Danube, The earliest Hallstatt rampart was con-
structed in the middle of the seventh century, and the site continued in use for
some 200 years. During Hallstatt D1 the defences were completely remodelled
in a style unique in Transalpine Europe: stone wall footings were laid with hol-
low, forward projecting bastions regularly spaced along its west side. Above the
foundations the wall was built of carefully squared mudbricks of regular size
and shape. This alien structure, so clearly the concept of a Greek mind, and pre-
sumably overseen by a Greek architect, is a striking example of the willingness
(and ability) of the local Hallstatt élite to adopt totally foreign modes of expres-
sion in the interests of displaying status and power.

That the colony of Massalia was now contributing to the aristocratic culture
of the west Hallstatt zone is clear, but the intensity or duration of this contribu-
tion is not. All that can safely be said is that there is no evidence to suggest that,
at this stage, the Rhone corridor saw a massive movement of goods and com-
modities. Massalia was still part of an extensive Mediterranean network and
there would have been little impetus actively to seek markets in the hinterland.

A major change came about at the beginning of Hallstatt D2-3, that is about
530-520 BC. In the west Hallstatt zone this can best be characterized as a ‘con-
centration of power’ in fewer centres. The phenomenon can be recognized in
two ways: by the increasing exclusivity of the élite burial rite and by the aban-
donment of a number of hill forts, leaving fewer sites to develop as strong cen-

53

36 The Greek bronze
hydria, found in a burial at

Grachwil, Switzerland, was
imported from the
Mediterrancan in the sixth
century s¢. [t may have been
a diplomatic gift to.a local
chieftain. Historisches
Museum, Berne.


===== PAGE 67 (index-70_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

37 The hilltop settlement of \
Heuneburg, Baden Heuneburg
Wirttemberg, Germany, 2 Period IVb
swing the situation in the 77> | ¢85

late sixth century wc (Period
1Vh), when the walls were
built in Greek stybe of mud.
brick on a stone-rubble
foundation. The barre
nearby

y above an carlier

settlement

2 f the hill fort
of Heuncburg overlooking
the River Danube. Th
was used and fortified ir
mittently from the Late
Bronze Age and in the late
sixth century became a 200 Motres
centre of princely power .

ter



===== PAGE 68 (index-71_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

of the Heun
strusted in Gr
st

30 Metres

55


===== PAGE 69 (index-72_1.jpg) =====
43 Above: The hill fort of
Ipf, Bopfingen, Germany,
dominates the surrounding
countryside. In all probabil
ity it served as a centre of
princely power in the late
sixth century s

44 Right: The location of
four of the 'princely centres
of the late sixth century s¢
The focus of each is a
fortified hilltop often com
manding a major river
route. Rich burials cluster
nearby.



===== PAGE 70 (index-73_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

tral foci. In southern Germany, for example, the core of aristocratic power, the
number of known burials with wagons or harness decreases from forty-six to
twenty, and in some areas of the Swabian Alps élite burials disappear altogeth-
erafter the end of Hallstatt D1, In the region of Breisgau, of the twelve hill forts
occupied in Hallstatt Dy, only one continued in use in the subsequent period.

The archacological data imply a rapid social change, but one which would be
entirely understandable within the context of indigenous development. In par-
allel with the emergence of fewer, richer centres of power in the core area of
southern Germany, there was a marked expansion of the system westwards
from the Rhine into northern and eastern France. A glance at Map 5 will show
that the focus of power now occupied a swath of territory to the north of the
Alps linking the river systems of the Rhone/Sadne, Seine, Rhine, and Danube.
It could fairly be said that the nexus of west central European communications
was now dominated by a single cultural and social system, and the amount of
gold found in the burials (Map 15) is an indication of its productive capacity.

The élite systems of Hallstatt D2-3 are characterized by the appearance of
comparatively large quantities of Mediterranean imports found in both the
major hill forts and the princely burials (Maps 10-12). That the range of goods
is limited to wine-drinking equipment appropriate to the Greek symposion
strongly suggests that it was the idea of the symposion that was accepted and
adopted by the élite, as an extension, no doubt, of their long-established feast-
ing rites. The rich female burial at Vix neatly exemplifies the range of imports
with its huge krater for wine-mixing, jug for pouring, basins, and Attic cups for
drinking. The discovery of numerous fragments of Attic cups in the nearby hill
fort of Mont Lassois isan indication of the princely residence. A similar array of
Attic pottery from Heuneburg 111, found together with the Massilliot amph-
orae in which the wine was transported, shows that after the rebuilding which
followed the violent destruction of the mudbrick defences of Heuneburg IV in
about 530/520 BC, contact with the Mediterranean world developed even more
strongly. Itis to this period that the rich chieftain burial of Hochdorf near the
hill fort of Hohenasperg belongs.

While it could reasonably be argued that this late phase of Hallstatt develop-
ment was little more than an intensification of social trends deeply rooted in the
indigenous Urnfield culture of the region, it would be perverse to say that the
economic impetus of the Greek littoral, after the traumas of the 540-530s Bc,
had nothing to do with the sudden appearance of Mediterranean trade goods in
the barbarian hinterland. The most satisfactory explanation would be to accept
that both socicties had needs—the Greeks to develop new trading partners, the
Hallstatt élite to find new modes of expression consistent with their aristocrat-
ic systems, For a brief period, 530-450, these needs coincided and the Rhone
corridor provided the principal axis of communication between the two zones.
How the exchanges were articulated is uncertain, but the identification of a
major trading centre at Bragny-sur-Saone, close to the confluence of the Saéne,
Doubs, and Dheune, dating to this crucial period, is of considerable interest.

57


===== PAGE 71 (index-74_1.jpg) =====
45 The princely burial
found beneath a substantial
barrow at Vix, Chatilion-
sur-Scine, France, was con-
tained in a wood-tined
chamber, The female burial
was accompanied by per-
sonal ornaments, a set of
imported Mediterranean
wine-drinking gear, and a
dismantled funerary vehicle.
The burial dates to the end
of the sixth century s,

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

Here, in the carliest phase (late sixth and early fifth century), Massilliot amph-
orae and other Mediterrancan-produced pottery together with Attic imports
and polychrome glass vessels were found in some quantity. Bragny, situated on
the interface between the Hallstatt north and the southern Mediterranean
sphere, is very well sited 1o have been the principal port-of-trade through which
exchanges could have been articulated. In the ready accessibility of luxury
goods from the south may lie the reason for the westward extension of the
Hallstatt élite zone after c.530.

The rich burials of the Late Hallstatt zone have been characterized as



===== PAGE 72 (index-75_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

46 The chicftain’s grave at
Hochdorf, Stuttgar,
Germany, dates to the
second half of the sixth
century ne, After the roof
had been added. the inner
grave chamber was
surrounded by stone rubble
laced with horizontal
timbers to hinder grave-
robbing. and buried beneath
alarge barrow,

47 Reconstruction of the
interior of the timber-built
grave chamber of the chief
tain’s burial at Hochdorf

48 Below: Funerary wagon
from the princely tomb of
Hochdorf. The wooden
structure was cased in iron
sheeting, Wirttemberg-
wches Landesmuseum,
Stattgan



===== PAGE 73 (index-76_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

60


===== PAGE 74 (index-77_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

reflecting a prestige goods economy—that is, a socio-economic system in which
élite status was maintained by the manipulation of rare and valuable com-
modities available only to the paramount chieftains (Map 16). They would
retain their power by making gifts of lesser value to those below them in the

social hierarchy in return for goods and services. So longas the supply of exotics

was kept up and the paramounts held the monopoly, the system would remain
relatively stable, Such a theoretical scheme provides a useful model for under

standing Late Hallstatt society. It gains support from the graded status

differences which can be recognized in the burial record, and from the evidence
for the manufacture of lower value personal ornaments, such as brooches and
bracelets, useful in gift exchange, in the princely hill forts of Mont Lassois and
Heuneburg.

So far we have assumed that the Mediterranean wine-drinking gear which
was imported into the Hallstatt sphere at this time all came via Massalia. This
may well be, but a significant number of items were of Etruscan manufacture,
riffon-headed cauldron and tri-

vessels such as the stamnos from Gurgy, the g
pod from Sainte-Colombe, the beaked flagons and dishes from Vix, and the

amphora from Conliege. The list is impressive, but there is nothing inherently

unlikely in supposing that those entreprencurs seeking to trade with the inter
ior should have put together sets of wine-drinking gear deriving from a variety
of sources. The most reasonable explanation for these exotic Etruscan bronzes

of the period 540/530~480/470 BC, therefore, is that they were, indeed, chan

61


===== PAGE 75 (index-78_1.jpg) =====
51 One of the nine drinking
homns from the Hochdorf
burial bound with bronze
and gold. Wrttemberg:
isches Landesmuscum,
Stuttgart.

52 Facing The stone statue
found at Hirschlanden,
Baden-Warttemberg,
Germany, probably once
stood on 1op of the burial
mound excavated nearby. It
dates ta the second half of
the sixth century nc and
compares in style to statues
from northern Italy. The
nakedness of the warrior,
wearing oaly a sword belt
and peck tore, wasto
become a characteristic of
the Celts in battle in the fifth
century and after. The coni-
<al hat which the figare
wears is very similar to the
birch bark hat worn by the
Chicftain buried at
Hochdorf, Worttemberg-
isches Landesmuseum,
Stuttgart,

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

nelled through the Greek port of Massalia. This should not, however, be con-
fused with the direct Etruscan trade which developed at the very end of the
Hallstatt period, 480/470-450/440, as a direct result of the consolidation of
Etruscan commercial interests in the Po Valley. In this development, the Gola-
secca communities, commanding the Italian lakes and the central and west
Alpine passes, served as the middlemen.

An assessment of the nature of the
contacts through the Alps depends
entirely upon archaceological evidence.
Links between the Transalpine commu-
nities and the Golasecca culture (Map
17) were long established and are most
dramatically exemplified by the four-
wheeled funerary wagons of the seventh
and sixth centuries sc found at Sesto
Calende and Ca’Morta as well asa num-
ber of broadly contemporary sword
types which have Transalpine origins or
antecedents. A similar pattern of contact continuing into the middle of the fifth
century is reflected in the second four-wheeled vehicle from Ca'Morta, which
sharesa number of structural details with the somewhat carlier vehicle found in
the Late Hallstatt burial of Vix. Whether the persistence of the use of funerary
vehicles at Ca’Morta and Sesto Calende was the result of diplomatic gifts from
the north or the adoption of alien burial rites by the Golaseccan élite is impos-
sible to say, but at the very least the vehicles must reflect constant cultural con-
tact over a long period. These long established systems of communication and
exchange facilitated Etruscan trade in the period after c.480/470. It is in this
period that the settlement at Como developed rapidly into an extensive proto-
urban agglomeration, probably as a direct response to an intensification in
commerce,

The settlement at Bragny-sur-Sadne was re-established at this time following
a phase of destruction. Numerous items of north Italic origin were recovered,
together with Golasecca-type pottery, thus demonstrating the continued use of
an established port-of-trade. The presence of Massilliot amphorae in the same
layers, however, shows that the Rhone corridor continued to function.

Among the most prolific of the Etruscan exports of the period 480-420 8¢
was the beaked flagon used as a wine-pouring vessel (Map 14) sometimes
accompanied by bronze stamnoi (Map 13). Made in Etruscan cities such as
Vulci and exported through the Golaseccan middlemen, they travelled far into
barbarian territory. A particularly dense concentration in the élite graves of the
Middle Rhine dating to the later half of the fifth century—the La Téne A peri-
od—suggests a very deliberate and well-focused axis of exchange which no
doubt contributed to the emergence of a discrete zone of power on the north-
ern fringe of the old west Hallstatt cultural zone, The impression given by this

62


===== PAGE 76 (index-79_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

startling phenomenon is that Etruscan trade through the Alpine passes rather
than being directed by the producers was, by this stage, being drawn by newly
emerging élites in the north. The southern link is further demonstrated by the
stone statue found near the barrow at Hirschlanden in Baden-Wiirttemberg,
ies to north Italian statues.

which has very close stylistic similar

New Centres of Power: The La Téne Elite, 450/440-380/370 8¢

In the middle of the fifth century the political geography of barbarian Europe
changed dramatically. While the processes and precise chronology of thes
changes are not easy to define, the broad picture stands out with clarity, and it
is from this point that the discussion is best begun. Simply stated, over much of
the west central Hallstatt élite burial zone rich burials ceased and the hill forts
y came toan end, in the case of Heuneburg witha cat-

occupied by thearistocra
astrophic fire. Meanwhile, in a broad zone to the north stretching from the
Marne to Bohemia there developed in the course of the La Téne A period a war-
rior aristocracy which frequently buried its dead with their spears and swords.
Itwas in thiszone that the highly distinctive Celticart style developed (Map19).

One of the difficulties of studying this change is the imprecision of our
od begin immediately after the end of the
, or was there an overlap of a generation

chronologies. Did the La Tene pel
Hallstatt in c.450, as some would argu
orso, with the earliest La Tene beginning c.4807 On balance, a period of overlap
seems more likely.

Early La Téne culture differed in many significant ways from that of the old
Hallstatt chiefdoms; the geographical focus of the two barely overlapped. In the
La Tene burials fighting weapons were frequent, in contrast to the Late Hallstatt
¢lite, whose only weapons were for hunting or display; moreover, the
y favoured the two-wheeled vehicle as a funerary cart in contrast to

aristocra
the traditional four-wheeled vehicle. The one important similarity was that
both had a system of élite burial employing the funerary cart together with s
of wine-drinking equipment derived from, or inspired by, the accoutrements
of the Mediterranean symposion.

A plausible explanation for the evidence, so far discussed, is that towards the
middle of the fifth century Bc centres of power and innovation shifted from the
old west central Hallstatt core 1o its immediate northern periphery. Why this
should be is a matter to which we shall return.

That there was a cant degree of continuity between the Late Hallstatt
and Early La Téne social systems is evident. This is particularly true of the
Middle Rhineland. In the Late Hallstatt period the focus of power was in the
valley of the Neckar between Stuttgart and Heilbronn, centred on the hill fort of
Hohenasperg, around which there clustered a remarkable group of élite burials
including Hochdorf, Grafenbiihl and Romerhiigel, all dated to the Hallstatt
D2-3 phase. Little is known of the chronology of the Hohenasperg settlement,
but the possibility that it continued in occupation into Early La Téne times is

ts

63



===== PAGE 77 (index-80_1.jpg) =====
53 Map showing the shift of
centres of power from c700
10 400 ne- The rich "horsy'
burials of the Hallstatt C
period focused on the region
from Bohemis to the Upper
Danube. Hallstart ) power
represented by the west
Hallstatt chiefdom zone

further west in
the sixth century, Early La
Tene aristocratic cultures
emerged in three zones—
the Marne, Moselle, and
Bohemia—on the northern
periphery.

BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

suggested by the date range of the élite burials in the area. Both Grafenbiihl and
Romerhiigel were later used for La Téne burials. Similarly at Kleinaspergle the
barrow mound contained a grave chamber with a burial accompanied by gold-
mounted drinking horns, four bronze vessels including an Etruscan stamnos,
and two Attic cups, dating to the La Téne A period. The continuity of power in
this arca throughout the fifth century is impressive.

Another focus of power lay some 150 kilometres north-west in the valley of
the Moselle close to its confluence with the Rhine. Here several élite burials
of the Late Hallstatt period have been discovered, including the well-known
vehicle burial of Bell. During the fifth century the number of rich graves in the
region increases dramatically. Many of the tombs contain bronze vessels
imported from Etruscan workshops at Vulci and elsewhere, These include the
characteristic beaked flagons, stamnoi, amphorae, and bowls. The number and
density of these exotics vividly demonstrate the close links between the
Rhineland and Etruria at this time (Maps 13 and 14). Even more impressive are
the array of locally manufactured gold-work and the inventiveness of local
craftsmen in adopting and adapting Etruscan motifs in a highly selective man-
ner to create an entirely new art form.

If we take the Middle Rhine as a single region, we can suggest that in the carly
fifth century Bc there were probably two centres of power, one in the Neckar
valley and one (possibly) in the Moselle, with the Neckar region being the more
prominent. By the end of the century a distinct shift had taken place, with the
Moselle region now being not only rich but vibrant and innovative. Through-
out, economic links were maintained with the Etruscan world to the south,



===== PAGE 78 (index-81_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

though whether the impetus for trade came directly from the Etruscan cities or
was instigated by entrepreneurs in the now-thriving Golasecca centres is a
debatable point.

The second major centre of innovation in the Early La Téne period was the
valley of the Marne lying some 150 kilometres north of the Late Hallstatt centre
focused on Vix. Already in this period occupation was intense and the rite of
vehicle burial is known from a tomb containing a four-wheeled cart at Les
Jogasses. The number of burials increased dramatically throughout the fifth
century, and élite burial became more common (though rare compared with
the Moselle region). Characteristically, the dead aristocrat was buried in a pit
accompanied by a two-wheeled vehicle, a range of harness trappings, and a
drinking set. Etruscan bronze vessels have been recovered from burials at
Somme-Bionne, Somme-Tourbe, and Sept-Saulx, while Somme Bionne also
contained a red-figured Attic cup dated to c.420. If the archacological evidence
is a fair reflection of the actual percentage of élite burials in the region, then it
was significantly poorer than the Moselle and evidently had less access to luxu-
ry goods from the south. In spite of this, Marnian culture displays a high degree
of stability during the fifth century and its craftsmen play a significant part in
the development of a distinctive style of Celtic art.

The relationship between the Moselle and Marne groups in the later part of
the fifth century raises a number of questions. Both shared a common warrior-
dominated social system and at some levels a common material culture based
on patterns of exchange, but by any standards the Marnians were the poor rela-
tions and may indeed have depended for their Mediterranean prestige goods
on reciprocal exchanges with the Moselle communities whose access to the
south was direct. It is interesting to speculate what commodities the Marne
may have been able to contribute. One possibility is that its links with the Seine
provided a means of tapping into Atlantic systems producing the much-desired
tin. Another is that the warrior society was able to supply a flow of slaves, useful
in exchanges with the south. Direct evidence is, however, lacking.

A subsidiary focus of power in the fifth century lay in western France, at
Bourges, at the confluence of the Auron and the Yévres, tributary of the Cher.
Settlement levels have produced quantities of Massilliot amphorae together
with a range of Attic black- and red-figured wares spanning the fifth century.
Contemporary technological innovations included the local adoption of the
potter’s wheel. A range of élite burials has also been found containing import-
ed vessels. Judging by the date range of the imported pottery recovered, it is
clear that Bourges was established as a significant trading centre in the Late
Hallstatt period but continued to function throughout the Early La Téne. Itis
well sited to control the movement of goods from the Atlantic corridor.,

The fifth century also sees the development of an axis of communication
extending from the Po Valley through the territory of the Veneti and along the
castern fringes of the Alps to the valley of the Vitava and the North European
Plain beyond. This long established route saw the transport of Baltic amber

65


===== PAGE 79 (index-82_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

southwards to the Adriatic. From about 1000 &¢, salt, mined at Hallstatt, would
have contributed to the flow of commaodities passing along the east Alpine cor-
ridor. About 600 nc the rich salt deposits at Diirrnberg (near Salzburg) began
to be worked in parallel with the Hallstatt mines, both ceasing about 400 uc.

The community at Ditrrnberg began to increase in size and prosperity at the
beginning of the fifth century and a cemetery of several hundred burials was
established. Among them were two élite burials, each with a two-wheeled
funerary vehicle. One produced a locally made bronze beaked flagon inspired
by Etruscan prototypes; the other a range of elaborate locally made wine-drink-
ing equipment together with a pottery Attic kylix made in about 470. The occu-
pant, a male, was also provided with his warrior equipment including a bronze
helmet, an iron sword, three spears and bows and arrows. The Diirmberg finds
are particularly interesting in that, like those of the Moselle and Marne, they
demonstrate trade links to the Po Valley providing goods and inspiration for
highly inventive local craftsmen. The difference, however, is that some of the
concepts incorporated by the craftsmen were learned from the already well-
developed bronze-working skills of the Venetic community to the south.

To the north of Diirrnberg the amber route leads through the valley of the
Vitavaand the territory of Bohemia. Here, one of the principal sites was the set-
tlement of Zavist, south of Prague. It was established in the Hallstatt period and
developed throughout the fifth century asa major cult centre. Thata number of
Bohemian cemeteries also show continuity throughout the sixth and fifth cen-
turies indicates a degree of social and economic stability. It was during the lat-
ter part of the fifth century that élite burials began to appear, characterized by
Etruscan wine-drinking equipment. Some of the graves also produced items of
gold and silver. Although the exact form of the Bohemian graves is not known
in detail, their number (eight at present) and the range of imports indicate a
distinctive enclave with close contacts via the Dirrnberg region to the Adriatic,

Standing back from the evidence, briefly summarized here, we can see that
during the course of the fifth century there arose two zones of power and inno-
vation: a Marne-Moselle zone in the west with trading links to the Po Valley via
the central Alpine passes and the Golasecca culture, and a Bohemian zone in the
cast with separate links to the Adriatic via the eastern Alpine routes and the
Venetic culture. Both zones, and their constituent regions, had already begun
to develop as significant foci of power towards the end of the Late Hallstatt
phase, but what stands out as particularly dramatic is that most of the core of
the west Hallstatt élite zone, so dominant in the late sixth and early fifth cen-
turies, was now a cultural backwater. In other words, as the centre decayed, its
northern periphery flourished—in much the same way as a mushroom ring
grows.

To offer explanations for the phenomenon is not easy. On the one hand, it
could be argued that readjustments in trading pressures from the Mediter-
ranean states caused social dislocation north of the Alps upsetting the delicate
balance of the prestige goods economy. Perhaps the interests of the Greek cities

66


===== PAGE 80 (index-83_1.jpg) =====
BARBARIAN EUROPE AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

of the Golfe du Lion turned more to the west as the lucrative Iberian market
developed leaving the northern markets open to exclusive Etruscan manipula-
tion. It could also be that internal social dynamics in Transalpine Europe were
the prime cause. The peripheral zone, so long producing the supplies of raw
materials such as furs, amber, iron, gold, and slaves for the core, may have
developed a penchant for southern luxuries. Given the warrior nature of
peripheral society, reflecting no doubt the practice of raiding, then aggressive
moves against the west Hallstatt core may have destabilized and destroyed the
old system. Perhaps it was a combination of all these factors which brought
about the dramatic changes of the fifth century. At any event, by about 400 BC
the scene was set for a new act in the story of Europe—the Celtic migrations.

67


===== PAGE 81 (index-84_1.jpg) =====
V' Facing The Battersea
shicld, found in the River
Thames at Battersea,
London. The shield facing
of copper alloy sheeting is
elaborately decorsted and
enhanced with inset red
glass, The date is uncertain
but probably lies in the first
century s or early first
century A, although an
carlier dating is passible.
The shickd was probably
ritually deposited. British
Museum, London,

4
The Migrations

400-200BC

ON 18 July 390 BC the army of Rome was soundly defeated by a horde of Celts
on the banks of the River Allia not far from the city. It was a devastating
moment for the Romans, as they saw their city ransacked by these little-known
northern barbarians. According to tradition, the Consul M. Popillius Laenas
had told the citizens before the event: ‘These are not civilized people who will
become your ally when you have taken their city but wild beasts whose blood we
must shed or spill our own." The attack remained a vivid folk memory in
Rome’s collective consciousness, and stories about the Celtic migrations from
beyond the Alps would have been told to every schoolchild. It is appropriate,
therefore, to begin a consideration of the migrations by exploring how they
were viewed by Greek and Roman historians writing well after the event.

The Graeco-Roman Tradition

The classic Roman view of the Celtic migrations is provided by Livy writing
towards the end of the first century sc and deserves to be quoted in full.

The Celts, who make up one of the three divisions of Gaul, were under the domination
of the Bituriges and this tribe supplied the Celtic nation with a king, Ambigatus was then
the man and his talents . . . had brought him great distinction; for Gaul under his sway
grew so rich in corn and so populous, that it scemed hardly possible to govern so great
amultitude. The king, now old, wishing to relieve his kingdom of a burdensome throng,
announced that he meant to send Bellovesus and Segovesus, his sister’s two sons, two
enterprising young men, to find such homes as the gods might assign to them by augury;
and promised them that they should head as large a number of emigrants as they them-
selves desired, so that no tribe might be able to prevent their settlement, Whereupon to
Segovesus were by lot assigned the Hercynian highlands [the Black Forest and
Bohemia, but to Bellovesus the gods proposed a far pleasanter road, into Italy. Taking

68


===== PAGE 82 (index-85_1.jpg) =====
.

S \,~':-V ¥
e e
VN W
Wi, 9

i A/')\ 1;')«)@?(?:,'
n'; \‘;: t’;‘%;\ f,'; t‘i v’ A J‘"
s


===== PAGE 83 (index-86_1.jpg) =====
§ ,HS, ]


===== PAGE 84 (index-87_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

with him the surplus population—Bituriges, Arverni, Senones, Aedui, Ambarri, Car-
nutes, Aulerci—he set out with a vast host, some mounted, some on foot,  (Hist. 5. 34)

He goes on to describe how they passed through the Alps by the passes of Tau-
rine and Duria and defeated the Etruscans near the River Ticinus. Thereafter
they established a settlement at Mediolanum (Milan).

Pompeius Trogus, a native of southern Gaul who composed his histories at
the time of the Emperor Augustus, adds that, in addition to Mediolanum, the
first Celtic settlements included Como, Brescia, Verona, Bergamo, Trento, and
Vicenza. His understanding of the initial stages of the migrations was similar to
that of Livy in that he believed overpopulation to have been the reason for the
Gauls sending ‘300,000 men to seek new territories”. ‘Some’, he said, settled in
Italy... some were led by birds, spread through the head of the Adriatic and set-
tled in Pannonia.’

Livy dates these events to the reign of the Roman king Tarquinius Priscus,
which would place the migrations in the period about 600 Bc. The Greek histo-
rian Polybius, who wrote in the carly second century s, firmly believed them
1o have taken place some 200 years later. Livy was clearly aware of this discrep-
ancy when he went on to say:

it was two hundred years before the attack on Clusium and the capture of Rome that the
Gauls first crossed over into Italy: neither were the Clusini the first of the Etruscans with
whom they fought: but long before that the Gallic armies had often given battle to those
who dwelt between the Apennines and the Alps.

Livy's remarks raise questions which will be considered again below when the
archacological evidence is examined.

While it is generally agreed by the ancient authors that overpopulation in the
Celtic homeland was the initial prime cause of the migrations, the reason for
the movement to Italy was seen to be the lure of the products of the south. The
point is explicitly made by Pliny:

The Gauls, imprisoned as they were by the Alps .. . first found a motive for overflowing
into Italy from the circumstance of a Gallic citizen from Switzerland named Helico who
had lived in Rome because of his skill as a craftsman, [and| brought with him, when he
came back, some dried figs and grapes and some samples of oil and wine: consequently
we may excuse them for having sought to obtain these things even by means of war,
(Nat. Hist. 12. 2. 5)

Much the same point is made by Livy—that it was the attraction of ‘delicious
fruits and especially wine' that drew the Celts south. He adds the unlikely anec-
dote that the Celts were deliberately enticed by an Etruscan, Arruns, from Clu-
sium, in order to bring retribution on those who had seduced his wife ( Hist. 5.
34).

As one might expect, the historical tradition has a degree of cohesion.
Against this we may now consider the archacological evidence,

69

VI Facing Statue of a Gaul-
ish chief wearing a tunic of
chain mailand a tore and
carrying a shield. From
Vachéres, Basses- Alpes,
France. Late first century nc.
Musée Calvet, Avignon.


===== PAGE 85 (index-88_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

A Prelude to the Migration of 400 Bc?

Livy’s considered view, that there was a Celtic penetration of the Po Valley in
the two centuries before the main migration in ¢.400 B¢, is not, on the face of it,
unreasonable, A foreknowledge, based on raid and trade, is usually a precursor
to migration and settlement. The obvious place to look for evidence is the
Golasecca culture of the Upper Po Valley.
The language spoken in the region covered archaeologically by the
Golasecca culture was 'Lepontic'—an Indo-European tongue
closely related to 'Celtic’ which can be traced back, by
means of inscriptions, 10 as carly as the sixth century nc.
Here, at least superficially, is evidence which might be
used in support of earlier Celtic folk movements,
but, since no break in culture can be recognized at
this time, it is generally assumed that the ‘Lepon-
tic’ language dates back much carlier, perhaps to
the time of the genesis of the culture as defined
archaeologically in the late second millennium.
The similarity of the languages on both sides of
the Alps would, however, have facilitated inter-
course between the two zones over a long period.
That active contact was, indeed, maintained is
abundantly clear from the archacological evidence.
Vehicles found in the burials at Ca’Morta and Sesto
ende are vivid demonstrations of an exchange of
ideas and possibly even of goods at an aristocratic
level, Weapons too, in particular the short swords
and daggers of the Golasecca region, have close affini-
ties to those found in the region from Burgundy to
southern Germany in the period from the seventh to
the fifth centuries sc. Many similarities can also be rec-
ognized among pottery types. Reciprocal influences can
be claimed based on the distribution, in the Transalpine
area, of small trinkets such as bronze pendants com-
mon in the Golaseccan cultural zone and we have
already referred to the range of Golaseccan material
54 Stane funcrary siela found at the trading port of Bragny-sur-Sadne in the fifth century. Taken
::r;:‘|;“t‘“"“::::‘“;;: ¥ together, the evidence suggests that close links between the two zones existed
towest puncl shows & for at least three centuries before 400 Be. One might even go so far as to argue

mounted Elruscan attacking— that the Golasecca culture underwent a degree of ‘Celticization” during this
anaked Celtic foot soldicr iiod

Museo Civico Arqucologico,  PEFIOd.

Botogna. The point at issuc is to what extent Celtic peoples from the north moved

south to establish enclaves of their own among the Golaseccan communities or,
more likely, beyond their southern border in land disputed by the advancing

70


===== PAGE 86 (index-89_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

Etruscans. Some evidence for such groups has been claimed on the basis of
weapon types found with burials at Casola Valsenio near Bologna and at San
Martino further to the south-east, both cemeteries being dated by Attic pottery
to within the fifth century. Also of late fifth-century date are the famous grave
stelac from Bologna depicting Celtic-style warriors in battle. The evidence is
not extensive but is sufficient to suggest the presence of warriors, adopting
Transalpine weapon types and fighting methods, in the Po Valley in the fifth
century.

A closer reading of the classical texts may provide a further insight to the
problem. Polybius (Hist. 2.17), in a somewhat enigmatic sentence, speaks of
Celts as neighbours to the Etruscans. Envying the beauty of the Etruscan terri-
tory they ‘gathered a great host and expelled the Etruscans from the valley of the
Padus’. This might suggest a phase of Celtic settlement preceding the main
migration. In another passage Livy (Hist. 5. 34) mentions that the invading
Celts, *having learnt that they were in what was known as the territory of the
Insubres, the same name as one of the cantons of the Aedui, took it as a
favourable omen and founded the town of Mediolanum’. A possible implica-
tion of this is that the Insubres, who occupied the territory south of the
Golasecca culture just north of the Po at the time of the main migration, may
have been a Celtic community long established in the region.

The whole question of a pre-400 Be Celtic settlement in the Po Valley is
impossible to resolve with certainty, though, on balance, the evidence would
allow there to have been an carly settlement of Celtic warrior groups in the

n

35 The principal
mavements of the Celts,
400-270 B


===== PAGE 87 (index-90_1.jpg) =====
56 The Celtic tribes of the
Po Valley and the migration
routes by which they
arrived, The Ligurians and
the Veneti were indigenous
peoples.

THE MIGRATIONS

frontier zone between the Golaseccan domain and the Etruscans, Such
enclaves, perhaps encouraged to come initially as mercenaries by the Golasec-
can communities, may have been sufficiently numerous to have retained a
degree of ethnic identity sufficient to have impressed the sources upon which
Livy based his History. Their presence and links with the homeland would have
provided the context for the massive influx which began about 400 sc.

The Initial Settlement: c.400 BC

Polybius provides an outline of the course of the migration. The lands near the
Po were occupied by the Laevi and Lebecii, then came the Insubres, and, to the
east of them, on the north bank of the river, settled the Cenomani. Further pen-
etration eastwards was halted by the Veneti, a long established indigenous tribe.
South of the Po, in the west, close to the Apennines, the Ananes established
themselves, with the Boii to the cast and the Lingones along the Adriatic coast.
To the south of them, along the littoral, the Senones appropriated territory. At
a later date Polybius mentions that the two largest tribes, the Insubres and the
Boii, sent messages to tribes living ‘about the Alps and on the Rhone” calling for
additional forces. These mercenary bands, called Gaesatae, arrived in formida-
ble numbers ‘furnished with a variety of armour’,

Polybius (Hist. 2.17) then goes on to provide a sketch of the life of the Celtic
communities. They occupied open villages and lived simple lives following



===== PAGE 88 (index-91_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

‘no pursuit other than war and agriculture’. Wealth was measured in gold and
cattle which could be casily transported when ‘they wandered from place to
place and changed their dwelling as their fancy directed’, Hospitality was
important and a man’s status was gauged by the size of his entourage of clients
or ‘companions in his wanderings’. This characteristic is one which persists in
the works of classical writers whenever Celts are described.

Archacological evidence for the Celtic settlement of the Po Valley is already
considerable and is growing rapidly, and it is now possible to identify cultural
differences reflecting the different tribal groups. One notable characteristic—
the prevalence of cremation among the Boii—serves both to distinguish them
from other Celtic communities in the Po Valley and to link them to the
Bohemian homeland from which they came, The Boian inhumation burials
also generally lacked ankle rings and torcs, while their arm rings were often
arranged in a distinctive asymmetric way. These, too, are characteristics of con-
temporary communities in Bohemia. The burials of the Senones and Ceno-
mani, on the other hand, reflect more closely styles already apparent in the
Marne region. Distinctive belt hooks were found in both regions, females often
wore torcs, and arm rings were symmetrically arranged. Taken together the evi-
dence emerging for regional patterns and their Transalpine parallels is begin-
ning to offer a striking confirmation of the traditional account of the
settlement.

In their new homeland the Celtic communities came into close contact with
Graeco-Etruscan culture, and inevitably there was a degree of assimilation.
This was most noticeable in the artistic field, where Celtic craftsmen began to
incorporate new motifs into their decorative creations. The dissemination of
Celtic items made in Italy, and quite possibly the migration of craftsmen, to the
Transalpine homelands introduced a new vitality to the now flourishing work-
shops of temperate Europe. Thus, albeit through a different social mechanism,
the Graeco-Etruscan world continued to influence the Transalpine communi-
ties,

The Celtic Homeland at the Time of the Migrations

It is reasonably clear from a variety of archacological evidence that in
the fourth century two principal axes of communication existed between the
Transalpine regions and the Po Valley, a western route funnelling from the
Seine, Marne, and Rhine, through the Great St Bernard Pass, to the upper
reaches of the valley and an eastern route from the Upper Danube, and
Bohemia bevond, via the River Inn and the eastern Alpine passes, to the lower
reaches of the plain. It isalong these traditional routes that migrating bands are
likely to have passed, filtering off surplus population from the Marne, Moselle,
and Bohemian regions, where, as we have seen, the principal innovatory cen-
tres were developing at this time.,

Of the two reasons given by the classical writers for the folk movement—

73


===== PAGE 89 (index-92_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

overpopulation and the lure of southern luxuries—the first is more likely to
have been the prime cause, An increase in population, especially in societies
which had created warrior systems as an essential part of the social structure,
would inevitably have led to instability, which could best have been alleviated
by the thinning-down of population by migration. But the situation may have
been more complicated. The warrior élites, represented in the archacology of
the three core Early La Téne territories—the Marne, the Moselle, and
Bohemia—probably maintained themselves by acts of prowess and their abil-
ity to command sizeable entourages at times of social display. One structure
within which this could be done was the raid, which, if successful, would reward
both the leader and his followers. This is the kind of system which Polybius
recorded among the Cisalpine Celts, We have already seen that, within the
northern ‘peripheral’ zone, raiding may have developed asan economic neces-
sity to provide resources for the prestige goods system of the ‘core to distribute.
Once established, it may have become embedded in the social system of the
Early La Tene periphery, generating a momentum of its own, particularly after
the collapse of the west Hallstatt chiefdoms. In this way, one of the defining
characteristics of early Celtic society was created,

In such a situation, the problem of a growing population could be dealt with
inseveral ways. Atits simplest, a small entourage under a leader could move out
from the homeland to find a new ecological niche to occupy. A process such as
this would have led to the establishment of enclaves of élite warriors, distant
from the homeland, who might, at least for a generation or two, have retained
their identity in an archaeologically-visible form. It is possible that the clusters
of Early La Tene vehicle burials along the Lower Seine, in the Ardennes and the
Haine, and even the group who emerged in Yorkshire, may have owed their ori-
gin to this kind of small-scale warrior exodus.

Attheother end of the scale, larger bands of roaming warriors having no par-
ticular territorial base may have come together under one or more charismatic
leader. It is quite possible that the Gaesatae—warriors who, according to Poly-
bius, were ‘available for hire’ and were decked out in “a variety of armour’ and
were to be found “about the Alps and on the Rhone'—were itinerant fighters of
this kind. Growing population and rigid social constraints in the homelands
could well have swelled their numbers. In such a turbulent and unstable situa-
tion, it would need only the decision on the part of one leader to take his
entourage to the rich pickings of the south for the news to spread and others to
follow, swelling the numbers to a migration and creating a momentum which
drew in the ambitious young from the home regions. A rapidly escalating social
upheaval of this kind could explain the apparently rapid movement of Celtic
populations into the Po Valley: it might also be expected to have left traces in
the home territories.

The most convincing evidence for an exodus of population comes from the
Marne region. A study of the rich burial data shows that during the fifth century
a large stable population occupied the region, its élite buried in state with their

74


===== PAGE 90 (index-93_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

two-wheeled vehicles and wine-drinking equipment. But some time about 400
8¢ the population suddenly declines. Thereafter, only one major focus devel-
oped, in the Reims area, while much of the rest of the Champagne region
appears to have been deserted. Taken at face value, the evidence strongly sug-
gests thata very high proportion of the population must have moved out, leav-
ing only one lineage to maintain a single power centre.

Much the same kind of evidence can be seen in the Rhineland. Although
there was a marked degree of continuity between the distribution and range of
burials from the fifth to the fourth centuries, a sharp reduction in the actual
number of burials is recorded, particularly of warrior burials normally accom-
panied by swords. The evidence from Bohemia is rather less clear-cut, but a
number of cemeteries came to an end at the end of the fifth century and élite
burials disappeared. The archaeological data are therefore consistent with there
having been a major social change in Transalpine Europe at the time of the carly
migrations,

From what has been said it is reasonable to suppose that the three most devel-
oped centres of Early La Tene culture—the Marne, the Moselle, and Bohe-
mia—contributed to populations which made their way through the Alpine
passes about 400 B¢ to set themselves up in the lush lands of the Po Valley. But
the Celtic tribes mentioned by name by Livy as taking part were numerous. The
names of many still appeared on the political map of Gaul, sketched by Julius
Caesar in the middle of the first century 8¢, occurring within the broad terri-
tory stretching from the Marne south to the Massif Central and from the Rhone
to the Middle Loire Valley—the core of Caesar’s Celtic zone of Gaul. While it
might at first sight be tempting to suggest that it was from this huge territory
that the migrating tribes came, tribal mobility in subsequent centuries is likely
to have confused the picture. Indeed, it may be that many of the tribes encoun-
tered by Caesar in central Gaul arrived in their traditional territories at the time
of the initial migrations as sectional groups from diffuse migratory bands. The
situation is likely to have been confused and the archacological evidence is too
ill focused yet to throw much light on it.

The Celts in Italy: 400-180 BC

The initial Celtic settlement of the Po Valley at the end of the fifth century
brought the invaders hard up against the barrier of the Apennines—a barrier
permeated by well-trodden routes linking the Etruscan-dominated north to
the Etruscan homeland backing onto the Tyrrhenian Sea. Inevitably Celtic war
bands were drawn southwards into the heart of Etruria. This occurred at the
moment when Rome, expanding her power northwards, was taking over the
old Etruscan cities one by one. The clash that followed is recorded in some
detail by Polybius and by Livy, though with slightly differing chronologies.
The first stage of the southern thrust brought the Celts to the Etruscan town
of Clusium in 391 B, where their principal demand was to be assigned land to

75


===== PAGE 91 (index-94_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

settle. Roman ambassadors were sent to act on behalf of the city, but negoti-
ations broke down and in the ensuing battle the ambassadors, in breach of
accepted custom, joined in the mélée, one of them killing a Celtic warlord. The
Celts’ demand for recompense was ignored by the Roman authorities, thus has-
tening the next stage of the Celtic advance—the march on Rome.

In July 390 (Livy's date; Polybius says 386), at the Tiber tributary, the Allia,
the Roman army was destroyed and the city, all except the defended Capitol,
fell. The sack of Rome was followed by months of uncertainty, with the Celtic
warriors camped around growing increasingly restive as they suffered waves of
disease. Eventually a compromise was reached and the Celts departed with
1,000 pounds of gold given by the thankful Roman authorities. It is possible
that news of aggressive moves by the Veneti on the eastern border of the Po Val-
ley settlements may have encouraged their departure. A more likely explana-
tion is that the rapid advance of 391-90 was little more than a series of
exploratory raids from the home base north of the Apennines, and, with
honour, curiosity, and the desire for spoils assuaged, the warring bands could
return satisfied.

The devastating blow to Rome's power and authority was in part responsible
for the unrest which gripped central Italy throughout the next half century or
50, during which time Celtic raids and Celtic mercenary forces made intermit-
tent appearances. The raids can best be understood in the context of the Celtic
social system, which employed the raid as a way of maintaining and enhancing
prestige. Expeditions of this kind may have been constantly mounted by the
tribes settled on the Apennine flank. Those raids, which were more ambitious
and deep thrusting than others, brought the Celts into episodic contact with
Roman forces.

The presence of Celtic mercenary forces was an altogether different matter.
Bands of warriors willing to fight were available for employment and were seen
as useful complements to the fighting force by aspiring tyrants. One such man
was Dionysius of Syracuse, who, having gained control of the Etruscan port of
Adria, established a colony further down the coast, at Ancona, in the territory
occupied by the Senones. Ancona provided a convenient base from which to
enlist Celtic mercenaries. An alliance was struck in 385, and one band of merce-
naries, returning from service in southern Italy, joined Dionysius” naval expe-
dition in a joint attack on the Etruscan port of Pyrgi in 384-3. Thereafter
Ancona continued to provide Dionysius and his son with mercenaries for thirty
years. For the most part they served in Italy, but one force was transported to
Greece in 367 to take part in the conflict between Sparta and her allies against
Thebes. Livy specifically mentions the presence of Celtic armies in Apulia, one
of which moved against Rome in 367. The fact that another attack came from
the same area in 149 might suggest that there may have been a long-established
Celtic enclave in the area, but there is little archacological evidence for this,
except for the rich grave of Canosa di Puglia with its extremely fine Celtic hel-
met dated to the late fourth century sc.

76


===== PAGE 92 (index-95_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

By the 3305 Rome had recovered sufficiently to begin a new expansionist
drive,and, tosecure its northern frontier, a peace treaty was negotiated with the
Senones in 334. The peace was short-lived and Celtic attacks became more fre-
quent and serious, but the situation was temporarily stabilized when, following
a defeat of the Senones in 283, Rome founded a colony at Sena Gallica at the
estuary of the River Misa on the Umbrian coast. The Boii reacted by joining
with the Etruscans in a move on Rome, but were defeated and cut to pieces near
Lake Vadimone. The peace treaty which the Boii were persuaded to sign with
Rome was to last.for forty-five years.

After the First Punic War (264-41 8¢) Rome’s attention turned once more to
the north, and in 232 the territory of the Senones was confiscated and made over
to Italian settlement. Further Roman activity in the western Apennines
alarmed the neighbouring Boii. Strengthened by a large force of Gaesatae—
mercenary Celts from beyond the Alps—the Boii, the Insubres, and the Tau-
risci began a long march on Rome through Etruria. In 225 at Telamon on the
Tyrrhenian coast they were caught between two Roman forces. Polybius'
account of the battle (Hist. 2. 28-3. 10) provides a vivid impression of Celtic
warfare. He describes how the Celtic army drew up its ranks to face the attacks
coming from two directions, with the wagons and war chariots on both wings
and their booty stacked on a nearby hill well protected. The Insubres and Boii
wore their breeches and light cloaks, but the Gaesatae fought naked. The
Romans were

terrified by the fine order of the Celtic host and the dreadful din for there were innu-
merable trumpeters and horn-blowers and . . . the whole army were shouting their war
cries at the same time, Very frightening too were the appearance and gestures of the

57 Naorthern Italy in the
second century s¢, at the
time when the Celts were
coming under pressure
from the advancing
Romans.



===== PAGE 93 (index-96_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

naked warriors in front, all in the prime of life and finely built men, and all the leading
companies richly adorned with gold torcs and armlets.

The Romans, impressed by the sight of the gold, took courage and battle com-
menced. Eventually Roman might prevailed and the Celtic force was destroyed.
Estimates of numbers taking part in ancient battles are notoriously unreliable,
but Polybius records that the Celtic force comprised 50,000 infantry and 20,000
horse and chariots. Of these about 40,000 were slain and 10,000 taken prisoner.
It was a defeat on a grand scale: thereafter Celtic attacks from the north were
much reduced.

The Roman triumph was quickly followed up with campaigns in Boian terri-
tory in 224 nc and among the Insubres in 222. The foundation of two Roman
colonies, in 218, among the friendly Cenomani who had taken no part in Tela-
mon, marks a tightening of the Roman hold on the Celtic Cisalpine homeland.

After the Second Punic War, in which Celts had been employed by Hannibal
assomewhat ineffective mercenaries, the Roman armies moved quickly to sub-
jugate the Po Valley. The Cenomani made their peace in 197 sc, Como was
taken in 196, and in 189 a colony was founded at Bononia (Bologna). Asa result
of these campaigns, many of the Boii decided to migrate northwards, back into
Transalpine Europe. But Celtic migrations from the Transalpine region were
not entirely at an end, for in 186 a Celtic horde including 12,000 fighting men
moved through the Carnic Alps intent to plunder and settle. The Roman army,
which marched against them in 183, forced those who survived to return home.
While not a major event in itself, it was a reminder to the Romans that history
might repeat itself and that the only sure defence was the thorough italianiza-
tion of Cisalpine Gaul,

The Danube Corridor in the Fifth and Fourth Centuries

The valley of the River Danube provided the principal corridor of communica-
tion between west central Europe and the east. At two points the valley is con-
stricted by the proximity of mountain ranges. In the west, in the vicinity of
modern Bratislava, the western Carpathians on the north and the Alpine Bur-
genland on the south create a comparatively narrow gap but east of this the
landscape opens up into the Carpathian Basin roughly equivalent to present-
day Hungary and parts of Serbia with the hilly countryside of Transdanubia to
the west of the river and the flatter Great Hungarian Plain to the east. The
eastern extremity of this huge and desirable territory is marked by the narrow-
ing of the valley once more when the eastern Carpathian mountains come close
to the Balkan range at the Iron Gates, now on the border between Serbia and
Romania. Culturally the region divides into two: the western zone from the
Danube to the eastern fringes of the Alps was occupied by indigenous commu-
nities sharing in the generalized Hallstatt culture, while to the east, in the Great
Hungarian Plain, the distinctive Vekerzug group, closely related to the horse-

78


===== PAGE 94 (index-97_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

riding communities of the east, may be regarded as part of the extensive
“Thracian’ culture which, in the sixth century, occupied much of eastern
Europe.

The ancient authors, writing about the Celtic expansion, were broadly
agreed that some part of the migration of ¢.400 s¢ moved eastwards (Fig. 55).
Geography dictates that the principal route used would have been along the
Danube corridor into Moravia, Slovakia, and Hungary. Certainly, by 335 sc,
Celtic groups are historically attested in the Balkans and it is simplest to inter-
pret them as settlers or raiders who had moved through the Middle Danube
region, though an alternative view—that they were an offshoot of Celts moving
eastwards via the Po Valley—should not be too readily rejected.

“The nature of the celticization of the Carpathian Basin can be approached
only through archaeological evidence—primarily the evidence of cemeteries. It
is convenient to divide the material culture of the period into two horizons, the
Vorduchcov (¢.400-370/360 8¢ ) and the Duchcov-Miinsingen (¢.370/360-300
8C), the latter being typified by distinctive brooch types found in a votive
deposit at Duchcov in Bohemia and at a prolific cemetery at Miinsingen near
Berne.

It needs to be stressed at the outset that the movements of Celtic peoples
throughout the Transalpine region in the fourth century are likely to have been
highly complex, varying from large-scale folk migrations, on the one extreme,
to the simple exchange of wives and warriors, on the other. Similarly we must
allow that some of the changes recognizable in the archacological record need
be nothing more than the adoption of new styles and new behaviour patterns
by indigenous communities. An attempt to give historical meaning to these
shades of cultural variation is a hazardous procedure. Having said this, certain
broad interpretations seem valid.

In Bohemia, for example, following the phase of migration, there are indica-
tions of new cultural infiltrations in the first part of the fourth century affecting
north-western, central, and eastern areas. A little later, at the end of the Vor-
duchcov phase, a more significant cultural change is apparent. It is at this time
that the hilltop settlement of Zavist was destroyed and flat-grave cemeteries,
with a new range of grave goods, make a comparatively sudden appearance.
Cultural similarities with material found in western Switzerland and Baden-
Wiirttemberg is generally taken to imply an immigrant warrior population
moving in from the west to take up lands previously vacated by the move of the
original Bohemian population to the south, In the Rhineland during the fourth
century there is a noticeable reduction in the number of settlements and ceme-
teries. Some of these populations presumably travelled south into the Po Val-
ley, but others may well have joined a general movement to the east to Bohemia
and beyond.,

The fourth century sees the development of Celtic communities across a sub-
stantial and diverse territory comprising Moravia, Lower Austria, western
Hungary, and south-west Slovakia. The earliest settlements date to the first half

79


===== PAGE 95 (index-98_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

of the fourth century, but a second phase, in the latter part of the century, can
be distinguished, typified by the flat-grave cemeteries, and characterized by a
material culture closely similar to that found in the Bohemia-Bavarian region
but with elements reflecting contacts further west in Switzerland and the Mid-
dle Rhine and the Marne, This complex spread of Celtic culture, presumably
reflecting successive movements of people, filled up the northern part of Trans-
danubia and extended to the northern fringes of the Great Hungarian Plain
during the fourth century. There is some evidence to suggest that some Celtic
settlers reached Transylvania, in the heart of modern Romania.

Standing back from the dimly perceptible eastward ‘movement’ of Celts, the
general situation developing during the fourth century can be appreciated from
Map 20 showing the European-wide spread of various Early La Tene groups
dominated by the burial of warriors. It demonstrates, with great clarity, a
degree of cultural uniformity brought about in this century of migration,
stretching from the Marne to Transylvania. Though there are distinct regional
variations, it is reasonable to regard this uniformity as a cultural continuum
through which ideas and people moved freely.

The Celts in the Balkans and Greece in the Fourth and Third Centuries

Celtic war parties had penetrated the mountains of llyria by the early fourth
century gc and were in conflict with the Ardiaioi of southern Dalmatia in 380,
It was, however, the expansion of Macedonian power under Alexander the
Great that occasioned the first recorded contacts between the Celtic and Mace-
donian leaders when, in 335 ¢, Celtic emissaries from the Adriatic region vis-
ited the court of Alexander to negotiate a treaty of ‘friendship and hospitality".
Strabo's famous description of the event is worth repeating in full:

The king reccived them kindly and asked them, when drinking, what it was that they
most feared, thinking that they would say himself, but they replicd they feared nothing
except that the sky might fall on them, although indeed, they added, they put above
everything else the friendship of sucha manashe,  (Geog.7.3.8)

The record of a second embassy is recorded by the Greek historian Arrian in
323, when agroup of Celtic leaders visited Alexander, who was then in Babylon.
It may well have been on this journey that the wealth of Asia Minor was noted
for future reference.

Little is heard of the Celts in Ilyria for the next fifty years or so, but the break-
down of Alexander's empire after his death, and the dissipation of the energy of
the Macedonians in the political turmoil which followed, so weakened Mace-
donia and its Greek outpost that the south-east Balkans must have begun to
look like an attractive prospect to the more energetic of the Celtic leaders based
in Illyria and southern Pannonia. In 298 B¢ a force had been led into Macedo-
nia and Thrace under the war leader Cimbaules, but it met substantial resis-
tance. In 280 another attempt was made, this time by Bolgius leading a Celtic

S0


===== PAGE 96 (index-99_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

and Thracian force: the leader of the Macedonians was kKilled and his head
paraded on a Celtic spear.

Whether or not these were exploratory expeditions designed to pave the way
for the massive folk movement which was to follow or were skirmishes caused
by a build-up of population in the Celtic homeland in southern Pannonia is
impossible to judge. One further possibility which has to be borne in mind is
that the Romans were at this time moving against the Senones on the Adriatic
coast of Italy, winning two decisive battles in 295 and 283. The disruption
caused by the Roman aggression may well have encouraged groups of Celts
from the Po Valley to move eastwards through Slovenia to seek new land,
swelling the numbers of dislocated warriors.

Matters seem to have come to a head in 279 Bc. In the previous year, while
Bolgius was involved in Macedonia, some Celtic groups, led by Kérethrios, had
been operating in Thrace and others under Brennus and Achichorius were in
Peonia. Bolgius’ victory over the Macedonian army opened the way for a more
concerted thrust to the south-east.

The onslaught was headed by Brennus moving southwards from central Bul-
garia. An account of what followed was provided by Pausanius, a second-cen-
tury Ap writer who seems to have made use of an carlier, now lost, history
compiled by Hieronymus of Cardia. Allowing for the potential inaccuracies
and bias of the sources, the main events are tolerably clear. The lure, says Pau-
sanius, was the ‘wealth of the Greek states and the even greater wealth in the
sanctuaries including votive offerings and coined silver and gold™. This is notan
unreasonable assumption, but his estimate of the size of the Celtic force—
152,000 infantry and 20,400 horse—is likely to be an exaggeration.

At an early stage in the advance there was discord, and, according to Livy,
some 20,000 men led by Leonorios and Lutorios moved off on their own, even-
tually settling in Asia Minor. The remainder under Brennus and Achichorius
first suffered heavy losses against a Macedonian force before continuing south-
wards to enter Greece through the pass of Thermopylae. Thermopylae was well
defended by the Greeks, but, by splitting forces in an outflanking movement,
the Celts overcame the opposition, though not without considerable losses.
Not pausing for the troops commanded by Achichorius 1o join him, or even to
bury his own dead, Brennus pushed on towards Delphi. What ensued is not
immediately clear. One tradition records that the sanctuary was pillaged, some
of the treasure obtained eventually ending up in the sacred enclosures of the
Volcae Tectosages at Tolosa (Toulouse), where it was appropriated by the
Roman commander Caepio in 106 sc. According to the Greek tradition, on the
other hand, the presiding deity, Apollo, came to the defence of the sanctuary.
Thunder and lightning accompanied by earthquakes caused rocks to roll down
from the heights onto the discouraged Celts, while the Phocians, used to the
stark and sudden nature of the countryside, employed guerrilla tactics in
attacking the Celtic rear. [t may have been these events, combined perhaps with
news that a large part of the force led by Achichorius had been left to guard bag-

81


===== PAGE 97 (index-100_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

gage and spoil at Heraclea, while the remainder had been attacked by the Acto-
lians and Phocaeans, who had captured their supplies, that disheartened the
forces of Brennus. In the event, the retreat began after the wounded had been
put to death. In the night of panic which followed fighting broke out among the
Celts and the next day constant Phocaean sniping prevented the forage parties
from collecting the necessary food,

Eventually the two Celtic armies were reunited but such was the effectiveness
of the growing Greek opposition that Brennus, who had been wounded, suc-
cumbed to the despair of a failed leader and committed suicide, either by drink-
ing undiluted wine or by some other means when drunk (depending upon
the source). The remaining force retreated through Spercheius, where Thes-
salians and Malians were waiting to fall on them in retribution for the brutali-
ties which the Celts had inflicted on the local population on their way south to
Delphi. The depletion of the Celtic force must have been considerable, but it
was surely an exaggeration of Pausanius to say that hardly one escaped safely
from Greece.

The thrust into Greece and the subsequent retreat probably took place
within the single year 279 Bc. It seems to have been no more than a raid
designed to obtain treasure. What distinguishes the attack on Delphi is that the
Celts had chosen to move against a literate people who could record events and
present them according to their own concepts of history. Thus it survivesasone
of the great stories of brutality and heroism. While a notable event in the history
of the Celtic expansion, it may have been no more significant than many such
events for which no written records exist. It is a sobering fact that, had we had
to rely entirely on the archacological evidence, no trace of the events of 279
would have been suspected (Map 21).

Whatever the effectiveness or otherwise of the raid in gaining spoils, the
event was celebrated at Delphi by a regular four-yearly festival of salvation—
the Soteria.

In the immediate aftermath some part of the Celtic force seems to have
moved back northwards to the Middle Danube Valley, contributing to the large
tribal complex which jelled there to become the Scordisci. Some, according to
Polybius, moved eastwards through Thrace and carved out for themselves a
territory around Tyle (Tylis), which became the capital. Here they were con-
veniently sited to demand, and reccive, regular protection money from Byzan-
tium until the enclave was annihilated by the Thracians ¢.212 sc. Another band
under Kérethrios was defeated by Antigonus Gonatus in 278-7 at Lysimacheia.
Of the rest, many will have stayed in Greece and Macedonia to serve as merce-
naries, where there was ample employment to be had. Some were active in the
army of Antigonus in 274, and their shields were among the trophies of victory,
dedicated in the temple of Athena Itomia near Larissa following Antigonus’
defeat by Pyrrhus. Another, very considerable, force was invited to cross the
Hellespont into Asia Minor to fight in the army of Nicomedes of Bithynia in
278. Their passage opens up a new chapter in Celtic history.

82


===== PAGE 98 (index-101_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

The Celts in Asia Minor, Third Century 8¢ to Fourth Century Ap

The Celts who crossed the narrow strip of water between Europe and Asia were
a varied group comprising three separate tribes, the Tolistobogii, the Tec-
tosages, and the Trocmi. They had separated from the main force which
attacked Delphi and were led by Leonorios and Lutorios. What is particularly
interesting is that half their total number of 20,000 were non-combatants—the
women, the children, and the aged. This suggests that, unlike the warriors who
chose to follow Brennus on his raid, the groups who stayed with Leonorios and
Lutorios were migrant populations in search of new land to settle.
In Asia Minor the various Celtic groups were referred to collectively as Gala-
tians and their history was recorded in the lost books of Demetrios of Byzan-
tium, which probably served as the source used by Polybius and for Livy.
Nicomedes employed them in his conflict with Antiochus I, settling them in
disputed territory between his own kingdom of Bithynia and that ruled by
Antiochus. The period of instability which followed culminated in the defeat of 53 The Celtsin Asia Minor,
the Celts in 2754 8¢ in the famous ‘Elephant Battle'. Thereafter the Celts were Shwiong the principal afees

i . o of settlement and the sites of
moved to a barren highland area flanking the Halys, From here, for the next  the major conflicts.

Alml‘"lt
<

77 >

@ w8 B

% 'Ate 2118 0C )

i
\_/a.-n-—: .,-. w-v-unm ~____..__\

.nev—uncm LR ..."""c. S

{g \//

8


===== PAGE 99 (index-102_1.jpg) =====
VIl Facing Statue of a Gaul
carrying a shield of Celtic
type. From Mondragon,
Vaucluse, France. Late first
century e, Musée Calvet,
Avignon,

THE MIGRATIONS

forty-five years or so they became a scourge to the surrounding cities, organiz-
ing frequent raids from their home base particularly against the rich hellenized
cities, where plunder or bribes could easily be had. According to Livy, each of
the three Galatian tribes had their own territory to raid: the Tolistobogii raided
Aeolis, the Trocmi focused on the Hellespont, while the Tectosages regarded
inland Asia Minor as their sphere of activity. Eventually an alliance with
Mithridates | of Pontus encouraged them to move to a new land around
Ancyra.

From the middle of the third century the Celtic raids against the cities of the
Acgean coastal area began to intensify, and Eumenes | of Pergamum (263-41),
now the prime power in the west, decided to buy them off. His successor,
Attalus 1 (241-197), however, chose instead to stand his ground, eventually win-
ning a decisive battle at the Springs of Kaikos in about 233 sc. It was to
celebrate this victory that a monument was erected on the acropolis of Perga-
mum, some statues of which survive in Roman copies, the most famous being
the ‘Dying Gaul',

In the later part of the third century Celts were used extensively as mer-
cenaries in the armies of the Seleucid and Ptolemaic rulers, though from the
fragmentary accounts that survive they appear to have been unruly and some-
what unreliable. One group who became demoralized at an eclipse of the moon
had to be returned with their wives and children to the Hellespont in case they
had decided to change sides. The incident is interesting, because it shows that
some at least of the Celtic mercenaries may have been arriving in fresh groups
from Europe. It was during this period that Celtic warriors were in action as far
afield as Egypt. In 218 Attalus Il employed a European tribe, the Aigosages, to
take part in his campaigns in Acolis and Phrygia and afterwards gave them land
on the borders of Phrygia, from where, under their own initiative, they began to
carry out extensive raids until the entire Celtic population was slaughtered by
Prusias of Bithynia,

In 191 B¢ the Romans were drawn into the political turmoil of Asia Minor as
allies of Pergamum against the Seleucid king Antiochus 111 At Magnesia, in 190,
the Seleucid army, together with its Galatian mercenaries, were soundly
defeated by a combined Roman and Pergamene force, and in the next year the
new Roman commander Cn. Manlius Vulso set out for central Anatolia to deal
with the Galatians in their home territory. In preparation for the onslaught the
Tolistobogii and the fighting men of the Trocmi rallied at Mount Olympos,
three days” travel west of Ancyra, while the Tectosages and the families of the
Trocmi made for Mount Magaba just cast of Ancyra. In a lightning strike Man-
lius defeated first the Tolistobogii and the Trocmi, selling 40,000 men, women,
and children as slaves, and then moved quickly on to defeat the Tectosages. In
the peace which was concluded, the Galatians agreed to stop all raids in the
western parts of Asia Minor. Apart from an abortive attempt by Ortiagon, the
Tolistobogian chief, to unite Galatia and in doing so to make war on Perga-
mum, comparative peace prevailed, the Romans ensuring that the Galatians

84


===== PAGE 100 (index-103_1.jpg) =====
\ ‘:("‘N N AN
i


===== PAGE 101 (index-104_1.jpg) =====
’.5 F:
P o
Wi e
. i g 4
«\“
N
&
'
3 I {


===== PAGE 102 (index-105_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

remained free from Pergamene control. However, in 167 the Galatian attacks
began again and Eumenes 11 was forced to engage in vigorous campaigns
against them, Two years later a new peace treaty was agreed.

The Pergamene victory was widely celebrated. At Pergamum a great sculp-
tured fricze was added to the altar of Zeus, while on the Athenian acropolis a
victory monument was dedicated by the Pergamenes proclaiming, in sculp-
tured allegory, that the rulers of Pergamum, like the Greeks, were the saviours
of the civilized world (see p. 7).

Thereafter the raid, so necessary for the maintenance of Celtic society, was
deflected away from the territory controlled by the western powers towards
other states. Cappadocia was first to suffer and later Pontus, but gradually the
Celtic communities—known universally as the Galatians—absorbed the ways
of Greece and Rome and of their Asiatic neighbours. When, in the middle of the
first century ap, the Christian apostle Paul wrote his letter to the Galatians, he
treated them no differently from any other community in the now Roman
world.

In the formative century following the first incursion of Celts into Asia
Minor in 278 B¢, the Celtic tribes, fed by new bands arriving from time to time
from Europe, maintained a distinctive lifestyle in which the raid, and its more
extreme form, mercenary activity, remained an essential part of the social
system,

The maintenance of a Celtic social structure, and indeed a sense of ethnic
identity implied by the widespread use of the name ‘Galatian', are a remarkable
reflection of the deep-rooted strength of the Celtic tradition. An even more
impressive reminder of this is the persistence of their language. When, in the
fourth century Ap, St Jerome offered the observation that the language used by
the Galatians around Ancyra was similar to that he had heard among the
Treveriat Trier, he was recognizing, though perhaps with the hindsight of a his-
torian, the Celtic ancestry of both people.

The North Pontic Regions in the Fourth and Third Centuries

The north Pontic region, lying both east and west of the Sea of Azov in the basin
of the Kuban River, has produced an array of artefacts which can be regarded as
Celtic. Celtic-style weapons, such as shields and anthropomorphic-hilted
swords, are also depicted on coins minted in the Bosporus in the second half of
the third century (Map 22). Equally significant is a group of Etruscan helmets,
found in Sarmatian graves, the manufacture of which can be dated to before the
middle of the third century, Other finds include a La Téne iron sword from
Neapolis, a Celtic helmet from Boiko-Ponura in the Krasnodar region, which
has close similarities to helmets from Slovenia, and horse gear of Bohemian
type from a grave at Marjevka.

To suggest a historical context for these finds presents some difficulties. One
possibility is that some were introduced by Celtic mercenaries from Asia Minor

8

Villa Facing, abows: Stone
head of a Celtic deity found
close 1o a rectangular
ditched sanctuary at Miccké
Schrovice, Bohemia, Crech
Republic. Note the
characteristic swept-back
hair, drooping moustache,
and neck tor ond or
first century sc? Narodni
Muzcum, Prague.

VIlb Below: Celtic helmets
sometimes had attachments
on the crest either to signify
lineage or status or, more
likely, as religious symbods
to protect the wearer. These
two small boars may well
have been used in such
way, They were found at
Hounsdow in Middlesex,
England and may possibly
have been part of a votive
offering, The bour was &
frequently used image
suggesting that it was.
endowed with particular
potency.


===== PAGE 103 (index-106_1.jpg) =====
E] k bronze kantharos
of the late fourth century w
found at Szob, Pest,

ry. It is very similar

din the
d may

y have been among
poils from the attack
on the sanctuary. Magyar
Nemzeti Muzeum,
Budapest

THE MIGRATIONS

who are recorded to have served in the campaigns of Mithridates Vlaround the
carlier and require a different explanation. It is possible, therefore, that they

northern shores of the Bla

in 63 s, but many of the finds are significantly

reflect a separate incursion from the Balkans or from Transylvania.

European Celts in the Third and Second Centuries

Intheaftermath of the Celtic expulsion from Greece there appears to have been
a period of some turmoil among the Celtic communities roaming south-east-
ern Europe. Historical sources are few and vague, One thread which can be dis
tinguished suggests that one of the returning groups, led by Bathanatos, finally
settled in the Middle Danube region at the confluence of the Sava, Drava, and
Danube, whence they had originally come, creating an extensive confederation
thereafter known as the Scordisci, forming the southernmost extremity of what
can be regarded as the settled core of Celtic Europe. Over succeeding centuries
the Scordisci were responsible for intermittent raiding against neighbouring
Macedonia and Greece.

To the north of the Scordisci, in Transdanubia and the Gr
Plain, the third century Be saw a steady incre:
LaT

the north as well as groups returning from the south-e

cat Hungarian
number and density of

se in the

ne

ettlements and cemeteries resulting from movements of Celts from

. Itis tempting to see
the Greek bronze kantharos found at
Szob in Hungary, which has its closest
s at Galaxidi near Delphi, as a
y brought back from the cam-
paigns. The tribal configuration is not
clear but much of Transdanubia was

in the hands of the Taurisci. The Vol-
cae Tectosages are also mentioned and
it is possible that the Boii were est-
ablishing some enclaves in the north.

In the Great Hungarian Plain the
burials of the native Siginni continued
until the mid-third century, but there-
after La Tene influence became more
apparent, possibly
“eltic groups, and it is in this period that some of the

a result of the

ttlement of infiltrating
La Téne cemeteries extending from the Hungarian border into Transylvania
begin to develop. Taken together, the archaeological evidence suggests that the
broad swath of territory stretching from the eastern fringes of the Alpsto Tran-
sylvania was rapidly becoming celticized. It was in this zone that the classic La

Tene styles and the artistic concepts of indigenous peoples rooted in an eastern
tradition of animal art interacted to create an eastern La Tene art distinguish-

able from that developing in the west.

86


===== PAGE 104 (index-107_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

The distribution of La Téne material extends northward of the Suddetin
Mountains into southern Poland. Finds have been made in sufficient quantity
to suggest that migrant populations may have moved northwards from north-
ern Bohemia in the late fourth and early third centuries to settle in Lower Sile
sia in the present region of Wroclaw, Okawa, and Strzelin, where cemeteries,
presumably indicating the distribution of settlements, are found to occupy the
. in the valleys of the Rivers Cyna and Troja,

most fertile lands. In Upper Silesi
the initial La Teéne settlement is a little later, dating to the second half of the

third century, and may have originated as the result of the movement of peoples

from Moravia. Both communities were ideally located to command trade in
desirable commeodities, such as amber, furs, wax, salt, and graphite, acquired
from the north European zone for exchange with the communities of the south,
where such materials were avidly sought.

The possibility that Celtic groups from the Balkans may have moved west-
wards through Europe and settled in the west is suggested by archacological

and literary evidence. In the Marne region, for example, a new range of warrior

burials accompanied by well-furnished female graves makes a sudden appear-

ance towards the middle of the third century. New cemeteries were established
and old burial sites reused. It is now that areas long abandoned are reoccupied.
The implication is that new Celtic groups had moved into the Champagne
region to augment the thinly scattered indigenous Celtic population. That
these new settlers may have come from the Carpathian Basin is suggested by
similarities in dress between the two areas, in
particular the use of anklets by women, and

by the prevalence of small funerary enclo

sures which now appear.

In southern Gaul there isalso evidence sug-
gestive of an influx of new people from the
Danube region. The southern Gaulish histo
rian Pompeius Trogus, quoted by Justinus,
records that a number of the Tectosages, who
were involved in the retreat from Greece,
moved west eventually to settle in the vicinity
of Toulouse, bringing with them treasure
from the sack of Delphi which they deposited

in sacred lakes. When, in 106 sc, Caepio was sent in charge of a Roman force to

put down a revolt among the Volcae and Tectosages, he had the lakes drained
and the treasure seized with the intention of keeping it for himself. The later
disasters which befell him were believed by Strabo and Justinus to have been the
result of Apollo’s wrath, angered that the sacred treasures of Delphi were again
disturbed.

Some potential archaeological confirmation for this suggested influx is to be

ance of La Tene material in the Languedoc region
At the hilltop settlement of Ensérune, near Béziers,

found in the sudden appe:
and in the Garonne Valley

&

6o Gold tore from Fenouil
let, Haute-G:
d century

nine, France
The

te style of decora:

al of tores from

m

have been introduced
the Middle Danube regior
perha
Musée
Toulouse

s by migrating



===== PAGE 105 (index-108_1.jpg) =====
61 Gold tore from Gajic,
Vojvodina, former
Yogoslavia. Third century
ue. The style is very similar
to those found in south-
westeen France, Magyar
Nemzeti Mazeum,
Budapest.

THE MIGRATIONS

from the carly third century, a high percentage
of the burials contain Celtic warrior gear,
including swords, spears, chain mail, and
shields. Although some La Téne material i
found in carlier contexts, this sudden appear-
ance of warrior panoply may indicate more
than just trade. Further west in the Garonne
Valley, in the general region of Toulouse,
highly decorated gold torcs and armlets made
their appearance in the third century, many
being deposited in hoards such as those at
Fenouillet and Lasgraisses. Stylistically they
can becompared to items found in the Danube
region. Although the density of the distribu-
tion suggests local manufacture, the strong
possibility is that they were made by migrant
craftsmen coming from the east.

The third century was evidently a time of
great mobility in Celtic Europe when coherent
groups of people moved vast distances and
were frequently able to maintain their ethnic identity. The extent of flux and
ferment is only dimly recognizable in the works of the ancient historians, while
the archacological evidence, as is so often the case, is ambiguous and opento a
variety of interpretations. Yet the huge sweeps of territory over which a distine-
tive La Téne culture spread in the third century, and the similarity of artistic
style and behaviour represented in grave goods and burial practice, are a dra-
matic demonstration of a fluidity of ideas caused in some considerable part by
an equal flux of population.

The Mechanisms of Movement

To understand the nature of the motivation behind this remarkable phase of
migration, it is necessary to return to the phenomenon of ‘the raid”. For a Celt
to enhance his status, it was necessary to engage in acts of prowess—to demon-
strate ability to lead, to provide the context for acts of valour, and to acquire
booty for distribution in displays of largess. We have seen above how the socio-
economic system at the end of the Hallstatt period created a situation in which
the raid could develop, but in all probability it was endemic throughout Europe
over a long period, rising to prominence from time to time as conditions
demanded. Late Bronze Age Greece, manifest in Mycenaean culture and refl-
ected in the Homeric literature, provides one such example.

Once the raid had become an established part of the status system, there was
an inbuilt imperative to intensify. A successful raid with spoils to distribute
provided enhanced status for the leader so that on the next occasion he would

88


===== PAGE 106 (index-109_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

attract more followers and there would be increased expectations. Younger
men, wishing to aspire to greatness, would feel compelled to compete, and so
the cycle would feed itself, growing all the while. In such a situation it is easy to
see how the limited raid on neighbours would need to give way to more adven-
turous expeditions, and how, for some sectors of the community, raiding could
have become a full-time occupation. In this context the long-distance raid,
requiring the absence from home for many months, becomes readily under-
standable: mercenary activity, notionally in the employ of others, is simply a
further extension. It is against this background that the long periods of rai
ing—from Cisalpine Gaul into Italy, from the Middle Danube into Macedonia
and Greece, and from central Anatolia to the Aegean coasts—must be seen. The
imperative to raid was the central focus of Celtic society.

The social ‘transhumance’ embodied in the system created the context for
entire populations to move when the territory became too constricted either
for the population to grow or to provide suitable marcher zones around for
small-scale military activity. The situation is vividly demonstrated in one of the
last and most fully documented migrations—that of the Helvetii in 59 and 58
e, Although we see the situation develop only in the words which Julius Cae-
sar chooses to provide for us ( De Bello Gallico1), his account contains a ring of
truth.

The Helvetii lived in Switzerland hemmed in by mountains and the Rhine.

These geographical features meant that they could not range over a wide area and had
greater difficulty in making war on neighbouring tribes. Since the Helvetii enjoyed
fighting, they bitterly resented the restrictions, They considered that the territory they
had did not match the size of their population or its reputation for bravery in war: it was.
toosmall, ..

Caesar goes on to describe the preparations for migra-

tion, the buying of draught animals and wagons, the Nolghoourd

sowing of as much land as possible to provide food for
the march, and the establishment of diplomatic rela- twrm
tions with neighbours through whose territories they

62 Theraid A disgram to
illustrate the dynamics of
the raid as an integral part
of the Celtic social system.
Campetitive emulation
among aspiring leaders will
have created a situation in
which raiding might esca-
late. Mercenary activity and
migration are extreme
muanifestations of the same
system.

Mercanary activity

wished to travel. “They thought two years would be Scale of rakd

enough for completing their preparations and passed a
law declaring that they would set out on the third .. ."
When they were ready to start the migration, they set
fire to their twelve oppida and 400 villages as well as the
surplus grain to prevent any possibility of return and,
with several like-minded neighbouring tribes, they set |
off for a new territory on the Atlantic coast of Gaul.
Their march was intercepted by Caesar, who with
massive force stopped the advance and drove the rem-
nants to return, except for the Boii, who were invited to

i

settle in the territory of the Aedui. Caesar claims to have { Prosige of loader


===== PAGE 107 (index-110_1.jpg) =====
THE MIGRATIONS

found documents in the Helvetian camp listing, in Greek, the migrants, distin-
guishing them by tribe and by gender and age. In total there were 368,000:
263,000 Helvetii, 36,000 Tulingi, 14,000 Latovici, 23,000 Raurici, and 32,000
Boii. Of these 92,000 were armed. After the battle those forced to return num-
bered only 110,000, How reliable these figures are will remain unknown, but at
the very least Caesar’s account gives some idea of the reasons, magnitude, and
organization of a Celtic folk movement.


===== PAGE 108 (index-111_1.jpg) =====
5
Warfare and Society

Tue Graeco-Roman world had many opportunities to observe Celtic armies
in action. Their viewpoint was usually, though not invariably, that of oppo-
nents, and those who recorded the confrontations did so to communicate more
than just ethnographic observations and the facts of history. The writing of
Greek and Roman history was formulaic, Pausanius would write of the Celtic
attack on Greece in the third century Be using the same structure and balance
as did Herodotus when writing of the Persian Wars two centuries earlier. This
equation of Celts with Persians—two enemies of the civilized world—is found
in a fragment of poetry preserved on a papyrus of the third century and again
recurs in sculptured form on the great victory monument erected by the
Pergamene king Attalus I in Athens in the second century. The message is the
same: the enemy from without is fierce and brutal but can be overcome by the
Greek peoples working together for the common good. Pausanius was writing
in the second century ap and was therefore using a variety of earlier sources,
among them Hieronymus of Cardia, who served the Pergamene king Eumenes
in the late fourth century se, and Timacus, who was in Athens during the Celtic
raids, as well as other writers, including, perhaps, Menodotus of Perinthus and
Agatharchides of Cnidus. The range of information available to him was varied,
but the constraints of his selection and presentation were rigidly circum-
scribed.

One of the key figures in the Roman historical tradition was Polybius, a citi-
zen of the Greek town of Megalopolis who was deported to Rome in 168 sc.
Polybius” intention was to present the Celts as a formative influence on the
development of Roman military power. In his view the initial invasion in the
carly fourth century and the continuous threat created by the Celtic settlement
in the Po Valley were instrumental in the honing of Rome's military compe-
tence. For him the Celts are to be presented as a contrast to the calm efficiency
of the Roman army. While the Romans are steadfast, level-headed, well-led,

9


===== PAGE 109 (index-112_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

and achieve victory by dogged determination, the Celts are volatile and unpre-
dictable and, though fierce in the initial onslaught, can casily lose heart and
panic. It is, therefore, their antithetical qualities to the Romans that he gives
most attention to. Polybius’ writings provide one of the prime sources used by
Livy (59 Bc-Ap17) for his History, and, while it is evident that Livy had other
sources of information on the Celts, the influence of Polybius' thes
Onge more the Celts are presented as impulsive barbarians with an inal
plan rationally.

The narrative history of Polybius was continued by Poseidonius for the
period 145-82 sc. The importance of Poseidonius (135-51 5¢) is that he travelled
widely in the Alps, Gaul, Spain, and possibly also Britain, observing for himself
different Celtic societies in different states of development. His description of
the Celts has survived only in the works of other writers, notably Strabo,
Diodorus Siculus, Athenaeus, and Caesar, but when these are taken together it
is clear that Poseidonius was a keen observer with the eye of an anthropologist
and that he was well aware of the changes that were taking place. From his view-
point asa Stoic he may be critical of many of the more irrational and exuberant
aspects of Celtic society and tend to overemphasize them, but what he offers has
a ring of truthful reporting. His approach is to present the Celt as a Noble
Savage—a natural man untouched by civilization—but in pointing up the con-
trast to the civilized world he was prone to overemphasis.

Julius Caesar probably used Poseidonius as a source, but he also had the
unique opportunity of observing a variety of Celtic tribes from close hand dur-
ing his eight years of campaigning. His war Commentaries are, by their very
nature, biased sources. Caesar is at pains to present the Celts ina way that would
have been familiar to his audience, playing on old prejudices, not least by
emphasizing the fierceness and unreliability of the enemy, thereby enhancing
his own achievements and providing a justification for his action. While his
descriptions of Celtic society in Gaul and his picture of Britain and the Britons
may be selective interpolations, culled from the sources available to him, there
is much in his general accounts of military and political matters that is highly
informative about the Celtic communities he was confronting.

Of the later sources, Tacitus offers new insights particularly about the Brit-
ons. Once more there is a reliance on stock stercotypes and the bias inherent in
using the concept of the Noble Savage to point up the iniquities of the times, but
behind the selection and the rhetoric there are many useful insights into native
customs and social and political organization.

Clearly all the historical sources available to us are biased in one way or
another—such is the nature of historical sources—but it should not prevent us
from using them in an attempt to characterize Celtic society and warfare. The
greatest difficulties concern chronological and regional variation. To imply
that any generalized description has universal application is evident nonsense.
Most of our sources concern Celtic groups in the fourth to second centuries liv-
ing in, and raiding from, those parts of Europe that were in proximity to the

92


===== PAGE 110 (index-113_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

Mediterranean world. Within these parameters we may legitimately attempt to
reconstruct a generalized picture of classic Celtic culture. Of the more remote
Il that can be said is that some of them may
n their history. There are, however, real

Celtic regions, ve shared aspects
of the classical model at some time
difficulties in extending the model. Thus, while the troops led by Calga
against Agricola in northern Scotland in ap 84 appeared to have behaved in

many ways like Celtic armies in Italy in the fourth and third centuries Bc, it is

us

not easy to decide whether these apparent similarities are a manifestation of

archaic "Celtic behaviour” in remote and backward areas or the use by itus
of a series of familiar Celtic stereotypes. A further possibility, that primitive
warfare exhibited many similarities irrespective of time, place, and ethnicity,

has also to be borne in mind.

The Warrior and his Equipment
The classic Celtic image is provided in Strabo's oft-quoted description:

The whole race . .. is madly fond of war, high spirited and quick to battle, but otherwise
straightforward and not of evil character, And so when they are stirred up they assem-
ble in their bands for battle, quite openly and without forethought, so that they are cas-
ily handled by those who desire to outwit them,

When they are aroused, he says,

they are ready to fa

¢ danger even if they have
nothing on their side but their own strength and
courage ... their strength depends on their mighty
bodies, and on their numbers . . . to the frankness
and high-spiritedness of their temperament must
be added the traits of childish boastfulness and
love of decoration. They wear ornaments of gold
torques on their necks, and bracelets on their arms

and wrists, while people of high rank wear dyed

garments besprinkled with gold. 1t is this vanity
which makes them unbearable in victory and so

completely downcast in defeat.  (Geog. 4. 4.2)

Here then are displayed all the characteris-
tics of the Greek or Roman vision of a Celtic
warrior: he is ferocious, impetuous, boastful,
flamboyant, and mercurial—not a foe to be
lightly tangled with,

The weapons carried by the warrior were a
sword, usually fastened on the right side, and
aspear. Some used bows and arrows, slings, or

throwing clubs. The normal means of protec-
tion was the shield, but sometimes helmets

63 Detail of a brooch,
parssibly of berian orig
showing a naked Celtic

rioe complete with &
typical set of armaur, attack-
sllection.

inga lion. Private



===== PAGE 111 (index-114_1.jpg) =====
64 Spearheads recovered
from the site of La Tene in
Switzerland, The variety of
forms suggests a degree of
specialization in the use of
the spear in the hunt and in
warfare.

65 The excavation of
Maiden Castle, Dorset,
England, exposed a pit
containing about 20,000
carcfully chanen pebbles
to serve as sling stones for
the defence of the fort in
the first century Ap. The
ammunition dump lay
just inside the strongly
fortified cast gate.

WARFARE AND SOCIETY

were worn and less often tunics of ring mail,
All these pieces of equipment, mentioned in
the texts, are reflected in the archacological
record and in the surviving iconography,
though it is sometimes possible to detect
regional variations. Among the Parisii of
Yorkshire, for example, the sword was some-
& times worn across the back and had therefore
) ). > to be drawn over the shoulder from behind
the head.

Iron swords in sheaths of iron, bronze,
wood, or leather were the symbol of the war-
rior and as such were often personalized by
elaborate decoration applied to the sheath or by stamps beaten into the blade
(Fig. 87). Polybius is scathing of the quality of the swords used at Telamon in the
third century. They were good for cutting but not thrusting and became easily
bent during battle, requiring the warriors to pause and bend them back into
shape with the foot, he reports. While there was, indeed, a variation in quality,
and some made of softer iron may have been ineffective, the description may
owe something to the fact that swords were often deliberately bent before being
ritually deposited and it may have been the results of ritual activity rather than
battle that Polybius was noting.

Throwing and thrusting spears were equally important, and a considerable
variety of spearheads have been found, the different weights and shapes suiting
them to different purposes. The large collection recovered from the ritual site
of La Téne presents a variety of lethal designs with serrated, flame-shaped, and
hollow ground blades designed for easy penetration. One version, with a
notched blade, conforms to the type described by Diodorus Siculus with
‘breaks throughout the entire length so that the blow not only cuts butalso tears
the flesh, and the recovery of the spear rips
open the wound’ ( Hist. 5. 30).

Bows and arrows are not often mentioned
and are rare in the archacological record, but
a scatter of bronze arrowheads of trilobate
kind, a type common among the Scythians,
may have been brought back to western
Europe by mercenaries and migrants who
had learnt to use them in the east. That it was
not used in any of the recorded conflicts
implies, however, that archery never ach-
ieved much favour in the Celtic world.

Theslingis also only mentioned in passing
and does not feature in any set-piece battle.
In Britain, however, there is ample archaco-

94


===== PAGE 112 (index-115_1.jpg) =====
Actial view of the __MAIDEN CASTLE DORSET FAST _ENTRANCE
Maiden Castle,

by the Second Le
Ab 43,

67 Right The cast entrance

of Maiden Castle ingthe

arrangemcnt of the sling
platforms



===== PAGE 113 (index-116_1.jpg) =====
logical evidence for its use asa defensive weapon at hill forts. Huge stockpiles of
carefully selected sling pebbles found near the gates of Maiden Castle and
Danebury were kept in readiness, and the design of the gates and earthworks
seems to reflect the use of the sling to drive away attackers, That slings were also
used in attacks upon hill forts is specifically mentioned by Caesar in describing
Gaulish warfare, in which the missile volley was employed to drive defenders

from the ramparts, In such contexts, slings would have been particularly

effective, but much less so in open warfare.

T'he principal form of personal protection used by the warrior in battle was
the shield, described by Diodorus as man-sized and decorated in individual
fashion, some with projecting bronze animals of fine workmanship. A visual
impression of the variety of decoration achieved is provided by the piles of
armour depicted on the Roman arch at Orange. The most effective form of
shield was made of leather or wood or a combination of the two. The ritual
deposit found in a bog at Hjortspring on the Danish island of Als contained a
number of wooden shields made out of planks with circular holes to take hand
holds with the knuckles protected by wooden umbos. Shields of this kind
would have been effective but heavy. A far more efficient model is that typified

96



===== PAGE 114 (index-117_1.jpg) =====
e shiclds are made fi

ks of wood with
covered by umbo

provide a hand-}

Nationalmuscet, Copen

hagen

perary,
is made
4

covered with beather and
bound around the edge with
leather strips. T

s that

whd, while very

sars. N
Ireland, D

7 Lefe The Chertsey shickd
recovered from the R
Thames at Chertsey, Surrey
England. Elsborate metal
elds of this k

ond century ne. British
Museum,


===== PAGE 115 (index-118_1.jpg) =====
72 Helmet found in a

s grave at Ciumesti
Romania. It bears a fear
some bird with movable

uld flap

when the wearer ran, a

staring eyes of red glass,
Early third century n
Muzeul National de Is
Bucharest. Th
helnset from the Th

rmed

would akso
wearer ook d

British Museum, |

WARFARE AND SOCIETY

by the shield found ina bogat Clonoura, Co. Tipperary, in Ireland. [t was com

posed of a thin sheet of wood covered back and front with leather providing a

light and highly resilient form of protection, the umbo was also of leather. A

shield of similar structure can be reconstructed from the archacological evi-

dence surviving in a burial at St Peter Port, Guernsey, but in this case the pro-
tective umbo was of iron, in the corrosion products of which traces of the wood
and leather body of the shield were preserved. In all probability this type was in
widespread use, though it is usually only the metal fittings that survive. Among
the more claborate examples are those covered in sheet bronze with bronze
umbos, often highly decorated. Examples from the Thames, at Chertsey and
Battersea (Pl V) and from the River Witham were probably votive offerings
and may indeed have been made as such. Such pieces were more appropriate to
the parade than to warfare.

Bronze helmets were a feature of warrior
equipment. Diodorus mentions that some
possess ‘long projecting figures, lending the
appearance of enormous stature to the
wearer. In some cases horns form one piece
with the helmet, while in other cases it is relief
figures or the foreparts of birds or quadru-
peds’ (Hist. 5. 30). This is amply borne out in
the archaeological record, with finds of hel
mets with sockets for projecting elements
and, in the case of one helmet from Ciumesti
in Romania, with an attached bird complete
with flapping wings. The horned helmet from
the Thames

at Waterloo Bridge conforms to
the general description, while small castings
of bronze boars found in many parts of Eur
ope are most likely to have been helmet
attachments. Boar-crested helmets as well as
others with birds and horns are shown worn
by the warriors depicted on the Gunderstrup
cauldron.

Diodorus also mentions that some war-
riors wear iron breast plates of chain mail.
S

ted figures of stone from the sanctuary of
Roquepertuse (Fig. 163) and a stone statue of
Alpes) (PL VI),
dating to the late first century gc, are shown

a Gaul from Vacheres (Basse

wearing chain mail, and actual examples have
been found in a few burials, including that of
the warrior provided with the bird-crested
helmet, who was buried at Ciumegti.

98


===== PAGE 116 (index-119_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOC

ETY

One of the features of Celtic warfare which impressed itself upon the classi-
cal mind was the fact that some warriors fought naked except for the sword belt
and a gold neck torc, In his description of the battle of Telamon in 225 8¢
Polybius distinguishes a particular detachment—the
Gaesatae—who fought in this way. 'Very terrifying, too,
were the appearance and gestures of the naked warriors
in front, all in the prime of life and finely built men, and
all in the leading companies richly adorned with gold
torcs and armlets’ ( Hist, 29. 5-9). Polybius believed that
they discarded their clothes because they thought that
they would be a hindrance in battle, but this is likely to
be a rationalization. In all probability nakedness had a
ritual significance. The Gaesatae (‘spear-men’) were
distinguishable as a distinct group and at Telamon
appear to have been a lately arrived mercenary force. Their ritual nakedness
may have been a demonstration of their oneness as a fighting body. Nakedness
in battle is again referred to in Galatia in 189 Bc, when the Tolistobogii and
Trocmi took off their clothes before battle with the Romans exposing their
podgy white bodies, which enhanced the vividness of their wounds as they were
cut to pieces by the Roman force.

The vision of the naked Celt is a recurring theme in Graeco-Roman art, as is
witnessed by the copies of the Pergamene statues, but it also appears much ear-
lier on the Bologna funerary stela of the fifth century nc, which shows a naked
Celtic foot soldier in conflict with a mounted Etruscan (Fig. 54). In sum, the
evidence leaves little doubt that to fight naked was a comparatively common
occurrence in the Celtic world.

Another recurring theme in the literature and in art is the wearing of the torc
in battle. The torc had a deep religious significance. Deities are usually shown
wearing torcs ( PL, X1) and the seated god on the Gunderstrup cauldron, in addi-
tion to wearing a torc, holds one in his hand. Torcs are also a component of rit-
ual deposi as is witnessed, in particular, at Snettisham in Norfolk (PL
XXI15). The tore will have given the wearer the sense of being protected by the
gods—it was a symbol of his life and being. When, in 361 nc, the Roman Man-
lius confronted a Celtic chieftain in single combat, the Celt fought naked but
for his shield, two swords, and his torc and armlets. Manlius killed him and
took his torc, acquiring, in doing so, the name ‘Torquatus’. Nearly 200 years
later, in 191, when the Roman army defeated the Celts at Bologna, the spoils
included 1,500 gold torcs. Even as late as A 60, when the British queen, Boud-
ica, led her troops into battle, she wore a cloak and a gold torc, and carried a
spear.

The Celtic war chariot impressed a number of observers. Diodorus describes
how ‘for journeys and in battle they use two-horse chariots, the chariot carrying
both charioteer and chieftain. When they meet with cavalry in battle they cast
their javelins at the enemy and then descending from the chariot join battle

99

73 Detail from the caukdron
found at Gunderstrup,
Denmark, showing
maunted warriors wearing
helmets, one with a bied
crest, the ather with a boar,
First century nc? National-
museet, Copenhagen.


===== PAGE 117 (index-120_1.jpg) =====
Chariot depicted,
somcwhat stylistically, on a
<oin of the northern Gaglish
tribe, the Remi. First half of
first centary ne..

7% Below: A Celtic war
chariot shawn in action on
the reverse of a Roman
denarius minted in 48 &
The charioteer drives the
horses, while the noble war
rior, naked but armed, looks
for action.

WARFARE AND SOCIETY

with their swords’. The absence of any reference to chariot warfare in Gaul dur-
ing Caesar’s campaigns suggests that as a means of fighting it was no longer of
significance. When, however, he crossed the Channel to Britain, he found the
chariot much in evidence. He was sufficiently impressed by the novelty of the

ng in particular the agility of the charioteer, who, by virtue of long
could run out along the chariot pole between the horses and
could check and change direction in a moment. The speed with which
chariots could move the combatant from one point of the field to
another was particularly effective and led Caesar to make the shrewd
observation of a military man that “They combined the staying power of
infantry with the mobility of cavalry.’ In Britain his chief opponent
Cassivellaunus was able to muster 4,000 chariots, which, if used together,
must have been a formidable sight.
Sufficient is known of these machines from the
their metal fittings and from depiction on contemporary coinage to appre-
ate their lightness and efficiency. The chariot was essentially a platform,
carried on a pair of iron-tired, spoked wheels c.0.9 metres in diameter,
linked by a pole and yoke to two small ponies. The sides were low dou-
ble hoops of bent wood or wickerwork, while the front and back were
open for case of access, The war chariot of this kind was a specialized
version of the two-wheeled vehicle which became popular in the Celtic
world in the fifth century sc and was used from then on in funerary rit-
ual. Its ultimate inspiration may well have come from the Etruscan world.

There is no reason to assume that the funerary vehicles were war chariots,
Structurally they
ial was a parade vehicle symbolizing the high status of the deceased, though it
might have been possible to convert one to the other.

Diodorus, as we hav vs that, when the chariot teams meet with
opposing cavalry, the combatants first throw their javelins and then descend
from the chariot to join battle with their swords. Caesar adds that the chariots
then moved off but returned when necessary to pick up the warrior and carry
him to another part of the field. The chariot driver was evidently a skilled per-
sonand of vital importance to the well-being of the warrior he served. Diodorus
records that the élite *bring into battle as their attendants free men chosen from
among the poorer classes whom they use as charioteers and shield bearers in
battle’ (Hist. 5. 29).

A remark of Pausanius’ throws some further light on the battle order. He
mentions the trimarcisia (literally ‘three riders') asa Celtic fighting unit, imply-
ing that the warrior élite were accompanied by two supporters. In this case we
are dealing with a cavalry unit. y behind the ranks as
battle proceeded ready to dash to their master’s assistance if he needed a fresh
horse or was wounded and, if he were seriously injured, to take his place in the
battle line.

chacological remains of

were similar, but it is more likely that the vehicle used in bur-

seen,

he supporters would s

100


===== PAGE 118 (index-121_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

The chariot team and the trimarcisia imply a
close and practised relationship between fight-
ing men bound by obligation and honour, much
as a knight and squire worked together in med-
ieval warfare. In this context it is possible to un-

derstand the depth of the antagonism between

the British queen, Cartimandua, and her hus-
band Venutius when she left her husband in
favour of Vellocatus, who was described as his
‘armour bearer', Not only was she publicly dis-
honouring Venutius, but she was weakening
him by removing a trained and trusted member
of his fighting entourage.

The Battle

The most informative description of the anthro-
pology of the Celtic battle is provided by Dio-
dorus Siculus (presumably using Poseidonius as
asource):

When the armies are drawn up in battle-array, they [the chiefs] are wont to advance
before the battleline and 1o challenge the bravest of their opponents to single combat, at
the same time brandishing before them their arms so as to terrify their foc. When some-
one accepts their challenge to battle, they loudly recite the deeds of valour of their ances-
torsand proclaim their own valorous quality, at the same time abusing and making little
of their opponent and generally attempting to rob him beforehand of his fighting spirit.
(Hist. 5. 29)

A further detail is added by Athenacus (also quoting Poseidonius) when he
notes that “The Celts have in their company even in war, companions whom
they call parasites. These men pronounce their praises before the whole assem-
bly and before each of the chieftains in turn as they listen.” It was no doubt this
pattern of behaviour that led Diodorus to the generalization that “They fre-
quently exaggerate with the aim of extolling themselves and diminishing the
status of others. They are boasters and threateners and given 1o bombastic self-
dramatization’ (Hist. 5. 31).

Taken together, and rid of the prejudice inherent in the style of the sources,
these statements provide a vivid insight into the nature of Celtic warfare in its
classic form, before frequent contact with Mediterranean armies brought
about changes. Conflict was endemic: it was embedded in the social system, but
was constrained, as it was and is in many societies, by conventions which
attempted to limit hostilities to selected heroes. Through them all society
could, vicariously, indulge in battle. The drawing-up of the two opposing
forces, with women and children looking on from the rear, provided the occa-
sion. The individual heroes would then issue their challenges, the tension

101

76 Reconstruction of a
Celtic chariot (after Stuart
Piggott). The essence of the
vehicle is its light flexible
construction designed for
spoed and casy manceuy-
rability.


===== PAGE 119 (index-122_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

heightened by eulogies of prowess. In these tirades the satirizing of an oppo-
nent in public could be a potent weapon. Once the challenge was accepted, the
combatants would engage in full view of the assembled mass. It is quite con-
ceivable that in such a situation, after a succession of contests, the result would
be obvious and all could disperse. On other occasions growing tension could
give rise to a more widespread engagement.

This pattern of structured aggression leading to a general mélée is evident in
the gladiatorial contest held in the amphitheatre of Pompeii during the reign of
Nero between contestants provided by Pompeii and Nucria. Dissatisfaction
with the result led the spectators supporting the two sides to engage in open,
and bloody, conflict. It is much the same chemistry that today leads supporters
to invade the football pitch.

The theme of single combat in the battle situation recurs in Livy’s History. In
361 e the Roman Manlius engaged in single combat with a Celt who goaded his
opponent by poking out his tongue and laughing. Manlius used his short
Spanish stabbing sword to good effect against the heavy Celtic slashing sword.
Inanother tale, referring to 348, the tribune Valerius confronted a Celtic chief-
tain, having first gained permission from the consuls to take up his opponent’s
challenge. As battle commenced a crow perched on Valerius” helmet and
attacked the Celt’s eyes and face before returning to the helmet to watch the
resulting combat. The Celt, weakened by the demonstration of divine dis-
favour, collapsed and was killed. For this Valerius gained the cognomen *Cor-
vinus'. The parallelism between the two stories may suggest the repetition of a
single incident or even a fictitious embroidery, but the fact that Livy had access
to the tradition suggests that single combat was a feature of fourth century
Celtic behaviour in Italy. As Celtic forces faced the armies of Mediterranean
states, so fighting tactics will have changed and single combat will have become
increasingly irrelevant. The general onslaught now became the norm, and the
fierceness and power of the Celtic charge became legendary.

One of the recurring themes in the classical sources is the noise of the Celts in
battle. The Celt who faced Manlius preceded the combat with a war dance and
battle chant which almost certainly had a magico-religious significance. Simi-
larly the war trumpets—carnyxes—used in the opening stages of conflict were
probably employed as much for ritual reasons as to strike fear into the enemy.
Diodorus’ description is brief. “Their trumpets again are of a peculiar barbarian
kind; they blow into them and produce a harsh sound which suits the tumult of
war’ (Hist.5. 30), but the theme is taken up more dramatically by Polybius in his
description of the battle of Telamon (225 8c). He tells how the Romans were
terrified by the fine order of the Celtic army and ‘the dreadful din, for there were
innumerable hornblowers and trumpeters and, as the whole army were shout-
ing their war-cries at the same time, there was such a tumult of sound that it
seemed that not only the trumpeters and the soldiers but all the country round
had got a voice and caught up the cry’ (Hist. 29. 5-9). While it is too easy to read
things into this picturesque description, it may have been intended to commu-

102


===== PAGE 120 (index-123_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

nicate the idea of the Celtic troops calling up the gods of the land in their cause.
This same sense of panic was instilled into the Roman force who faced a Celtic
mob supported by their Druids shouting dreadful imprecations as they pre-
pared to attack the Druidic sanctuary on Anglesey in ap 59.

There is nothing specifically Celtic about the use of horns or battle cries,
After all, Joshua used musical instruments to good (no doubt symbolic) effect
when he paraded around the walls of Jericho. Why the classical sources tend to
emphasize this raucous noise is that it was alien to the more ordered and con-
sidered Greek and Roman approach to battle—it served to characterize the bar-
barian.

The strength of the Celtic attack lay in the ferocity of the first onslaught. It
was a power generated by many things, a belief in an afterlife, a desire to gain
glory, and a battle hysteria created by the building crescendo of noise and
chanting, often enhanced still further by alcohol—in fact the usual methods
which fighting forces through the ages have used to give courage at the moment
of battle. But the fury, by its very nature, lacked control: it was impetuous but
without any forethought or planning. Thus, when the onslaught was held and
turned, there was no strategy in reserve (o cope, and desperation set in. The
misery of the Celt in defeat was recorded on a number of occasions. At
Telamon, after Roman successes, some of the Celts, ‘reduced to utmost distress
and complexity . . . in their impotent rage rushed wildly on the enemy and
sacrificed their lives, while others, retreating step by step on the ranks of their
comrades, threw them into disorder by their display of faint-heartedness”. This
same theme recurs in the aftermath of the battle between Agricola and the
native war leader Calgacus and is told vividly by Tacitus:

On the enemy’s side cach man now followed his bent. Some bands, though armed, fled
before inferior numbers, some men, though unarmed, insisted on charging to their
deaths. Armour, bodics, severed limbs lay all around and the carth recked of blood; and
the vanquished now and then found their fury and their courage again.  (Agricola 37).

The unpredictability and unreliability of the Celt who could at one moment
be fierce and bombastic and at another flee in a deranged panic were part of the
stereotype which classical writers chose to perpetuate, but that there were many
occasions of steadfast heroism is not in doubt. Caesar’s description of his battle
against the Nervii in the second year of his Gallic War serves to redress the bal-
ance:

When their front rank had fallen, the next stood on the prostrate forms and fought from
them: when these were cast down and the corpses were piled up in heaps, the survivors,
standing as it were upon a mound, hurled darts at our troops, or caught and returned
ourjavelins,  (De Bello Gallico 2. 27)

As a result of this engagement, the tribe was almost annihilated. Of the 60,000
who could bear arms, only 500 survived. Even allowing for Caesar's exaggera-
tion, the battle of the Sambre was an heroic last stand.

)
1 oo f:

77 Abore Parts of war
trumgpets (carnyxes) from
Deskford. Banfishire,
Scotland (left), and
Tattershall Ferry,
Lincolnshire, England
(right), Trumypets of this
kind are shown on the
Gunderstrup cauldron and
on various Celtic coins.

78 Belom: Detail from the
Gunderstrup cauklron
showing three men blowing
war trampets (camyxes).
First century nc? National-
musect, Copenhagen.



===== PAGE 121 (index-124_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

Heroism is a leitmotif in classical accounts of Celtic warfare. Wounds were a
source of pride and might even be opened up further by the bearer if considered
to be too insignificant. Failure, particularly of a war leader, was unacceptable.
The stark sculpted image of the Celt committing suicide by the body of his wife,
adorning the temple of Athene at Pergamum (PL 11), would have reminded the
Graeco-Roman world of the Celtic moral code. The recorded suicides of failed
Celtic leaders are many: Brennus flecing from Delphi, Florus and Sacrovir after
the failed rebellion in Gaul, and Boudica in Britain dre among the more famous.
Against the social context of Celtic warfare, this is easily understood. The battle
wasameans of creating and enhancing warrior prowess. It wasa public event in
which achievement could be seen, judged, and remembered: failure subjected
to the same scrutiny was socially unacceptable and demanded the honourable
solution,

Celtic warfare evolved in different places at different rates. Boudica and
Calgacus were using methods and equipment abandoned in the more central
areas of the Celtic world several centuries earlier, and it is doubtful if the war
chariot was ever seen in Ireland, in spite of its frequent appearance in the heroic
vernacular literature. Similarly, the Nervii who so bravely opposed Caesar
would have developed their fighting methods against neighbours and Ger-
mans, in contrast to the Volcae Tectosages of southern Gaul, whose ancestors
were conversant with the hoplite army of the Greeks. Although Celtic warrior
equipment remained remarkably similar across considerable areas and
through time, subtle changes can be detected. By the third century s the stan-
dard panoply became increasingly heavy, involving, it is estimated, up to five
times more metal per man than two centuries earlier. The Celt at this stage was
a heavily armed infantryman. The shield had developed a more elaborate and
efficient umbo, and the chain by which the sword was slung from the belt had
become a heavy complex structure brilliantly designed to keep the sword in
place, however the body moved, to prevent the sheath from encumbering the
warrior’s feet. Thus equipped, and adopting the technique of the furious
frontal onslaught, the Celts were able to deal efficiently with Mediterranean
armies organized on the model of the Macedonian phalanx.

During the third century cavalry began to play a significant part in Graeco-
Roman warfare, and the Celts’ familiarity with the horse, which was long
established, made them a sought-after addition as specialized mercenaries.
Hannibal was to make good use of heavily armed Celtic cavalry during the
Second Punic War. The growing importance of the cavalry is reflected in a
marked increase in the length of the sword, many examples of which, by the end
of the century, had reached 80-90 centimetres—too long for comfort in
infantry fighting.

The battle of Telamon in 225 B¢ in many ways marks a turning-point. Itis the
last recorded battle on the continent of Europe in which the chariot appeared,
and one in which Celtic cavalry, separately deployed, was to play a significant
part. Thereafter, as cavalry became increasingly important, it is likely that the

104


===== PAGE 122 (index-125_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

chariot began to decline, disappearing altogether by the beginning of the first
century Bc exceptamong the Insular Celts. During Caesar's campaigns in Gaul,
detachments of Gallic cavalry were widely used on both sides, and after roman-
ization Gaul provided some of the most effective cavalry auxilia in the Roman
army.

The Feast

Central to the establishment and maintenance of the social equilibrium was the
feast. The feast was a social gathering at which status and prestige were demon-
strated, flaunted, and challenged. The Poseidonian tradition provides an out-
line of procedure. On a formal occasion the men sat in a circle with the most
influential member, judged on the basis of military prowess, nobility of birth,
or wealth, occupying the central position. Beside him sat the host and next, on
cither side, the others in the order of their distinction. It appears that each man
had two retainers present: his shield man, who took up a position behind his
master, and his spear man. The spear men dined together but in the same room
as their masters.

Poscidonius (in Athenaeus, Deipriosophistae 4. 40) records three behavioural
practices. The first is the hero's portion, in which the beast is cut and served
according to status, “When the hindquarters were served up, the bravest hero
took the thigh piece and if another man claimed it they stood up and fought in
single combat to death.” This, he notes, was the practice in ‘former times”. Itisa
motif which is to be found several times in the vernacular tradition of Ireland,
in famous stories like Bricriu's feast and Mac Datho’s pig. The second, which
may have grown out of the first, was outright aggression. Sometimes single
combat took place, as a result of which people could be wounded or killed. The
third practice was more extreme. A man might pledge his life for gifts of gold,
silver, or amphorae of wine, When the deal had been done, he would distribute
the gifts among family and friends and would then lie stretched out face up-
wards on his shield, ‘while another standing by cut [his] throat with his sword'.

These anecdotal scraps belie the social complexity of the feast but provide
some indication of its importance in Celtic society. The feast was evidently a
highly structured affair organized rigorously according to status. The arrange-
ment of the participants and the serving of the meat provided the occasions for
the definition of the social hierarchy and its public affirmation. If anyone felt
demeaned by the ordering, he would contest it, and the ensuing conflict could
lead 1o single combat and death. In any event, the contest would be resolved in
the public arena, and thereafter the new order would be known and observed.
Clearly, then, the feast provided the opportunity for the aspiring young man to
make his claim and to demonstrate the power and the following to sustain it.
The feast may well have been the moment when a warrior would propose to
lead a raid and would gather support from those present. The size of his follow-
ing would depend upon his status and the degree of inebriation of the assembly,

105

79 Bronze cauldron with
itsiron suspension chain
and hooks found at the site
of La Téne, Neuchitel,
Switzerland. Third or
second century s,
Caubdrons of this kind
would have formed the
focus of the feast. Musée
Cantonal d'Archéologie,
Neuchitel, Switzerland.


===== PAGE 123 (index-126_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

Just such a practice is recorded by Tacitus among the Germans. Failure to meet
assurances made at the feast would bring disgrace.

In such a context the need for the individual to proclaim his virtues is evid-
ent. The Poseidonian tradition is possibly referring to this in recording that the
Celts frequently exaggerate with the aim of extolling themselves and diminish-
ing opponents. Others could be employed to do it for them, such as the ‘para-
sites’ who accompanied their masters in war and peace to pronounce their
praises to the whole assembly and, no doubt, to denigrate their lord’s rivals by
satire. The bards are to be distinguished from these dependent followers. They
were part of the skilled élite—the entertainers and ‘poets who delivered eulo-
gies in song’. The value of the praises of such men would be greater than that of
the subservient parasites, and one can anticipate the tension that there must
have been at a feast when the bard started to perform to see whom he would
choose 1o praise and how he would use his skills to balance his culogies between
those he considered to be worthy of them. Part of his skill would have been to
keep his audience on tenterhooks until the last moment. To cultivate such men
was important to an aspiring leader. The Arvernian chief Louernius was well
aware of this when the bard who arrived late at his feast composed a song to the
chief’s greatness, lamenting his own late arrival. Louernius was sufficiently
judicious to throw the bard a bag of gold as he ran behind his chariot and was
rewarded by another song based on the theme that even the ‘tracks made by his
chariot on the earth gave gold and largess to mankind’, It would have been in
Louernius’ interests that this song remained prominent in the bard’s reper-
toire!

The feast which Louernius prepared and the gold which he liberally distrib-
uted is a fascinating demonstration of the ‘potlatch’—the system by which an
individual's status was enhanced by the public dispersal of wealth in the form of
gifts, often, but not invariably, of food and drink at feasts. The more that was
given away, the greater the giver’s reputation, and the more he would, in turn,
acquire through gift. At its most basic level, the potlatch provided a simple
redistributive mechanism by which surpluses could be spread throughout the
community. Often, however, it necessitated the destruction of wealth. The ded-
ication of works of great craft skill, like the Battersea shield, or of great value,
like the Snettisham gold, to the gods provides an example of wealth destruction
within the religious context. Similarly, the burial of valuable goods with the
dead was the public affirmation of the lineage’s ability to destroy wealth, The
feast itself, with the consumption of huge quantities of expensive imported
wine, of which the Celts were so inordinately fond, was another form of public
wealth destruction.

In a system in which individuals used the potlatch as a means of competing
for status there would, inevitably, have been a tendency towards escalation. Itis
probably in this context that we should attempt to understand the Poseidonian
account of the individuals who submitted themselves to death having acquired
and distributed rich gifts. By sacrificing their lives solely in the interests of being

106


===== PAGE 124 (index-127_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

able to redistribute the gifts they had received to their friends and kin, they were
indulging in an extreme form of potlatch. The heady competitive atmosphere
of the feast, the liberal consumption of alcohol, and a belief in the afterlife will
all have contributed to the individual’s willingness to submit to death in the
interests of renown.

Hospitality to strangers is another leitmotif of Celtic society, and the Posei-
donian tradition refers to the need to offer food and drink before finding out
about a visitor's business. The rigorous rules which no doubt covered hospital-
ity were manipulated by the Romans more than once in tricking and slaughter-
ing Lusitanians and Celtiberians in Spain and by Mithridates in the massacre of
the Tetrachs in Galatia. In all these cases the Celtic peoples were bound by cus-
tom and tradition 1o a system involving trust which their opponents simply
abused for their own advantage.

The Social Hierarchy

That Celtic society was strongly hierarchic is evident from the archacological
record of burials, Itisalso reflected in Caesar’s stark generalization that in Gaul
only two classes were of any significance, the Druids and the knights, the rest
being little better than slaves. The knights were constantly involved in warfare,
their status being reflected by the number of dependants and clients they could
command. Caesar’s sketch is a gross oversimplification, but it reflects a simple
basic structure which may well have lain behind the social systems of many of
the Celtic communities. The social hierarchy graded from those who could
command huge entourages, men like the Helvetian Orgetorix whose *house-
hold’ numbered 10,000 excluding his dependants and debtors, to the semi-free,
who were roughly equivalent to a medieval bondman. Within this spectrum
would have been carefully distinguished social classes about which little is
known. No doubt the law gave a degree of rigidity to the system, but there
would have been much visual symbolism to make the social distinction readily
apparent in such things as settlement style and dress. These symbols of status,
and indeed the social system itself, would have differed with place and time, but
one may suppose that the possession of a panoply of arms was a ready and uni-
versal means of distinction, similarly the wearing of a torc and arm rings.
Another hint is provided by Poseidonius when, describing tonsorial styles, he
remarks that ‘the nobles shave the cheeks but let the moustache grow freely so
that it covers the mouth’, This may well have served to distinguish the élite from
the others who shaved entirely or grew short beards. The prominence of the
moustache on Celtic iconography and Graeco-Roman representations of Celts
may suggest that the practice was widespread among the Celtic élite. Caesar’s
reference to the fact that the Britons painted their bodies with woad allows that
body decoration may have been common and carried with it social messages.
The use of tattooing among many societies, including the contemporary
Scythians, is a reminder of the significance of this form of communication.

107


===== PAGE 125 (index-128_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

The importance of bonds of obligation among the Gauls, operating at a
number of different levels, is frequently referred to by Caesar, At one level,
clientage in its various forms could bind retainers to individual members of the
élite, but ata different level it could relate tribes one to another. This was clearly
the case in Gaul in the first century nc. By Caesar's time the Sequani had estab-
lished themselves as paramount, with the help of the Germans, and thus had
acquired as clients many of the smaller tribes, who previously had looked to the
Aedui, taking the sons of their chieftains as hostages. When Caesar appeared
and offered the Aedui the support of Rome, the hostages were returned and the
clients flocked back to the Aedui, together with new clients impressed by the
power the Aedui derived from their friendship with Rome. At the same time,
the Remi, thought to be clients of Rome, received clients of their own who
wished to ally themselves to the Roman cause but were not prepared to doso as
clients of the Aedui. This broad pattern of changing allegiances seems to have
been the norm in Gaul and was probably widespread in the Celtic world.

Clientage, at the tribal or personal level, implied obligations on both sides. As
Caesar succinctly put it: “The leaders do not allow their clients to be oppressed
or defrauded, otherwise they lose their influence with their clients.” The clear
implication here is that clientage was an agreement entered into willingly by
both parties. Both were probably bound by strict rules as well as by the antici-
pation of mutual benefit.

The taking of hostages, referred to above, was equally widespread. It should
not, however, take with it the connotations of the modern world. Among the
Celts, hostages were usually young men of noble families from one tribe who
lived and served with another asa guarantee of agreed behaviour: it was, in fact,
a bonding mechanism. Caesar made ample use of the system during his con-
quests in Gaul, accepting or requesting hostages whenever agreements were
reached. The case of the Treveri is instructive. In s4 B¢, suspicious of the
motivesof one of the Treverian leaders, Indutiomarus, Caesar ordered the chief
to attend his camp and to bring 200 hostages with him. “The hostages were
delivered, and included his son and all his relatives who had been specified by
name. | reassured Indutiomarus about their safety and encouraged him to stay
loyal." At the same time 4,000 Gaulish cavalry arrived from all parts of Gaul,
each group with its own leaders in charge. Those whose allegiance to Rome was
inany way in doubt Caesar decided to take with him, as hostages, on his British
campaign. Dumnorix, a chieftain of the Aedui, refused to join and fled with his
cavalry, but was pursued, captured, and executed, even though he was brother
of the Aeduan leader Diviciacus, a staunch Roman ally.

Although it can fairly be argued that Caesar’s use of hostages may have been
extreme because of the unusual nature of events, he was simply adapting a prac-
tice common among the Gaulish tribes to his own benefit.

Two other aspects of the bonding system—fosterage and marriage—deserve
to be mentioned. The placing of children with foster parents is a theme con-
stantly referred to in the Irish vernacular literature, where the close bonds

108


===== PAGE 126 (index-129_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

between foster brothers are used to heighten literary effect. In all probability
fosterage was adopted by Celtic communities quite widely, though there is very
little positive evidence for it outside the Insular literature. There is, however,
one somewhat obscure reference by Caesar. In writing of the Gauls he says that
they differ from other peoples in “that they do not allow their sons to approach
them in public unless they have grown up to the age of military service, and they
think it a disgrace for a boy under this age to sit in public within sight of his
father’ ( De Bello Gallico 6.18). Poseidonius, however (through Diodorus Sicu-
lus), mentions that at meals they are served by their youngest grown-up chil-
dren, both boys and girls. The apparent contradiction can be resolved if the
meal is considered to be a private occasion, when such intimacy is permissible.
Whether or not this passage of Caesar’s is an ill-understood observation of the
taboos associated with active fosterage is unclear, but it could equally be that
fosterage had, by this stage, died out in Gaul and all that remained were pale
echoes reflected in symbolic behaviour patterns.

Women clearly occupied a more significant position in Celtic society than
they did in the Graeco-Roman world and for this reason the classical sources
give some prominence to observations about them, though in no systematic
way. The Poscidonian tradition notes the beauty of Gallic women, describing
them to be as tall and as strong as their husbands though the fourth-century
Roman writer Ammianus Marcellinus, in a memorable piece of descriptive
writing of the Celtic woman raised to anger, implies that as a fighter she is more
than equal to the male. A tendency to promiscuity is noted. “They generally
yield up their virginity to others and this they regard not as a disgrace, but
rather think themselves slighted when someone refuses to accept their freely
offered favours' (Diodorus Siculus, Hist. 5. 32). To this, Cacsar, writing of the
Britons, adds that wives are shared between groups of ten or twelve men, espe-
cially between brothers, fathers, and sons. Once more the literary referencesare
likely to be ill-observed and misleading, content simply to convey an impres-
sion of ‘the barbarian’. Behind this probably lies a complex structure of
male-female relationships beyond the comprehension of monogamous Medi-
terraneans, Something of the intricacies of these bonds are preserved in the
Irish vernacular literature. In the Tain Queen Medb is prepared to offer inter-
course in the interests of friendship or gain without any sense of shame, while
in the Old Irish Laws three grades of wife are recognized.

In Gaul, females had legal rights in marriage. A joint account was kept of the
marriage wealth, composed of the bride’s dowry, an equal sum contributed by
the husband, and any interest accruing. Whoever survived the marriage inher-
ited the total. The equity of the arrangement must, however, have been some-
what diminished by the fact that the husband had the power of life or death over
his wife and children and if husbands died in suspicious circumstances wives
could be interrogated under torture. We owe this insight to Caesar without
being able to test the veracity of his account or the extent of the practice.

Marriage provided an important means of social and cross-tribal bonding.

109


===== PAGE 127 (index-130_1.jpg) =====
WARFARE AND SOCIETY

The Helvetian Orgetorix, for example, in attempting to consolidate his power
base, gave his own daughter in marriage to the Aeduan leader Dumnorix, while
Dumnorix married his half-sister and other female relatives to prominent men
in other tribes. A little earlier, the sister of the king of Noricum had been mar-
ried to the German leader Ariovistus to cement a political alliance in the face of
the Dacian advance, This use of the female relative, in the manner of a hostage
bonded by marriage, was no doubt as widespread among the Celts as it was later
to become among the royal households of Europe.

Women do not appear in positions of overt political power in Gaul at the
time of Caesar's campaigns, unless he chooses not 10 record the fact, but in
Britain Cartimandua of the Brigantes and Boudica of the Iceni were potent
leaders, and the large bulk of Boudica, her harsh voice, and the mass of red hair
falling to her knees, resplendent in gold torc and bright cloak, remains a lasting
image of Celtic female power. Whether we are looking at the aberrant behav-
iour of a peripheral backwater in a time of unnatural stress or the survival of a
phenomenon once more widespread throughout the Celtic world, it is difficult
to say. The dominance of females in the Insular literature might, however, be
thought to support the latter.

It must readily be admitted that any consideration of Celtic social systems is
likely to be biased, not only by the prejudices and preconceptions of the
Graeco-Roman sources but by the narrow time span and geographical area
over which they range. None the less it is possible to construct an outline of the
way in which society articulated itself. We must, however, constantly remind
ourselves that no general scheme can ever hope to apply to all Celtic societies at
all times,

no


===== PAGE 128 (index-131_1.jpg) =====
6
The Arts of the
Migration Period

Two things in particular stand out from viewing the entirety of the
archaeological record from the La Tene period in Europe, the broad cul-
tural similarity that can be seen over vast tracts of country and the daz-
zling inventiveness of what can broadly be called La Téene (or Celtic) art.
We must be careful here to distinguish the technology of construction
and manipulation of materials from the love of pure decoration. The two
are strictly separate but they may come together to enhance cach other
and create a greater whole. Take, for example, the simple functional fire-
dog—a piece of wrought-iron furniture for the hearth. It was essentiall

framework for controlling roasting spits, but its projecting ends were fre
quently decorated with enormous skill to create the spirited essence of

horned bulls’ heads. In another medium, the large pottery jar from Saint-

Pol-de-Léon in Finistére is an elegant and functional vessel, but it has
been transformed into an object of beauty by a series of flowing scrolls
and arabesques lightly incised on the body before firing.

T'he fire-dog and the pot are both visually highly satisfying to the mod-
ern eye—there is something about Celtic art with which we can easily
f that
simply by describing and classifving we can understand. The quintessen-
tial bovine head on the fire-dog is a symbol, but of what? The sanctity of
the hearth? The spirit of the beasts being roasted? The power of fire and of
the smith’s mag|  know. So it is with the decorated pot. To
the archacologist it is an item first to admire and enjoy and then to analyse
stylistically, but the response of the original owner would have been
totally different. One has only to consider decorated pots from Africa,
whose meanings have been transmitted to us in language by their makers
or users, to understand that form and decoration can have an immense
subtlety of significance in their contemporary society, symbolizing func-

empathize—but this should not persuade us into the facile beli

?We canne

80 &1 Iron furniture from a rich
grave at Welwyn, |
England, second half
century b, The lower piture

shows the detail of a fire-dog, a pair
of which w
cither side

d have stood on
the hearth. British
Museum, London.



===== PAGE 129 (index-132_1.jpg) =====
Kerneve
de-Léon, Fi

closely similar to that

adopted by metalworkers

in the fourth century nc

six

ve, right: Stc

ty wearing a neck

Marne, France. The b
ved in relief

Antiqu

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

tion, status of owner, gender, sexual relationship, and so on. Itis totally beyond
the abilities of the art historian or archacologist to say what the owner of the
Saint-Pol-de-Léon pot was attempting to communicate. All that we can be tol
crably sure about is that communication was intended.

If, then, we reject ‘art for art’s sake” as a starting-point (and with it the even
less acceptable ‘art for art historians’ sake’), it is pertinent to ask how readily

?Wasitknown toall oronly toa few,

understood was the symbolism at the tim
like the skilled men whose magic went into its creation?
The remarkable iron helmet of the early third century 8¢ found in the chief

wides an interesting example, On its crest

tain’s tomb at Ciumesti (Fig. 72) §
stands a bird of prey, with articulating wings, staring fixidly with its violent red

eyes atanyone who approached the wearer. It isa startling reminder of the story

of the single combat between Valerius and the Celt (see p. 102). The symbolism
of the bird on the helmet of the Ciumesti chieftain would have been widely
understood. So, too, would the symbol of the boar, found on helmet crests (Fig
73), on the Witham shield (PL. X), on a sword blade from Switzerland, on the
statue of the god from Euffigneix, and in a variety of other contexts. The
primeval strength and ferocity of the beast would have been considered to give

strength and protection to the wearer, and it islikely that the boar, like the crow

"


===== PAGE 130 (index-133_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

would have been understood to be a war god in animal form. The shape-shift-
ing of gods and the semi-divine to appear as animals is a recurring theme in the
Irish and Welsh vernacular literature.

Herein might lie a clue to another aspect of Celtic art—the appearance of
human and other faces either directly or obliquely and half hidden in Celtic
designs on, for example, the Battersea and
Witham shields (Pls. V and X), but also on a
host of other items when carefully observed.
The art historian Paul Jacobsthal once referred
to this as the ‘Cheshire Cat Style'—sometimes
the cat appears in the tree, sometimes just the
grin of the cat. He went on to describe it as the
mechanism of dreams. Perhaps here, too, we
are seeing the shifting shapes of Celtic myth-
ology where visions appear and disappear and
nothing is quite as it seems.

The skilled men, who were able to design and execute these timeless works of
art, were clearly far more than just craftsmen. They carried with them a deep
knowledge of mythology. The symbols which they used and the combinations
in which they used them were a form of communication. They were the repos-
itory and the perpetrators of ancient skills and beliefs and as such they them-
selves would surely have been regarded as being above normal men.

Materials and Methods

The skills of the metalworker in bronze and gold were already long established
by the beginning of the Iron Age. They involved casting, sheet working, and
other forms of hammer working. Casting was normally by the cire perdue (lost-
wax) method, best exemplified by the collection of metalworking debris found
in an early first-century Bc context at the settlement at Gussage All Saints in
southern England, where sets of horse harness and vehicle fittings were being
manufactured. The first stage involved the modelling of the desired item in
beeswax using small bone spatulac. When complete, the wax form was invested
with a refractory clay with at least two vents, one surrounded by a funnel or
‘gate’. Next the whole would have been warmed, to melt the wax so that it could
be poured out for reuse, before the clay mould was baked. Once the mould was
hardened, molten bronze could be poured through the gate to fill the interior
void. When it had cooled, the mould would be broken open and the cast item
remaved for fine trimming, filing, and polishing. What is perhaps most note-
worthy is the comparative simplicity of the process, given the skill of the crafts-
man. Wax was reusable, and bronze could be melted down from scrap in
crucibles. The only materials consumed were charcoal for the fire and clay for
the moulds. In this way, using closed moulds, or, for more simple items, open
moulds, a wide range of artefacts could be produced.

"3

%4 Human faces hidden in
the decoration of two terret
rings from northern France,
now in the Musée Nationale
des Antiquités, Saint-
Germain-en-Laye, Paris.
The half-visible face has
been referred 1o as ‘the
Cheshire Cat Style’. After
drawings by Paul Jacobsthal.


===== PAGE 131 (index-134_1.jpg) =====
85 Bone tria

bly used by a craftse
work ¢

metal object, F

caim Hat [ Crew, Co.

Nationa
ndl. Dublin.

Meath, Irelans

Museum of Ir

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Sheet bronze working was in some waysa more skilled process. To begin with
the sheet of appropriate size and thickness had to be beaten out by hand froma
metal billet, constantly annealing the metal to prevent it from becoming brittle

In the process the sheet might be moulded into vessel shape or kept flat. The

most common form of decoration was by inscribing, chasing, or repoussé
working. In the last two cases the sheet being worked would have had to be
attached to a suitably pliable backing material. A necessary preliminary to dec
oration of whatever kind would have been the laying-out of the design with
li

rate constructions, as the intricate pattern on the open-work discs from the

htly scribed lines, often using compasses, sometimes involving highly elabo

Marne vividly demonstrates, Bone trial pieces found at Lough Crew, Co.

Meath, in Ireland show how craftsmen tried out designs in rough first.
Other items such as brooches could be made by hammering out a billet, con-

stantly annealing to retain malleability, drawing out, winding, flattening, and

folding as required.
Finished items could be further enhanced by attaching or insetting other
out most of the

materials of which coral and red glass were favoured thro
period. These substances were either attached with small pins or fixed, cloi
sonné-style, in pre-made cells. In the later stages the art of enamelling was

developed, allowing elaborate multicoloured finishes to be achieved which

were particularly favoured for horse harness mounts. The skills of the bronze

workers were also those used by goldsmiths and silversmiths,

14


===== PAGE 132 (index-135_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Iron became of increasing importance
after its first widespread introduction into
barbarian Europe in the eighth century.
Though occurring naturally over far more
extensive areas and in far greater quantity
than copper and tin, its extraction required a
and a higher tem-
perature for the chemical change to take
Once this had been achieved, the
spongy iron bloom had constantly to be
reheated and beaten to remove slag. Finally,
when the iron was pure enough, a number of
blooms would be beaten together to form an

more complex technolog

plac

ingot of sufficient size to allow tools and
weapons to be forged.

Large numbers of ingots are known, most of them dating to the later stages of

and western Ei
thick in the centre with the ends drawn out. In

A common form in centra

the La Tene period (Map 23 ropeis
the double pyramidal typ
Britain the most common form is the sword-shaped bar, with the flanges of one
end beaten round to form a hollow tube. Both forms and others were developed
to demonstrate the quality of the iron, because if the metal had been too impure
it would have been impossible to beat out ends or form the tube without cracks
appearing.

It is clear that ironsmiths had a detailed understanding of the qualities of
their material and the appropriateness of different qualities to different func-
tions. This is particularly apparent in the swords of the La Tene period.
Metallurgical analysis has shown that for cutting blades different qualities of
iron were used, layering it to provide a high-quality cutting edge of steel which
was usually well tempered. The boars’ stamps on the sword from Port in
Switzerland and the name Korisios with its attached stamp on a sword from the

same site are possible examples of craftsmen’s personal marks being a guaran-
tee of quality. There is no better example of the ironsmith’s technical skills than
the tunics of ring mail which o come to light in graves, but for the

smith asan artist the fire-dogs are pre-eminent.

sionall

In addition to the metalworker’s products, one must not overlook those of

the other men of skill: the glass workers, the wood carvers, the sculptors, the
potters, and the woad painters (or tattooists). All created original works which
in their different way transmitted the rich images of
and symbolism.

eltic artistic expression

The Origins of Aristocratic Art

The carliest examples of Celtic art appear in the fifth century, accompanying
the élite burials of the Moselle and Marne. Inevitably, in the first faltering

us

86 A schection of iron
semith’s tools fro
Nikolausberg, Austria,

dating from the hor
third century ac, fron §
ing skills developed durin
the La Téne period have

been little improved upon
since. Museum Carolino
Augusteum, Salzburg.

stamp on an
iron sword blade found at
1, Bern, Switzerland.
the stamp is the
inscribed name KORISIOS.
Whther the marks indicate
the maker
some other meaning is
unclear. First century ne
Bernisches Historisches
Muscum, Berne.

owner, or have



===== PAGE 133 (index-136_1.jpg) =====
IX Facing One of a pair

of wine flagons from &
barial(?) at Basse-Yutz,
Moselle, France. They are
examples of carly native
craftsmanship of the early
fourth century ne, reflecting
the initial stages in using
Etruscan forms and decora-
tive matifs, together with
ideas from the cast and from
the traditional repertoire, to
create something distine-
tively ‘native’. The vessels
are inlaid with red enamel
and coral. British Museum,
London,

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

stages, it was the imported Mediterranean wine-drinking equipment which
provided the model and the stylistic stimulus. The bronze beaked flagons from
the burials of Kleinaspergle, Diirrnberg, and Basse-Yutz (PL 1X), all clearly
based on Etruscan ideas, differ in form and in the treatment of the decorative
detail to such a degree that they must all have been manufactured by local
craftsmen working for aristocratic patrons. Yet all three are sufficiently
different in their interpretations to show that a variety of regional influences
were at work.

The grave from Kleinaspergle (found in a side chamber, the main grave hav-
ing been robbed) provides an interesting range of items reflecting the develop-
ment of Early Style art. The grave goods included an Italic cordoned bucket, an
Etruscan stamnos, a locally made beaked flagon, two gold drinking horn termi-
nals, a gold-repaired Attic cup, and a fitting probably for a belt. The drinking
horn terminals were ornamented with rams’ heads in a style that is reminiscent
of ‘eastern’ animal art, while the flagon, even with its highly original interpre-
tation of the human head at the base of the handle, is clearly of Etruscan inspi-
ration. The gold patching on the Attic cup and the belt plaque incorporate plant
motifs—palmettes, lotus-buds, and lotus-blossom, which, though original in
their transformation, are 2 grammar learnt from the Greek world. In this one
burial then, dating to the middle of the fifth century, we can see the first stages
in the use of disparate inspirations from the classical Mediterranean world and
the cast being brought together and moulded into something new.

The Basse-Yutz flagons (PL 1X) (a pair possibly from a single grave) were
accompanied by two Etruscan stamnoi and probably date to the second half of
the fifth century. The general concept of the flagons is evidently Etruscan, but
the sharp high shoulder and concave sides are very unclassical. From its
Hallstatt ancestry comes a band of coral interlace set around the base and a
small duck riding on the spout. Less certainty attaches to the inspiration for the
animals shown on the rim and handles of the flagon, but the dashed pellets and
spiral joints may point to an eastern ancestry.

The Darrberg flagon shares the high-shouldered shape of the Basse-Yutz
vessels butis otherwise altogether different. The handle attachment embodies a
stylized head, with bulbous nose, lentoid eyes, and swept-back hair of a kind
that was to recur many times in Celtic art, framed by vegetal renderings which
have evolved from the classical palmette. On the handle a beast appears to hold
asevered head in his mouth, while further around the rim a curious quadruped
lurks. Once again we might see in the beasts some inspiration from the east.

Taken together, these fifth-century flagons provide a glimpse of an art style
in the making—Etruscan vessel forms are mutating and already Greek pal-
mettes and lotuses are disintegrating into more loosely structured plant forms.
Echoes from the Hallstatt past are still dimly to be discerned; a new distinctive
animal menage is beginning to intrude and the iconography of the ‘Celtic head”
is now becoming defined.

The Marne region at this time, while sharing in the general development,

né


===== PAGE 134 (index-137_1.jpg) =====
e R S
NGRS N
. P
| —— 7
b
RN
S


===== PAGE 135 (index-138_1.jpg) =====
. el /A PEEEINN ;
A Noe,

S LA rCE &l
A o I U, (SR R 1‘
aar N B RS AR


===== PAGE 136 (index-139_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

develops characteristics of its own, most notably an emphasis on plant motifs
and a preference for open-work ornaments, This is particularly clear on the
open-work mounts for the chariot pole or yoke from the burial at La Bouvan-
igns also develop, while a different tradi-
tion of highly accomplished engraving incorpor:
recognized on a few élite items such as the pointed helmet from Berru (PL XIV)
in the Marne and the Etruscan beaked flagon, enhanced by a Celtic engraver,
now in the muscum at Besangon.

In the Moselle region the high point of artistic achievement in the fifth cen-
tury was attained by the goldsmiths, whose masterpieces included the open-
work gold covering of a hemispherical wooden bowl, found in barrow 1 at
Schwarzenbach in Saarland (PL Xllla), with its two registers and a basal disc
decorated with transformed palmettes, lotus motifs, and triskels. A similar
piece, possibly once ornamenting a drinking horn, from Eigenbilzen in the
Belgian Limburg, is closely related in style and craftsmanship and
could be taken for the work of'a Moselle ‘master’. Schwarz-
enbach has also produced four gold plaques displaying
clean-shaven human faces framed by a ‘comma
shaped” headdress similar to the depiction of the
head on the handle of the Kleinaspergle flagon.
Closely related items of gold-sheet decora-
tion have been found further east at Dirrn-
berg and at the warrior grave of Chlum in

deau. ymetric compass-work de:

g classical palmettes can be

Bohemia.

The pre-eminence of the Middle Rhen-
ish goldsmiths is further demonstrated
by a brilliant array of neck and arm rings
which combine the plant motifs of the
sheet-gold workers with superbly mod-
elled fabulous and semi-fabulous beasts
and human heads. One of the most spectacu-
lar of their products is the arm ring from
Rodenbach found with an Etruscan flagon and
basin and an Attic kantharos. The arm ring has
central moustached face, closely similar to that on the
handle attachment of the Basse-Yutz flagon, flanked on
her side by pairs of recumbent carpids looking over their backs to another
human head behind them. The style of the beasts, with their legs folded up
beneath them and their turned-back heads, vividly recalls Scythian gold-work
of the sixth and fifth centuries, some items of which found their way as far west
as Hungary,

The Rodenbach arm ring is not alone. Related pieces have been found in
female graves at Besseringen and Reinheim and in a hoard of seven gold rings
from Erstfeld in Switzerland, all seven evidently the product of a single work-

nuy

X Facing Bronze shickd
found in the River Witham
near Washinghorough,
Lincolnshire, England, The
end roundel illustrated in
detail shaws the careful
interplay of repoussé and

mscribed decoration. The
roundel is ‘carried” on the
head of & fabulous beast.
Third or second century ne
British Museum.

tk bronze disc
from the vehicle burial at
me-Bionne, Marne.
fifth century
e The disc, which was part
of a set of harness fittings,
demonstrates the skills of
the bronze-worker in setting
out complex geometric
designs, British Muscum,
London.



===== PAGE 137 (index-140_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

89 A diagrammatic repre-
sentation of the decoration
ona flagon from an
unkaown location but prob.
ably north-esstern France,
The flagon is Etruscan in
form but the decoration is
Celtic, Early fourth century
. Musée des Beaux-Arts,
Besangon, France,

grave of Roden
iserslautern,

Germany. The decoration is
characteristic of Early Style
and incorporates squatting
backward-looking cervids
similar in form to Scythian
animal art. The disembod

sed heads are common in shop. The iconography of the Erstfeld rings is complex in the extreme, with a
Cetife art of this periad. variety of humanoid, animal, or bird figures bound interminably in apparent
Historisches Muscum der Y ’

Plalz, Speyer. contlict. That it had a meaning we cannot doubt, but how to interpret the con-

ns

torted scenes is beyond recovery.

Together the items of ¢lite art, created by
master craftsmen in the Marne-Moselle
region in the fifth century, represent the first
innovative steps in the development of a
Celtic art style. Though they display an evi-
dent variety, there is a sufficient degree of
cohesion for art historians to use such port-
manteau phrases as Early Style or Early Strict
Style to contain the full repertoire. The
influence of the Graeco-Etruscan world is
still easily discernible. The much debated
‘animal art’ or ‘eastern influence’ is less cer-
tain. It could have been inspired by a few
imported items, perhaps of carved wood, for
which the Scythian artists were famous, but,
as some commentators have emphasized,
fabulous animals were very much a part of
the Etruscan repertoire and there is little



===== PAGE 138 (index-141_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

need at this early stage to suppose there to have been a strong eastern compo-
nent.

Celtic Art in the Fourth Century: Influences from the Po Valley

The development of Celtic art styles in the fourth century sc have been vari-
ously characterized. Earlier attempts used the rich ‘princ grave from
Waldalgesheim, near Bonn, as a type assemblage against which to compare
fourth-century products, and some observers even went so far as to propose a
‘Waldalgesheim master’. Others have been content with a less constricting ter-
minology, referring to the development as an Early Free Style. However, the
more descriptive phrase, Vegetal Style, best captures the principal and distinc-
tive characteristics of the products of the period, since the overriding motif is
the running tendril or linked band of lyre-palmettes. Animals and human
heads recede into the background. They do not entirely disappear but rather
lurk in the vegetation, from which, disguised, they occasionally peer out.

The centre of innovation is no longer the Rhine-Moselle region but the
Marne, Switzerland, Hungary, and the Po Valley, and it is the relationship of
the last with the broad northern zone that raises interesting questions. It is now
widely believed that the Celtic groups in the Cisalpine region, notably the Boii
¢ responsible for integrating Graeco-ltalic ideas with
Celtic and transmitting the result back to the innovating centres north of the
Alps. This interpretation would imply that close social links were maintained
between the Celts who had emigrated to the south and those who remained in
their northern homelands.

One artefact type which well exemplifies this is the jockey-cap helmet witha
neck-brim, hinged side pieces, and central plume attachment. Helmets of this
kind were usually made of iron, with an internal fabric lining and an exterior
decoration of bronze or gold panels ornamented in repoussé. Three have come

and the Senones, wi

ng

91 Gold neck rings from a
hoard found at Ensteld,
Canton Uni, Switzerland.
dating to the late fifth or
carly fourth century we. The
complex interweaving of the
figures and motifs is  theme
running throughous Celtic
ant. Schweizerisches
Landesmuscum, Zurich



===== PAGE 139 (index-142_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

g8 A S

La Tene artefacts.
Nos. +-7, Early Style, all

LaTenel. =/, 2
+ Bronze disc, Ecury-sur-

Coole, Mare; 2 Bronze

bowl, Saulces-Champen-

oises, Ardennes; 3 Helmet,
Amfreville-sous-les-Monts,

Eure: 4 Pot, Prunay, Marne:

5 Bronze flagon in Besangon

Museunt: 6 Beonze strainer

in Morel Collection;

7 Bronze brooch from

Prosues. Mamne. s

O

Nos. $-11, Vegetal Style.
& Flagon, Waldalgesheim, 7
Mainz-Bingen: 9 Tore,
Jonchery-sur-Saippes,
Marne: 1o Pot, Saulces-
Champenoiscs, Ardennes:
1 Bucket, Waldalgesheim,
Mainz-Bingen.

from northern Italy, from Monte Bibele, Gottolengo, and an imprecisely
located example from Umbria, and another was found in an elaborate grave at
Canosa di Puglia in Apulia (PL [Va). All four, which were evidently made in
northern Italy, display the Vegetal Style of decoration, which is at its most lux-
uriant on the Canosa example. The lower register shows, alternately, reversed
palmettes linked in a continuous band with fleshy S-shaped leaves, while in the
upper register half palmettes alternate with lyre palmettes. The style is closely
similar to that displayed on a disc from Auvers in the Marne, and on the flagon
at Besangon (Fig. 89), as well as the painted pot from Prunay (Marne), imply-
ing a close relationship between the craftsmen of the Po Valley and Marne in
the fourth century.

Two jockey-cap helmets of very similar kind have been found in France, one

120


===== PAGE 140 (index-143_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

from Agris (Pl XIIIb) near Angouléme and another from the Seine at
Amfreville-sous-les-Monts, the latter being made of bronze, while the former,
of iron covered with gold, could, technically,
be a north Italian product.

Another item which serves to link the
Celtic communities north and south of the
Alpsis the buffer-headed gold torc. An exam-
ple found in the cemetery of Filottrano in the
Italian territory of the Senones, decorated
with a central palmette combined with twin
ned foliage, is of a type found widely in tem-

perate Europe, with ¢
Bohemia, Austria, the Rhineland (Waldal
gesheim), and probably the Marne region.

amples coming from

Within this closely related series the Filot-

trano torc is seen to be an early example,
showing the initial stages in combining Greek
and Celtic motifs. The suggestion that the
style developed and spread north from Italy is
further supported by scabbard decoration
found at Filottrano and Moscano di Fabri-

ano, which is considered to be the origin of a type displayed on several scab

bards in northern France and on one from Bohemia, Taken together, the
evidence is strongly suggestive that artistic developments among the Italian
Celts were readily transmitted northwards to enhance the work of the crafts-
men who served the Transalpine Celtic élite and in whose schools many
regional variations began to develop. The vast spread of territory over which
the Vegetal Style is found is a reflection of a social mobility occasioned by the
warrior movements of the time.

Developments in the Third and Second Centuries

Formuch of the third and carly second centuries nc the society of Celtic Europe
was characterized by small communities whose menfolk equipped themselves
as warriors and may well have spent time away from the home base engaged in
raiding expeditions. There was, therefore, a high degree of mobility in both the
geographical and the social sense: some archacologists have even gone so far as
to characterize this as a period of democratization. In such a context it was the
swords of the warriors and the ornaments of their women that were to carry
forward the development of the metalworker's art,

The large numbers of decorated sword scabbards that survive allow distinct
schools or styles to be proposed, though inevitably in such cases art-historical
classifications are at best broad oversimplifications.

One of the most distinctive series of swords is found concentrated around

93 Bronze di red in

sheet gold decora

di
d inlaid with

repou

coral. From Auvers-su
Olise, Val d'Olise, France
Early fourth century n

Médailles, Bibliotheue
Nationake



===== PAGE 141 (index-144_1.jpg) =====
94 Examples of the
Hungarian Sword Style of
scabbard decoration.
Swords (lefi to right) from:
Batina, Croatia: Sremska(?),
Setbia; and Bolcske-
Madocsahegy, Hungary

(both right-hand examples).

Various scales. (After R.and
V. Megaw.)

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Lake Balaton in Transdanubia and is accordingly referred to as the Hungarian
Sword Style. Of the various motifs used, ‘dragon- pairs” are the most distinctive.
The two facing S-shaped dragons are really a variant of the simple lyre motif.
Dragon-pair swords, though concentrating in Hungary, are very widely dis-
tributed, reaching as far afield as England, Spain, Romania, and Italy. By the
second century the rigid bisymmetric motifs merge, giving way to more asym-
metric designs, which flow across and down the scabbard.

Another school of swordsmiths was at work at the same time in Switzerland
(Fig. 26). One of the favoured motifs here is that of birds” heads which grow out
of triskel or lyre motifs. The Swiss compositions are more symmetrical and
restrained than the Hungarian.

The Hungarian and Swiss Sword Styles are little more than the archacologi-
cally recognizable manifestations of a specific form of craft production which
spread across Europe and, over two centuries or so, will have been practised and
developed by a multitude of craftsmen, their individual creations being carried
farand wide by their warrior patrons to be admired and sometimes emulated in
distant lands,

The sword styles and related pieces are sometimes referred to as the Free
Graphic Style, to distinguish it from its more three-dimensional manifestation,
the Free Plastic Style. Plastic decoration is the method appropriate to the deco-
ration of neck, arm, and ankle rings and for decorative fittings attached to vehi-
cles or bronze vessels.

Knobbed anklets, hinged for case of fitting, are especially distinctive, the
knobs providing hemispherical surfaces which are ornamented in three dimen-
sions often with triskels terminating in buttons or studs. The same plastic con-
cepts were put to good use to create the human, animal, and grotesque heads
which brighten up the yokes and Jinch pins of chariots or stare Srom the rims or

22


===== PAGE 142 (index-145_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

handle attachments of vessels like the cauldron found in the Danish bog at Bri
with its fearsome guardian bird.

Free Plastic art, particularly that which incorporates animal forms, is very
different from that of the decorated sword scabbards. It uses the methods (of
casting) and also the ethos of the earlier styles of the fifth and fourth centuries;
even so it has moved a long way from its origins. These cast pieces and the
graphic decoration on sword scabbards and spears are far more than just orna-
ment to amuse. There can be little doubt that they were all deeply symbolic,
denoting status, lineage, and power, warning off adversaries and providing
protection, The sword, the chariot, the cauldron, and the human body were
redolent with visual messages which the Celts themselves would have well
understood.

The Impact of Scythians and Thracians?

During the sixth and fifth centuries Transdanubia developed a strong eastern,
horse-focused culture which may have been, in part at least, the result of new
peoples moving in from the region of the Pontic Steppe. To free it from pre-
conceptions which might be implied by ethnic names such as Scythians or
Sigynnae, it is usually referred to as the Vekerzug culture, after a type site pro-
ducing distinctive horse burials. The maintenance of strong cultural links with
the Pontic Steppe region produced, on the eastern borders of the Early La Téne
cultural province, a rich source of concepts and iconography, and from the
fourth century, when Celtic groups extended eastwards, there was much
mingling of populations. In such a situation one might expect eastern Celtic
culture to have absorbed some elements from the indigenous culture.

If one excludes the dragon-pairs on the swords, assuming them to have
developed from the Etruscan lyre motif, then there is remarkably little metal-
work that can be regarded as showing eastern characteristics, with the excep-
tion of a bronze drinking horn terminal from Jaszberény-Cserdhalom which
ends in an open-mouthed dragon wearing a torc. Hungarian pottery, on the
other hand, embodies many reflections of its complex cultural ancestry. Most
dramaticis a pottery vessel from Libatlan, inscribed on the neck with a scene in
which a cervid is being attacked and brought to the ground by two fierce
quadrupeds, presumably wolves. The composition is redolent of the struggling
animal theme so prevalent in steppe art.

Much of the Lower Danube Valley down to the Black Sea and the territories

95 Scene of stragghing
animals in a Scythian Style
inscribed on a pottery vessel
from Labatlan, Hungary,
Magyar Nemzeti Muzeum,

Budapest.


===== PAGE 143 (index-146_1.jpg) =====
96 Torc of iron covered in
silver from Trichtingen,
Baden-Wirttemberg,
Germany. The style of the
piece with the confronting
bovine beads and the use of
silver suggests an origin in
the Middle Danube region.
Sevond century ne. Wit
tembergisches Landes-
museum, Stuttgart,

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

on either side was occupied by a complex group of tribes who may collectivy
be called Thracians. From the fifth century onwards the Thracian tribes devel-

oped a characteristic art style of their own based on an amalgam of Greek,
Scythian, and eastern, ultimately Persian, ideas (Fig. 141). For the most part it
was an aristocratic art designed to provide prestige vessels for the feast and
armour for parade. The juxtaposition of Celtic and Thracian tribes in the
Middle Danube created conditions of contact between the two cultures, vary-
ing from trade and the exchange of gifts to the acquisition of booty by raiding.

Several items, found in western La Téne contexts, may be thought to show
Thracian influence. The ram-headed drinking horns from Schwarzenbach
have already been mentioned. Drinking horns and ram-headed terminals were
both prevalent in Thracian culture, and another drinking horn from
Weiskirchen, on the Saar, decorated in gold stamped with sphinxes, may con-
ceivably have been made in a Black Sea workshop. Their appearance in the
Rhine-Moselle area could have been the result of a diplomatic gift between the
nobility of the two regions. The Rodenbach arm ring, with its pairs of rams
looking over their shoulders, though presumably of local manufacture, would
have been familiar to a Thracian or Scythian.

From the early third century, when the Scordisci became firmly established
in the Middle Danube as direct neighbours of the Thracian Triballoi, regular
diplomatic relations must have become the norm. Surprisingly little has yet
been found to give substance to the exchange, but two items must be consid-
ered. The first is a silver-plated iron torc of massive proportions found at

y



===== PAGE 144 (index-147_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Trichtingen in south-western Germany. The high technical quality of the silver
plating might suggest an eastern craftsman, while the iconography, incorporat-
ing two facing bulls’ heads as terminals, is evidently Thracian. There can be lit-
tle doubt that the torc was made somewhere along the Lower Danube. By what
process it reached southern Germany it is impossible to say but its massive size
and the fact that both beasts wear torcs, a sign of sovereignty, suggest that it
could have been a diplomatic gift symbolizing a treaty of friendship between
two equal élites.

The second item is the justly famous Gunderstrup cauldron recovered from
abog in Jutland (P1. X1). While the cauldron form and certain pictorial details,
in particular the depiction of warrior infantry and cavalry, are decidedly Celtic,
much of the iconography and the use of silver and of gilding are Thracian. The
most reasonable explanation for this remarkable piece is that it was made by
Thracian craftsmen thoroughly conversant with the Celtic world. Whilst it
could have been a gift, of great value, from the king of the Triballoi to his equal
among the Scordisci, a more attractive hypothesis is that it was made and used
as a symbol of lasting friendship, and perhaps even joint rule, between the two
ethnically different polities.

The fact that the cauldron was eventually deposited in a Danish bog and the
Trichtingen torc ended up in Germany is an interesting comment on the
mobility of valuable items in the Celtic world. To this same list we may add an
animal-ornamented silver gilt disc from Helden in Holland which is stylistic-
ally and technically of Thracian manufacture, and the remarkable collection of
metalwork including phalarae and greaves recovered (but subsequently lost
again) in the cighteenth century, on the tiny island of Sark near the Channel
Island of Guernsey. Judging from contemporary illustrations, the collection is
likely to have come ultimately from the Lower Danube region. The Helden and
Sark finds were probably buried in the late first century e or early first century
AD, but this says little of their date of manufacture or the route through which
they passed to their final place of deposition.

What survives in the archacological record presently available is only a
minute tithe of the works of high artistic merit which must have been moving
about Europe displayed for all to admire, The visual stimulation for the inven-
tive craftsman must have been immense.

The Art of the Sculptor

The art of the sculptor is art in the service of the gods. Here we will consider the
range and style of the work rather than its religious context, which is the theme
for a later chapter. Although a number of notable stone sculptures have been
recovered, mainly from western Europe, in reviewing them we should bear in
mind that they probably represent only a pale reflection of the sculptor’s art,
much of which islikely to have been in wood and therefore tends not to survive,

The earliest piece so far to come to light is a unique, roughly life-size carving

125


===== PAGE 145 (index-148_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

in the round of a warrior, found lying at the edge of a barrow at Hirschlanden
(Fig. 52) near Hohenasperg. If, as seems highly likely, the statue once topped the
barrow and was contemporary with it, then it must date to the late sixth cen

tury. The figure is shown as naked except for a two-thonged belt holding a short
dagger of Late Hallstatt type, a neck ring, and a conical hat very similar to that
made in birch bark and worn by the Hochdorf chieftain in death. The figure is
carved from local sandstone but in style is highly reminiscent of contemporary
carvings from the Abruzzi region and from Nesazio Pola in
Istria, su ting that the inspiration, and perhaps even the
sculptor, came from the Etruscan south, whence, at this time,

the élite of the Middle Rhine were receiving many cultural
influences.

group of sculptures from southern Germany dating to the
fifth or fourth century is more obviously of native work,
embodying as it does a religious iconography that is also
reflected in broadly contemporary metalworkers' art. The
most obviously ‘La Tene’ of the pieces is a four-sided pillar
from Pfalzfeld. Each of the sides, framed by cabling, bears a
stylized human head carved in high relicf. The heads wear the
a common motif presumably of reli-
gious significance—and appear to be sprouting three-pointed

so-called ‘leaf crowns™

ds and the frames the space is filled
-shaped

beards. Between the hea

with running scrolls and lyre patterns composed of ¢

mot

The leaf crowns are a feature shared with two other items
from the region, a fragmentary stone head from Heidelberg
and a stone pillar figure from Holzgerlingen. The Heidelberg
head is a dramatic piece with piercing circular eyes and a fur-
rowed brow which enhances the ferocity of his stare. The
Holzgerlingen pillar statue, carved similarly on two opposite
faces, is altogether simpler, with the facial features, and right
arm folded across the stomach, heavily schematized. None the
less, standing originally some 2.5 metres, it would have pre-
sented a terrifying vision. Another pillar sculpture, from
Waldenbach, not far from Holzgerlingen, is rather different in
style. Only the bas
pattern with which it is decorated in low relief is characteristic
ofthe fourth or third century. Little remains of the figure which
sepillarfrom  comprised the upper part of the pillar except for a well-sculpted arm and hand.
<StGoar Germany.— Together the southern German group of sculptures suggests a long-lived and

ide bears a head with a

now survives, but the complex curvilinear

d triple varied tradition.

d. Fift

pointed b
fourth cen
Rheinisches |

museum, I

A second group of religious sculptures comes from Provence and helps to
8 R

characterize the Celto-Ligurian culture of the region—a long-established folk

des.

nn culture overlain and modified by influences from the nearby Greek colonies

126


===== PAGE 146 (index-149_1.jpg) =====
THI ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

and also from the Celtic world. A recurring theme is the cult of

the severed head. This is most dramatically represented by a
pillar carved with a series of heads, presumably from a sanctu
ary, which was found reused as a door sill in the oppidum of
Entremont, near Aix-en-Provence. A carving of four severed
heads in a pile is a further image of the cult. Not far away, at

Roquepertuse, an array of religious sculptures has been recov

ered, including columns with niches for severed human heads,
and a lintel carved with a fricze of horse heads (Fig. 164) upon

which probably once stood a dramatic stone carving of a bird of
prey. Another notable find was a pair of stylized Janus-heads

sharing a single leaf crown. Both Entremont and Roquepertuse

also produced elegant renderings of life-sized human figures

seated cross-legged. In the trabeated architecture of the

Roquepertuse sanctuary and the seated figures (Fig. 163) we are


===== PAGE 147 (index-150_1.jpg) =====
o1 B

pottery

% and red painted
ft

e Early La Tene

Champagne.

Le Champ la Guerre',
Prui 3 20 Quartier Saint
Basles’, Prunay;

‘Culvidame’, Bussy-Je
Chiteau: 4: "Le Mont de la
Forche', Lavannes

THL ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

4 clearly seeing the influence of the Greek world,
but the severed heads and Janus-like deities
provide a firm link with the Celtic symbolism

Ane

n more fearsome image was found at
Noves in the Lower Rhone Valley. The “Taras-
que’ of Noves, as itis called, is a squatting beast
clasping severed, bearded heads in its fore-
paws whilst devouring a body of which only
the arm protrudes from its jaws. A somewhat
similar rendering, from Linsdorf in Alsace, is
an indication that the imagery had a wide geo
graphic spread.

In addition to these two highly distinctive
regional groupings of sculpture, a number of
individual items have been found widely scat
tered. A small stone figure from Euffigneix

. 83) in the Marne evidently depicts a deity,

wearing a tor, and is identified by a vigorous
rendering of a boar against his body. Another
god figure, again wearing a torc, but this time
holdingalyre, was discovered at Paule in west

ern Brittany. It is probably also in this same
category of deities that we should place the
famous head from the religious site of Miecké
Zehrovice (P, Villa) in Bohemia. He, too,

wears a torg, but is considerably larger in scale than the two French figurines.

These few surviving isolated examples are a reminder of both the diversity and
the extent of Celtic sculpture. Similar icons and their wooden counterparts
must have pervaded all parts of the Celtic sphere.

Ceramic Art

One of the most striking characteristics of La Tene culture is the frequent, and
often highly elaborate, deco

ation of pottery using motifs common to those of
the metalworker. An example of this is the popularity and widespread distribu-

tion of pottery with stamped decoration (Map 24) which was produced in sev

eral centres from the fifth to the third centuries, concentrating in a broad zone
from the Moselle to Transdanubia but extending as scattered outliers even fur-
ther. The high technical quality of this ware and standardized range of motifs
and motifarrangements are strongly indicative of a shared set of cultural values
and a degree of centralization in production. Outliers of the generalized style in

western Brittany (Fig. 122) raise interesting questions about the nature of con-

tact at this time.
By the fourth century the Breton potters had begun to develop a highly dis

128


===== PAGE 148 (index-151_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

tinctive curvilinear style of decoration, at its most sophisticated on vessels from
Saint-Pol-de-Léon (Fig. 82), Pendreff en Commana, Kélouer Plouhinec and
Blauet (Fig. 123). The lyre patterns and running S-scrolls are highly accom-
plished reflections of the very best of the metalworker's repertoire developing
in the Marne and Moselle regions. The striking similarity raises the question of
the mechanism by which these visual concepts spread. The simplest explana-
tion is that the Breton masters were using imported metal vessels as the source,
and the discovery of inscribed bronze vessels of this quality from Cerrig-y-
Drudion (Fig. 124) in Wales shows that such pieces had a mobility. Even so the
transmission of metalworkers' designs to a subtly curving ceramic form
required exceptional skill.

The same range of abilities was demonstrated by the potters working in the
Marne region. Already in the fifth century pottery was being decorated,
wsually with geometric incisions, but more adventurous compositions were
making an appearance, such as the facing S-shaped beasts, or dragon-pairs, on
the beaker from La Cheppe. In the fourth century a far more claborate style had
developed in which the red-fired vessel was painted in black in such a way asto
leave intricate curvilinear patterns appearing in the red body colour. The close
similarity between the design on the pedestal vase from Prunay and that on the
helmet from Canosa di Puglia leaves little doubt of their common artistic
ancestry. A slightly later vessel from Bussy-le-Chateau, probably dating to the
carly third century, uses the same reversal technique, but the running scroll is
more developed. Clearly, in the Marne region painted pottery served as a pres-
tige item for several generations, during which the ceramic artists remained in
the forefront of artistic development.

The inscribed curvilinear decoration of Brittany and the painted version of
the Marne are two of the most impressive examples of potters’ art in the Early
and Middle La Téne period, but other regions could boast more modest output.
In the south-west of Britain, for example, a number of different production
centres created their own simplified versions of curvilinear decorated pottery,
perhaps influenced by their neighbours across the Channel in Brittany, while in
Northamptonshire a different curvilinear style of pottery decoration devel-
oped. In Hungary, on the other hand, potters favoured more plastic forms of
decoration in the form of human or animal heads usually at the attachment of
handles to the vessel. In this they will have had in mind the heads attached to
metal vessels,

Many of the fine creations of ceramic art are likely to have been prestige
goods produced by skilled craftsmen for an élite, perhaps specifically as grave
goods, but their more lowly value, when compared with metalwork, and their
general fragility will have mitigated against movement, by gift or exchange, far
from their territory of origin. Below this level of production were far more
humble pots, essentially the folk art of the ordinary people, produced to serve
everyday needs, to symbolize the ethnic unity of the community, and to demar-
cate aspects of their social relationships.

129


===== PAGE 149 (index-152_1.jpg) =====
Painted pottery
m the cemetery of
Fosse-Minore at Caurel,
Mame, France. The bold
curvilinear decoration

is painted in red. Se

Nationales, Saint-Germain
en-Laye, Paris.

THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

w2 Right: Pottery vessel from La
Cheppe, Marne, France. Second
half of fifth century sc. Each of the
two zones of decoration shows.
pairs

fronting m
Similar dragon-pairs frequently
ormament the hilt ends of sword
sheaths. Musée des Antiquités
Nationales, Saint-Germain-<n
Laye, Paris.

nsters.

An indication that decorative motifs of orig)
part of everyday existence is provided by the wooden vessels preserved at the
lake village of Glastonbury in Somerset. At this level we might reasonably begin
to wonder whether decoration might here be being used for no reason other

ity and vigour were a regular

than to give pleasure.

The Art of the Die Engraver

The debt of Celtic art to inspiration gained from the Mediterranean extends to
the specialized sphere of die engraving as the essential creative preliminary to
the striking of coins. Coin manufacture began in the Celtic zone at the begin-
ning of the third century 8¢, the impetus coming, in part, from the flood of

130


===== PAGE 150 (index-153_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

Hellenistic coinage brought back from the Mediterranean by Celts who had
served as mercenaries, and in part from the Greek colonies around the Golfe du
Lion. The gold or silver coin was a convenient method of payment for service or
reward for faithful clientage and as such it soon gained widespread popularity.

Silver was the favoured medium in the Middle and Lower Danube, the
Balkans, northern Italy, and southern France, while gold was preferred in the
north inazone stretching from Bohemia to southern Britain. Different regions
favoured different prototypes. The most popular in the Middle Danube was the
tetradrachms of Philip 11 of Macedon (359-36), which had a head of Zeuson the
obverse and rider on the reverse, but in the west the model was Philip's gold
stater, with the head of Apollo on the obverse and a charioteer and team on the
reverse. Between the two, in the Upper Danube and Bohemian region, the gold
stater of Alexander the Great with helmeted Athene and a winged Victory pro-
vided the prototype. Why these different preferences developed is impossible
1o say—it need mean little more than the accident of what models were to hand
when the decision was taken to begin a particular local series,

The coins minted in the Greek cities around the Golfe du Lion proved popu-
lar prototypes in the west. The didrachms of Rhoda were widely copied in
south-western Gaul in the basin of the Garonne, while the communities of the
Po Valley favoured the model provided by Massilliot drachms.

The processes involved in manufacturing coins were comparatively simple.
To begin with the appropriate amount of metal had to be exactly weighed out
and reduced to a blank by melting in a proformer. In the first-century rectan-
gular sheets of baked clay with rows of deep indentations were used, so that fifty
or more blanks could be produced at any one time. The blank (or flan) was then
placed between two engraved dies, one firmly fixed to a base the other held in
the hand, and the foot of the hand-held die was struck a heavy blow impressing
both designs onto the flan.

The huge array of Celtic coinage available for study leaves little doubt that
from the third century sc there existed a distinct class of craftsmen highly
skilled at the intricate art of die cutting, Not only were these craftsmen techni-
cally accomplished, with steady hand and fine eyesight, but they were creative
artists in their own right. The vitality and sense of movement they were able to
create, particularly when dealing with the horse and chariot, are remarkable.
The freedom (and constraint) of the die provided the stimulus for a creativity
which, in many instances, surpassed that achieved by craftsmen working on
larger scales. The art of the coin engraver deserves far more attention than it has
been afforded by numismatists intent on clas

The Broader Context

Celtic art, because of its energy and novelty, has justly achieved fame, but to
remove it, as has so often been done in the past, from its social context and to
treat it in the manner of modern art-historical analysis, is entirely inappropri-

131

104 Abowe: Gold stater of
DVMNOL THGHR SN0 of the
British tribe, the Corieltauvi
who occupied much of
Lincolnshire. The original
coin is t9 millimetres across.
To make a dic on this small
scale indicates the great skill
of the die-carver,

108 Below: Silver minim of
the Atrebates, a tribe which
controlled much of central
southern Britain (Hamp-
shire, West Sussex, and
Berkshire). The original
coin is only 9 millimetres
in diameter.

.~



===== PAGE 151 (index-154_1.jpg) =====
THE ARTS OF THE MIGRATION PERIOD

ate, Celtic art was functional and served a variety of ever-changing needs. Its
practitioners carried with them not only skill but a deep knowledge of society's
beliefs and values expressed in symbols. That knowledge was potent and it must
surely have been revered and feared. For this reason it is quite likely that the
craftsman existed in a world outside the bounds of the closed community.,

To attempt to understand the nature of a society through an observer-
imposed interpretation of its art is a dangerous game. But is it too spurious to
see in the tightly sprung tension of the art of the fourth and third centuries
something that would have appealed to the reckless warrior hordes, or in the
enigmatic faces which peer from the stylized foliage an image that had meaning
for those who believed in the shape-shifting of the gods?

132


===== PAGE 152 (index-155_1.jpg) =====
s, Denmark
eals weari
ods, much of the detail derives from Thracian art, and

silver, of which the cauldron ph e made, is common in the Thra orkd and
the Celts. It is able that the cauldron was made in the Midk n in
y »¢ and trans,



===== PAGE 153 (index-156_1.jpg) =====
e P
a


===== PAGE 154 (index-157_1.jpg) =====
7
Iberia and the Celtiberians

Tue questions raised by the origins and nature of Celtic settlement in the
Iberian Peninsula bring into sharp focus many of the general issues considered
in Chapter 1, in particular the relationship between language, ethnicity, and
archacology. Classical writers describing Iberia frequently refer to the presence
of Celtiberians, the Celtic language was spoken in some areas, and social sys-
tems existed which bore similarities to those of the historical Celts in temperate
Europe; yet the material culture differed markedly from that of the La Tene
type. In considering the problem in the Peninsula, therefore, it is necessary to
dissociate La Tene material culture from the concept of ‘Celtic” and in doing so
the nature and significance of the Celtic language are inevitably raised.

The Landscape and Culture of Iberia

Before considering the matter of Celtic societies in the Peninsula, something
must be said about the landscape and the broader cultural context within which
the enquiry lies. The roughly square mass of the Iberian Peninsula can, at a
highly simplified level, be regarded as a flat plain tilted down to the west.
Because of this the east and south coasts present their somewhat austere moun-
tainous backs to the Mediterranean while the western, Atlantic, coast is lower
and more accessible. Iberia is also effectively isolated from the rest of Europe by
the Pyrences and their westward extension—the mountain ranges of Canta-
bria, This basic structure determines that most of the major rivers of Iberia—
the Duero, Tagus, Guadiana, and Guadalquivir—flow westwards to the
Atlantic; the Ebro and the Segura are the only significant east-flowing rivers.
The position of the Peninsula, between the Atlantic and the Mediterranean,
aswell as its varied relief, has a direct effect on climate, the north and west being
significantly wetter and cooler than the south and east. This, in turn, conditions
vegetation—the south-east has a Mediterranean climate, allowing the growth

133


===== PAGE 155 (index-158_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

and ripening of olives and vines, while the north and west are essentially tem-
perate with much deciduous woodland. The Peninsula is also a rich source of
metals, the most prolific zone being the ‘pyrite arc” extending from the copper-
and silver-rich Sierra Morena in the south to Galicia and the Cantabrian
Mountains in the north-west where tin and gold are concentrated. These geo-
morphological factors, in their various ways, have all had an effect on the eth-
nic and political development of the region.

The communities of the east Mediterranean first began to establish links with
Iberia, either directly or indirectly, in the Late Bronze Age, an interest reflected
in a few sherds of Mycenaean pottery found in Andalucia. It may have been in
the wake of these early exchanges that the first Phoenician contacts were estab-
lished with the south-west, but it was not until the eighth century nc that the
Phoenician port-of-trade at Gadir (Cddiz) developed as the base for regular
and intensive exchanges between the cast Mediterranean entrepreneurs and
the metal-rich kingdom of Tartessos occupying the region of the Lower
Guadalquivir and the valleys of the Rio Tinto and Odeil. In the seventh and
sixth centuries a string of Phoenician settlements were set up along the south-
ern coast as far east as Guardamar, and as a result the native culture of Anda-
lucia underwent an ‘orientalizing' phase.

Greek contact with the south is attested as carly as ¢.630, when Kolaios, a
native of Samos, explored the markets of Tartessos and came back a rich man.
It was also during the latter part of the seventh century that the Greeks from
Phocaea began to explore the north-western shores of the west Mediterranean
from the Rhone to the Segura, an exploration which culminated in the founda-
tion of Massalia c.600 and the creation of other colonies around the Golfe du
Lion with Emporion (Ampurias) founded not long after. Greek trading inter-
ests extended well down the coast of Levantine Iberia, at least to the Segura
mouth, where a fortified base was set up at La Picola in about 430 sc. Further to
the south and west Greek trading interests penetrated the zone first developed
by the Phoenicians, but the nature of the interaction is obscure,

From the eighth century until the middle of the third century the orientaliz-
ing and classicizing effects of intensive trade on the Mediterranean coastal zone
of Iberia, from the Straits of Gibraltar to the Ebro Valley, contributed to the
development of Iberian culture. Large nucleated settlements, many of them
already occupied in the Late Bronze Age, developed the characteristics of Medi-
terranean cities; a distinctive art style represented in vase painting, sculpture,
and metalworking emerged; and the social system developed a degree of com-
plexity which, by the fourth century, can reasonably be called a state system,
That a distinctive script emerged to express the Iberian language was no doubt
aconsequence of increasing socio-economic complexity. It wasat this time that
military forces, armed with round shields and falcatas (short swords with a sin-
gle curved cutting edge), took on the appearance of hoplite armies and were in
demand as mercenaries throughout the Mediterranean,

Inshort, the Iberians of southern and castern Iberia can best be regarded asa

134


===== PAGE 156 (index-159_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

Mediterranean people sharing in the broader development of the region
throughout the middle of the first millennium. After the mid-third century,
when the Barcid dynasty from Carthage began to build a power base in south-
ern Iberia, following Carthaginian failures in the First Punic War (264-241), the
Iberians became caught up directly in Mediterrancan power struggles—an
involvement which led to the gradual annexing of the entire Peninsula by the
Romans over a period of two centuries following their destruction of Cartha-
ginian power and the capture of Cidiz in 206 nc.

The Atlantic zone presented an altogether different picture. Already during
the second millennium the Atlantic communities had developed close contacts
one with another along the length of the Iberian seaboard and had established
wider links with the network which bound the communities of western France,
Brittany, western Britain, and Ireland together in a series of overlapping
spheres of interaction. It is unlikely that long-distance voyages were the norm
along the Atlantic front: exchanges at this time were probably down-the-line
between neighbours, but in this way commodities, especially metals, could be
moved over considerable distances.

The Atlantic bronze industry received a new impetus when the Phoenicians
established themselves on the Atlantic island of Cédiz. The consuming demand
for tin, which was to be had in quantity in Galicia, Brittany, and Cornwall, and
the ready accessibility of gold from these regions and from Wales and Ireland
would certainly have led the entrepreneurs of Cidiz to encourage their native
counterparts working the Atlantic sea-ways to bring supplies to the Phoenician
port. As the Phoenician presence became established, Mediterranean sailors
began to explore the Atlantic for themselves. In this way, it seems, enclaves were
established around the coast at least as far north as the estuary of the Tagus and
south along the African coast to Mogador. In all probability a few more enter-
prising ships’ masters ventured further. The sixth-century sailing manual
known as the Massilliot Periplus gives directions and advice for sailing into the
Atlantic at least as far north as Britain and Ireland. On one such journey, in the
late fourth century, Pytheas, a Greek from Massalia, reached Britain and prob-
ably beyond and managed to return safely to record his experiences.

In spite of the infiltration of the Atlantic sea-ways by Mediterranean influ-
ences, the indigenous culture, deeply rooted in the Bronze Age, remained
strong. In the north-west of the Peninsula continuous development through-
out the second half of the first millennium led to the emergence of a highly dis-
tinctive Castro culture characterized by defended hilltop settlements (castros),
decorated pottery types, and stone sculptures. This community was among the
last to submit to Rome in the first century se.

The north-east of Iberia, and in particular the Ebro Valley and the coastal
regions of Catalonia, developed a Late Bronze Age culture which exhibited
close parallels with Urnfield developments in temperate Europe. The cultures
on the two sides of the Pyrences were sufficiently similar to suggest that close
contacts were maintained, possibly involving limited movements of people. At

135


===== PAGE 157 (index-160_1.jpg) =====
106 The Iberian Peninsula,
showing the focus of Celt-
iberian culture with the
names of the principal Celtic
tribes.

IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

the very least the Iberian communities
readily absorbed the beliefs and material
cultural assemblages of their northern
neighbours interpreting them in a local
manner, The extension of Greek influ-
ence along the coast of northern Cata-
lonia, following the establishment of
Emporion in the sixth century, helped
to integrate this coastal zone into a
Ligurian sphere which spread around
the Golfe du Lion.

This brief overview of Iberia in the
first millennium e has left the centre of
the Peninsula unaccounted for. Here
lived indigenous groups who spoke
Celtic and were to develop the distinctive characteristics of Celtiberian culture.

Celts and Celtiberians through Contemporary Eyes

Direct evidence for the existence of Celts in Iberia is provided by the classical
historians. The carliest of these is Herodotus, who, writing in the mid-fifth cen-
tury 8¢, makes oblique and somewhat confusing references to the Celtic pres-
ence. In one passage he mentions that they were the most westerly people in
Europe next to the Cynetes, who appear to have been the inhabitants of the
extreme south-west of the Peninsula. Elsewhere he says that the Celts lived
beyond the ‘Pillars of Hercules'—the area known 1o us as the Straits of Gib-
raltar. Both comments provide a reasonable geographical precision and leave
no doubt that Herodotus' informants believed there were Celts in western
Iberia. When Herodotus notes that Celts lived around the source of the Danube
and that the Danube rose near Pyrene—a place name thought to be connected
to the Pyrenees—he was presumably conflating two different scraps of infor-
mation into a single incorrect perception.

The third-century writer Eratosthenes also comments on Celts in Iberia,
contrasting their prominence in his own time to the situation two centurics
earlier when they had been less numerous or at least less important. From the
beginning of the second century Celtiberes or Celtiberi began to be referred to
with increasing frequency in the various conflicts in which the Romans were
engaged in the Peninsula. According to Diodorus, no doubt quoting Posei-
donius, ‘Celtiberes are a fusion of two peoples and the combination of Celtsand
Iberes only took place after long and bloody wars’ (Hist. 5. 33). This may be
nothing more than a helpful rationalization but it was widely believed. Indeed
Martial, who was born in Bilbilis in Celtiberian territory in Ap 40, several times
refers in his writing to ‘we who are descended from Celts and Iberians’,
Diodorus characterizes the Celtiberes, saying that they were very warlike but

136


===== PAGE 158 (index-161_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

were noted for their hospitality, since they regarded strangers as being under
divine protection. He goes on to say that ‘some have shields of lightly-con-
structed Celtic type; others a round shield of the kind more familiar in the
Greek world. The iron of their two-edged swords, shorter than the Celtic great
sword, is capable of cutting anything’ (Hist. 5. 33).

Other authors contribute to the generalized Graeco-Roman view of the
Celtiberian, emphasizing the dual attribute of military ferocity and hospitality.
Support of the chiefin battle was demanded of every warrior and to survive him
was a criminal act: death in battle was glorious. One tantalizing account says
that they believed that the souls of those who died in battle and were eaten by
vultures went straight to heaven. Here, just possibly, is a reference to the rite of
excarnation. Among at least one tribe, the Vaccaei, land and the harvest were
the property of the community, and every year land was reapportioned to those
who worked it. Many other anecdotes are recorded, such as Celtiberians drink-
ing wine mixed with honey or cleaning their teeth with stale urine, but these
add little to our understanding other than local colour. Taken together, then,
the ancient sources are consistent in their belief in the Celtic ethnicity of the
societies they encountered beyond the northern and western borders of the
more civilized Mediterranean-facing Iberians of the south and east.

The Celtic Language

The origin and development of palacohispanic languages present highly com-
plex problems which have provided a fertile field for study and debate among
scholars, It is only fair to stress that that debate continues and many issues are
still unresolved. At the very simplest level, however, it is possible to divide much
of the Peninsula into two broad linguistic zones based on the common occur-
renceof distinctive typonyms. In the south and east there exists a concentration
of place names ending in -il()i, -il(t)u, which are thought to be non Indo-

107 The distribution of
Celtic place names in Iberia
gives some idea of the area
of the Peninsula aver which
the Celtic language wasin
use. Some of the Celtic name
elements appear for the first
time in Roman place names.

European and from their distribution

clearly correspond to the region that was [_
culturally and historically that of the
Iberians. Over much of the rest of the
country names ending in -briga are
comparatively widespread; these reflect
the area over which a Celtic language

was spoken. .
When examined in more detail, how- > S "
ever, something of the complexity of the r A R

situation becomes apparent. The zone
of non-Indo-European place names
extending from southern Portugal to
the Levantine-Catalan region can be
divided into several different groups.

——

TN A0 Wowes



===== PAGE 159 (index-162_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

Similarly within the broad -briga zone several linguistic sub-zones can be
defined, the most distinctive being the area of the Lusitani and Gallaecia on the
Atlantic coast, which is thought by some linguists to represent an archaic form
of Celtic, and the north of Galicia around Lugo and La Coruna. There are also
significant differences in language east and west of a divide which runs approx-
imately through Oviedo and Mérida. None the less, these groups all belong to
the broadly defined Celtic family of Indo-European.

The questions which immediately arise are when and how was the Celtic lan-
guage introduced into Iberia? Earlier linguistic studies have stressed that most
of the Celtic which survives for study in Iberia is of the more ancient Q-Celtic
form, suggesting an early penetration. There is, however, some evidence of P-
Celtic in place names with the -dunum ending, suggesting to some linguists the
possibility of a second penetration. Since the -dunum names were found over
only a limited territory, concentrating mainly in Catalonia, it has been sug-
gested that a later Celtic ‘influx” through the Pyrences was superimposed upon
an already established and far more extensive Celtic-speaking region.

Interpretations of this kind must be regarded as oversimplifications. At best
the linguistic evidence shows that Celtic, in various forms, was spoken over
large areas of Iberia. It does not take with it a convincing chronology nor can it
be used as a model for population movements.

It has been argued that the Celtic language had already evolved by the time
that food-producing communities first moved into northern and central Iberia
in the Neolithic period, but the view is not widely supported. An alternative is
to see the language spreading as the result of a series of successive migrations in
later prehistoric times, different ‘waves’ of Celtic speakers settling different
areas. Yetanother suggestion is that a limited influx of population took place in

108 One of the longest the north-east of Iberia, whence, as an élite language, Celtic spread to other
bcripian Ok o The simple reality is that we do not know, nor is it within the nature of
iéiteyey e s the evidence ever to provide firm answers to these problems. All that can safely
Saragossa in Spain, It was. be said is that by the fourth century sc a Celtiberian spoke a language which had
:;:l:‘l::d'l::‘u':::';::r‘l::" much in common with that spoken by many communities of western and cen-
preted ssa contracteelating  tral Europe, and by good fortune the Celtiberians sometimes had recourse to
insame waytoland awner record transactions in their native language on metal plaques like that found at

ship. Museo Arqueoldgico 5 g s g .
Nacional, Madrid, * Botorrita, which contribute to a growing corpus of invaluable texts,

inscriptions in the Celt- region

——— e s — -
L WONAMEEZQONM AW LR WM QL I MEQAMNTHQY MG T e § iyl Y
W MEOL T QAP B DI WMYINEQE XAME MR CAOPINEOERPIMNPIY Y SPANENT P W EMHS PR D
S PREa Rp ) RIVERR HMOESM @ MPREGSH MY WM 91 PUGIM PR WY BNM S MY @09 7 51 @
: o f'AW':’ WINEE [EMAQ PR P NP RNG (h M ARHIA Dk § )iy P8R 9T T
DI | WAL L PPN Fin BTN RSP TS H 570 mm Y o 914D W Goa Xl SE DS IS
: DIk ey MR N IMDN DB E QRAE VKA QNG AMNINY B I ol ¥ IR o
i
M
s
S

B NIV N 77 8% 1 N 1O R MARIVS M SHNG MK [ 9 5 e MV 1o B OMXIG
P93 ¥PrOp e il oM e QX A 10"“:&’.‘#-‘0%5‘«&w&*?gfém?w%p\:ms':mwwg
BN KUY LR @G W M DF MDA S P GERQMPArP S el g I mEr QR M

T 2 T N A (N A L Ay Tl SR S e LA Te

HOETNYNSTMXNIN ZTEMPIEN S MO NS L Fif 51 KRG
HOETNRNI0 XN T TEWPIEN QM (€M 5 pytire SR SPURTROW

138


===== PAGE 160 (index-163_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

The ‘Arrival’ of the Celts: Some Theories

The question of the ‘arrival’ of Celtic-speaking peoples in the Iberian Peninsula
has understandably been the subject of much debate. In the nineteenth century
it was usual to link 'Celts” with the construction of megalithic tombs, more
because the megaliths were at that time the best-known elements of the archae-
ological record than for any more positive reason. In the 1920s and 1930s, asan
awareness of the complexity of the archaeological record grew, it was suggested
that the Celtic advent was reflected in the material culture of the Urnfields of
north-eastern Iberia. This, it was argued, was directly related to the culture of
western and central Europe, which was the homeland of the Celts. Further
study refined the view, leading to the ‘two-Celtic-waves’ theory. This saw an
initial wave arriving from north of the Pyrenees about 1000 e, with a second,
more complex invasion bringing in new peoples in the sixth century. Another
version of the same general theory held that there was only one phase of incom-
ings, some time in the eighth century. However, the demonstration that the
Celtiberian zone and the distribution of the Iberian Urnfields were exclusive
and that the language spoken in the Urnfield area was not Indo-European did
much to undermine the traditional view. More recently some commentators
have attempted, somewhat unconvincingly, to demonstrate that the Celtic
incursion was the result of movements of the La Téne Celts,

Current Spanish work accepts that these monocausal explanations are over-
simple. Invasionist theories are rejected in favour of a model based on the
assimilation of selected cultural elements by the indigenous élites. The model
proposes the existence of a cultural ‘substratum’ embedded in the Atlantic
Bronze Age which had already absorbed some linguistic and ideological traits
common to the historical Celts. Among the distinguishable characteristics are
a language form in which place and personal names retain an initial P and are
closely related to the later Lusitanian language, circular houses, burial rites
involving the excarnation of the dead, and religious locations associated with
natural phenomena such as mountains, springs, rivers, and woods. This
‘proto-Celtic” culture gradually developed, in the highlands of the Iberian
Mountains and the Eastern Meseta, into the culture of the historical Celtiber-
ians, as a result of absorbing influences emanating from the Mediterranean
fringe. From the homeland of its genesis, Celtiberian culture spread to north-
ernand western Iberia, being readily assimilated by the ‘proto-Celtic” substrate,
butin the extreme north and west—the area of the Castro culture—the ‘proto-
Celtic’ culture remained largely untainted.

Thisinterpretation raises a number of interesting questions and possibilities.
In its reliance on an Atlantic Bronze Age ‘proto-Celtic’ culture, it opens the
possibility for developing a model which embraces the whole of Atlantic
Europe—a matter to which we will return in the next chapter. The view that
classic Celtiberian culture was an amalgam of the indigenous ‘proto Celtic’ with
an overlay of Mediterranean influences is precisely what has been suggested, in

139


===== PAGE 161 (index-164_1.jpg) =====
100 Above Antennac-hilted
sword from Alcacer do Sal,
Porgugal, is typical of swords
of the sixth to fourth cen
turics 8¢ in use in the
Celtiberian region. Museu
Nacional de Arqucologia ¢
Etnologia, Lisbon.

1o Right: The oppidunt of
Los Cogotas, Avila, Spain,
s one of the better-known
defended scttlements of the
Celtiberian region of Spain,
1t has been extensively exca.
vated as the result of which
the arrangement of the inte-
rior buildings has been
identified in outline allow
ing this artist's reconstruc
tion to be offered.

IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

Chapter 3, as the process behind the emergence of the La Tene Celtic culture of
temperate Europe.

The Archaeology of the Celtiberians

The homeland of the Celtiberians lay in the north-eastern part of Iberia stretch-
ing from the southern flank of the Ebro Valley to the Eastern Meseta. To the
north lay the territory of the Urnfield culture, to the west the loosely linked
communities of the Atlantic Bronze Age, while to the cast and south, along the
Mediterranean fringe, the distinctive Iberian culture was soon to emerge as
contacts with the east Mediterranean states intensified. The Celtiberian zone
therefore lay on three peripheries and inevitably benefited by absorbing cul-
tural elements from all three.

The harshness of parts of the territory, particularly the plains of the Meseta,
desiccated during the summer months, necessitated a degree of transhumance
in the pastoral economy. The flocks and herds were taken to upland mountain
pastures before the heat came and were brought down again in autumn. Such
conditions allowed a gradual increase in population and led to the emergence
of an élite reflected in a series of rich graves furnished with short swords, spears,
d round shields, redolent of the warrior-based nature of society.
The principal burial rite was urned cremation, adopted from the Urnfield
cultural zone to the north-east, but other elements came from the south and
east, including geometric painted pottery, fibulae with two-part springs, and
belt hooks, all characteristic of Tartessian culture. The short antennae-hilted

140


===== PAGE 162 (index-165_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

iron sword was, however, a development spec-
ific to the north, extending, with regiona i
tions, over the Celtiber

an area and the Ebro

Valley, and across the Pyrences into Languedoc
and Aquitania,

From the sixth century se the influence of
stimuli from the cultures of the Mediterranean

littoral and the developing Iberian hinterland
intensified. By the fourth century the Celt-
iberians were using rotary querns and the pot-
ter's wheel. Celtiberian script, derived from
Iberian, was in use by the third century, and
large oppida-like settlements—again probably
an Iberian inspiration—began to develop at
about the same time or a little later.

To what extent Celtiberian culture received
significant influences from the La Téne cultural
zone it is difficult to say. A scatter of La Téne
artefacts have been found in Iberia, most nota-
bly the collection of third-century weapons
from the burial at Quintana de Gormaz, which
included
pairs. This
existed with communities north of the Pyrenees,
but it need not imply anything more than
processes of gift exchange. Nor does the adop-

a scabbard decorated with dragon-

array of material shows that contacts

tion of the torc as an item of prestige display
mean more than a sharing of belief or value sys-

1 Above The defences of
Los Cogotas enclose in total
some 14.5 hectares but oaly
the upper enclosure was
intensively occupied.
Though large, it is by 0o
mcans the largest of the
appida in the Ambles Valley
as the lower plans will
demonstrate.

fi: Gold torc of the
fourth-second centuries e
from Vilas Boas, Portugal
Museu Nacional de
Arqueologia ¢ Etnologia
Lishon

4


===== PAGE 163 (index-166_1.jpg) =====
13 Distribution of horse-
man fibulag, typical of the
Celtiberian area of Spain.
The styleis local but the
basic structure of the brooch
s found throughout much
of western Europe.

IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

tems. The silver torcs of the Meseta and the gold torcs of the north-west are dis-
tinctively Celtiberian in style, as are the widely distributed horse-and-rider
fibulae.

The possibility that groups of La Téne Celts may have moved south into
Celtiberian lands, as raiders, settlers, or mercenaries, cannot, however, be ruled
out. Celtic war bands may have attached themselves 1o the incursion of the
Cimbriin 104 B¢ and Caesar specifically mentions thearrival in Lérida, in 49 sc,
of 6,000 Gauls, including Gallic cavalry, Ruthenian archers, and their families.
The contribution of these and other possible intruders to Celtiberian culture
seems to have been minimal.

The Expansion of Celtiberian Culture

From its homeland in the north-east of the Peninsula, Celtiberian culture
spread to many other areas of the country. This is best exemplified by the extent
to which the Celtic language was spoken, as is demonstrated by the distribution
of place names with the suffix - briga or the prefix Seg- (Fig. 107).
Archaeological evidence from grave finds suggests an extension of Celt-
iberian culture westwards to the territory of the Vettones in the fifth century ic,
and to Estremadura and the far west, where the surname Celtius was used to
indicate cthnic origin. According to Pliny, some Celtiberians from this region
moved south to settle in Baetica, whence they became known as the Celticr: one
of the towns, Penaflor, was called Celtiin the Iberian and Roman period. Pliny
as well as other writers record further movements to the north: the Celti praest-
marici settled in northern Portugal, the Gallaeci moved to the extreme north-

142


===== PAGE 164 (index-167_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

west (modern Galicia), while the Galli settled in the Ebro Valley, That
all these groups were known by ethnic rather than tribal designations
is an indication that the Celtiberian expansion is more likely to have
been the result of military élites taking over the power structure of the
peripheral tribes than of large movements of population. Beyond this
zone raids may have penetrated still further into the territories of the
more advanced Iberian communities, and it was in these regions that
, like those depicted on the stone relief from Osuna
or the pot from Liria, will have found employment. In rare sculptures,
like the stone head from Cordoba, we may be glimpsing an icon of a
Celtic deity.

Celtic mercenarie:

Celtiberians and the Classical World

The value of the Celtiberians as mercenary troops was well appreciated
by the Carthaginians, who employed substantial detachments in their
various campaigns. Celtiberians were also used in the Roman armies,
which entered Spain in 218 e at the beginning of the Second Punic
War, though they proved to be somewhat unreliable. By the end of the
second century, with Carthage defeated and Rome now developing its
hold over the Iberian lands, Romans and Celtiberians had become all
too familiar with each other’s strengths and weaknesses.

114 Lefe Stone relief of a warrioe from Osuna, Andalucia,
Spain. The warrior holds a typical Iberian faleata (single edge
sword) in his right hand. but his dongated shield i
type and quite unlike native therian round shiclds. Third or
second century se. Museo Arqueokogico Nacional, Madrid.

15 Above: Detail of the decoration of a painted pottery vessel
from Liria, Valencia, Spain, showing a warrior holding an
clongated shield of La Tene type. Third or second century ne
Musca Prehistorico de Valencia

116 Stone head carved in a style very
similar to Celtic stone heads found in
southern Gaul. From the region of
Cordoba. The very simplicity of the
depiction makes it difficult 10 argue that
the object was actually carved by &
craftsman with knowledge of ‘Celti
iconography, but the head stands out
marked contrast to Iherian and Roman
work in this region of Andalucia
Mauseo Municipal de Cordoba

143


===== PAGE 165 (index-168_1.jpg) =====
IBERIA AND THE CELTIBERIANS

For the next seventy years, in a long-drawn-out war of attrition, enlivened by
peace treaties and revolts, Rome was drawn deeper and deeper into the territo-
ries of the Celtiberians and Lusitanians. Some indication of the devastating
scale of the conflict is provided by Tiberius Gracchus, who could claim to have
destroyed 300 Celtiberian hill towns in his single expedition of 179-8 Bc. A brief
respite followed, but after the revolt of the Celtiberiansand Lusitaniin 154a fur-
ther series of bitter engagements ensued, the native opposition being rallied
and brilliantly led for a time by the Lusitanian war leader Viriathus. The final
stage began in 143 B¢, by which time the Lusitanian campaign had been sepa-
rated from that against the Celtiberians, and culminated in 133 with the destruc-
tion of the Celtiberian stronghold of Numantia after a long and bitter siege.
Although it was to take more than a century for the whole of Iberia to be
brought under Roman control, the destruction of Numantia and the selling of
its survivors into slavery effectively marked the end of organized Celtiberian
resistance,

During the second century Rome had come to understand and respect the
Celtic peoples of Iberia. They were characterized as fearles
who fought with a total disregard for their own safety: their cavalry was awe-
inspiring and they were capable of producing charismatic war leaders like
Viriathus. They were also bound by their overriding beliefin the sacred nature
of hospitality.

In stressing the valour and hospitality of the Celtiberians, the Roman writers
were providing a familiar caricature of the Noble Savage, but there can be little
doubt that these aspects were deeply embedded in the social system of the
Celtiberians. It was this, as well as their language, which allowed the classical
authors to believe them and the Celts of temperate Europe to be one people.

ferocious warriors

117 A wolf's head made
from baked clay found at the
native hill town of
Numantia, Spain. The head
is the mouth of a trumpet
similar to the carnyx.
Second to first century s
Museo Arqueologico
Nacional, Madrid.

144


===== PAGE 166 (index-169_1.jpg) =====
8
The Communities of the
Atlantic Facade

Tue Celtic language was spoken throughout much or most of western Europe
to the very fringes of the Atlantic and survives now in a vital spoken and written
form as Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Breton, and, until recently, Cornish. Over much
of this same region distinctive elements of the La Téne material culture are to be
found, and there is ample evidence that local craftsmen, working in metal or
clay, were thoroughly conversant with the grammar and spirit of Celtic art, For
these reasons, then, one may assume that western Europe was an integral part
of the wider Celtic world.

But behind this broad linguistic and cultural similarity lay a more complex
pattern. In the opening paragraph of the first book of his Commentaries on the
Gallic War, Caesar offers a sketch of the ethnic structure of Gaul:

Gaul as 2 whole consists of three separate parts; one is inhabited by the Belgae, another
by the Aquitani, and the third by the people we call Gauls, though in their own language
they are called Celts. In language, customs, and laws these three peoples are quite dis-
tinct. The Celts are separated from the Aquitani by the river Garonne and from the
Belgae by the Marne and the Seine.  (De Bello Gallicor. 1)

The reference is admirably clear and explicit, and, while it may well containa
degree of oversimplification either through ignorance or 1o aid the audience,
there is no reason not to accept it as a fair summing-up of the situation in the
mid-first century be. The archacological evidence provides some support for
this threefold division, but the broad swath of territory designated ‘Celtic’ by
Caesar can be further divided into Armorican Gaul, occupying the entire
Atlantic zone from the Seine to the Garonne, Narbonnaise Gaul, comprising
Provence and Languedoc from the Alps to the Pyrenees, and a central zone
which subdivides roughly along the Loire Valley into an Arvernian and central
castern region.

Further west, Britain and Ireland pose an altogether different problem. No

145


===== PAGE 167 (index-170_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

ancient author ever described the inhabitants of the islands as Celts, though
Caesar says of the occupants of Kent that their way of life was very like that of
the Gauls. The earliest surviving reference is to be found in the Massillior
Periplus, a source probably of the sixth century sc, preserved in the Ora Mari-
timaof Avienus, Here Britain is described as insula Albionumand there is men-
tion of gens Hiernorum—the race of the Irish. The underlying Celtic forms are
Albiones (roughly “people of the living surface world’) and lerne (‘people of the
fertile earth’). The account of the voyage of Pytheas, which took place about 320
1, makes no use of these ethnonyms, employing instead a transliteration of the
Gallo-Brettonic Pritani to describe the British—a name which has persisted
ever since. Taken together, this evidence is usually thought to imply that the
carlier form of Celtic (Goidelic) was replaced by the later (Brythonic), in Bri-
tain but not in Ireland, between the sixth and the beginning of the third cen-
turies. The reasoning has further been extended by suggesting that the
appearance of Brythonic Celtic is the result of social contacts between Britain
and Gaul reflected in the development of Insular Celtic art. As a simplified
model this may be broadly acceptable, but, as we will see, the situation is likely
to have been far more complex. A point of particular relevance, however, is that
in Ireland and Britain the Celtic language was already established by the sixth
century.

The situation in Brittany is less clear. Modern Breton is based on Brythonic
Celtic, very similar to that spoken in Wales and, until recently, Cornwall. Since
the Armorican peninsula is known to have received settlers rom south-west-
ern Britain in the fifth century an, it has generally been assumed that the Breton
language developed from that spoken by the incoming population. This is,
however, likely to be an oversimplification. Archacologically Armorica, south-
west Britain, and south Wales formed a broadly linked cultural zone in the first
millennium s and must have shared a similar Brythonic Celtic. Although the
Roman interlude in Armorica seems to have imposed itself rather more heavily
than that in the south-west of Britain or in Wales, there is no reason to suppose
that the indigenous Celtic language was totally replaced by Latin. In other
words, the British migrants in the fifth century ap are likely to have encoun-
tered a native population able to communicate with them in the language
shared by their ancestors five centuries before, even though it must have under-
gone a degree of transformation. In the rest of Gaul, where romanization was
far more intense, Latin had, by the fourth century, begun to oust Celtic, Even
50, that St Jerome could note the similarity between the native language of the
Treveriand that of the Galatians suggests that Celtic survived in spoken form in
parts of Gaul other than Armorica until the Migration Period.

The principal question to emerge from this briefintroduction is when and by
what processes did the communities of western Europe become Celtic? The tra-
ditional view, held until the 1960s, was that the answer lay in one or more major
migrations. More recently it has been suggested that the Celtic languages of the
west simply evolved in situ from an indigenous Indo-European base. On both

146


===== PAGE 168 (index-171_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

archacological and linguistic grounds, neither generalization is acceptable. By
reviewing a selection of the evidence, it may be possible to come closer to an
understanding of the issues involved.

The Nature of the Atlantic Fringe in the Bronze Age

To take the broadest view it may be said that the communities of the Atlantic
fringe of Europe formed a single cultural zone, linked by the sea. It differed sig-
nificantly from the central zone of temperate Europe and from the Mediter-
ranean zone, yet all three were bound by networks of contact channelled along
corridors determined, to a large extent, by the opportunities created by geogra-
phy. Most of these corridors were threaded by navigable rivers—the Rhine,
Seine, Loire, and Gironde-—but other nodes, such as the trading port of Gadir
(Cddiz), provided essential points of articulation.

That cultural links along the Atlantic sea-ways extend back far in time is evi-
dent from the archacological record. As early as the fourth millennium nc,
megalithic tombs, of the type known as passage graves, developed on a broad
front from Portugal to Ireland, and within this zone common symbols recur-
red, carved on the orthostats of the tombs, While no one any longer conjures up
visions of migrant ‘Megalithic Saints' proselytizing along the Atlantic fagade,
the similarities are such that the different com-
munities must have been developing their belief
systems in the general knowledge of what was
happening clsewhere. A flow of ideas implies
movements, however limited, of people, and it
may well be that the exchange of rare commodi-
ties, such as fine stone axes, between neighbour-
ing polities provided the mechanism.

Continued contact was maintained through-
out the second millennium and began to inten-
sify as copper and later bronze became generally
available. Along the maritime networks a dis-
tinctive burial practice spread, characterized by
single inhumations accompanied by grave sets
including decorated beakers. It was during this
time that centres displaying élite dominance
emerged in Brittany and Wessex. Cultural con-
tact was maintained through gift exchanges
which saw fine stone axes, gold, amber, and
faicnce beads pass between them across the
intervening channel.

Contacts intensified still further in the Late
Bronze Age, after about 1300 . From then,
until ¢.600 i, bronze in various forms—as its

97

18 Atlantic Europe, indi-
cating the main cultural
zones in the second half of
the first millennium sc.



===== PAGE 169 (index-172_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

raw metal components, as scrap, or as finished weapons and implements—
moved in increasing quantity, and over greater distances, than before. The evi-
dence derives almost entirely from the distribution of artefacts, but includes
rare examples of shipwrecks, such as the vessels carrying French-made imple-
ments to Britain which foundered off the cliffs of Dover and in Saltcomb Bay in
Devon in about the tenth century se. Artefact distributions are at best a surro-
gate for understanding the movement of people and can offer only a crude indi-
cation of direction and intensity of contact. Thus the Sicilian-made shaft-hole
axe found in the sea near the southern British port of Hengistbury is not neces-
sarily evidence of a Mediterrancan adventurer visiting Britain in the eighth cen-
tury BC. At best it indicates the geographical extent of contact and hints at the
complexity of the social processes involved.

The copious evidence for the movement of bronze in the Late Bronze Age
also raises the question of the movement of skilled people able to judge the
quality of metal and, in some remote areas, to introduce the technology of
extraction or manufacture. The individuals who cast a range of bronze items at
Dun Aengus on the Aran Island of Inishmore off the Galway coast and at Jarl-
shof on Shetland 170 kilometres north of Scotland must have travelled in small
boats with their metal, beeswax, refractory clay, and skills.

It would be possible to call upon an array of varied evidence to demonstrate
local interactions, but sufficient will have been said to show that, for at least
three millennia, the communities of the Atlantic had maintained a degree of
contact such that many aspects of culture, especially belief systems and techno-
logical skills, were held in common. The contact would mostly have been
between adjacent communities, with few venturing further afield, but in this
way, from one neighbour to another, ideas would quickly have spread.

The principal change which can be discerned within this longue durée is an
intensification in the volume of bronze moving through the system after the
beginning of the Late Bronze Age. It is difficult to discern an internal cause for
this, and the simplest explanation would be to suppose that the metal-rich
Atlantic zone was being increasingly drawn into the bronze-consuming world
of the Urnfield and Nordic cultures. Here, in central and northern Europe,
bronze was used up in great quantities as furnishings for the burials of the dead
and as gifts to the chthonic deities whose worship demanded the deposition of
valuable items buried in pits in the ground or thrown into bogs, springs, and
rivers. As the Atlantic communities began to respond to the demand, develop-
ing new networks of communication along which the metals could pass,
aspects of Urnfield material culture, learned from the contact, began to be
absorbed into the Atlantic system-——so too did the belief systems which re-
quired the deposition of wealth on a considerable scale. The Late Bronze Age
was, therefore, the time when the technology and ideologies of the central
European Urnfield world were introduced to the communities of the Atlantic
fringe.

The Mediterranean states will have been made aware of the potential of the

148


===== PAGE 170 (index-173_1.jpg) =====
Xilla Above: A cup f

f iron
is, Charante, France. Fourt

Style of Celtic art

de la Charante,



===== PAGE 171 (index-174_1.jpg) =====
P
-
o
Ve
;
i 3 N
g7 e
S KSR T IR RER T
f o = —
—— \


===== PAGE 172 (index-175_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC

AGADE

Atlantic zone by the Phoenician enclave at Gadir (Cadiz), and it was probably
as the result of Phoenician activity that Atlantic bronzes were carried into the
western Mediterrancan. Their appearance, scattered though they are, reflects
an increasing awareness of the potential of the Atlantic zone among the com-
munities of the Mediterranean.

Within this sweep of territory, extending over 30,000 kilometres from the
Straits of Gibraltar to the Shetlands there developed a number of distinctive
cultural zones (Fig. 18) which, because of their geographical proximity, main-
tained close links and shared socio-cultural attributes.

Oceupying a central place in this Atlantic continuum were
the sea-girt peninsulas of southern Ireland, south Wales, south-
west Britain, and Armorica. It was a region composed, for the
most part, of old hard rocks heavily mineralized, its Atlantic
face washed by the Gulf Stream, which ensured a mild but
damp climate. What encouraged continued contact between
these four promontories was the attraction of their metal re-
sources, principally copper, tin, and gold.

A second system included the coastal region of Gaul,
between the Seine and the Rhine, and the adjacent shores of
Britain from Hampshire to East Anglia. Here the most evident
medium of exchange was bronze, either in the form of finished
items or as scrap, but behind this archacologically visible mate-
rial no doubt lay exchanges in many other commoditics.
Further to the north cultural similarities suggest that the com-
munities of north and west Scotland, the Northern and Wes-
tern Isles, and the north-eastern part of Ireland formed another
closely related zone.

South of Armoricait is possible to distinguish two distinctive
cultural zones: the north-west corner of Iberia, including Gali-
cia, Asturia, and Cantabria, with its highly localized settlement
types and copious supplies of gold and tin; and a south-western
zone, stretching from the Tagus to the Lower Guadalquivir,
characterized in the Late Bronze Age by engraved stelae and
burnished pottery. This region rich in copper and silver.

: 800-200 BC

The Development of the Atlantic Communiti

The attraction of Atlantic metal resources is apparent from the Massilliot
Periplus. In it is a rel ands in the Atlantic called the Oestrymnides,
‘rich in the mining of tin and lead. A vigorous tribe lives here, proud-spirited,
energetic and skilful. On all the ridges trade is carried on.” The account des-
cribes the native boats made of leather hides sewn together, and goes on to loc-
ate the Oestrymnides at two days' sailing distance from Ircland, which would
ther Cornwall or Brittany. Avienus says that the Tartessians

rence to

place them in

149

XIV Fu
from a vehicle grave at
Berru, Marne, France. Early
fourth century s, Musée
des Antiquités Nationales,
Saint-Germain-en-Laye,
Paris.

119 Carved stela, possibly of
Late Bronze Age date, from
Ategus, Andalucts, Spa

The central part of the scene
illastrates a two-wheelod
vehicle pulled by paired
quadrupeds with another
standing by. At the battom
are human figares, one
group of whom scems to be
dancing. The scene is proba
bly part of a funcrary ritual
Musco Municipal de
Cérdoba.


===== PAGE 173 (index-176_1.jpg) =====
THE €

MUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

traded with this region, as later did Carthaginian merchants after the sea-way:
had been explored by the Carthaginian Himilco about 400 kC in a journe:
which, he claimed,

ook four months.

Alater explorer, the Massilliot ship’s master Pytheas, braved the Atlantic sea-
ways in about 320 &, venturing even further. His reference to Belerion—the
Land’s End peninsula—suggests that he may have been following the estab-
lished tin route, but he gives no further details. However, the Sicilian historian
Timaceus, who was roughly contemporary with Pytheas and may indeed have
used Pytheas as a source, recorded some additional facts which survive now
only in a confused and muddled account in Pliny's Narural History. An island
called Mictis is mentioned where tin is produced and the Britons sail to it in ves-
erwork covered with hide. Much the same story is taken up by
Poseidonius (quoted by Diodorus Siculus), though the island is called Ictis and
oined to the mainland at low tide. *Here the merchants buy the tin from the
natives and carry it over to Gaul and after travelling overland for about thirty
days they finally bring their loads on horses to the mouth of the Rhone' ( Hist. 5.
22). It is not immediately clear which route was being used, but the general
assumption is that the tin was shipped either to the mouth of the Loire, where
the port of Corbilo was said to be located, or to the Garonne. Both estuaries,

sels of wi

Strabo tells us, were ports of embarkation for Britain.

The tin trade described by the ancient sources is best seen as a specific devel-
opment of the long-established Atlantic exchange network, manipulated now,
either directly or indirectly, by Mediterrancan entrepreneurs, It need have

changed little except for the introduction into the native systems of concepts
and possibly artefacts from the Mediterranean region. On this matter the
archaeological record is not particularly informative but two small bronze fig
urines, one from Sligo in Ireland, the other from Aust in the Severn Estuary,
may be imports from southern Spain. There is also a close similarity between
fibulae from Mount Batten in Devon and Harlyn Bay in Cornwall and types
manufactured in Aquitania and the Garonne estuary region. In addition to th
some at least of the comparativ e number of Greek and Cartha,
coins discovered in Armorica and southern Britain are likely to have been con
temporary imports.

The Mediterrancan penetration of the Atlantic systems seems to have
focused particularly on the tin-rich areas of Armorica and Cornwall with a pro
bable extension to southern Ireland where gold was to be had. But that there
was also direct interest in the tin and gold production of Galicia is indirectly
indicated by the extension of Phoenician activity along the Portuguese coast
and the discovery of Mediterranean trade goods, including Greek pottery, ata
number of coastal locations in the north-west.

Whilst the Mediterrancan world was learning how to exploit the Atlantic
trading system, the complex network of exchange which linked the western

lar nian

European communities to the innovating core of the Urnfield ¢lite in western

rope continued to develop in the subsequent Hallstatt C period

central

150


===== PAGE 174 (index-177_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

(€750~600). The distribution of the typical Hallstatt C slashing sword, known
after the type site of Gundlingen, together with the winged chapes which
adorned the ends of the scabbards, give a vivid impression of the direction and
intensity of these contacts (Maps 3 and 4). The more common bronze version
is found in the Low Countries and northern France between the Rhine and the
Seine, in the Loire Valley, and in the basin of the Garonne. It also occurs quite
widely in Britain, where the form is copied and modified by local craftsmen,
and is scattered across the face of Ireland. In Britain and Ireland the majority of
the swords from known findspots occur in rivers, lakes, or bogs in just those
locations where weapons were customarily deposited throughout the latter
part of the Bronze Age.

A range of other élite equipment in bronze echoes this pattern: bronze caul-
drons and buckets (both with distinctive British/Irish varieties), bronze horse
gear, razors, pins, and other trinkets. In other words the full panoply of élite dis-
play, except for the ceremonial vehicle, finds its way, selectively, into the hands
of the western communities. What is particularly interesting is that the élite
items were incorporated in different ways into the cultural systems of the west.
In the Low Countries, for example, swords and horse gear were deposited with
cremation burials under barrows according to the indigenous rite. In the
Garonne-Tarn region, urned cremations accompanied by personal jewellery
or weapons were also normally buried beneath low barrows continuing indige-
nous practices. In Britain and Ireland, on the other hand, deposition was usu-
ally in watery contexts and less often in hoards. Evidence of this kind
demonstrates not only how the alien goods were adopted and adapted by the
western communities who received them, but also how extensive were the
mechanisms which bound the polities of the Atlantic zone to those of the Hall-
statt C chiefdoms of west central Europe. The network, which had developed
throughout the Late Bronze Age, was now being even more intensively
exploited. The view, frequently expressed up to the 1960s, that the distribution
of Hallstatt C material represented invasions or migrations of warriors from
the centre is not supported by any of the evidence and is best disregarded.

In the subsequent Hallstatt D period (c.600-450 8C) there was a significant
change in the pattern and intensity of interaction. One possible explanation is
that developing contact between the Late Hallstatt élite and the Mediterranean
states diminished the desire to maintain traditional links with the west, or,
more precisely, such links as there were were refocused.

The range and quantity of centrally produced (or inspired) Hallstatt D goods
in northern France, the Low Countries, Britain, and Ireland dropped dramati-
cally. In Britain, apart from a single antennae hilted sword and a bronze caul-
dron, the only distinctive items are a small number of bronze daggers which
were avidly copied by local craftsmen and were mainly deposited in the
Thames. Similar daggers from the Low Countries and northern France suggest
that these display pieces were items of exchange in the sixth and fifth centuries.
The same pattern can be seen in Aquitania, where native craftsmen copied the

151

120 Facing, above Small
bronze figure identified as
coming from Stigo’ in
Ireland, considered to be an
import from Iheria in the
fourth to first centuries be.
National Museum of
treland, Dublin

121 Facing, below: Small
bronze figure found at Aust,
Glowcestershire, England.
The style of the figure is
Therian, the chosest parallels
coming from Andalucia,
dating to the fourth or thisd
century ne. The Aust figure
may have arrived in Britain
via the Atlantic trading sys»
tems. British Muscum,
London,


===== PAGE 175 (index-178_1.jpg) =====
Stamped pottery from
Brittany dating to the fifth
century be.

No. 1 from Pludual, Cotes
&Armor: no. 2 from
Morbihan;
Roz-an-Tré-
10, 4 from

Mané Rouillard, Morbihan;

no. 5 from Saint-Martin
des-Champs, Finistére.

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

Hallstatt D dagger form, the local version in
this region accompanying the dead to the
grave. Once again the alien concept was ad-
opted and adapted technically and culturally
| to suit indigenous demands.
/ In Armorica the picture was altogether dif-
/ ferent. Items of Hallstatt C type are noticeably
absent and there is little evidence of signifi-
cant contact with west central Europe, but in
the late sixth and early fifth centuries the situ-
ation changed. Imported metalwork is rare
(not least because soil conditions are not con-
ducive to preservation), but two notable
items, a fragment of a bronze oinochoe from
a cemetery or shrine at Tronoén and a deco-
rated dagger scabbard from Kernavest-Qui-
beron, represent alien élite goods. Even more
dramatic is the development of a highly dis-
tinctive style of stamp-decorated pottery
which belongs, in general, to a broad category
of stamped pottery found throughout central
Europe in the fifth and fourth centuries (Map
24). The inspiration for the Breton vessels
probably came from Late Hallstatt metal-
work, like the Kernavest scabbard, but the
origin and chronology of the style is still
unclear.

If it is accepted that the Breton stamped
wares reflect intensified links with west central Europe (and the argument is by
nomeans decisive), then this could be seen asa reflection of the growing impor-
tance of the Armorican peninsula in providing access to the metal-producing
Atlantic system. It would be easy from here to transport metals along the Loire
to the western extension of the Late Hallstatt chiefdom zone in Burgundy. The
development of the Loire corridor would also explain the rise of Bourges as an
¢élite centre (see p. 65).

Having once established a direct route to Brittany, which occupied the cen-
tre of the Atlantic system, the peninsula appears to have remained a zone of
innovation into the Early La Téne period. The intensity, and indeed the nature,
of the contacts are difficult to characterize, but the remarkable ceramic art of
Armorica in the fourth century (Figs. 82 and 122) is witness of the willingness
and ability of local potters to accept the most up-to-date ideas developed by
metalworking craftsmen in the Marne and Moselle regions. The inspiration
which the potters received would almost certainly have been through the med-
ium of imported metalwork. Of this virtually nothing has survived in the

152


===== PAGE 176 (index-179_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

archacological record except a fragment of helmet found at the sanctuary of
Tronoén, but it is possible that the metal vessels, which were eventually depos-
ited in a cist burial in Wales at Cerrig-y-Drudion, could have passed through
Brittany. Tronoén has also produced the only Early La Téne swords, albeit
fragments, so far found in Brittany.

Northern France, the Low Countries, and Britain received a flow of goods
throughout the Early La Tene period. The rite of élite burial distinguished by
two-wheeled vehicles, which had developed in the Marne and Moselle regions
in the late fifth century, was adopted in four peripheral areas: in the Lower Seine
Valley, the Ardennes, the Haine, and Yorkshire. What initiated these trends is
difficult to say, A population movement is one possibility but is by no means
required of the evidence, which could equally well be explained by supposing
that local élites with access to the knowledge of vehicle burial (and possibly the
vehicles themselves as diplomatic gifts) simply adopted the fashion as a means
of self-aggrandizement. Once established it would have generated its own
momentum. Other gifts that passed through the exchange network included
daggers, swords, shields, and spears, as well as trinkets such as fibulae. All were
copied by native craftsmen and accepted into the local repertoire,

123 Abvwe: Curvilinear decorated pots from Brittany of
the fourth century ne. From Blavet, Hénon, Cotes
d'Armor.

124 Right: The bronze vessels from Cerrig-y-Drudion,
Cleyd, Wales reconstructed here (incorrectly) asa
hanging bowl. The decoration is highly reminiscent of
styles of pattery decoration in Brittany but the basket-
work cross- hatching within the designs may indicate
British manufacture. National Museum of Wales,
Cardiff.



===== PAGE 177 (index-180_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

Itis simplest to see the distribution of these Early La Tene items as reflecting
a continuation of the systems which had been established in the succeeding
Hallstatt D period. In other words, the pattern of contact in northern France,
the Low Countries, and Britain continued little changed over a period spanning
the sixth to fourth centuries. Thus the British craftsmen, who in the sixth cen-
tury began to modify imported Hallstatt D daggers, and were the heirs of the
makers of British Hallstatt C swords, were themselves succeeded by craftsmen
who responded to new styles of La Tene daggers when they arrived on the
island.

For Ireland during this time, the archaeological evidence suggests an alto-
gether different picture. In the Hallstatt C period it is apparent that the island
played a significant part in the exchange networks which bound the Atlantic
communities together and received an inflow of élite items from west central
Europe. The fact that Ireland is specifically named in the Ora Maritima is an
indication of its prominence. But from the beginning of the sixth century until
the end of the second century sc there is little trace of any contact with conti-
nental developments, and indeed the dendrochronological evidence shows
that over large areas forests were regenerating—an observation suggestive of a
dramatic decline in population. In other words, after the sixth century Ireland
seems to have become a backwater for almost halfa millennium,

The folk movements which were underway by the beginning of the fourth
century in west central Europe disrupted the long-established networks of
exchange which had developed throughout Europe. In Brittany, north-western
France, the Low Countries, and Britain there isa marked diminution in the vol -
ume of centrally produced goods and ideas absorbed into local repertoires.
Each of the regions developed its own distinctive culture in relative isolation
and itis not until the second century that extensive networks of exchange begin
to develop once more.

Archacology and Language

The archaeological evidence from Atlantic Europe for the period from 1300 to
200 BCallows three phases to be recognized. In the first, from ca300to ¢.600, the
Atlantic system of exchange was at its most dynamic. During this time the
entire system north of Galicia was actively bound in a complex network of rec-
iprocal exchange to the Urnfield and Early Hallstatt systems of west central
Europe. Meanwhile in the south of Iberia the Phoenicians and possibly the
Greeks were creating ties with the Mediterrancan system.

In the second period, from ¢.600 to ¢.400, the intensity of the east—west con-
tacts slackened noticeably, with Ireland now left outside the system, This dim-
inution may have been caused by a reorientation with new networks
developing through Brittany, linking the West Hallstatt chiefdoms more
directly with the metal-rich core of the Atlantic zone. It was at this time that
Mediterranean interest in Atlantic products increased.

154


===== PAGE 178 (index-181_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

In the third and final period, c.400-c.200, with much of Europe in the throes
of disruptive migratory movements, the Atlantic system was left to develop
without significant external contacts, except for a continued, and possibly
increasing, interest by Mediterranean entrepreneurs,

There can be little doubt that the intensity and duration of these reciprocal
exchanges between western central Europe and the communities of the Atlan-
tic fringe led to a convergence in many aspects of culture. Similar élite goods
were accepted over large areas, technologies and craft skills were shared, and
decorative symbols may well have been understood by communities separated
by considerable distances. There was also a common attitude to the gods, who
required valuable equipment to be deposited in their honour in rivers, bogs,
and lakes or raw materials to be buried in the carth. Taken at this level, the
degree of cultural similarity over huge territories is remarkable. It is a similarity
born of long and intimate contact. All parts of the Atlantic zone as far south as
south-western Iberia shared this common culture until the sixth century sc.

So much for archacology: we must now turn to language. That the Atlantic
communities spoke Celtic is well established. The generally accepted view is
that the Celtic spoken in Ireland was an early form of Celtic—Goidelic or Q-
Celtic—whereas in the British Isles and France the later Brythonic or P-Celtic
was dominant. If the difference between Q-Celtic and P-Celtic is significant
and if that difference has chronological implications, then one reasonable
interpretation would be that Ireland received its Celtic language roughly at the
same time as the rest of the Atlantic zone but did not share in the development
or spread of the later form of P-Celtic which replaced the earlier linguistic form
in France and the British [sles.

The possible correlation of archacological and linguistic data is self-evident.
‘The question which arises is whether the network of cultural interrelationships,
so clearly demonstrated for the entire region in the period c.1300-600, provides
a suitable context for the Celtic language in its more archaic form to spread
from its west central European homeland to the Atlantic zone without having
toinvoke the deus ex machina of ‘invasion’ or ‘folk movement'? The acceptance
of élite systems and their symbolism and the sharing of complex technologies,
as well as religious concepts and practice, imply ease of communication. It is
not at all unreasonable 1o suppose that it was within this context that the Celtic
languages became widely adopted in the west.

This view, of the progressive celticization of the Atlantic province, could also
help to account for the development of an early form of Celtic in the Iberian
Peninsula. If Celtic was the lingua franca of the Atlantic sea-ways, it may have
been from the western coasts of Iberia that the inland Celtiberians developed
their language and the Lusitanians theirs, Herodotus may not have been so mis-
informed when, in the fifth century, he wrote that the Celts were the most west-
erly people in Europe next to the Cynetes (who occupied southern Portugal).

After the re-formation of the sixth century, the cultural isolation of Ireland
will have ensured that the more developed form of Celtic did not penetrate toa

155


===== PAGE 179 (index-182_1.jpg) =====
125 The village at Goulvars
on the Quiberon peninsuba,
Morbihan, Brittany. The
rectangular style of house-
buiding is typical of the 13
Téne period in Armorica

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

degree sufficient to alter the established forms, whereas in Britain and Armor-
ica and the rest of western France, two more centuries of continuing contact
with the innovating areas of west central Europe brought in new forms enhanc-
ing and modifying the Celticness of an already thoroughly celticized zone.

Regional Variations among the Communities of the Atlantic Zone

In spite of the broad similarities which bound them, the communities of the
Atlantic fringe exhibited a considerable cultural variety. Some aspects of this
are worth considering to provide an indication of the diverse social systems
which could exist in peripheral areas away from the main centres of innovation
and movement.

The metal-rich core pro
sula, south-western Britain
peninsulas surrounded by the Atlantic—share many physical characteristics in
common, and aspects of their culture suggest that links between them were
maintained throughout much of the formative
period (1300-600 8c), though little is known of
southern Ireland after this.

Culturally the communities of the Armorican
peninsula provided the focus, especially after the
sixth century e, when close contacts developed
h west central Europe and, as we have argued
above, the symbols and grammar of Celtic art
were readily adopted by local craftsmen. It was
during this time that a distinctive Armorican
Iron Age culture developed among a population
concentrated more in the coastal zone than in the
centre of the peninsula. The principal settlement
form was the enclosed farmstead of family or
extended family type, comprising one or more
small subrectangular houses. Some larger and
more complex sites may represent a hierarchic
structure. A frequently occurring feature is the
souterrain—an elongated chamber or series of
chambers tunnelled out of the soft bedrock and
entered from the surface through one or more
shafts. The function of souterrains is much

des a good starting-point. The Armorican penin-
buth Wales, and southern Ireland—all essentially

debated, but the explanation most likely lies in a
storage use, possibly involving a belief in the
power of the chthonic deities to preserve and
protect stored commodities, The distribution of
souterrains, which have been found in consider-
able number in Brittany (largely because tractors

156


===== PAGE 180 (index-183_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

o e
127 Above Souterrain at Lavban en Kerfourn,
Marbiban, Brittany. These underground chambers

may have been used for storage, perhaps of seed grain.

136 Left: The defended sette-
ment of Saint- Symphoricn.
Cotes d'Armor, in Brittany,
was discovered during road-
building and has been the
scene of a major excavation.

introduced particularly in the post-war period caused the hollowed chambers ;5.5 complex multiperiod
to collapse) provides a striking impression of the extent of the classic Armor-  site of the La Tenc period.

ican Iron Age culture and its sharp boundary with the rest of France.
The second settlement type is the defended coastal promontory, generally

Amang the finds was a stone
<arving of a god playing a lyre.

128 Below: The distribution

called cliff-castles (PL. XVII). These occur in some numbers, particularly oo 0w Gy
around the northern and western coasts. Little is known of their internal fea-  reflects the disssibution of

tures or chronology, but it is clear from Caesar’s accounts of his Armorican

Knvowen sctilements of the
Middle La Téne period, since,

campaign in the mid-first century b that cliff-castles were widely used at that  where cxcavation has been
time. While it is possible that their substantial defences endowed them witha 972 sufficint scale, they are

usually found 10 be a compo-

higher social status than the more normal farmsteads, there is no direct evi-  nentof rural settlements.

dence that this was so and a ritual function is
not unlikely.

Another highly distinctive aspect of the
Armorican Iron Age is the prominence of
standing stones (stelae) scattered widely in
the landscape. Of the many hundreds which
are known, two types can be distinguished:
tall pillar-like stelae and shorter hemispheri-
cal stones, All were worked with some care to
create smooth surfaces, the tall types being
columnar, faceted, or ridged. A few, most
notably the low stela from Kermaria, near
Pont-L'Abbé, and the tall example from
Sainte-Anne-en-Trégastel, were carved with
curvilinear and rectilinear designs, a remin-
der that many of the others could also have



===== PAGE 181 (index-184_1.jpg) =====
ve:dak
Ker

existin Hrittany, but

agh carefully finished,

are usually plain.

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADF

been decorated with paint. The function of the stelae is unknown, but their
prominence in the landscape may suggest that they served as religious foci or
boundary markers, perhaps both. The distribution of these stones is closely

to define west

comparable to that of the souterrains, the two features serving
ern Armorica as a culturally distinct zone.

The culture of the south-western peninsula of Britain reflects that of Armor
ica but has its own defining characteristics. There is a preference here for pot
tery decorated with curvilinear motifs, though the British south-western
decorated wares are less exuberant and refined than contemporary Breton
wares.

The settlement pattern has close similarities to that of Armorica, with defen

»unds

ded enclosures for the family or extended family (in Cornwall called *

and cliff-castles around the coasts. In Devon the rather more elaborate multi

vallate enclosures, usually sited on hill slopes not far from a permanent water

supply, might suggest a different kind of social organization, perhaps based on

the importance of cattle. Underground stone-built storage chambers, called
lent to the Breton souterrains.

fogous, are the Cornish equiva
Much the same array of settlement types occurs across the Severn Estuary in
south Wales, extending across to the south-west of the country. Here the
enclosed homestead type is characterized by Walesland Rath (rath being the
generic name for this type of enclosure in Wales and Ireland ), where total exca
vation demonstrated a simple arrangement of circular houses in the centre with
storage buildings around the periphery, the individual structures being re
placed on a number of occasions. The material culture of the south Welsh Iron



===== PAGE 182 (index-185_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

Age communities is not prolific but includes
the sporadic use of decorated pottery import-
ed from across the Severn.

The one noticeable difference between
the British south-western
communities is the absence of stelae, though
the possibility must be allowed that in Britain
a similar socio-religious function may have
been served by wooden pillars no longer ex-
tant.

Ireland remains something of a myste:
this period, but certain characteristics link it
culturally to the communities of the south-
west. Cliff-castles, all undated, occur around
all the coas
and a small number of carved stone stelae
have been recovered, the best known and
most elaborate being the Turoe stone from
Co. Galway, One structural feature, which
has been much debated, is the chevaux de

Armorica and

, particularly the south and west,

frise—a zone of close-spaced angular stones
laid out in advance of the walls or ramparts of
fortified enclosures. One of the most dra-
matic example of this from Ireland is at Dun
Aengus on the Aran Island of Inishmore (Pl
XVIla and b). Other examples are known in
the west of Ireland, north-west Britain, and
south Wales, and are closely comparable to
sites in north-west and central northern Iber-
ia. It is tempting to suggest an Atlantic origin
and dissemination of this style of defens
definition, but the angular stones may be

nothing more than local manifestations of a
more widespread system employing sharp-
ened wooden stake

of which has been excavated at Castell Hen-
I

an impressive example

in south-west Wales,

T'he great stone-built fort of Dun Aengus is
one of a group of stone forts focused on the
Aran Islands and the nearby limestone up-
lands of the Burran. Although similarities in
style were conditioned by the use of limestone
for building, these western stone forts must
reflect a strong local cultural tradition as well

130 Aerial view of Clovelly Dykes, north Devon, England. The many
lines of roughly concentric arthworks are typical of the ‘multiple-
enclosure’ forts of south-western Britain, Some of the enclosures may
1 cattle.

have scrved as paddocks

131 The landscape of south-west Wales is scattered with small defended
enclosures called raths, Walesland Rath in Dyfed is one of the few exca
vated examples. The central area was occupied by a succession of circu
lar houscs, while around the perimeter were arranged four-past storage
structures. Occupation spanned the third and second centurics ne



===== PAGE 183 (index-186_1.jpg) =====
Granite

1

carved in a curvili

Co, Galw

which suggests a possible
date in the first century e

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

as the abilit

 of society to mobilize labour on a massive scale. Little dating evi
ept at Dun Aengus where it can be shown that

thessite began its lif
massive stone walls were erected,

ensiv

cttlement in the Late Bronze Age before the

The northern extension of the Atlantic zone leads to the west and north
coasts of Scotland and the Islands—the Inner and Outer Hebrides, the Ork-
neys, and the Shetlands, This zone
shares a cohesive culture which can be
called that of Atlantic Scotland. Its
most notable characteristic is the pro-
liferation of massive stone-built settle-
ments—brochs or duns—in which the
desire to monumentalize by grandiose

building has gone far beyond the need

for physical comfort or even protec

tion. These structures are clearly a
statement symbolic of the social status
claimed by the lineages who occupied
them. At what stage this monumental

ization began is not easy to define, but
there is sufficient evidence now avail-
able to show that the structural tradi-
tion can be traced back to the Late
Bronze Age. The material culture of
Atlantic Scotland is limited and indig-
enous in the extreme, suggesting a high
degree of cultural isolation throughout

most of the Iron Age, though there is

evider

ce of developing contact along
the Atlantic sea-ways in and after the
first century b,

This brief review of the north-west-
ern part of the communitics of the Atlantic zone has shown something of the
variety of cultural responses reflected in the archacological evidence. The clear
impression given is of a cultural focus in Armorica linked to mainstream
European development with increasing regionalism and increasing isolation
the further one ventured north

The one essential characteristic binding these
communities together was a similar social structure based on the family unit or
lineage group. There may, in some regions, have been variations in status or
communal works such as hilltop enclosures

pla

perhaps defining the meeting
s of the larger community at annual festivals when flocks and herds

needed to be gathered in, but evidence for large agglomerations of population
is noticeably absent.
The castern part of Britain, from the Yorkshire Moors to the Thames Valley,

160


===== PAGE 184 (index-187_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

presents a very varied landscape, Broch of Mousa, Shetland Broch of Dun Troddan, Inverr

divided by a number of large rivers
flowing castwards into the North
Sea. Within this zone a broad cul-
tural similarity can be recognized,
although regional variations per-
sist. In the ninth and eighth cen-
turies a glimpse of an élite society is
provided by large, circular, defen-
ded enclosures containing substan-
tial circular houses. A little later,
from the fifth to the third centuries,
the distribution of locally made
daggers and anthropoid hilted
swords, centred within this zone, is
a further indication of a privileged
class served by able and inventive
craftsmen.

In the late fifth, or early fourth century, the élite occupying the area of the
Yorkshire wolds, just north of the Humber, adopted the burial practice of their
peers in northern France and the Low Countries—the burial of a two-wheeled
vehicle and an array of personal gear with the dead man or woman and the def-
inition of individual burials by placing them within square ditched enclosures.
The practice, once introduced, persisted at least into the second century se.

Continued contact with the Continent brought to Britain items of metal-
work decorated in the Vegetal Style. These were copied and developed by local
craftsmen producing prestige goods for the élite of eastern Britain throughout
the third and second centuries. For the most part it was the equipment of the
warrior that was selected for embellishment, in particular sword scabbards like
those from Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, Standlake, Oxfordshire, the River With-
am near Lincoln, and the éite burial at Wetwang Slack in the Yorkshire wolds.
A few decorated shields are also known, including the bosses from the Thames
at Wandsworth and from the River Witham. It is also possible that the deco-
rated pony cap from Torrs in Scotland, together with the engraved drinking-
horn terminals, which had at some stage been incongruously attached to it,
were products of eastern British craftsmen. Most of these valuable products
were dedicated to the gods of rivers, but a few accompanied prominent people
to their graves. Among these we may include, in addition to the Wetwang Slack
sword, a decorated canister, also from a grave at Wetwang Slack, and anarmlet,
from what was probably a female burial, found at Newnham Croft in Cam-
bridgeshire. The corpus of the surviving material is impressive and leaves little
doubt that the socially varied communities of eastern Britain were dominated
by élites served by skilled craftsmen in much the same way as their continental
neighbours.

161

133 The brochs of Scotland
and the Scattish islands
reflect a local tradition of
house-building in which the
simple idea of the circular
house has been transformed
into a massive walled
structure sometimes of
tawer- like proportions far
outgrowing defensive nceds.
Brochs may have originated
as carly as the fifth century
»e and may have continued
1o develop at least 1o the first
century me.


===== PAGE 185 (index-188_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

The

status after the eighth centu

ettlement pattern, as it is at present known, throws little light on social
. Enclosed homesteads are known but a number
of much larger and more straggling settlements have been discovered, suggest-
ing sizeable communities, of village-like proportions and complexity. Settle-
ments in the Yorkshire wolds have been found to extend for considerable

distances ays.

along the principal track
The social systems in eastern Britain, with their élite gear and nucleated set-
tlements, contrast noticeably with those of the west, but are far more closely
paralleled by those of northern France and Belgium, where the distribution of
prestige warrior metalwork, the vehicle burials of the Lower Seine, the Haine,
and the Ardennes, and large open settlements like Haps in the Netherlands
reflect, though with re; rall structure.
A third area of Britain—the central southern zone—presents an altogether

onal differences, much the same ove

different picture to that of both the west and the east. Its most obvious charac-
teristic is the dominance of hill forts—hilltops of some 5-10 hectares enclosed
by substantial defences sometimes multivallate and with elaborate entrance
carthworks. The hill-fort-dominated central southern zone extends from the
south coast, between Devon and East Sussex, in a band of decreasing width to
north Wales, with outliers spreading into Northamptonshire. It is a region of
different landscapes and encompasses a number of communities demonstrat-
ing their separateness through different styles of pottery decoration: the com-
mon link between them is the hill fort,

it Bronze sword
nd at Wishech
shire, England. The
decoration isa rather faltering
British version of the Vegetal
Style and probably dates ta the
third century s<.. Wisbech and
Fenland Museum Cambridge
shire.

134 Tap.
scabbard
Cambrid,

135 Lt ind below lefe: Bronze
sword scabbard sheath from
the River Thames at S¢
lake, Onfordshire, Eng
showing the Vegetal Style of
decoration. The basketry
cross-hatching on the upper
mount is typically British. Late
fourth or carly third century

s Ashmolean Muser

Oxford.
136 Right: Bronzc shield
boss from the River Thames

tiddlesex,
ation

at Wandswonh,
England, The de
resobves itself into two birds
with wings stretched. It is
brilliantly executed ina
combination of repoussé and
incmion. Second century ne?

162


===== PAGE 186 (index-189_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

Although a number of excavations have shown
something of the variety within the general *hill-
fort’ category, some generalizations can be offer-
ed. The earliest of the forts at present known,
dating to the end of the Bronze Age, concentrate in
the Welsh borderland, but by the sixth century the
phenomenon has spread to the Wessex region,
extending into the south-cast (Surrey and Kent)
by the third century. In some areas, such as central
Wessex, it is possible to show that over time the
number of forts in active use decreased, but the
strength of those surviving, and the intensity of
their use, was enhanced.

Functionally, the forts seem to have served their
region in a variety of ways, providing central
places where the different needs of the community
could be articulated. Some, like Danebury and
Maiden Castle, were intensively used for settle-
ment, production, and storage on a large scale.
The extent to which the forts were designed to pro-
vide defence is debatable. The enclosing earth-
works and the structure of the developed gates
would certainly have offered efficient protection, but there may well have been
an element of display involved. However, that some were actually defended and
attacked is clear from the excavated evidence. At Danebury, for example, large
numbers of sling stones were hoarded on at least two separate occasions, in the
third century and again in the carly first century, and after both phases there is
evidence of burning at the gates, the last burning marking the abandonment of
the fort. Other forts offer similar evidence, and at Bredon Hill in Gloucester-
shire the mutilated remains of bodies were found at the entrance.

The hill forts are only one aspect of the settlement patterr
contemporary countryside was densely scattered with farmsteads, many of

Elsewhere the

which showed continuous occupation over centuries. Most of the farmsteads
seem to have been of family size and were therefore probably centres of single
estates practising a mixed farming with a heavy emphasis on cereal productior
afew larger agglomerations indicate a scatter of more substantial communit
Apart from the massive nature of the hill forts, there is very little evidence in
this central southern zone for a hierarchy or an élite, but the heavy emphasison
the intensive working of the land and the production of grain might indicate
that status was measured by land or livestock. In the second century the two-
wheeled chariot, represented by decorated bronze fittings for the vehicle and
the bronze harness attachments for the horses, becomes far more evident.
Whether the vehicle was simply an indication of status or a means of warfare is
impossible to say, but most likely it served as both. The virtual absence of elab-

163

137 Pany cap with drinking
horn terminals attached
from Torrs, Dumfries and
Gallaway, Scatland, as origi
nally found. The decorated
terminals of the two drink
ing horns had been attached
atsome date to a repoussé-
decorated pony cap. Though
the context of the curious
marriage of these disparate
items is uncertain, the style
of both clements is typical of
that of a skilled school of
craftsmen working in east
crn Britain in the third or
second century nc. National
Museum of Scotland,
Edinburgh



===== PAGE 187 (index-190_1.jpg) =====
The Iron Age hillfort of

hite He
ncarby. The hill

xquently ¢
its gates was

The hill f

orate weaponry is at first sight puzzling, but it could be that this was simply a
reflection of the fact that prestige weapons were not consigned to rivers or buri
als within this region and therefore stood less chance of survival.

The developments in central southern Britain are in marked contrast to
those in the west and east. One possible explanation is that the central southern
zone was a border region between the metal-producing west and the warrior
élites of the cast. The instability of such a region, perhaps under threat of con-
tinuous raids from the eastern zone, may well have led to the need to develop
and maintain fortifications,

Similar hill-fort-dominated zones dating to the fourth to second centuries
can be seen elsewhere in west central Europe, especially in the region between
T'rier and the Rhineland, where again it could be their border position, between
the fully developed La Tene warrior élites in the south and zones with totally
different socio-economic systems to the north, that created a 'marcher’ society.

The western coastal area of France from the Charante southwards to the
Pyrences has produced a varied range of archaeological evidence for the period

200 B, ILis, however, clear from the distribution of Late Bronze Age tools

and weapons that the region played a significant part in the networks of

exchange during this period, and the Garonne-Gironde axis provided an easy

164



===== PAGE 188 (index-191_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

route linking the Atlantic to the Mediterranean. It was certainly an important
corridor for the trans-shipment of tin after the sixth century.

In the sixth and fifth centuries a distinctive Aquitanian culture can be recog-
nized, largely from the evidence of cremation cemeteries. Grave goods inclu-
ded local versions of anthropoid hilted swords and fibulae with elongated
springsand ornamented feet. Although both types are local products, they were
evidently inspired by widely distributed west central European forms. What is
more significant perhaps are the gencral similarities which the Aquitanian
forms share with those south of the Pyrences in north-west and north central
Iberia. The two regions must have shared systems of exchange linking them
through the western Pyrenean passes.

The discovery of a remarkable series of gold torcs in Haute-Garonne, Tarn,
and Gironde, dating to the third and second centuries, decorated in an exuber-
ant form of plastic art, has been linked to the possible migration of Tectosages
intheaftermath of the Celtic expedition into Greece. Whatever the origin of the
inspiration for these pieces (and Middle Danube parallels can be quoted), they
are likely to have been of local manufacture, utilizing gold extracted from the
gold-rich sands of the Tarn Valley. The social context of these items is obscure,
but their discovery in hoards suggests a religious motivation for their deposi-
tion, although this does not exclude their production under élite patronage.

To what extent these western French communities had become celticized it
is debatable, but the fact that Caesar regarded them as ethnically separate from
the Celts of Gaul may suggest that they retained a strong indigenous identity
throughout.

Although the Iberian Peninsula has already been considered separately in
Chapter 7, it is necessary here to offer
a brief comment on the cultural
development of the north-west—the
area of present-day Galicia. The area
is rich in metals, in particular tin and
gold, for both of which it became
famous in the ancient world. Its
cultural links were, traditionally,
Atlantic, although during the first
millennium a series of closer contacts
developed with the Celtiberian peo-
ples of the interior. The socio-eco-
nomic system seems to have become
warrior-based, the most evident set-
tlements being the fortified hilltop
enclosures, known locally as castros
which gave the culture its archaco-
logical name—the ‘Castro culture’.
Stone-built round houses, which

139 In central southern
Britain, in a zone spreading
from the south coast of
England to the north of
Wales, strongly defended
hill forts dominated the tron
Age landscape in the period
from the sixth to first cen-
turies ne. Not all hill forts
were in use for the whole
time. After the carly third
century a few sites rose to
dominance while the rest
were abandaned. The hill-
fort-dominated zone may
have been a ‘marcher” area
between the Atlantic com-
munities of the west and the
mare socially complex com-
munitics of the castern zone.



===== PAGE 189 (index-192_1.jpg) =====
dominate the settlement pattern, and the use of chevaux de frise around some of
the castros, have been used to stress the cultural links between Galicia and the
northern areas of the Atlantic province, but how significant these structural
similarities are it is difficult to judge. Recent work on the Castro culture has
en

shown it to have been an indigenous development rooted in the second mill

nium. Many settlements originated in the period 1000-700 1 at a time when

Is were strong. From about

maritime links generated by the exchange of me
700 BC Phoenician influences show that the indigenous culture was being pro
gressively integrated into Mediterrancan systems. After the middle of the mil
lennium regional differentiation becomes apparent among the settlements,
ts an increase in popula

and at some the extension of their boundaries sugg
tion. Parallel with this it is possible to detect an increase in items of both male
and female prestige and the appearance of rather closer cultural links with the
communities of the Meseta which might be related to the folk movements of

the Turduli and Celti towards the north-west referred to by Strabo, Increasir

contact with the Roman world, particularly after the campaign of Decimus
Brutus in the region in 138-6 sc, provided the stimulus for further change. It

an to take on

was at this time that those settlements in favoured positions be;

166


===== PAGE 190 (index-193_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE ATLANTIC FAGADE

distinctly urban characteristics, with well-defined street grids and public open
spaces.

Taken together, the array of disparate evidence for the communities of the
Atlantic zone, presented in summary here, emphasizes the highly individual
nature of each of the major regions within this broad Celtic-speaking zone.
Maritime links bound them in systems of reciprocal exchange which waxed and
waned as internal and external stimuli had their different effects. Superim-
posed upon this was a network of cast-west contacts, linking the Atlantic to the
developments of the La Téne cultural heartland of west central Europe. Each of
the Atlantic cultures responded in an individual way.

167


===== PAGE 191 (index-194_1.jpg) =====
9
The Communities of the
Eastern Fringes

Tue classical sources and the archacological evidence taken together leave lit-
tle doubt that by the end of the fourth century s Celtic communities were well
established in the lands of the Middle Danube and some groups seem to have
moved eastwards from the Tiza into Transylvania. As a generalization we can
regard the Carpathian mountain range, which swings in a broad arc south then
west to join the mountains of the Balkans, as the effective limit of expansion by
the mid-fourth century. The Iron Gates—the gorge through which the Danube
flows from its middle reaches to the lower part of its valley, where it now defines
much of the border between Serbia and Romania—were still, at this stage,
closed to Celtic expansion.

Eastern Europe before the Celts

The cultural development of eastern and south-castern Europe beyond this
mountain barrier was complex. The most potent force was, of course, that of
the Greek city states, which, standing together in the period 513-479 8¢, had
managed to halt the western advance of the Persian armies under first Darius
and later Xerxes. This episode, which saw a massive Persian presence in the
Lower Danube Valley for much of the forty years of threat, had a significant
effect on the development of Thracian society. The Persian Grand Army moved
with its treasure and its finery and an entourage of craftsmen who could serve
the needs of the élite. Inevitably the Thracians were to learn much from the
example: eastern values and the accompanying symbolism were adopted and
adapted by the local craftsmen to serve their own masters, and there emerged a
highly distinctive regional style of aristocratic metalwork in silver and silver-
gilt, blending ideas derived from the east, from the nomadic cultures of the
steppe, and from the Greek cities which fringed the western shores of the Black
Sea, Thracian art, in its fourth-second century manifestation, was the eastern

168


===== PAGE 192 (index-195_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

at indigenous artistic

counterpart of Celtic art and is its equal as one of the gr
developments of late prehistoric Europe.

The Greek cities of the western Black Sea coast provided an interface with the
Greek world through which a wide range of raw materials and products could
be exchanged. After the Persian incident, trade intensified: corn, slaves, furs,
and metals flowed out of the Thracian hinterland and wine and prestige goods
of Greek manufacture flowed in. As Thucydides noted: ‘you can accomplish
nothir

with the Thracians without giving gifts." It was a situation with many
a, and it was during this period
an to become archacologically recognizable through

parallels in the west Mediterrancan and in Iber
that the Thracian élite be
their elaborate burials richly furnished with the accoutrements of status and

wealth. No doubt the competition engendered would frequently have
expressed itself in raiding and more extended bouts of warfare. The impression
given by the designs on the prestige metalwork of the period is of an élite inti-
mately involved with feasting and hunting. These pursuits—statements of
nobility and prowess—were as much a part of the Thracian social fabric as the
raid was of the Celtic,

By the beginning of the fourth century sc it is possible to identify distinct

ac of cen-

‘kingdoms” and their kings. One of the most powerful were the Odry:
tral Thrace, whose close links with Athens, both political and economic, con
tributed to their strength and ascendancy. In the early fourth century one of

their kings, Kotys, scems to have been acknowledged by other lesser polities as

having extensive powers beyond the territorial limits of his own kingdom.

169

41 Bridal decoration in
silver-gilt from Letnitsa
Bulgaria, showing a
Thracian rider wearing scale

armour. The rider’s b
tied in a topkn
das Thr

in Th
warrior,

god,isa ,
Thracian art. Narod
Archeologteski Museg,



===== PAGE 193 (index-196_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITINS OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

The broadly defined Thracian culture, within which at this stage we can
include other specific groups named by the classical authors such as the Getae
and Dacians, extended northwards along the coast of the Black Sea into Mol-
dova. Beyond this, stretching around the northern shores of the Black Sea in the
vast expanse of the Pontic Steppe, a somewhat different cultural configuration
was developing which can, for convenience, be called Scythian or Scythio-
Sarmatian, We saw earlier (pp. 46-7) that this region had been occupied by
nomadic and semi-nomadic groups known to the classical writers as Cimme-
rians but that during the eighth century sc they were coming under increasing
pressure from groups living on the Volga who, historically, were called Scyth-
ians. The picture given by Herodotus of the replacement of the Cimmerians by
the Scythians is a considerable oversimplification and may have been little
more than the movement of a Scythian élite westwards into the northern Pontic
zone. What is clear, however, is that the cighth and early seventh centuries were
a period of upheaval and folk movement which resulted in hoards of dislocated
horse-riding warriors, distinguished as Cimmerians and Scythians by contem-
porary sources, pouring through the Caucasus southwards into Asia Minor,
where they became involved as mercenaries and freebooters in the struggle
between the Assyrians and the kingdom of Uratu.

By the sixth century the ‘Royal Scyths’ were firmly established in the Crimea
and in the steppe zone to the north and, through the Greek colony of Olbia at
the mouth of the Bug, had developed close contacts with the Greek world, with
which a lively trade developed. The highly skilled craftsmen working through-
out the length of this Greek interface produced a range of exquisite items, most
notably in gold, for the Scythian élite who were buried in the great royal tombs
such as Chertomlyk and Solocha. When Herodotus visited Olbia in about 450
he was able to observe Scythian culture at first hand and to provide a vivid
description of the complex processes involved in the burial of the Royal Scyths.

Scythian culture developed a distinctive and original character in the sixth
and fifth centuries, and many aspects of this northern Pontic culture spread
south, to be absorbed into the eclectic culture of the Thracian tribes, and west
into the Middle Danube region, especially into the Great Hungarian Plain and
Transylvania. These influences may have been the result of the migratory
movements of populations or élites or simply of intensifying systems of ex-
change. By the fifth century, however, many of the communities of the Great
Hungarian Plain, extending westwards along the Danube into Slovakia, had
adopted a style of horse-riding and a material culture which bore many simi-
larities to that of the people living around the Black Sea fringe.

The pattern of folk movement from the east, reflected in the carly movement
of Scythians from the Volga to the northern Pontic zone, was repeated again at
the end of the fifth century sc, when the Sauromatae (Sarmatians), who
emerged as an ethnically identifiable group in the region east of the Don,
moved westwards into Scythian territory. One classical text, Pseudo-Hippo-
crates, suggests that this expansion took place about 4oo sc. Certainly, by 338

170


===== PAGE 194 (index-197_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

another text, Pseudo-Scylax, could refer to the Syrmataias the tribe now occu-
pying the old Scythian lands west of the Don. That the transference of power
was not peaceful is suggested by the archacological evidence, which shows that
a number of Scythian settlements on the Lower Dnieper were destroyed in the
late fifth or early fourth century. Whilst there may well not have been a
significant replacement of population, it is clear that the Scythian élite—the
Royal Scyths—were ousted from much of the territory; some retained power in
the Crimea while others established themselves in the Dobruja at the Danube
mouth, whence it seems that forays were made deeper into Thracian lands.
What emerged in the Pontic Steppe was a complex culture deeply rooted in
indigenous systems, which can best be called Scytho-Sarmatian.

The political and social upheaval around 400 sc dislocated the economic
systems which sustained the port city of Olbia. Cut off from its traditional cus-
tomers on the mid-Dnieper and from the exchange networks which brought
raw materials from the Urals and beyond, the city suffered a decline, though it
maintained control of the coastal strip between the estuaries of the Dnieper and
the Dniester,

The growth of Macedon asa significant political and military force in the area
began in the mid-fourth century B¢, when, under Philip 11 (359-336), Mace-
donia began to expand northwards into Thrace. Expansion continued with
Alexander, who, in 335, crossed the Danube to lead his armies against the Getae,
and it was on this occasion that his famous meeting with the embassy of Celtic
chieftains took place. After Alexander’s departure to the east in 334 the Mace-
donian interest in the north continued, and in 331 (or 326) detachments of
Scytho-Sarmatians came to the aid of Olbia, when Zopyrion, one of Alexan-
der’s generals, then governor of Thrace, mounted an attack on the now weak-
ened city.

In the political and social chaos which followed Alexander's death in 323 the
Macedonian hold on Thrace collapsed. The power vacuum was to some extent
filled by the rise of the Odrysae, who, under their king Seuthes 111, made good
use of their central position in the Balkans to command the trade which was
intensifying with Greece, particularly along the Maritsa valley route. Even so
the sudden demise of the power of Macedon, which had to a large extent held
south-castern Europe in a state of stable equilibrium, created an entirely
changed situation which, as we saw in Chapter 4, provided new opportunities
for Celtic expansion.

Asia Minor before the Celts

In Asia Minor the ethnic and political situation was no less complex. In the
period of turmoil which followed the collapse of the Mycenaean system,
migrating communities moved from Europe into Asia Minor, trekking across
the Hellespont or sailing the Acgean. It was in this way that the early Greeks
established their colonies along the Aegean coast. One of the migrating groups

7


===== PAGE 195 (index-198_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

was the Phrygians, whose homeland is thought to have been Thrace. Itis possi-
ble that they were involved in the destruction of Troy Vla and the Hittite cap-
ital of Hattusa some time about 1180 ¢ at the time of their settlement in north
central Asia Minor. They became archaeologically recognizable by the middle
of the eighth century, and in the period ¢.725-675 the Phrygian empire had
developed into a regional power, under King Midas, with its capital at Gordion.
The stability of the area was undermined by the conflicts between Assyria and
Uratu and by the incursions of horse-riding hordes from the Pontic Steppe (the
Cimmerians and Scythians) at the beginning of the seventh century. At this
time Gordion was destroyed by Cimmerians and the power of the Phrygians
collapsed. Many factors—the rise of the Greek cities on the west and north
coasts, the land-locked nature of their territory, the comparatively poor quality
of the land, and the eventual dominance of Persia—contributed to the Phry-
gian decline. By the third century they were regarded as effete, good only at
embroidery and best used as slaves.

The degree of stability which had been maintained in Asia Minor by the
Persian domination after the mid-sixth century was finally shattered by
Alexander’s ‘liberation’ and by the chaos of rivalries left in the wake of
Alexander’s death. After ¢.330 BC Asia Minor, like the Balkans and the Pontic
zone, was destabilized to such an extent that migrant Celts would find little
resistance and even, in some regions, a misguided welcome. This opportunity,
together with continued population pressures in their homelands, were two of
the more significant factors that encouraged the eastern advance of the Celtic
tribes.

In Chapter 4 we outlined the main historical framework for the Celtic pres-
ence in the east. Populations and bands of fighting men moved comparatively
freely over large territories. They came from the mid-Danube region, and,
while identified as Celts, or more usually Gauls or Galatians, by the historical
sources, they are likely to have been of mixed ethnicity. Intermarriage and alle-
giances will undoubtedly have made the Celts who moved into the Balkans and
Asia Minor significantly different from those who a century earlier had pene-
trated the Po Valley. None the less, since they were recognized as *Celtic’ by
their contemporaries and, some at least, appear to have spoken a Celtic lan-
guage, we may legitimately consider them here.

Celtic Settlement in Thrace

The Celtic expansion from the Middle Danube was underway in the early third
century. In 281 8¢, in a major thrust to the south and cast, the capital of the
Odrysac at Seuthopolis was sacked and the way was clear for the historic attack
on Delphi. It wasin the aftermath of the expedition into Greece that a Celtic set-
tlement, the kingdom of Tylis, was established in Thrace. According to Poly-
bius, the kingdom was not far from Byzantium, but a later source, Stephen of
Byzantium, says that Tylis was further away near Mount Balkan. Itis difficult to

172


===== PAGE 196 (index-199_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

offer greater precision and the thin scatter of items of La Tene metalwork are no
sure guide. Indeed it is possible that throughout the third century the Celts
maintained a high degree of mobility within a much larger territory. Certainly
in 227 Bc one group had reached Chersonesos (Gallipoli) but was defeated by
Antigonos Il At any event, Celtic power in Thrace was finally destroyed in
213-12 BC.

Since the Celtic presence in Thrace lasted for only two generations, it is
unlikely to have left any substantial trace, nor is there any reason to suppose
that its material culture was closely comparable to that of the west central
European La Tene culture, The few La Tene objects recovered from Thrace
need be little more than gifts arriving by exchange from the west, and their dis-
tribution does not necessarily reflect that of the Celtic group.

One outstanding discovery does, however, deserve mention. At Mezek, in
the valley of the Maritsa River, which
runs south through the Rhodope
mountains, a settlement and cemetery
were discovered. The principal tomb
was a tholos type, with a circular cor-
belled chamber (the tholos proper)
reached by a long passage or dromos,
the entire structure being embedded

within a substantial tumulus, The style

142 Map to illustrate the
principal areas of Celtic set-
tlemnent in eastern Europe
and Asia Minor and the
neighbouring political or
tribal entitics.

143 The Thracian tholos
somb of Mal-tepe, Mczek,
Bulgaria, It was possibly
reused for a Celtic burial in
the third century ne.



===== PAGE 197 (index-200_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

of the burial is Thracian, its architectural refinement being the result of tech
niques coming ultimately from the Greek world. The original burial, dating to
the end of the fourth century sc, is likely to have been of a Thracian chieftain
but the tomb was later used for a second burial in the third century. The new
interment was accompanied by a group of decorated bronze fittings appropri-
ate to a chariot, which may well have been placed in the grave. Stylistically the
fittings are Celtic and may be paralleled by contemporary material found in
Bohemia and Moravia,

The Mezek “chariot burial' nicely points up the problem. Was it the burial of

a Celtic chieftain, his lineage laying claim to territorial legitimacy by choosing

%
3

Bulgaria. Narodniis Arches

Sol



===== PAGE 198 (index-201_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

an indigenous royal tomb for the interment, was the chariot a diplomatic gift
from a Celt to a Thracian, or was it a Celtic chariot captured by a Thracian?
There is, of course, no certain answer, but the questions highlight the complex
of relationships which could have occurred between Celt and Thracian in the
region during the third century. The absence of any systematic body of archae-
ological evidence and the lack of anything more than a few passing references in
contemporary sources make it impossible to assess the nature or extent of
Celtic settlement in Thrace or of its impact on Thracian culture.

Celts in the Pontic Region

That groups of Celts moved cast of the Carpathians into the Ukraine and
Moldova now seems tolerably certain, since their presence is specifically
mentioned on a marble inscription from Olbia put up in honour of
Protogenes. Itis dated to the late third or early second century e but may

well be referring to events carlier in the third century—a time of great
instability in the region. It records that “T'he Galatians and Scirians had
formed a union and had assembled large forcesand intended to arrive in the
winter’ and that “The Thisamatiae, Scythians and Saudaratae, who were like-
wise afraid of the Galatians’ savagery, sought shelter within the city walls.
Protogenes, one of the wealthy inhabitants of the city, received his honour for
paying for the building of a defensive wall along the river and port side of the
city, which had previously been unprotected.

Additional evidence of a Celtic presence is provided by a number of Celto-
Illyrian hydronyms and place names such as Gallitsyja and Galich found in
western Ukraine which are suggestive of settlement on a more permanent basis
than that of merely a roving war band.

The archaeological record is also informative, producing an array of La Tene
metalwork, mainly brooches and bracelets, of which a significant number came
from Scythian graves. Among the more diagnostic of the metalwork are items
belonging to the Duchcov-Minsingen phase dating from the mid-fourth cen-
tury to roughly the middle of the third century, spanning the period of the his-
torical migrations of the Celts into Greece and Asia Minor.

If we accept the presence of a Celtic population in the Moldova-Ukraine
region, the question arises from which direction did they come? One possibil-
ity is that it was a northwards move from Thrace, but it is equally possible that
the penetration came from the west from the area of Celtic settlement in Tran-
sylvania. At any event it was probably the state of disruption caused by the
Sarmatian destruction of Great Scythia that provided the opportunity. Another
group which took advantage of these troubled times was the Bastarnae, proba-
bly of Germanic origin, who are first mentioned in the region in the later third
century. It may have been they who constrained the opportunities for a further
and more intensive Celtic penetration.

The nature of the Celtic presence in the northern Black Sea littoral is unclear.

175

145 Bronze coin of the
Bosporan king. Leucon 11,
Although the symbols are
the subject of debate. the
shicld resembles the Celtic-
style bong shicld. The use of
these weapons as symbols
could reflect an unrecorded
vent when Celtic peoples
came into contact with the
Bosporan kingdom.
National Museum, Moscow.


===== PAGE 199 (index-202_1.jpg) =====
146 A plague of bronze inset
with enamel from Kerch,
Ukraine. First century
showing the influence of

pted from Celtic

s ad
art, Ashmolean Museum
Oxford.

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

names and the Protogenes inscription show that
|
could imply at least a degree of assimila-
tion in the confused Sarmato-Scythian culture of
the region. The Celtic swords in Scythian

The plac
remained a cohesive entity, but the archacologi

graves, like that at Verkhnjaja Tarasovka in
the Lower Dnieper Valley and the Celtic
fibulae and bracelets from other Scythian
cemeteries, may well represent the ex-

change of weapons and women between

reek town

te

The familiarity of the
dwellers with Celts is also suggested by a
number of terracotta figures depicting

Celtic w

Further to the east, east of the Sea of

aponry.

Azov including the basins of the rivers Don
and Kuban, a scatter of ‘Celtic” items has
been found, most notably Etrusco-Celtic hel-
mets of Montefortino type. Although these were

probably made in the fourth and third centuries,
most have been found in Sarmatian graves of the second
and first centurie:

the processes by which the helmets were transported, and the;
items need not imply a Celtic presence. [t may be relevant, hower
geographers considered Mcotide (the Sea of Azov) to be the frontier of the
Celtic world. In such a situation it would not be unreasonable t«
helmets and other prestige items such as bronze vessels were the result of gift
exchange between Celtic communities and their Sarmatian neighbours on the
other side of the s
Sufficient will have been said to show that there are grounds for accepting a
Celtic presence in the north Pontic region, but the nature of the community, its
size, and its longevity as a distinct ethnic entity remain uncertain. Only one set-
tlement, at Bovshev on the Dniester, and one grave, at Zalesye in the Pripyat
estuary near Chernobyl, may reasonably be regarded as 'Celtic’. The remaining

. Various explanations may be offered for
v and the other

er, that Greek

argue that the

thirty or forty items are all stray finds. In a minimalist view, the Celtic presence
need have been no more significant or long lasting than the Thracian kingdom
of T

lis.

The Galatians

The Galatians of Asia Minor provide an interesting example of a Celtic com

munity which retained an ethnic integrity after its initial settlement in the early

third century s¢ and yet appears to have adopted the material culture of its new
homeland wi

h little or no reference to that of its roots.

176


===== PAGE 200 (index-203_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

The history of the Galatians has been outlined above (Chapter 4), and need
not be repeated here. Suffice it to say that the historical view records the move-
ment of some 20,000 people, only half of whom were fighting men, into Asia
Minor in 278-7 B¢ under the leadership of Leonorios and Lutorius. They came,
weare told, at the invitation of King Nicomedes of Bithynia to serve the king in
his conflicts with his neighbours, After fifty years or so as mercenaries in the ser-
vice of different factions and as raiders in their own right, they were eventually
settled in Phrygia in the vicinity of Ankara.

Livy, no doubt following Polybius, gives an account of the migrants at the
time of their arrival. They were divided into three tribal groups, all speaking the
same language, the Tolistobogii, the Trocmi, and the Tectosages, each of which
laid claim to a territory over which to rampage and raid. It was in this mobile
phase of their occupation that they provided mercenary services for any Hel-
lenistic potentate prepared to employ them. After a major defeat in about 232
8¢, the Celtic peoples were compelled to concentrate in Phrygia. The Tecto-
sages were already in the Ancyra region and the other two tribes were settled
nearby. An agreement with the Pergamene king, Attalus, recognized the Celts”
right to the land they now occupied in return for an agreement to cease raiding
the Pergamene kingdom and other spheres of Pergamene interests. In reality
this left only the lands to the cast as legitimate for punitive exploitation and it
was probably at this time that some territorial expansion took place east of the
River Halys. The agreement with Attalus marks the point at which Galatia—the
land of the Galatac—became a recognized territory, and we can henceforth
speak of the inhabitants as Galatians.

The Galatians by this time must have become ethnically mixed. The élite lin-
cages may well have been descended from the original migrant families of two
generations past, but the indigenous population of Phrygia will now have been
absorbed, if only in a subservient position, into the Galatian state.

The social structure of the Galatians seems to have remained little changed
from its earlier form. According to Strabo, each of the three tribes was divided
into four parts, which were called tetrarchies, and each had its own overall
leader (tetrarch) to whom a judge, a war leader, and two subordinate comman-
ders were answerable. A council, representing the twelve tetrarchies and com-
posed of 300 men, met at Drunemetom. Among its duties was to pass judgment
on murder cases. The system has interesting similarities to the organization of
the Celtic Gauls described by Caesar. There is the same separation of leadership
between a civil and a military leader and the recognition of a distinct judicial
class. A supreme council was also a feature of Gaulish society. Originally it
seems to have met once a year under some form of Druidic authority in the ter-
ritory of the Carnutes, but Augustus refounded it as the Consilium Gallarium
and required it to meet at Lugudunum on 1 August at the Altar of Rome and
Augustus. The name of the meeting-place of the Galatians’ council—Dryne-
metum—also implies a religious focus, since nemeton is a Celtic word for a
sacred place and is suggestive of a controlling religious authority.

7


===== PAGE 201 (index-204_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

How long this essentially Celtic system of social organization lasted among
the Galatians is difficult to say. Strabo, writing about the turn of the millen-
nium, specifically mentions that in his time power had passed first to three
rulers, then to two, and finally to one, in contrast to ‘the organization of Galatia
long ago’. This may have been as a result of Roman encouragement or duress,
but there are clear signs of change carlier. In 189 s we learn that Ortagion, a
chief of the Tolistobogii, wanted to unite the Galatians under his leadership,
but his attempts met with little success and a few years later a number of social
units are mentioned each with its own chiefs.

A century later the old system of tetrarchs still appears to have been in force.
The glimpse is provided by a treacherous incident orchestrated by Mithridates
V. In 88 BC, in a bid to take control of Asia Minor, he effectively destroyed
Galatian opposition by inviting the Galatian chiefs to meet him at Pergamum,
Of the sixty who turned up all but one were massacred. Those who did not
attend were picked off in individual attacks, only three tetrarchs managing to
escape.

The massacre of the tetrarchs may well have been the deciding factor in
bringing about far-reaching changes in the old social order. Not only did it
greatly weaken the ruling élite, but it showed that divided leadership was
inefficient in dealing with the problems of the rapidly changing world. Perhaps
even more important was that the incident drove the Galatians to the Roman
side, and it was in the interests of the Roman state to encourage a more unified
leadership.

Very little is known of Galatian ritual or religion. The existence of Druneme-
tom is a hint that sacred locations existed, presided over, perhaps, by a Druidic
priesthood, but there is no direct evidence of this, What is clear is that the
indigenous cults were assimilated by the Celts. Such was the case of the worship
ofthe Mother Goddess at Pessinus. In the late second century sc the high priest,
known by the ritual name of Attis, was a Celt whose brother, Aiorix, bore a
characteristically Celtic name. It is evident from a later, Roman, inscription
that half the college of priests at the temple were of Celtic birth. The sanctuary
at Pessinus was, however, a thoroughly hellenized place. Strabo refers to it as
having been built up by the Pergamene kings ‘in a manner befitting a holy place
with a sanctuary and also with porticoes of white marble’. Yet, in spite of their
acceptance of native cults and practices, the Galatians could revert to a more
typically barbarous practice, as they did in 165 B¢ when, following the conclu-
sion ofa war with Eumenes, the most important of the prisoners were sacrificed
to the gods, while the less favoured were dispatched by spearing. In this incident
we may be witnessing a resurgence of the Celtic belief in the need to sacrifice the
best of the spoils of war to the deities.

The fighting practices of the Galatians were, as we have seen, vividly depicted
by Pergamene artists in an array of victory monuments. Their fierceness and
ferocity in battle were legendary. In 189 sc a Roman army, under the command
of Cn, Manlius Vulso, moved against the Tolistobogii and Trocmi and won a

178


===== PAGE 202 (index-205_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

decisive victory at Olympus near Pessinus. Livy gives a detailed account of the
engagement using the occasion 1o provide his reader with a series of familiar
stereotypes about the Celt as a fighting man (Hist. 38. 19~30). Thus from the
mouth of the commander, in his set-piece pre-battle oration, comes direct ref-
erence to incidents from the Celtic invasion of Italy in the fourth century. That
Livy should emphasize the comparison in this way shows, at the very least, that
he was acutely aware of the similarities of the two peoples, even though he may
have overstressed or oversimplified them. Yet even allowing for these potential
distortions, several interesting points emerge. The Galatians, it appears, were
still using the rather archaic type of Celtic shield, ‘long, but not wide enough for
the size of their bodies and. ... flat in surface’, and they still adopted the practice
of fighting naked, a point vividly described by Livy: “Their wounds were plain
to see because they fight naked and their bodies are plump and white since they
are never exposed except in battle,” There is no reason to suppose that these
observations were not specific to the event. Together they show that patterns of
behaviour in battle had changed little, in spite of nearly a century of experience
in Asia Minor. Even so, Livy could report the Roman commander as saying:
“The Gauls here are by now degenerate, a mixed race, truly described by their
name Gallogrecians,”

In his brief review of Galatian territory, Strabo ( Geog. 12. 5) makes no men-
tion of towns, The Trocmi, he says, have ‘three walled garrisons’, Tavium,
Mithridatium, and Danala; the Tectosages command the fortress of Ancyra;
while the fortresses of the Tolistobogii are Blucium and Peium, the former
being the royal residence of King Deiotarus, and the latter where he kept his
treasure, Strabo’s use of ‘fortress” is clearly intended to imply that these sites
were not towns in the classical sense. He does, however, say that Tavium was
‘the emporium of the people in that part of the country” and he uses the same
word in describing Pessinus in the border region to the west of Galatia. By
‘emporium’ he was presumably seeking to stress the market functions of the
two places. If we can accept Strabo's distinctions, the implication is of an essen-
tially non-urban society focused on a series of fortified enclosures and with an
economy articulated at a few trading centres, at least one of them sited at a
major shrine. The towns of the Phrygian indigenes were left to decay. By the
time of the Roman annexation in 25 8¢, Ancyra, Pessinus, and Tavium were
sufficiently important to become the capitals of the three tribes.

Several Galatian fortresses have been located. Blucium has been tentatively
identified with the fortifications partially excavated at Karalar 35 kilometres
north-west of Ankara. A nearby tomb with a funerary inscription showing it to
have belonged to King Deiotarus (son of the king of the same name who was an
ally of Rome) provided some assurance of the identification. Pefum, the second
of the Tolistobogii strongholds mentioned by Strabo, is thought to lie in the
meander of the river Girmir Bay at Tabanlioglu Kale. The deeply incised river
provides the site with more than adequate protection on three sides, while the
neck of the promontory is defended by a wall protected by multiangular bas-

179


===== PAGE 203 (index-206_1.jpg) =====
147 The treasury of the
Galatian king Defotarus is
situated at Pefum in
Anatolia on a ridge
protected on two sides by a
Soop in the valley of the
River Siberis. The masonry
of the fortifications is typical
high-quality late Hellenistic
work.

THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

tions built in fine Hellenistic masonry. The strength of the defences would be
entirely appropriate toa fortress guarding the king’s treasure. The quality of the
architecture of Peium (if correctly identified) is a reminder that the Galatian
élite were well able to use Hellenistic building techniques, even if their fortified
sites were typical Celtic *hill forts” in size and location,

The material culture of the Galatians has not been extensively studied, but
sufficient is known to suggest that indigenous styles and technologies
adopted from the beginning. Distinctive items of La Tene metalwork are at pre-
sent limited to four bracelets and twenty brooches from the whole of Asia
Minor. While a few items appear, as would be expected, in Galatia and on the
Aegean coast, the densest concentration lies in the south-cast of the country in
Cappadocia, a pattern which might suggest that Celtic raiding parties ranged
over a wider territory than might be supposed from the classical sources,

The Galatians provide a fascinating example of a Celtic people who main-
tained a high degree of ethnic identity over several centuries, even though they
must have represented a minority in their territory. Their persistence as a rec-
ognizably * people must be the result of élite dominance. As a powerful
warlike group, thrown together by migration and periods of mercenary service
they were easily able to dominate the effete Phrygian inhabitants of the land in
which they eventually settled without feeling the need for recourse to material
symbols of their ethnici

were

The Celts in Egypt

The Ceits who burst onto the Hellenistic world in the 280s and 270s Bc were, as
we have seen, largely absorbed into the armies of the contending dynasts of Asia
Minor, but the renown of the Celt as a fighting man was already well known in
the castern Mediterranean. It is hardly surprising, therefore, to learn of Celts in
Egypt as early as 274 nc serving in the army of Ptolemy 11 Philadelphos, In all

180


===== PAGE 204 (index-207_1.jpg) =====
XV Aerial view of the hill fort of Las Cogotas on the edge of the
northern Meseta in the province of Avila, Spain. The site was first
nt received its first fortifications
s) in the fifth century
sure was added Later. Clo

were found in the 2 osure while the

contained evidence of pottery manufacture.



===== PAGE 205 (index-208_1.jpg) =====
XVI The Celtiberian hill fort of Numantia, in the Ebro valley in north-castern Spain, had
taken on the appearance of a Mediterranean town by the beginning of the second century
sc. with a regularly laid out street grid defining insulac of closely packed houses, The settle-
ment stood out against Roman advances and was eventually taken by Scipio in 13y B¢ after 2
long ssege during which time, it is said, the inhabitants were forced 10 resort to cannibalisr



===== PAGE 206 (index-209_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

probability they were recruited from the horde that broke into Asia Minor in
278, but that they may have arrived in Egypt some time before is notimpossible.
They soon proved to be unreliable allies. Believing that Ptolemy was caught in
an impossible position between his half-brother Magas in the west and
Antiochos 1 in the east, they rebelled, buoyed on by the prospects of the wealth
10 be gained by looting the cities and sanctuaries of Egypt. They had, however,
misjudged the situation: Ptolemy reacted swiftly, driving some 4,000 of the
mercenaries onto an island in the Sebennytic branch of the Nile, where,
Pausanius tells us, “They perished by hunger and each other’s swords’.

This was by no means the end of the Celtic presence in Egypt. It was normal
in third-century Egypt for troops, no longer needed for active service, to be
settled and given land to cultivate, usually in the Fayum. These cleruchs (*sleep-
ers’) were, in theory, expected to retain their military skills and to be immed

iately available when called upon. Among the cleruchs living in the Fayum was

adetachment of Celts whose presence is demonstrated by

1 wooden shield, pre-

served in the dry desert conditions. In 217 8¢, when Egypt was threatened by

(L

't Wooden shield
of Celtic rype, well preserved

148 Farlke

1 the desert atmosphere of
the Fayum oasis, Egypt.
where a group of Celtic
mercenaries were given land
in the third century i
Services des Anti

Cairo

149 Lefe: Small terracotta

figure of a Celtic warrior
from Egypt. Th
ue, British Muscum,

London,


===== PAGE 207 (index-210_1.jpg) =====
THE COMMUNITIES OF THE EASTERN FRINGES

the Seleucid king Antiochos I11, Ptolemy IV called the ‘sleepers” to his defence.
Among the 50,000 or 50 troops who were eventually amassed were 6,000 'Gauls
and Thracians’, of whom 2,000, of unspecified nationality, were newly re-
cruited, Some of the cleruchs who took part were, according to Polybius, the
sons of original settlers. In the event the Ptolemaic force won a resounding vic-
tory at Raphia in Gaza. It is tempting to think that the small terracotta of a
resplendent Gaul found in Egypt proclaims Gaulish successes at this time.

Gauls still retained their identity throughout the second century sc and their
presence is recorded from time to time: they helped besiege the rebel town of
Abydos in 186-5 and were among the garrison resident at Hermopolis Magna
towards the end of the century, Whether these detachments had families in the
Fayum and returned there when not on military duty is difficult to say, but that
other communities existed is implied by funerary stelae naming Gauls and
sometimes depicting Celtic shields, found in the necropoli of Alexandria. One
wonders whether the old fighters living in the desiccating atmosphere of the
Fayum oasis in the mid-third century told their incredulous children stories of
the fertile Danube plain or the pine-clad slopes of Mount Parnassos remem-
bered from the time when they had camped in its shadow waiting to pillage
Delphi.

182


===== PAGE 208 (index-211_1.jpg) =====
10
Religious Systems

In describing the Irish and Welsh vernacular sources for Celtic religious
beliefs, the Irish scholar Proinsias MacCana, in a memorable phrase, referred to
the ‘fertile chaos of the insular tradition”. ‘Fertile chaos’ perfectly characterizes
the enormously rich array of partial and confusing evidence available to us
from a wide variety of sources reflecting on the religious beliefs of Celtic peo-
ples. It may fairly be said that there is more, varied, evidence for Celtic religion
than for any other aspect of Celtic life. The only problem is to be able to assem-
ble it in a systematic form which does not too greatly oversimplify the intricate
texture of its detail.

The Greek and Roman texts provide a number of pertinent observations, but
these are at best anecdotal, offered largely as colourful background by writers
whose prime intention was to communicate other messages. The most com-
prehensive account is that given by Caesar in his description of Gaulish society.
Though useful, its summary nature could lead to confusion if it was not bal-
anced against other evidence. Similarly the immensely rich vernacular litera-
ture of the Insular Celts must be approached in the awareness that Celtic
religion was not necessarily consistent across Europe, nor was it unchanging.
The very ‘Insular’ nature of the sources and the fact that what comes down to us
has passed through the emasculating filter of a Christian monastic perspective
demand particular care when such material is used as a basis for generalization.

The archacological record produces an equally varied mix of data. Icon-
ography in the form of stone and wood sculptures is not particularly plentiful,
but, if Celticart in its broader sense is taken into account, as it must be, the vari-
ety of symbols and images is greatly multiplied. In addition to this we have evi-
dence for belief systems embedded in burial practice, in a great number of
votive deposits, and in religious structures such as shrines and shafts. From this
huge mass of disparate evidence, sometimes distorted and usually partial, some
semblance of the religious systems of the Celts can be reconstructed.

183


===== PAGE 209 (index-212_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Itis necessary to stress at the outset the complexity of the problem. Three fac-
tors, in particular, contribute to it: the substratum of religious beliefs coming
through from the earlier prehistoric period; the relative isolation of certain
regions for periods of time; and the impact of rapid social and economic change
on those communities in closest proximity to the Mediterrancan world.
Together these factors will have created a disparity of belief systems taking,
from the general gene-pool of concepts, different combinations of characteris-
tics and emphasizing them in different measure. Yet behind this variety, broad
structural similarities can be detected.

There can be little doubt that religious concepts, prevalent in the second mil-
lennium e, appear, albeit dimly, in some of the beliefs and practices of the
Celtic communities in the later first millennium, yet there does seem to have
been a significant transformation across much of Europe some time in the sec-
ond half of the second millennium. Simply characterized, the carlier systems,
with their strong solar symbolism, were evidently focused on the solar and
lunar cycles, the significance of which underlies the orientation of some at least
of the megalithic tombs, circles, and alignments of the third and early second
millennia. By the end of the millennium these early monuments, many of them
long-lived, had been largely abandoned, and instead an emphasis had devel-
oped on the deposition of items of value placed in pits in the ground or thrown
into rivers, springs, and bogs. This focus on deposition intensified throughout
the first millennium. Deposits of this kind imply 2 more earth-related belief
system which may be best understood as a corollary to the increased emphasis
which was now being placed on the organization of the land and its productive
capacity. A greater reliance on crops and herds would have meant a greater
interest in marking the seasons. Thus the seasonal calendar may have begun to
replace, at least in emphasis, the solar and lunar calendar.

Some memory of these earlier beliefs may have been caught up in the myth of
the Hyperboreans who were believed to have lived in the distant north. Heca-
tacus, who wrote in the sixth century sc (and is quoted by Diodorus), said that
they occupied a large island in the ocean facing the country of the Celts and
there, in a magnificent circular temple, worshipped the sun god. One may rea-
sonably wonder if this is a reference to Britain and more specifically to Stone-
henge, about which the ancient world must have had some knowledge even
though there is no evidence that it was in active use much after the middle of the
second millennium.

The Nature of the Celtic Gods

At first sight the Celtic world was pervaded by a multiplicity of gods and god-
desses, of whom the names of more than 200 have been recorded. But if we
accept that individual deities could have been known by several titles or epi-
thets, then, in theory at least, the plethora of divine personages might be
reducible to a more manageable system.

184


===== PAGE 210 (index-213_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Julius Caesar attempted to do so in a famous passage in Book 6 of his
Commentaries on the Gallic War. Having introduced the topic by telling us that
the Gauls as a whole were extremely superstitious, he goes on to correlate the
Celtic gods, whom he does not name, with their Roman counterparts. The most
popular was Mercury “and they have very many images of him’. He is regarded
to be the inventor of all arts, and also presides over travel and commerce. The
other deities include Apollo, who averts diseases, Minerva, who instructs in
industry and craft, Mars, who controls warfare, and Jupiter, who *has suprem-
acy among the gods’. Caesar’s rationalization is clearly an oversimplification
designed to explain the essentials of the Celtic gods to his Roman audience, but
as such it offers a useful guide.

A rather different approach was taken by Lucan, who, in Pharsalia, names
three Celtic deities—Teutates, Taranis, and Esus—who were propitiated by
human sacrifice. The victims of Teutates were to be drowned, those of Taranis
burnt, and those sacrificed to Esus hanged. The Celtic names are informative.
Teutates means ‘the god of the tribe’ from the Celtic fewutd “tribe’; Taranis is
probably a sky god whose name comes from the Celtic taran ‘thunder’; while
Esus means ‘good” in the sense of all-competent. It is reasonable, therefore, to
equate Taranis with Jupiter as a deity of the sky and Esus (the all-competent)
with Mercury (‘inventor of all arts’). In another guise Esus may have been
synonymous with Lugh, a widely revered deity in the Celtic world whose name
is preserved in a number of place names such as Lugudunum (Lyons) and
Luguvallum (Carlisle). In Ireland Lugh (whose associated description means
“skilled in many arts together') conquered the evil creatures of the other world
and was celebrated at the harvest feast of Lugnasad held on 1 August.

Less certainty attaches to the other correlations. Itis, however, likely that the
tribal deity, Teutates, who was the protector of the tribe in times of war, is to be
seen as roughly equivalent to Mars in Caesar’s list. His Apollo and Minerva find
no parallels in Lucan’s classification but may be recognized among the Celtic
gods. Minerva is most likely to be a generalization for a formidable troop of
female deities who appear under various names as the consorts of male gods of
the tribal kind, as protectors of springs and rivers, or simply as Matres or Mat-
ronae—the divine mothers. Caesar’s Apollo is probably the Celtic Maponos—
the divine son—whose cult is known in Gaul and Britain and may be associated
with healing springs,

If the Celtic deities are approached through the vernacular literature of Ire-
land, a rather different perspective is achieved. Here the essential structure was
a dualism between the male tribal god and the female deity of the land. The
male deity was the Dagda, which means the good (that is all-competent) god
who served as the protector of the tribe. He was all-embracing and included
among his functional attributes control of warfare and the provision of wis-
dom, The Dagda’s counterpartand consort was the Morrigan, a native goddess
frequently referred to as ‘the Queen of Demons' in the Irish texts but also
known under other names such as Macha and Maeve, and often associated with.

85


===== PAGE 211 (index-214_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

the symbolism of the horse. She is both fertile and destructive. The coming
together of the Dagda and the Morrigan on the night of the festival of Samain
ensured the continuing prosperity of the tribe and the fertility of the crops and
animals in the coming year.

This simple binary opposition, which is probably of ancient origin, was com-
plicated by further deities who may have been introduced at a later stage. Thus
Brigit was the daughter of the Dagda. She was a potent fertility force and seems
also to have had powers of healing and wisdom. Another latecomer, portrayed
as such in the mythological tracts, was Lugh, who, like the Dagda, was good at
all things. It is tempting to see in this pattern a simple early system, which may
date to pre-Celtic times, becoming overlaid by levels of complexity and appar-
ent conflicts as the celticization of Ireland proceeded. This would explain how
it was that the all-competent characteristics of the Dagda were to some extent
replicated by those of the newcomer, Lugh, and how the fertility/healing pow-
ers of Brigit could be understood to differ from those of the Morrigan. If one
allows that the early Irish binary system represented the continuation of an
ancient pan-European tradition, which in continental Europe developed more
rapidly to become the Graeco-Roman pantheon and the Celtic ensemble, then
the Mercury/Lugh/all-skilled god may be only a continental version of the early
Insular Dagda, while the Minerva/Brigit/fertility-curative deity could be the
continental manifestation of the Irish Morrigan. Reintroduced into Ireland at
a later date in their evolved form, they were accepted as different gods. Clearly
such suggestions must remain in the realms of speculation, but they have the
advantage of opening the mind to something of the complexity of the situation.

Various approaches have been made to attempt to systematize the Celtic
pantheon by scholars who, like Caesar and Lucan before them, have felt the
need to understand the structure which lay behind the apparent chaos. On the
one hand, it has been argued that Caesar was wrong to attempt to separate
divine functions. Leaving aside the female deities, the male tribal gods were
more or less polyvalent in that they were competent at all things and they were
also polymorphic, appearing in many guises and answering to a variety of
names. In this view the male tribal god was one. Other scholars have regarded
this as an oversimplification, a view which was neatly summed up by Proinsias
MacCana when he wrote:

one cannot but reflect that if the Celts were monotheists at heart, then they were
remarkably successful in disguising this, for not merely have they fractured their single
godhead into a multiplicity of aliases, but they have also invested some of these with a
convincing air of individuality.

For him, while Caesar’s account was wrong to imply that a pantheon of Celtic
gods with specific names occurred all over the Celtic world, it was none the less
a useful typological index to the principal classes of deity that a traveller in Gaul
in the first century sc might encounter. Thus, inaddition to the male tribal god,
one might expect to find Lugh (Mercury), Taranis (Jupiter), Maponos

186


===== PAGE 212 (index-215_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

rnuunos ( ‘the horned one'),
Epona (the horse goddess), and others cropping up almost anywhere.

Apollo), Brigit (Minerva), Ogmioc (Hercules), C

Caesar adds one tantalizing detail to hisaccount of Celtic religion. “The Gauls

claim that they are all descended from Dis Pater; they say this is the tradition

handed down to them from the Druids.’ Dis Pater, the Roman god of the dead,
provides an understandable eponymous ancestor. As the first man alive, he was
first to die and thus to acquire control of the underworld, and it is to him that
the spirits of the dead return after their earthly life. In Celtic mythology and in
the Irish Insular tradition, as Donn ‘the brown or dark one’, he stands aside
from the other gods.

One further aspect deserving of consideration is the prevalence of triplism in
Celtic religion. This is best understood to be an expression of extreme potency
rather than of any coming-together of three disparate elements. The ‘power of
three” was frequently expressed in iconography, as, for example, in the three-
faced stone head from Corleck, Cavan, in Ireland or the tricephalic deity
depicted on the pot from Bavay in northern France, but it is also found as a
the triskele—in Celtic art.

recurring motif he concept is made even more

llo-Roman religion in the form of the Deae
—who together form a
unity representing strength, power, and fertility. Another but less widespread

specific in Romano-British and

Matres or the Matronae—the three mother goddesses

female trinity are the Saluviae, who preside over springs. Male deities are less
pr
Lugoves in Switzerland and Spain may well

ne to triplism, but inscriptions to the

refer toatriple form of Lugh. In the Insular
literature of Ireland triplism is a recurring
theme. The great goddess, the Morrigan in
her plural form, the Morrigna, resolves
into three: Morrigan, Badb, and Nemain.
Brigit and Macha also occur as triads. It is
tempting to wonder if the threefold divi-

sion proposed by Lucan, of Esus, Teutates,

and Taranis, is a further expression of
Celtic triplism,

Sufficient will have been said in this brief
summary to have justified describing the
Celtic gods as a subject of ‘fertile chaos’,
Certainly by the first century 8¢, when the
first
sources, inscriptions, and iconography be-

coherent evidence from  classical
gins to appear, a bewildering variety of
deities present themselves, some strictly
local others with a wider geographical dis-
tribution. No doubt there would have been

an accompanying mythology explaining

150 Small plaque of schist
from Cleveland Walk, Bath,
England, crudely carved
with three female f
probuably represen
three mothers’, a triad of
deitics. The piece is undated
but is probably Roman
Triads of mother goddesses
wete comparatively
mon in the west of Britain in
the Roman period. probably
reflecting an carlier Iron Age
tradition. Roman Baths
Museurn, Bath



===== PAGE 213 (index-216_1.jpg) =====
151 The fray

calendar f

columns each of

four 29- or 30-day months,

containing a total of sixty
two months. Propitic

s times are

festivals
century Al

Civilisation Gallo- Roma

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

the supernatural community and this will have varied in emphasis and content
ion, The many-layered complexity of it all is well exemplified

from region to reg
by the mythologies which survive embedded in the Irish and Welsh vernacular
literature.

It would be unwise to try to structure Celtic religion more rigidly than we
reat geographical rang

have here, given the long period of development, the
and the variety of indigenous and external influences to which it was subjected.

Yet, among the multiplicity and mobility of titles and powers exhibited by the
Celtic gods, it is possible to detect an underlying structure of simple binary
oppositions:  male/tribe/sky/war female/place/earth/fertility.  The
coupling of the two produces balance, harmony, and productivity and has to be

painst

enacted on a regular annual cycle determined by the seasons,

Seasons and Festivals

The Insular literature and the remarkable calendar found at Coligny near
Bourg, dating to the late first century pc, enable an approach to be made to
Celtic concepts of time. The Coligny calendar, inscribed on sheets of copper
alloy, is divided into sixteen columns each subdivided into four months except
for the fifth and ninth columns each of which contain two lunar months and
one intercalary month. needed to adjust the system to the realities of actual
time, The months are divided alternately into 29 and 30 days, making a year of
354 days. Each month is also divided into a light half and a dark half, the divide



===== PAGE 214 (index-217_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

signified by the word Atenowx (‘returning night’), and the months are divided
between those that are auspicious and those that are not, with the abbreviations
MAT (‘good’) and ANM (‘not good'). The days are numbered and some are
also marked by abbreviations which must have been significant for those who
were informed: there are indicative signs for the festivals of Beltane (1 May) and
Lugnasad (1 August). Considerable similarities to the Greek calendar suggest a
possible source of inspiration.

That time was rigorously ordered need occasion no surprise in a society
whose economic basis was agrarian and pastoral. To beable to chart the passage
of time and to know when to initiate essential processes, such as sowing the
crop and moving animals to upland pastures, lay at the very basis of existence.

The Irish literature provides the most detailed insight into the divisions of
the year into seasons. The end of the old year and the beginning of the new was
marked by the greatest of the ceremonies, Samain, which took place on 1
November. It was a liminal time between the two yearsand as such was danger-
ous: the spirits of the dead could roam free. [t was on this occasion that the male
god Dagda and the female goddess, usually Morrigan, came together, and
through their intercourse the well-being of the tribe and fertility of all their
enterprises were assured. In some versions of the myth the goddess, now an old
hag, was revitalized by the union and became young and beautiful once more.
Samain was the time when all the important communal acts, meetings, and
sacrifices took place. The strength of tradition which lay behind the festival has
ensured its survival as Hallowe'en and its Christianized version, the festival of
All Souls.

The next festival, Imbolc, which took place on 1 February, is less well known.
Inall probability it was associated with the goddess Brigit, a goddess of fertility,
learning, and healing (cognate with Minerva). In Christian mythology the
Celtic Brigit became a saint: her festival falls on 1 February and is still celebrated
widely in Ireland. In terms of the agrarian year it probably signified the begin-
ning of the period of lactation of ewes, when the sheep could be moved to
upland pastures.

Next came Beltane, held on 1 May, a ceremony associated with the Celtic god
of fire, Belenus. The fires lit on this occasion may have been used to fumigate
cattle before they were turned out to graze on the summer pastures.

Finally on 1 August the festival of Lugnasad was held, presided over by the
god Lugh, The timing might suggest that it was when the propitiatory offerings
had to be made to the chthonic deities in anticipation of a fruitful harvest. In
Gaulin the first century s¢ this was the occasion when the Council of the Gauls
met, a fact neatly manipulated by the Emperor Augustus when, in 12 B¢, he
relocated the Gaulish consilium requiring it to meet annually at the Altar of
Rome and Augustus at Lyons. In doing so he was demonstrating the unity of
Gaul and Rome, by equating himself with Lugh.

The Irish sources enable us to recognize the overall structure of seasonal fes-
tivalsin its most complete form in relation to the main events of the agricultural

189


===== PAGE 215 (index-218_1.jpg) =====
152 Coin showing the Altar
of Rome and Aagustus at
Lyons, consecrated in 12 nc
as the focus of imperial
power in Gaul, Here the
annual meeting of the Gallic
Council was held

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

and pastoral year. The Coligny calendar, in indicating only the festivals of
Beltane and Lugnasad, might be thought to imply that here, in the most civi-
lized part of the Celtic world, some of the old beliefs and practices had already
fallen away. The suggestion would not be inconsistent with the other
$0€i0-pol

ical changes which were already underway in Gaul. The issue
is a reminder of variations possible across the Celtic world.

Time was crucial to the proper enactment of ritual. This is made
clear by Pliny’s famous description of the rituals attendant on the
cutting of mistletoe from the sacred oak. It had to be done by a white-
robed Druid using a golden sickle and afterwards a suitable sacrifice

had to be made, but more important to the present discussion is that
the act had to be carefully timed: ‘it is gathered with a great deal of cere-
mony, if possible on the sixth day of the moon. . .. They choose this day
because, although the moon has not yet reached half-size, it already has con-
siderable influence’ ( Nar. Hist.16.249). Int
the monthly cycle with its dark and light halves and its propitious and unpro-
pitious days had to be recorded and ac le to those whose task it was to
attend to supernatural matters,

is context one can understand why

Man and the Gods

In most societies interactions between the natural and supernatural world are
ordered by ritual and mediated by specialists and so it was in the Celtic world.
The principal mediators were called Druids ( druides, druidaein Latin; druad in
Old Irish; dryw (singular) in Welsh), which is thought to mean ‘knowledge of
the oak’ or, less likely, ‘deep knowledge’. Another group of religious practition-
ers were called by Strabo vates ( fathi in Old Irish), which probably originally
meant ‘seer’ or someone who was inspired by the gods to understand that

which was invisible.

Caesar gives the most comprehensive, and in many ways the most convin-
<ing, account of the function of the Druidic class (De Bello Gallico 6. 13-14).
Druids belonged to the social élite and had control over all sacrifices, both pub-
lic and private, It was they who gave rulings on all religious questions. They
were also called upon to act as judges in criminal cases and in disputes about
boundaries and inheritances. To enforce their judgements they were able to
ban any defaulter from taking part in sacrifices—an easy thing to accomplish,
since they were the sole intermediaries—and in doing so they cut off the indi-
vidual from the gods, thus making him unclean and excluded from normal
social intercourse: ‘no one will go near or speak to them for fear of being cont-
aminated.’

Among the Druidic class in Gaul one man was elected as supreme and held
the position for life. There was an annual meeting held in the territory of the
Carnutes, which was considered to be the centre of Gaul, where all the major

issues were settled.

190


===== PAGE 216 (index-219_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

The Druids enjoyed various benefits: they were exempt from tax and were
not required to offer military service, though Diviciacus, brother of the ruler of
the Aedui, who Cicero assures us was a Druid, was also a fighting man. The
privileges of the class attracted many pupils, who would be required to spend
twenty years studying the doctrine, committing everything to memory. Caesar
believed that emphasis on memorizing the teachings was designed to train the
mind. This may well be, but there must also have been the desire to keep the lore
exclusive to the initiated. In this way the Druids maintained their hold over the
population.

Caesar offers one final and intriguing observation: ‘It is thought that the doc-
trine of the Druids was invented in Britain and was brought from there into
Gaul: even today those who want to study the doctrine in greater detail usually
goto Britain to learn there." If one can accept the factual accuracy of the second
part of this statement, it might suggest that the power of the Druids in Gaul had
decreased by Caesar's time largely as a result of the social changes which were
taking place,and that in Britain, where a more undeveloped form of Celtic soci-
cty remained, Druidism was still strong. That this was so is suggested by
Tacitus’ account of the destruction of the Druids on the island of Anglesey by
the Roman army in Ap 59. None of this, however, need be seen to support
Caesar’s report that Druidism originated in Britain, though there is no inherent
reason why this should not have been the case.

One of the functions of the Druids was to officiate during sacrifices to the
gods, and there is ample evidence to suggest that among the commodities
sacrificed were human beings. For this reason, in the writings of the classical
authors, Druidism was associated with human sacrifice, which the Roman
world claimed, somewhat disingenuously, to find abhorrent. In describing
Druidic altars on Anglesey as ‘soaked with human blood’, Tacitus could hope
to offer justification for the destruction of the priestly class. What is more likely
to have been at issue is not so much the upset to Roman susceptibilities caused
by human sacrifice as the fear of the Druids as the unifying force able to galva-
nize Celtic opposition. It may have been no coincidence that the trouble which
broke out in the otherwise peaceful region of Gaul in 53 se started among the
Carnutes, where the Druids held their annual pan-Gaulish assembly. It may
also have been no coincidence that the rebellion of Boudica in eastern Britain
began in the immediate aftermath of the Roman attack on the Druidic centre
on Anglesey. In both cases the Druids may have provided the spur to rebellion.

Human sacrifice among the Gauls is mentioned by several classical writers,
Lucan’s commentaries distinguish the particular mode of death which the
different gods preferred: the victims of Taranis were burnt, those of Teutates
were drowned, while those of Esus were hanged. The same methods of dispatch
were enumerated by Poseidonius (and reported by others), though without
specifying the preferences of the different gods. Strabo, quoting Poscidonius,
says: “They used to shoot men down with arrows, impale them in the temples,
or, making a large statue of straw and wood, throw into it cattle and all sorts of

191


===== PAGE 217 (index-220_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

wild animals and human beings and thus make a burnt offering’ ( Geog. 4. 4.6).
Burning victims alive is mentioned by Caesar, probably quoting the same
source. Itis interesting that Strabo uses the past tense, which might suggest that
the practice had died out in Gaul by the first century sc. Britain, however, still
upheld traditional values. Not only were victims sacrificed on the altars of
Anglesey, but Boudica chose to impale captives taken during the rebellion of an
60, though whether out of sheer ferocity or as offerings to the gods of war is not
clear.

A distinction should be made between human sacrifice made to propitiate
the gods and that performed in the interests of divination. Diodorus Siculus,
probably quoting Poseidonius, is informative, When enquiring into important
matters, he tells us:

They devote to death a human being and stab him with a dagger in the region of the
diaphragm and when he has fallen they foretell the future from his fall and from the
convulsions of his limbs and. morcover, from the spurting of the blood, placing their
trust in some ancient and long continued observation of these practices.  (Hist. 5. 31)

A little earlier in the same passage Diodorus describes auguries, based on
sacrificed animals, which are made by “seers’, taking care to distinguish these
practitioners from the Druids. By implication, therefore, it is the ‘seers’ who
were likely to have been most closely involved in the human sacrifices, even
though the Druids must have been present.

Convincing evidence of human sacrifice is surprisingly rare in the archaco-
logical record. In the case of the body placed in a bog at Lindow in Cheshire in
the first or second century ap, there is tolerable certainty of ritual death. He had
been strangled, hit on the head, and his throat cut all in rapid succession. This
is surely an example of the threefold death referred to in the Irish vernacular lit-
erature. Less certainty attaches to the complete bodies thrown into disused
corn storage pitsat varioussites in southern Britain, most notably at the hill fort
of Danebury. Whilst the victims could have been dispatched on the spot before
deposition, some at least could have been stoned to death in situ. Bog burials
and pit burials may well represent offerings made to chthonic deities, the
different places of deposition reflecting perhaps different deiti

The concept of dedicating material to gods was well established in the Celtic
world. The belief system is neatly encapsulated by Caesar:

When they have decided to fight a battle, it is to Mars that they usually dedicate the
spoils they hope to win; if they are successful, they sacrifice the captured animals and
collectall the rest of the spoils in one place. Among many of the tribes itis possible to see
piles of these objects on consecrated ground. It is most unusual for anyone to dare to go
against the religious law and hide his booty at home, or remove any of the objects that
havebeen placed on such piles. The punishment laid down for that crime is death by the
most terrible torture,  (De Bello Gallico 6.18)

It may be that in this section Caesar was relying on Poseidonius. Strabo used the

192


===== PAGE 218 (index-221_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

153 The body of a man
buried in a peat bog at
Lindow, Cheshire, £
The man had suffered a
bangon the h

throat had been cut. The
three ways of death suggest
that he may have boen a

An. British Muse
London.

154 Human body buried in
adisused storage pit in the
hill fort of Dancbary
Hampshire, Engl
was 1o indication of how
and where the individual
died. but it is possible that
the large rocks which or
nally covered most of th
body were the cause of
ath. Hes
probably witnessi
tistory burial, Third or sec
ond century ¢

n we are

193


===== PAGE 219 (index-222_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

same source for his discussion of the great treasure at Toulouse believed to have
come from the sack of Delphi, which was eventually appropriated by the Rom-
ans. Part of it was stacked up in temple enclosures and part had been thrown
into sacred lakes. The temple at Toulouse was highly revered by the local inhab-
itants and for this reason the treasure stored there was considerable. Religious
taboos kept it entirely safe until the Roman Conquest, and even then the des-
poiler, Caepio, suffered a succession of misfortunes at the hands of the gods.

The beliefs lying behind these two accounts were widespread and are well
reflected in the rich archacological record. The most famous of the sites which
can reasonably be regarded asa religious location is La Téne on the edge of Lake
Neuchitel in Switzerland (Figs. 23-7). Although there has been much debate
about the nature of the site, there can be little doubt of its ritual connotations.
The principal structure was a timber pier running out into the lake, which
served as a platform from which votive offerings were thrown into the water
(Fig. 25). The range and quantity arc impressive, In addition to 269 spearheads,
166 swords, and 29 shields, there were hundreds of brooches and an array of
other items including wooden yokes, bronze cauldrons, iron ingots, knives,
razors, belts, and so on. La Tene is by no means unique. A similar pier built out
into the River Witham was found at Fiskerton in Lincolnshire, and from the
sediments around were recovered a number of metal artefacts, including a La
Tene Isword inan iron scabbard, though the radiocarbon dates suggest that the
structure may have begun earlier. Much the same arrangement was found at
Flag Fen in Norfolk, where a timber platform, reached by means of a bridge,
served as a place from which weapons, with a few tools and other items, were
thrown into the surrounding water over a long period from ¢.1600 10 200 Bc.

This same general concept is inherent in the famous ritual site of Liyn Cerrig
Bach in Anglesey, where a rock outcrop served as the place from which a wide
range of items, principally war gear, was thrown into a lake in the late first cen-
tury Bc or early first century ap.

In none of these cases is there any need to suppose that there was only one act
of deposition. Indeed, there is positive evidence to show that the dedications
took place over a period of time, perhaps on a seasonal basis or when a particu-
lar event, past or pending, demanded a propitiatory response. The examples
cited so far were all well-defined locations focused on a structure or natural fea-
ture. The possibility of less focused deposition also exists. Very large quantities
of artefacts, mainly weapons, have been found in European rivers with no evi-
dent concentration at any specific location. This pattern could be the result of
deposition from the river bank or from boats—the river itself, rather than a
specific location along it, being the sacred place. The Thames providesa partic-
ularly impressive example, with concentrations of weapons spanning the
period from the Late Bronze Age to the end of the Iron Age. Many of the
items—Ilike the Battersea and Wandsworth shields, the spearhead from Dat-
chet, and the Waterloo Bridge helmet—uwere prestige goods of considerable
value, and it remains a strong possibility that they were made specifically for

194


===== PAGE 220 (index-223_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Rver (1) @ (5)
Hoord &

Rier o (1) @ (5
Sway feds o

parade purposes or for ritual deposition. Given the apparently scattered nature
of these river deposits and the exceptional quality of some of the picces, the
belief system underlying their deposition must have differed from that govern-
ing the more normal array of warrior equipment dumped at one location.
What binds the two types of behaviour is the underlying belief that the gods
needed to be propitiated by dedicating war gear to them in watery locations. It
was a long-lived tradition which began in Europe in the sixteenth century sc
and continued unabated until the Roman Conquest in those areas reached by
the Roman armies. Rich finds as far north as Denmark, most notably the col-
lection of weapons deposited in a boat in a bog at Hjortspring on the island of
Als in the third or second century B¢, are a reminder that placating the gods in
this way was not the sole preserve of the Celtic regions.

Other types of propitiatory deposit are also known. The description of the
sacred treasure at Toulouse is an indication that items of considerable value
could be dedicated. Such deposits have occasionally been recovered. At Nieder-
zier in the northern Rhineland, for example, a hoard of gold consisting of two
torcs, an armlet, and forty-five coins were found together in a bowl buried next
to a post which was considered by the excavators to be of cult significance. The
total weight of the gold amounted to 321.84 grams, which was almost one
Roman pound (327.45 grams). This type of mixed deposit composed of various
combinations of torcs, arm rings, and coins occurs widely. At Tayac (Gironde)
almost 4 kilograms of gold were recovered made up of a massive tor, ingots,
coin blanks, and coins. At Fenouillet (Haute-Garonne) six torcs (Fig. 60) were
found, while at Lasgraisse (Tarn) two examples came to light.

195

155 The Thames may well
Iave been 4 sacred river in
the Late Bronze and lron
Age. From it have come a
remarkable number of items.
of prestige metalwork. The
maps show the distribution
of Iron Age swords ponting
10 sight change in the
focus of deposition between
the Hallstart and La Téne
periods.


===== PAGE 221 (index-224_1.jpg) =====
156 A hoard of sheet-gold
neck rings, an arm ring, and
gold coins from Niederzier,
Dibren, Germany. First
century we, This Fecurring
combination of abjects,
found in hoards in Belgium
and Britain, suggests adher
ence 103 particular propitia
tory ritual. Rheinisches
Landesmuseum, Bonn.

XVIla Fitcing The stone
fortifications of Dun Acagus
cling to the edge of the island
of Aran, Ireland, while the
Atlantic waves pound far
Ielow. The fortifications,
still undated, have been
shown to be multiperiod and
post-date an extensive Late
Bronze Age settlement.

XVIIb [nser: A barmier of
osely spaced angular rocks
placed to hinder the
approsch of men or horses
1 the fort of Dun Aengus.
Aran, Ireland. This kind of
defensive cordan is known
as chevaex de frise and is
widespread in the west from
Iberia to Scotland,

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

This same pattern of deposition extends to castern England. A hoard from
Ipswich (Suffolk) contained six torcs, but the most informative site is
Snettisham in Norfolk (Pl. XX11b) where chance finds and, later, systematic
excavation exposed twelve individual deposits
overan area of some 1.2 hectares, The deposits var-
ied in size. One of the original finds, producing the
famous Snettisham torc, in addition yielded
another torc, a bracelet, and a gold quarter stater.
Among the more recent, scientifically excavated,
deposits were five separately buried groups
together producing sixty-three torcs of gold, sil-
ver/gold, silver, and bronze. The sheer concentra-
tion of material in a small area and certain details
of deposition—for example, that some of the pits
contained two deposits separated from cach
other—leave little doubt that the motive for depo-
sition was ritual. Snettisham with its apparent lack
of boundary features and absence of structures,
other than the votive deposits, provides a fascinat-
ing insight into the kind of “natural’ sacred place
implied by certain of the classical texts. It is tempt-
ing to see Snettisham as little more than a clearing in a forest protected only by
its sanctity and the religious taboos restraining the people.

The great deposits of weapons and of treasure are likely to represent a ‘tribal’
response to the deities, either one related to a particular momentous event, ora
continuous process of reverence, but it is evident from the archacological
record that everyday life was pervaded by the need to propitiate the deities, and
there will have been very many acts of deposition carried out by the community
and the individual throughout the year. Evidence for this level of response has
come from the large-scale excavations of the hill fort of Danebury, in central
southern Britain. Here, in common with much of southern Britain and north-
ern Gaul, grain, presumably seed grain, was stored in pits. When the storage
phase was over and the pits ceased to have a functional use, propitiatory
offerings were placed in them. The range of material offered is impressive, In
addition to the complete human bodies mentioned above, which may have
been sacrificial victims, parts of human bodies have been recovered, including
severed heads. The most common deposit comprised domestic animals in
whole or in part. While the sheep, cattle, and pigs could have been animals
offered by virtue of their value to the community as food, other animals includ-
ing dogs, horses, and ravens are more likely to have had specific ritual
significance. Th most noticeable with horses, which were usually repre-
sented either by a single articulated leg or by a skull, sometimes in combination
with dogs. Other deposits include small collections of tools or horse gear, whole
pots, grain, and quernstones. Clearly, in these deposits we are glimpsing only

196


===== PAGE 222 (index-225_1.jpg) =====
& A

i - A ! . &
% ‘mwz» Lo "
ik g A


===== PAGE 223 (index-226_1.jpg) =====
gl e = 7N
v A
% M‘@i /4


===== PAGE 224 (index-227_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

the archaeologically recognizable clements of a highly complex pattern of
behaviour. Itis possible to imagine a whole range of offerings, including hides,
wool, cheese, and s0 on, which would have left no archacological trace.

The positions in which these deposits are found in the pits is informative,
The majority are from the bottommost layer, before any erosion had taken
place, but some pits had secondary deposits placed after a phase of erosion. The
implication is that there was a fixed pattern in the timing of the depositions. It
is tempting to see this as related in some way to seasonality and possibly to one
or more of the seasonal festiv

The most convincing explanation for this complex pattern of behaviour
would be to regard the storage of the seed corn in pits as representing a belief in
the power of the chthonic deities in preserving the corn during the liminal
period, when itis dormant, and ensuringits
fertility when sown, Once, therefore, the
seed had been taken from the pits for sow-
ing, it would have been necessary to make
an offering to the deity in anticipation of a
productive harvest. The second deposition
might represent an offering of thanks. For
spring-sown seed, the appropriate seasonal
festivals would have been Lugnasad and
Samain,

For societies for whom the productive
capacity of the land was of vital importance,
it is easy to understand how propitiatory
offerings specific to the community’s cen-
tral concern became dominant. In times of
stress, such as a succession of bad harvests,
theintensity of sacrifice will have increased.
It is probable that societies more reliant on
flocks and herds will have developed diff-
erent systems, In the case of upland areas, deposition in bogs seems to have
been a significant pattern of behaviour. In this context, the discovery of ‘bog
butter’ in the bogs of Ireland and Scotland is interesting. It is not unreasonable
to see in these kegs or cloths of butter the offering to the deities, by a pastoral
community, of part of its valued product in expectation of a satisfactory milk
yield, Other items found in bogs, including wooden containers and bronze ves-
sels, may again reflect the importance of the uplands for milk production.

Groves, Springs, and Shrines

Sufficient will have been said to show that offerings to the gods were made
throughout the landscape—both the natural and the domestic landscape.
There were also specifically designated sacred locations, known by the Gallo-

XV Facing The River
Thames has produced 2
spectacular array of
extremcly fine Iron Age
metatwork much of which
was probably thrown into
the water s offerings to the
gods. The shickd boss from
Wandsworth is 3 consider
able work of art. Itis deco-
rated in repoussé style with
two large birds whose
flowing wings develop inta
tendril motifs. Secand or
first century o, British
Museum.

17 The carcass of a dog and
the leg of a hoese buried
together in a disused storage
pit in the hill fort of
Danebury, Hampshire,
England. This combination
of dog and harse recurs on a
number of occasions and is
suggestive of a distinctive
ritual belief. A range of other
animal burials was also
recorded. The practice of
animal burial was wide-
spread in southern Britain
and northern France and
may represent thank
offerings 10 the chthonic
deities for protecting the
seed corn stored in the pits.


===== PAGE 225 (index-228_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Brittonic word nemeton, which, like the cognate Latin nemus, means a sacred
clearing in a wood or a sacred grove. The word recurs throughout the Celtic
world, from the Galatian Drunemeton to Nemetobriga in Spain and Aquae
Arnemetiae, the sacred spring at Buxton in Derbyshire. In Old Irish fidnemed
refers to a shrine in a forest.

Tacitus, in his description of the rout of the Druids on Anglesey in Ap 59,
writes of ‘groves sacred to savage rites’ which were cut down, ‘for their religion
encouraged them to drench their altars with the blood of prisoners and to find
out the will of the gods by consulting the entrails of human beings’. But the
most evocative description of a grove, in this case in southern Gaul, is provided
by Lucan in his poem Pharsalia and deserves to be quoted in full.

A grove there was untouched by men’s hands from ancient times, whose interlacing
boughs enclosed a space of darkness and cold shade, and banished the sunlight from
above . . . gods were worshipped there with savage rites, the altars were heaped with
hideous offerings and every tree was sprinkled with human gore. On those boughs . . .
birds feared to perch; in those coverts wild beasts would not lie down; no wind ever bore
down upon that wood, nor thunderbolt hurled from black clouds; the trees, even when
they spread their leaves to no breeze, rustled of themselves. Water, also, fell there in
abundance from dark springs. The images of the gods grim and rude were uncouth
blocks formed of felled tree-trunks. Their mere antiquity and the ghastly hue of the rot-
ten timber struck terror. . . . Legend also told that often the subterranean hollows
quaked and bellowed, that yew trees fell down and rose again, that the glare of
conflagrations came from trees that were not on fire, and that serpents twined and
glided round their stems. The people never resorted thither to worship at close quarters
but left the place to the gods. For, when the sun is in mid-heaven or dark night fills the
sky, the priest himself dreads their approach and fears to surprise the lord of the grove.
( Pharsalia 3. 400-25)

Forallits poetic licence, Lucan’s description, which so brilliantly conjures up
the sense of stark panic, may be regarded as a reasonable evocation of a sacred
place and the hold which it will have had over the local population. Lucan goes
on to mention that Caesar had it cleared ‘for it grew near his works’, though it
was more likely that he wished to destroy the power of the place. An interesting
parallel is provided by the sacred spring of Sulis at Bath, where hot mineral
water still gushes out of the ground at the rate of a quarter of a million gallons a
day. Very soon after the Roman invasion of Ap 43, a road, presumably of mili-
tary origin, was driven through the sanctuary within 30 metres of the spring
itself. Twenty years or so later, by which time the province had been firmly
grasped, the road was removed and the land returned to the deity, now
conflated with the Roman goddess Minerva: there is some suggestion in the
archacological record that a grove was replanted nearby at this time.

The archacological demonstration of sacred groves is likely, by the very
nature of the places, to be difficult, but, as we have suggested, there is a possi-
bility that deposits like that found at Snettisham may indeed represent just such
a place. The thermal springs of Bath and Buxton are other contenders.

198


===== PAGE 226 (index-229_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Reverence for springs was widespread. Among the best known are two
Gaulish examples, the shrine of Sequana at the source of the Seine in Burgundy
and Chamalieres near Clermont-Ferrand. Both have produced a remarkable
array of votive offerings in the form of small wooden carvings or, less common,
embossed plaques of metal. The symbolism of many of these items, emphasiz
ing as they do limbs, internal organs, and eyes, leaves little doubt of the under
lying belief in the curative power of the waters. Such a belief is also implied by
the way in which the thermal springs at Bath and Buxton developed. That the
figurines from the sanctuary of Sequana date to the first century Ap might sug-
gest that the sophistication evident in the depiction of that part of the body
which required the deity’s attention was something which developed late, per
hapsasa result of Mediterranean influence, but the sanctity of the springs must
go back to an carlier period. It is significant that
the majority of them for which the dedication is
known were presided over by female deities, but

this is entirely appropriate to the generalized
Celtic belief which related earth and place to

goddesses. The continuation of this belief pat-

tern is shown by the large number of wells and
springs in the west of Europe which continue to
be associated with female Christian saints, and
in this context it is not irrelevant to point out
that the majority of the French river names are
feminine,

The sacred nature of lakes and bogs should
also be remembered. The collections of war gear
at Llyn Cerrig Bach (Anglesey), Hjortspring in
Iene in Switzerland have
already been mentioned, and it is clear from

Denmark, and La

deposits comprising a range of metal items of

the eighth to the sixth centuries sc from the lake

of Llyn Fawr in south Wales and from numer
ous bogs in Ireland that the tradition was long

established and need not be exclusively associ-

ated with weapons. Geneva provides another

example of a lakeside sanctuary. Here an inlet
from the lake was found to contain a collection
of human remains especially skulls, and a mas-

sive statue carved from an oak tree and dated to

.80 sc may well have been one of the cult fig-
ures which dominated the sanctuary. Its some.
what gaunt appearance is a reminder of Lucan’s
haunting description.

Reverence for the chthonic deities, inherent

199

158 The sanctuary of

Seine, Cote d'Or, was used

during the Late Iron Age

n period as a he

simply carved wooden

d by emphiasin
the parts of the body requir
Musée



===== PAGE 227 (index-230_1.jpg) =====
159 Timber ido erected at
the port of Geneva, Swit
rerland, <80 e, The port
was constructed between 123
and 120 nc. based on den
drachronological dates, at
the time when the Romans
were establishing a firm
presence in Provence. The
devdlopment of the port
may have been encouraged
by rapidly increasing trade
with the Roman colonists.
Musée d'Art et d' Histoire.
Geneva.

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

in the worship of watery places, also finds an expression in the digging of shafts
or wells, which are found throughout Celtic Europe. The tradition is evidently
an ancient one and it is likely that the shaft found at Wilsford near Stonehenge,
dating to the Middle Bronze Age, represents the same belief system. A slightly
later example, of the Late Bronze Age, from Swanwick in Hampshire, is said to
have contained an organic deposit identified as blood.

The majority of the shafts from continental Europe date to the later stages of
the Iron Age and many of them lie within rectangular ditched enclosures
(viereckschanzen) (Map 27). That at Holzhausen in Bavaria was some 9o metres
across. In one corner was a timber structure, possibly a shrine, together with

three shafts 2.5 metres in diameter and 40 metres deep. One of the shafts con-
tained an upright wooden stake associated with material thought to have
derived from decayed flesh or blood. The viereckschanze of Fellbach-Schmiden
in Baden-Wirttemberg has proved to be particularly informative. Within the
enclosure, in addition to burials, there was a well, the lower part of which was
waterlogged, creating conditions for the preservation of the timber lining and
of organic remains within the filling. According to the dendrochronological
date, the timbers were cut in 123 Bc. Parts of a timber structure which sur-
rounded the top of the shaft had fallen in and were preserved. These included a
group of remarkable wooden carvings of animals (Pl, XX1), one a rampant stag,
another comprising two goats standing on their hind legs and clasped about the
waist by a central human(?) figure, now missing. On the bottom of the shaft
were two almost complete pottery ve The shaft probably served as a well,
presumably for ritual purposes, before it was abandoned and filled. Whether
the well was associated only with the activities attendant upon the burial or
a function after burial was complete remains

whether it continued to ha

unclear.

Viereckschanzen, with or without burials, have tended to produce little
archacological material other than that which might have been thrown into
shafts, if they occurred. This implies that, whatever activity went on within
them, the deposition of votive offerings was not normally part of the ritual. The
inds of sanctuaries which have been excavated is

contrast with the numerous
striking. Broadly speaking there are two basic sanctuary types: the
Ligurian sanctuaries of southern Gaul and the northern Celtic type which clus-
ter densely in a broad zone extending from Germany to Britain.

The southern Gaulish type is best known from the sites of Roquepertuse
(Bouches-du-Rhone) and Entremont near Aix-en-Provence. At Roquepertuse
two separate elements survive: large seated figures carved in stone, which are
now thought to be prominent members of the aristocracy, and the stone ele-
ments of a stone and timber architectural complex incorporating the famous
Janus-heads (Pl XI1), a stone bird of prey, a frieze carved with simply delin-
ecated horse heads, and stone pillars carved with niches 1o take severed human
heads. Most of the ensemble dates to the third century scand the sanctuary was
abandoned after it was destroyed by fire at the beginning of the second century.

Zelto-



===== PAGE 228 (index-231_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

of th
ny. Enclasur

at Neufahrn, Baden
are widespread in

160 Above Acrial vi

he rectangular ritual enclosure (v3
of this sort da ot

orthern France.

pe. In the case of those du

featur,

161 Ry

Late fron Age Eur

whether they were dug

s wells or for ritual pur
from Fellbach-Schmiden,
lar ritual enclosure
Stuttgart

nnotat
od with a

use asa well d
1-Wilrttemberg, Ger

s not preclude rite

was assoc

and produced well-preserved wooden sculptures. Wirttembergisches Landesmuscus

162 Below: The bottom part of the ritual shaft or well at Fellbach-Schmiden during excavation

201



===== PAGE 229 (index-232_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

Many of these same elements recur at Entre
mont, where the architectural features include a
vertical pillar carved with severed heads and
another fragment with a carved severed head
flanked by niches for real severed heads, of
which some fifteen examples were found, some

still bearing nail holes for attachment. Other

sites in the region have produced fragments of

similar sculpture as well as human heads.

To what extent the religious sites of the
Celto-Ligurian area differ significantly from
those of the rest of Gaul is difficult to say. The

availability of easily carved limestone

and prox-

imity to the Greek cities of the Mediterranean
coastal zone will have had some influence, but
the principal elements of iconography—the
squatting figures and the Janus-heads—are
known in other parts of the Celtic world and the
collection of human heads among the Celts was
an often-repeated anecdote among Greek and
Roman writers. It is simpler, therefore, to re-

gard the Celto-Ligurian sanctuaries as a region
al manifestation of a more widespread pattern
of beliefs,

In the northern Gaulish zone the normal type
of sanctuary by the Late Iron Age was a rectan
gular or circular building of timber usually set

within a rectangular temenos defined by

difched or fenced boundary. Excavations at
Gournay-sur-Aronde (Oise) have provided a
detailed insight into the form and development
of a sanctuary of this kind and the rituals prac-

tised there. The sanctuary occupied a spur

overlooking a stream which flowed from a

small lake. The carliest building dates to the

fourth century s, and thereafter the site was

164 Friceesimply carved continuously used and modified until the end of the first century B¢, when the

with a row of

rses’ he

timber structures were burnt and the site levelled. The sacred nature of the loca

fre ctuary of
; pertuse, Bouches-du- 110N remained in folk memory until the fourth century ap, when a Gallo
Rhone, France. Traces ¢ Roman temple was built precisely over the original shrine.

TR Throughout, the pre-Conquest shrine was surrounded by a ditch of rectan-
& Archéologie Meditér gular plan later enhanced by an external palisade. From the fourth until the first

Shafewmc; Wil century e the focus was a large oval-shaped pit, in which the remains of

sacrificed cattle had been placed. It first lay in the open within a setting of



===== PAGE 230 (index-233_1.jpg) =====
(!l ) M_\
LS
\ - J
' w ‘
( % —
-
\ J
/ A
4 . o) iyl


===== PAGE 231 (index-234_1.jpg) =====
106 The temple site exca-
vated a1 Gournay, Picardy,
France, remained in use
over aconsiderable period,
for much of the time
focused around a ritual pit,
The ditch, created in period
1, formed the receptacle for
extensive ritual depositions
comprising weapons and
animals. The sanctity of the
site was still recognized in
the Roman period, when a
typical Romano-Celtic tem-
phe was built in masonry.

RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

upright posts placed some distance away.
Later it was enclosed on three sides by three
sets of three pits containing a range of offer-
ings. In the next stage the pits were replaced
by a setting of timbers, which may have
served as uprights to take a roof over the cen-
tral pit. In the early first century ¢ the build-
ing was reconstructed in timber in a more
regular rectangular form and was rebuilt
again ¢.30 B, this time of daub on stone foot-
ings surrounded by an ambulatory of light
posts.

Throughout the life of the sanctuary the
temenos ditch was used as a repository for sac-
rificed offerings, including some 2,000 bro-
ken weapons and large quantities of animal
bones, which were found to have been placed
in successive layers, each representing a dis-
tinct act of sacrifice.

The continuity of the sanctuary over a long
period of time, from the pre-Roman Iron Age
wellinto the Roman period, isa phenomenon
T Maver widely recognized across the northern part of

the Celtic zone. Among the sites where struc-
tural evidence of the early sanctuaries has been found beneath later Roman
shrines may be listed Uley (Gloucestershire), Worth (Kent), Hayling Island
(Hampshire), Vendeuil-Caply (Oise), Saint-Germain-le-Rocheux (Chatillon-
sur-Seine), and Schleidweiler (Trier); many others have produced evidence
suggestive of a long continuity.

The evidence from Gournay-sur-Aronde and Vendeuil-Caply, only 30 kilo-
metres apart, show that in this region of Belgic Gaul, from the fourth century
until the beginning of the first, the religious structures—pits and upright
posts—were essentially open air; the concept of a regular roofed structure was
afirst-century 8¢ development. A similar open-air sanctuary dating to the third
century Bc was discovered at Libenice in Bohemia. Here the temenos was cre-
ated by a continuous ditch defining an elongated rectangular area at one end of
which a standing stone and two large post-holes provided the ritual focus. The
possibility that the posts were carved into god-like figures is suggested by the
discovery nearby of two bronze torcs which might have been worn by the
wooden images. A series of pits, dug one at a time and refilled, seem to have
been associated with successive libations, while deposits of animal bones and
the burial of a female indicate the variety of sacrifices offered.

The evidence from Britain differs only in that rectangular buildings appear
before the first century. The best known is the rectangular cella with its post-

204


===== PAGE 232 (index-235_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

built ambulatory found at Heathrow (Middlesex) within a rectangular enclo-
sure. Other examples of rectangular- or square-built structures have been
found in the hill forts of Dancbury (Hampshire) and South Cadbury (Somer-
set) and at Lancing Down (Sussex). All are thought to have served as shrines
during the British Middle Iron Age (¢.300-100 BC).

Another feature of the British evidence is the prevalence of circular temples.
This is most clearly demonstrated by the first-century se structure found on

. P g vt 167 Below, lefe: A rectangu-
Hayling Island, a large building 15 metres in diameter set within a rectangular  j,; givched enclosure N’:

ditched enclosure, The entire structure was rebuilt in stone, after the Roman "'l'n" Huiuh.hw/‘\"l\-"-
RONEES - 5 f e o Middlescx, England., in 1944,
invasion, in the late first century ap. A circular shrine, this time built with dry- sy anedule sl
stone wall footings, was found in the centre of the hill fort of Maiden Castle  angular timber building
(Dorset). This, too, was replaced in masonry in the Roman period, Although ~ *ith2 sishter ambulatory

L ’ : Yy X 8 9 around it. The plan is highly
circular shrines of the Iron Age are not yet known in continental Europe, circu-  reminiscent of later
lar Gallo-Roman temples suggest that earlier prototypes may once have existed,  Romano-Cetic temples

7 : 5 PR, 2 The date would appear to be
In Ireland, circularity was the prime characteristic of religious sites. Four  \iddie or Late Iron Age.

168 Left: The temple at Hayling Istand, Hamp.
shire, England, in use from the first century

e, was rebuilt in masonry by the Romans in

the late first century Ap, the Roman structure
reproducing the form of its predecessor.

169 Abowe: Aerial view of the sacred site of
Tara, Co. Meath, Irekand. The large ench
the Rath ma Riogh, contains a number of i
uments, the most prominent being two
smaller enclosures and a Bronze Age burial
mound—the Mound of the Hostages. Beyond
the enclosure, close to the church, is the Rath
of the Synods, which was in use during the first
century ap; the parallel banks beyond are
Known as the Banqucting Hall. Tara was
important in early Irish history as the place
where kingship was legitimized.

ure,

205


===== PAGE 233 (index-236_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

NAVAN

great ritual centres are known from the vernacu-
lar literature and all have been identified on the
ground as surviving complexes of earthworks:
Tara (Meath), Cruachain (Connacht), Din
Ailinne (Co. Kildare), and Emain Macha, or
Navan Fort (Co. Armagh). All were associated
with rites of kingship in the early historic period,
but Tara was pre-eminent.

The complex of Emain Macha is best known
archacologically. The focal point isan oval enclo-
sure of 5 hectares set within a ritual landscape
which included a natural lake, from which four
bronze horns and a number of human skulls
were recovered, and an artificial pool known as
‘the King's Stables’ which appears to have been
dug for ritual purposes ¢.800 nc. The enclosure
itself contained two prominent circular monu-
ments. One was a ploughed-out ring barrow, the
other survived as a mound 50 metres in diameter
tion showed it
he earliest occu-

and 6 metres high, but as exc
was altogether more comple:
pation comprised a series of circular buildings
associated with a range of prestige goods dating
from ¢.700-100 nc: the assemblage included the
skull and jaw of a Barbary ape which it is tempt-
ing to interpret as an exotic Mediterranean
import, though whether as a living beast or sim-
ply a severed head is unclear.

In 94 Bc (a precise date based on the dendro-
chronological evidence) an oak tree was felled
and set up as the centre post of a massive circular
structure nearly 40 metres in diameter composed

170 Toplefi: Aetial view of Navan Fort in Co. Armagh, Northers
Treland. Navan is the Emain Macha of the Irish epics. The crest of
the hill was occupied by a remarkable timber structure 40 metres
in diameter built around a single oak fefled in 94 me. The struc
ture was embedded in a cairn of stones and the exposed parts set
on fire.

171 Lefe: The map shows the ritual landscape dominated by the
enclosure known as Navan Foet (1), overlooking the lake of
Loughnashade (2), where four lange bronze horns and a number
of human skulls were found, Other sites are Haughey's Fort (3
and an a ial pond known as the King's Stables (4), which
produced finds of Late Bronze Age date, Other archacological
sites are shown as black spots. The detailed plan shows the mas.
sive timber structure dating to 94 s found under mound B
within the fort.



===== PAGE 234 (index-237_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

of six concentric settings of posts, some 275 timbers inall, arranged in radial sets
ina manner highly suggestive of a structure designed to be roofed. No evidence
of internal activity was found and the floor was kept absolutely clean. The
standing structure was then embedded in a stone cairn piled up inside toa max-
imum height of 2.5 metres, and that part of the building which projected above
the cairn was set on fire. After the conflagration the cairn was covered by a
mound of cut turves, raising the height by a further 2.5 metres. The motivation
for this remarkable programme, involving the mobilization of huge social
effort, defies explanation, except as a ritual act of momentous proportions.

The excavation of Din Ailinne provided a further insight into Irish ritual 172 Dun Alinne, Co.
sites, Here the hilltop was defined by an enclosure of 16 hectares. A succession :;:‘::::.::‘::"‘:;:':":l
of three substantial timber structures occupied a central position. The first was  in the Irish vernacular
a circular palisaded enclosure 22 metres in diameter. This was replaced by a !:f':l":""“'h'}':“;‘\:l:‘::“
more elaborate circular structure with concentric settings of timbers which the  rimber buikdings.
excavator suggests supported platforms of
different heights looking inwards. A smaller
enclosure formed an annex, while radiating
palisades and posts created a monumental
funnel approach. In the final stage concentric
palisades defined a circular area 37 metres in
internal diameter. Within the centre of this
was a circular building 5 metres in diameter
surrounded by a setting of massive free-
standing timbers probably 3-4 metres in
height. Aftera period, during which there was
intensive burning near some of the posts, the
entire structure was dismantled. Subsequent
use suggests that the site was given over to
periodic, perhaps seasonal, meetings involv-
ing feasting. The dating evidence shows that
the entire sequence belonged to the period
from the third century sc to the second or
third century Ap.

The size and form of the structures at Dan
Ailinne leave little doubt that they served a
centralizing ritual function. It is possible that
the creation of the mound at Emain Macha
and the demolition of the final structure at
Din Ailinne were broadly contemporary and
mark a significant change in the ritual use of
these sites.

The monumentality of the Irish religious
sites sets them apart from their British and
continental European counterparts. The



===== PAGE 235 (index-238_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

huge timber structures, and the enclosing earthworks which invariably have
the banks outside the ditches, are features which hark back to Neolithic and
Early Bronze Age times and provide a firm reminder of the strength of indige-
nous traditions in more remote areas of the Atlantic fringes.

In this context it is worth recalling the carved stelac—standing stones—of
Armorica, which occur in their columnar and hemispherical forms throughout
the Breton countryside (Fig. 129). That they were regarded as religiously pow-
erful is demonstrated by the Christianization which many of them suffered by
having Christian symbols, usually the cross, carved on them or by being moved
bodily into the precincts of a church. These Iron Age stelae clearly belong to a
belief system which can be traced back to the standing stones of the megalithic
period.

Some echo of the outlandish rites of the distant fringes is provided by
Poseidonius’ anecdotal tale (quoted by Strabo) of an island lying off the mouth
of the Loire occupied only by women ‘possessed by Dionysus’. Once a year they
removed the roof of their temple and replaced it with a new roof within the day.
During this ceremony one of the women was chosen for sacrifice. She was ‘torn
to pieces by the others, and they carry the pieces around the temple crying out
“euoi” and they do not cease until their madness has passed away' (Strabo, Hist.
4. 4. 6). Presumably this behaviour was judged to be sufficiently unusual for
Poseidonius to have mentioned it.

Sufficient will have been said to indicate that built temples existed through-
out the Celtic world. The archacological evidence adds firm support to the
references about religious structures given by the classical writers. When Dio-
dorus Siculus writes of ‘temples and sanctuaries’ and Plutarch tells us that
Caesar's sword was hung up in a temple of the Arverni, they were presumably
referring to the quite sophisticated timber structures of the type represented at
Gournay, the sanctity of which was to be remembered for many centuries to
come.

Attitudes to Death

The archacological evidence derived from the excavation of cemeteries is suffi-
cient to suggest that a belief in the afterlife may have persisted throughout
much of the Celtic world. Caesar makes the matter explicit by reporting that the
Druidsattach particular importance to the belief that after death the soul passes
from one body to another. In this he, like other commentators, is probably fol-
lowing Poseidonius, and rationalizes his observation by supposing that the
doctrine was favoured because it made the warrior fearless in battle.

The burial tradition most widely practised in continental Europe from the
seventh to the first centuries s was inhumation, the dead person being pro-
vided with the equipment appropriate to his or her status as perceived by the
lineage responsible for burial. This qualification is necessary to remind us that
the burial rite, at least of the élite, was an occasion for the lineage publicly o dis-

208


===== PAGE 236 (index-239_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

play its prestige to the assembled company. Rich burials, like those of the West
Hallstatt chicfdoms and their successors in the fifth century, and those of the
northern Celtic zone in the first century sc and early first century ap, reflect
societies in which command of prestige goods was considered to be an attribute
of status. For most of the period from the beginning of the fourth century to the
end of the second status was expressed in terms of warrior equipment reflecting
arather different set of values,

The change to cremation, which becomes evident in much of Celtic Europe
late in the second or early in the first century sc, implies a significant shift in
belief, though it is not apparent what caused it. It may be little more than the
resurgence of a long-established view of the spirit being released into the sky.
An alternative possibility is that the custom was an emulation of Roman prac-
tice. The move to cremation, together with the formalization of temple build-
ings and the development of oppida, may be seen as part of the package of
changes which spread through much of the Celtic world in the last decades of
the second century Bc.

The probability that much of the British Isles adhered to a somewhat
different belief system is suggested by the virtual absence of any form of burial
over much of the country before the beginning of the first century ¢, with the
exception of the cemeteries of the Arras culture in Yorkshire and the cist buri-
als of the South-West peninsula. The simplest explanation for this is that the
normal method for dealing with the dead body was by excarnation—that is, the
exposing of the body in some area set aside for the purpose. The bones would
cither be left there in the open or selectively brought back to the settlement for
curation or use in other rituals, Some such explanation accounts both for the
absence of evidence for regular interments and cremations and for the presence
of human bones in settlement contexts. It is quite possible that excarnation was
widely practised in other parts of Europe alongside other rites: its archacologi-
cal invisibility makes the issue difficult to judge.

The curation of human remains is dramatically reflected in the Celtic atti-
tude to the head. Diodorus Siculus, presumably quoting Poseidonius, offers the
standard disapproving view seen through the classical eyes:

They cut off the heads of enemies slain in battle and attach them to the necks of their
horses. These blood-stained spoils they hand over to their attendants and carry off as
booty, while striking up a pacan and singing a song of victory, and they nail up these first
fruits upon their houses just as do those who lay low wild animals in certain kinds of
hunting. They embalm in cedar-oil the heads of the most distinguished enemies and
preserve them carefully in a chest and display them with pride to strangers, saying that
for this head, one of their ancestors, or his father or the man himself, refused the offer of
alarge sum of money.  (Hist. 5. 29)

In comparing the human head taken in battle with that of wild animals caught
in the chase, Diodorus demeans the Celtic practice whether by ignorance or
design. But behind the second part of the quotation one can discern something

209


===== PAGE 237 (index-240_1.jpg) =====
RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS

of the importance of the head in Celtic society: to own and to display a distin-
guished head was to retain and control the power of the dead person, which was
the inheritance of the lineage. Refusal to part with such a trophy is understand-
able in that it would diminish the holder’s power. Behind this might also lurk
the belief that the head, once freed from its captor or his successor, would be
able to work against them.

Reverence for the power of the head lies behind the story told by Livy of the
battle between the Boii and the Romans during which the Roman consul,
Postumus, was killed. His body was carried to the most prestigious temple of
the tribe and there decapitated, the skull being cleaned and mounted with gold
to serve as a cup in the deity’s honour. Evidently the skull of such a distin-
guished enemy was a gift appropriate to a god. Itis in this context that the skulls
found in the Celto-Ligurian sanctuaries are probably best interpreted. Their
power added to that of the god and was prevented from working against those
who brought about the death. Behind what the Greek and Roman writers saw
as a caricature of Celtic barbarism lay a complex pattern of values and beliefs.

That the Celts were, in Caesar’s words, extremely superstitious seems fair
comment. The gods, in their various guises, were everywhere and controlled
everything. They could communicate with man through augury and could be
cajoled or persuaded by sacrifice, but no contact was possible without the over-
sight of a trained practitioner—a Druid. Stated in these simple terms, Celtic
religion was much like any other in its basic form. It is only in its vibrant
mythology, still vivid in the Irish vernacular literature, that the rich complexity
of the inherited lore can be glimpsed.


===== PAGE 238 (index-241_1.jpg) =====
11
The Developed Celtic
World

THEe migratory movements which began towards the end of the fifth century
e were largely, but not entirely, over by the beginning of the second century,
by which time the immense energy spent on conquest and raiding was being
turned to more productive activities. The result was that throughout the Celtic
world intensification in production and exchange becomes evident on an
unprecedented scale. The reasons for these changes are complex, and their pace
and trajectory differed from place to place and over time, and yet the general-
ization holds good for a vast territory from the Middle Danube to south-east-
ern England and from northern Iberia to Bohemia. In attempting to draw out
the causal threads running through these developments we must begin by con-
sidering the impact of the extension of Roman influence, both direct and indi-
rect, on the communities around the Mediterranean core.

Rome survived the threat of the Second Punic War (218-202 B¢) and in the
aftermath embarked on the first significant stage of its territorial expansion. On
all fronts—in Iberia, southern Gaul, the Po Valley, lllyria, and Asia Minor—
Rome confronted Celtic peoples. While the pace and nature of the interactions
varied, the barbarian periphery cannot have failed to have undergone some
change as a consequence of contact with the energetically expanding economy
of the Mediterranean. These factors, together with the internally generated
social dynamics of the different Celtic communities, led to the emergence of
societies very different from those existing at the height of the migration period.

The Extension of Roman Power: 200-60 BC

The Second Punic War was a turning-point in Rome’s relations with the wider
world. Before the war began, Rome's interests were focused on peninsular Italy
and the seas around, the command of which required the control of the islands
to the westand the coasts of Hllyria to the east. The conflict with Carthage totally

2m


===== PAGE 239 (index-242_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

changed the perspective. As a result of Hannibal's energetic campaigns, Rome
was led to appreciate the strategic importance of controlling the Po Valley; her
armies were actively involved in the south-cast of the Iberian Peninsula, and
were regularly using the land route through Provence and Languedoc; while in
the cast, in the Balkans and Asia Minor, the potential dangers of political insta-
bility there were fast becoming apparent. To maintain and develop the Italian
core it was becoming necessary to control a much more extended periphery.

This was not just for reasons of military security. Active campaigning in dis-
tant territories provided a context for young men to gain experience and to
advance in the Roman social system. Indeed there are interesting comparisons
to be made between the importance of the raid in maintaining social hierar-
chies in the Celtic world and overseas campaigns in providing the aspiring
Roman with a context in which to progress his career through a display of mil-
itary excellence. Nor should the economic importance of overseas territories to
Rome’s development be underestimated. New territorial gains could yield raw
materials and slaves in desirable quantity. For example, huge amounts of gold,
silver, and copper were extracted from Iberia in the six years following the des-
truction of Carthaginian power, and Caesar's campaigns in Gaul are estimated
to have provided a million slaves, most of them destined for the Roman mar-
kets, The other great advantage of overseas territories was that they could pro-
vide markets for surpluses produced on the estates of the Roman aristocracy.
The quantity of north Italian wine offloaded in Gaulish markets in the early first
century Bc is thought to have been in the order of 100,000 hectolitres a year.
Interactions on this scale must have had an effect on native communities in the
areas peripheral to Roman activity.

Roman expansion into the Po Valley was rapid after the defeat of Hannibal.
Traditional fear of the Celts, intensified by an awareness of the weakness of
Rome’s northern borders and the value to a potential enemy of the large pool of
willing mercenaries provided by Cisalpine Celtic settlements, focused Rome’s
attention on the need for rapid conquest of the entire Po Valley. A series of
determined campaigns ensued. In 197 B¢ the Cenomani were defeated at the
Minico and forced into a treaty of friendship, and the next year the Insubres
were overcome at Como. In a later rebellion, aided by the Boii, the Insubres
were again unsuccessful, and in 194 the Boii were finally subdued, as the result
of which many of them retreated northwards back into Transalpine Europe.
Further campaigns in the west against the Ligurians and the east against the
Carni during the next few years extended Rome’s power to the southern fringes
of the Alps. By the end of the 180s nc the process of latinization was well under-
way and surplus native manpower was finding itself in Roman employ both as
auxiliary troops and as farm workers called accolae galli.

The romanization of Cisalpine Gaul meant that the routes through the Alps
were now firmly under Roman control, and, with the instability of the Po Valley
at an end, trade could begin to develop in a more regular and organized man-
ner. For the Alpine and Transalpine Celts the new political geography of the


===== PAGE 240 (index-243_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

south meant the beginning of a period of dramatic socio-economic develop-
ment.

In Iberia the capture of Cidiz in 206 sc marked the end of Carthaginian colo-
nial involvement and the beginning of Roman influence, while the foundation
of the two provinces of Hither and Further Spain in 197 Bc formalized the
process. For the next sixty-four years, until the capitulation of Numantia in 133,
Rome was in a state of almost constant war with the native tribes on the provin-
cial borders, most notably the Lusitani and the Celtiberians. These hostilities,
and the Social War which followed in the carly first century sc, part of which
was fought on Spanish soil, mitigated against the development of significant
trading systems between the native and Roman zones, and it was not until
Caesararrived in 61 8¢ that the west of Iberia began to be brought under Roman
control. By this stage, however, even the remote north-west—the region of the
Castro culture—had begun to absorb the concepts of Roman urbanism, fol-
lowing the expeditions into the region of Decimus Brutus in 138136, which ini-
tiated the opening-up of the Atlantic fringes.

The long and painful wars against the native [berians in the second century
Bc and the Social and Civil Wars of the first century created the need for a con-
stant movement of men and supplies to and from the Peninsula, a movement
enhanced by the outflow of raw materials from the highly productive Spanish
provinces. Although direct contact by sea was an option, the overland route
through southern Gaul was preferred, especially for the movement of troops
and military equipment. Thus, throughout the second and first centuries
Roman convoys passed through Provence and Languedoc across the now thor-
oughly hellenized coastal zone. The needs of the military quartermaster and the
entreprencurial activities of civilians travelling with the armies opened up the

AJ'
'i: M. TROHR Y

WAL B

23

173 The hilltop tovn of
Entremont, Bouches-du
Rhone, France, was the capi-
tal of the Saluvii, who
occupied the termtory in the
region of Aix-en-Provence,
The town was defended by a
stone wall with bastions
which derives its inspiration
from the Greek ity walls of
the southern French coast.
Entremont was destroyed by
the Romans in 123 we.


===== PAGE 241 (index-244_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

remont was defended with sic

dels. The urban layout within was

second centuries ne

175 Be

by stone walls with bastions rem

+ The native oppivhums of Nages, Gard, France, was defended

o Greek defensive architec

ture. The regular layout of the parallel streets is a characteristic

Greek urh ining. which can only have been learned from the

Greek cities of the coastal zone. Third to first centuries w

the
Celto-Ligurian inhabitants absorbed many asp

zone to Roman commerce. In this w

ects of Roman culture. This is demonstrated by
the Mediterranean styles of architecture adop-
ted by the inhabitants of the hill forts of Ensér-

une, Entremont, and Nages.

In crossing southern Gaul the Roman entre-

preneurs will have become increasingly con-
ataxes of trade—the Rhone

route 10 the north and the Aude-Carcassonne

scious of the two gr

Gap-Garonne route to the west. The large native

settlements at Tolosa (Toulouse) on the Garo-
nne and Vienna (Vienne) on the Rhone were no
doubt thoroughly explored by the more adven
turous at an early stage in the contact period.

The mutual interdependence of the native
and Roman systems worked well, until increas
ingly serious raids mounted by the tribes of the
Maritime Alps and Lower Rhone Valley against
Roman convoys and Greek cities alike led, in
evitably, to annexation in 123 sc. After this the
Province of Transalpina was formally estab-
lished.

T'hus, while in Iberia Celtic-speaking peoples
were locked in a seemingly interminable conflict
with the Roman armies, in the west the early sec-
ond century B¢ saw the establishment of an
interface between the Roman and the Celtic
worlds stretching from the Adriatic to the Pyr-
ences. Along the 1,100 kilometres of this cultural
frontier social and economic interactions devel

oped, increasing in intensity as the Italian econ
omy became more and more dependent on the
periphery.

In the eastern Mediterranean and the east the
situation was different. The mountains of the
Balkans formed an effective barrier between the
Adriatic and the Middle Danube regions, shel

tering the Celtic communities from Roman

interference, apart from brief campaigns against
brigands in the Upper Sava Valley between 156
and 129 s, In the Lower Danube Valley the
Thracians acted as a buffer against the develop-

ing Roman interest in Greece and Macedonia



===== PAGE 242 (index-245_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

until the middle of the first century Ap, when Thrace finally became a Roman
province,

The situation in Galatia was different yet again. Here, as we have seen, the
Galatian state remained independent and, to a large extent, isolated, even after
its decisive defeat by the Romans in 189 sc. Following the massacre of the
Tetrarchs by Mithridates IV in 88 nc, the Galatians became increasingly pro-
Roman until their territory was annexed by Pompey in 67 sc. During the cen-
tury or more of contact between the two peoples there is little evidence of
significant acculturation, but the allegiance which developed between the later
Galatian leaders and the Roman authorities implies a close political relation-
ship at least by the first century nc.

The Roman Economy and the Celtic World

During the second century 8¢ the Roman economy was undergoing major
transformations. The reasons were various and complex. One of the principal
factors was the need to maintain substantial citizen armies to forward Roman
interests abroad. This meant that men who would otherwise be engaged in
rural activities were required to spend long periods away from home and were
therefore unable to work the land. For many of those who survived and
returned home, farm work retained little attraction. This encouraged a gradual
drift to the cities and in particular Rome, leaving farms abandoned and land
uncultivated. As the urban proletariat grew, so the smallholdings were bought
up and gradually amalgamated into estates of increasing size. By the end of the
second century large tracts of land were held by comparatively few owners, One
of the reasons for the growth of big estates, in addition to the availability of
cheap land, was that for the senatorial class land provided a convenient and
socially acceptable form of investment. To be involved directly in the trading of
commodities was not considered to be a proper pursuit for a man of status,
though in all probability many ignored or circumvented the convention. To
own land, on the other hand, was desirable. The physical extent of the estate or
estates was a ready indicator of a man’s prestige. More to the point, the yield
provided a cash return on the money invested in the original land purchase.

The estates required large bodies of agricultural workers. With extensive
rural depopulation, labour for hire was not readily available. A more certain
way to fuel productivity was with slave labour. Slaves were cost effective, not
least because they could breed in captivity and slaves could be sold. By the
beginning of the first century B¢ the reliance of the Roman economy on slave
labour was considerable. One estimate is that in the early first century ¢ there
were 300,000 Gaulish slaves in Italy alone, a total which required to be topped
up at the rate 0f 15,000 a year.

There is one further factor to be weighed. For the most part those estates, too
far from Rome to deliver fresh fruit and vegetables to the city, had to rely on
producing corn, oil, and wine. Of these, manufacture of wine soon became the

215


===== PAGE 243 (index-246_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

most popular, no doubt because of ease of production and profit margin, but
overproduction led to pressure to develop new overseas markets.

From this brief, and greatly oversimplified, sketch, two things stand out: the
need to maintain a steady flow of slaves; and the need to create new markets in
which to dispose of surpluses not required in Italy.

While the Roman economy became increasingly dependent on slaves to fuel
its productive capacity, its need for raw materials, and in particular gold and sil-
ver to serve as currency in the increasingly complex economic system, also
increased. Copper, tin, and high-quality iron were always in demand. Other
imports listed by contemporary writers such as Strabo include hides, furs,
amber, hunting dogs, and other exotic animals. These raw materials would
have been sought in the newly won territories and in the barbarian hinterlands
beyond. Thus from the beginning of the second century sc Rome became more
and more dependent upon sources of supply beyond its immediate control.

Romans and the Society of the Celtic Periphery

There can be little doubt that the imperative of Roman needs impinged
significantly upon the barbarian world, such was the energy of the Roman state.
But the Celtic north was also undergoing social change, in part sui generis.
Opportunity for raiding was now far more restricted, not only by the growing
power of Rome in the south but by the rise of the Dacian state in the east and
what may be interpreted as the population increase now underway among the
Germanic peoples of the north. New systems were evolving for the display of
power among the élite. The entourage remained important: the size of a
leader’s ‘following’ was seen as an indicator of his status. In earlier times, as we
have argued above (pp. 88-90), the raid provided the opportunity to lead and
the feast was the occasion for the display of status before the assembled com-
pany. But times had changed, and Poseidonius (through Strabo), in describing
the feast among Celts with whom he was familiar, could assign it to ‘former
times’.

What seems to have replaced this early system, at least in parts of Gaul, was a
form of potlatch—a process of conspicuous giving and consumption, enacted
publicly so that the company could gauge the wealth of the host and benefit
from his generosity. The account which Poseidonius gives of an event staged by
the Arvernian chief Louernius is informative. In a bid for status he built a large
square enclosure and there stockpiled food and set up wine presses to feast all
comers over a period of many days. He also drove about the countryside in his
chariot scattering ‘little pieces of gold and silver’ to the horde who followed
eagerly in his wake. To be able to mount such a display of largess Louernius was
evidently in command of considerable resources. Thus the control of goods
and raw materials, and the facility to manipulate them to produce luxury
exotics such as wine to dispense to clients, now became essential for the aspir-
ing leader. The development of oppida controlling route nodes, and thus the

216


===== PAGE 244 (index-247_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

movement of goods, might be seen as one of the more visible elements in the
complex package of social change now coming about in the Celtic world,
Whether or not the ‘little pieces of gold and silver’ which Louernius threw to
his followers were coins or bullion is unclear, but the development of coinage
played a significant part in the new system. Gold and silver coins were used for
gift exchange rather than commerce in the capitalist sense. Since they were
stamped with the symbols of the issuing authority, often in the first century Bc
actually mentioning the king by name, the coin, however acquired, would be
seen to emanate ultimately from this authority. It was part of the largess which
he distributed to his people, and the current holder was therefore beholden to
him for his initial generosity. The sporadic mintings of coins were, quite possi-
bly, occasioned by the desire of the issuer to legitimize his claim to leadership.
The proximity of the Roman world introduced another new factor into the
political and social dynamics of the periphery. A tribal leader could ally himself
and his following to the Roman state—that is, he could become a client of
Rome. In doing so he would acquire prestige and power by virtue of the pro-
tection which the Roman patron would offer. In the same context an aspiring
young warrior might place himself and his fighting entourage in the hands of
Rome to serve as auxiliaries in the Roman army, much as his ancestors might
have been engaged in a less formal way as mercenaries by Mediterranean pow-
ers. Knowledge of Roman fighting methods and acceptance of Roman ways
would have provided another opportunity to demonstrate social superiority.
The kingdom of Noricum provides an informative example of the relation-
ship which could develop between Celtic and Roman society. The kingdom lay
in the eastern Alps in an area roughly coterminous with present-day Austria. [t
began as a group of loosely allied Celtic tribes but achieved a degree of unity

176 The kingdom of
Noricum in the second and
first centuries nc.


===== PAGE 245 (index-248_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

some time during the second century sc under the hegemony of the Nori of
central eastern Carinthia. Noricum lay astride the east Alpine trading routes,
but it also commanded rich supplies of iron, which were worked locally into a
fine steel, well known in the Roman world as ferrum Noricum. Relations with
Rome began in 186 c and developed amicably, until the region was eventually
annexed in 15 8¢, Throughout this period trade intensified. In about 70 sc a
local coinage was developed in southern Noricum to serve as a medium of
exchange.

The capital of Noricum, Virunum, was located on the Magdalensberg, near
Klagenfurt, close to the major route leading northwards from Aquileia. The
native oppidum was sited on the highest point of the mountain. It was here that
the royal residence was located, and, inevitably, the oppidum served as the prin-
cipal administrative centre of the kingdom. Just below the native town there
developed a ghetto occupied by resident Roman traders. Excavation suggests
that it was established as early as the beginning of the first century Bc and con-
tinued to grow. By 30 e the lower settlement could boast a large forum and
masonry-built houses constructed and decorated in purely Roman style. These
were the residences of traders linked to enterprises based in Aquileia. When, in
15 8¢, Drususand Tiberius began to annex the Alpine territories, Noricum, now
thoroughly romanized, was absorbed with ease.

Roman relations with the Celtic tribes of Gaul were no less intense. The con-
stant Roman presence in the south of the country after ¢.200 nc will have pro-
vided ample opportunity for Roman entreprencurs to develop lucrative
trading links with native communities living around the fringes of the Roman
sphere of influence. At the hill fort of Nages, in the Vaunage not far from
Nimes, itis possible to trace the impact of the Mediterranean world through the
increasing quantities of imported pottery, both fine wares and transport ves-
sels, found in successive stratified layers throughout the duration of the settle-
ment’s habitation beginning about 300 B¢ and ending about ap 10.

One of the most desirable of the Roman imports was wine. The Celts’ love of
wine was legendary in the Roman world. Diodorus Siculus (quoting Poseid-
onius) sums up the stereotype in a famous account:

They are extremely partial to wine and glut themselves with the unmixed wine brought
in by merchants, Their desire makes them guzzle it and when they get drunk they either
fall into a stupor or become manic. For this reason many lalian merchants, with their
usual love of money, regard the Celtic passion for wine as a source of treasure. They
transport the wine by boat on the navigable rivers and by cart through the open coun-
try and they get an incredibly good price for it: for one amphora of wine they get a
slave—a servant in return for adrink!  (Hist. 5. 26)

Whilst it is always necessary to treat texts of this kind with caution, archaco-
logical evidence amply bears out the huge volume of Roman wine which was
transported to Gaul in distinctive amphorae of Dressel 1 type. Two trading
ports have been identified, one near Toulouse in the Garonne Valley, the other

n8


===== PAGE 246 (index-249_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

on the Sadne at Cabillonum (Chalon). At Chalon, it is estimated that 24,000
amphorae were discarded in the river, while the farm land at Vieille T
still so thick with amphora sherds that even today ploughing is difficult. Both
locations must have functioned as trading ports where the wine, transported by
the merchants in amphorae, was decanted into other containers, either barrels
At other sites deeper into Celtic territory the
show that sometimes it was moved
veral of thes

pulouse is

or skins, for movement inland.

discovery of large numbers of amphor.
further without decanting.
Essalois, and Montmerlhe, were native fort

sites, such as Bibracte, Jeeuvres,
fications. To such places the Italian
wine may well have been carried by Roman merchants and there exchanged for
slaves and other commodities with the local élite, who could then dispense the
wine to their followers.

The exchange rate noted by Diodorus—an amphora of wine for a slave—
need not be taken too literally: it may have been little more than a neat literary
flourish, But if it is an accurate record of relative values, then comparative data
suggest that the Celts were getting a poor deal: in Rome the trader might expect
to get the equivalent of half a dozen amphorae of wine for a healthy Gaul.

The development of the wine trade can be charted from the relativ
quency of amphorae in dated archacological contexts. In southern Gaul Italic
amphorae make their appearance in small number about 200 nc and increase
steadily throughout the second century e, but it may well have been the
annexation of southern Gaul by Rome 120 Bc that gave the impetus for the
adventurous to seek more lucrative markets deeper inland (Map 28). The first
of the distinctive Italic amphorae to be found widely in Gaul are the Dres
type 1A, the earliest known examples of which were recovered from the
destruction levels at Carthage and can therefore be dated to 146 B, It is quite
hing the Gauls of the interior as
carly as the middle of the second century sc. Thereafter the quantities increased
dramatically, reaching a peak by the middle of the first century, when ¢
ted new and extended marketing opportunities,
he distribution of Dressel 1A and the later Dressel 1B amphorae provides a
vivid illustration of the Roman penetration of Celtic socicty in the west. The
navigable rivers of Gaul, as Diodorus says, provided arteries along which the
wine could flow. The long-established trading route along the Aude, Garonne,
and Gironde to the Atlantic sea-ways—the route by which tin had been
brought to the Mediterranean—was evidently busy in the late second and first
centuries Bc. Dressel 1A amphorae have been found on wreck sites off the
Breton coast and at a number of settlements in Brittany. The further extension
of the route can be traced, by amphora sherds, via the Channel Island of
Guernsey toa major port-of-trade at Hengistbury Head on the coast of Dorset.
Contemporary archaeological levels at Hengistbury have shown that other
, and unknown commodities
transported in Armorican-made pottery, were reaching Britain at this time.
idence for the production and refinement of metals—iron, gold, silver, and

el

possible, therefore, that wine was already r

aesar’s
conquest cr

goods, including figs, raw glass, metal vessel

219

177 Amphorac used to
transport wine provide a
clear indication of trade
routes. Two amphora types.
Dressel 1A and Dressel 11,
both made in fraly., are par
ticularly useful in identify
ing the changing patterns of
commerce in the second and
first centuries ne. The 1A
type was in commaon use
from the mid-second 10
mid-first centuries ne. The
1B type became
the second hal
century ne, Musée de Saint
Raymond

oulouse.


===== PAGE 247 (index-250_1.jpg) =====
78 Distribution of Dressel
1A amphorac in noeth-west-
e Gaul and southern
Britain, indicating the trade
axis operating in the early
first century se.

THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

bronze—and for the manufacture of shale bracelets, provides some tangible
indication of British exports. Others, mentioned by Strabo a little later as the
desirable products of Britain—hides, corn, hunting dogs, and slaves—can
hardly be expected to leave much archaeological trace.

The evidence from Hengistbury is interesting in showing the impact which
the Roman economy could have on distant communities. There is, however, no
need to suppose that Roman entrepreneurs
were actually sailing the Atlantic sea-ways. In
all probability commodities moved back and
forth within an indigenous network of
exchange, but Roman demands may have
influenced the intensity and focus of the
exchanges. That the major port-of-trade on
the south coast of Britain developed at
Hengistbury rather than a port in the south-
west peninsula might suggest that the
emphasis was more on corn and slaves than
on metals. The hill fort-dominated society of
central southern Britain might have been a
convenient source of slaves, It was probably
for some such reason that Hengistbury be-
came the port-of-call in the late second and
carly first centuries. It was short-lived, for
after the Caesarian conquest of Gaul new sys-
tems of trade emerged (see pp. 247-50).

The head of the Adriatic provided another convenient route between the
Roman world and the north. A Roman colony, established at Aquileia as early
s 169 B¢, led to the further development of an already important trading post
on the route northwards along the eastern Alpine fringes to the Danube, in the
vicinity of Sopron in north-west Hungary, thence to the Morava Valley and the
far north. This was broadly the route along which Baltic amber was carried to
the Mediterranean throughout the later prehistoric period, in Roman times,
and into the early Middle Ages. The importance of Sopron as a route node is
amply demonstrated by the large settlement and cemetery which developed
there and flourished between the fifth and first centuries B, its function even-
tually being continued by the Roman town of Scarbantia.

Between the head of the Adriatic and Transdanubia lay the hilly, even moun-
tainous, country of the Julian Alps from which flowed the upper streams of the
Drava and Sava rivers, In terms of modern political geography the region is
roughly equivalent to Slovenia and north-western Croatia. It was through this
territory, controlled by many Celtic tribes, among them the Taurisci, Carni,
Istri, and lapodi, that items of trade had to pass.

The Carni caused some disruption in 186 B¢, when, intent on establishing
new settlements, they moved west, forcing the evacuation of Aquileia, but they

220


===== PAGE 248 (index-251_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

were eventually driven back in 183. Thereafter Roman relations with the area
were not always harmonious. In 171, returning from an abortive attempt to
reach Macedonia, a Roman army commanded by Cassius Longinus rampaged
through the region taking large numbers of captives to sell as slaves. A formal
complaint was presented to the Roman Senate by ambassadors from the Carni,
Istri, and lapodi, and the brother of the king of Noreia went to Rome as a rep-
resentative of other Alpine tribes. The incident is interesting in that it demon-
strates the nature of diplomatic relations between Celts and Romans at this
time. A few decades later, in the 140s and 130, Polybius records the discovery of
gold in the territory of the Taurisci. Italian entrepreneurs joined the gold rush
but were expelled as soon as the price of gold began to fall. Partly as a result of
this a Roman force was sent into the area in 129 B¢, gaining victories over the
Taurisci, lapodi, and Istri, and probably also the Liburni and Carni. Further
expeditions followed in 115 Bc,

Thus, although the relations between Rome and the eastern Alpine region
were uneasy during the second century, a degree of equilibrium was eventually
established allowing an active trade to develop. At the end of the first century 8¢
Strabo could list the materials flowing through Aquileia as ‘slaves, cattle, and
hides'.

The situation further cast is confused by the many different ethnic groups
inhabiting the area and the mobility of many of them. As we have seen, the
Celtic enclave in Thrace had been destroyed by the end of the third century and
the Celtic communities which had penetrated Transylvania and the southern
parts of Moldova and Ukraine had in all probability been absorbed or ousted,
the former group into the emerging Dacian state, the latter by the Sarmatians
and the Bastarnae. After the end of the second century itis unlikely thatany rec-
ognizable Celtic community existed east of the Middle Danube Valley, except
for the Galatians in their remote homeland in central Asia Minor.

The Dacians and the Germans

Totheeast of the Celts of the Middle Danube lay the Thracians and the Dacians,
while to the north were many tribes regarded by classical writers as being ethni-
cally German. While the Thracians mostly maintained friendly relations with
their Celtic neighbours during the second and first centuries sc, the Dacians
and certain of the so-called Germanic peoples made territorial inroads on the
Celtic homelands.

The earliest recorded movement came from the north and involved two
different tribes, the Cimbri and the Teutones, who migrated, sometimes singly
sometimes together, through western Europe in the late second century 8¢,
causing widespread disruption among the Celtic tribes and sending a chill of
fear down every Roman spine (Map 29).

The origins of these tribes is obscure, though there is sufficient evidence to
suggest that they came from north-west Europe bordering or close to the North

221


===== PAGE 249 (index-252_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

Sea. The long debate about their ethnicity—whether Celtic or Germanic—is,
and is likely to remain, inconclusive. In 120 B¢ the Cimbri had moved against
the kingdom of Noricum, where they were unsuccessfully opposed by a Roman
force. In 114 they were ousted by the Boii in northern Hungary and moved
south, where they became involved in various clashes with the Taurisci and
Scordisci. Thereafter they thrust westwards into Gaul, inflicting further defeats
on Roman armies at Bordeaux in 107 and Orange in 105. A brief expedition
through the Pyrences brought them into conflict with the Celtiberians. By the
time they returned once more to southern Gaul, Gaius Marius, with a reformed
Roman army, was ready to meet them. In two decisive battles, in 102 at Aix-en-
Provenceand 101 at Vercellae in northern Italy, the marauding barbarian forces
were destroyed.

The significance of the invasion is difficult to judge. While it may not have
caused extensive disruption among the tribes of western Europe, it served asa
destabilizing element in that it demonstrated to local tribes that Rome was not
always invincible.

A more serious threat to the eastern Celtic tribes was posed by the growing
power of the Dacians. The origins of the Dacians are obscure. The earliest liter-
ary accounts of them refer to the first half of the second century e, at which
time they were successfully preventing the Bastarnae from moving into the
Carpathians. Under King Rubobostes, in the 170s 1¢, their territorial control
was said to be increasing, and it is generally assumed that this implies an expan-
sion from their original homeland, in the plain of Wallachia north of the Lower
Danube, into Transylvania, where they will have come into contact with long-
established Celtic communities, absorbing them into the expanding Dacian
state.

By the 8os of the first century sc the focus of Dacian power lay in Tran-
sylvania, with its centre in the Origtic mountains to the south of the fertile val-
ley of the Mures. Here, under the leadership of King Burebista working in
partnership with a religious leader named Deceneus, a number of disparate
tribes, among them the Daci, the Getae, and the Buri, were welded together to
form a single powerful state covering roughly the present area of Romania.
After some twenty years of consolidation, Burebista was in a strong position,
able to command, according to Strabo, 200,000 warriors.

In 60 or 59 B he began a policy of expansion westwards, moving first against
the Scordisci and then against the Boii and Taurisci (Map 30). His intention,
Strabo tells us, was to win back ancient Dacian territory. The defeat of the Celtic
tribes was so devastating that Strabo was able to write of the ‘desert of the
Boii'—a phrase open to several interpretations. The archacological evidence,
mainly in the form of distinctive Dacian pottery, suggests that the conquered
territories extended across the northern Tisza region into Slovakia and possibly
as far as Moravia. By expanding westwards Burebista was evidently seeking to
take control of an important route node where the cast-west Danube corridor
was crossed by the north-south amber route, He then turned his attention east-

222


===== PAGE 250 (index-253_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

wards to the Dobrudja, attracted both by the Greek cities of the Pontic coastal
region and by the prospect of halting Roman advance north of the Danube.

Having established a massive power block from central Europe to the Black
Sea, Burebista felt strong enough to intervene in international politicsand in 48
e he sent a message to Pompey, then at Heraclea Lyncestis in Macedonia,
offering him the support of Dacia against Caesar. In the event Pompey was
defeated at Pharsalus, and, before Caesar could take up the Dacian challenge, he
was assassinated in 44 B¢, at about the same time that Burebista met a like fate.
The king's death signalled the end of Dacian expansion: the annexed territories
were quickly lost and the Dacian homeland was split into a number of smaller
polities ruled by reguli, leaving only a resistant core in the Ordstic mountains to
provide continuous trouble for Rome until its final conquest early in the sec-
ond century AD.

The Dacian expansion into the eastern Celtic territories in 60 s¢ caused con-
siderable reverberations among the Celtic tribes of the Alpine region. The Boii
who had been displaced from northern Hungary/Slovakia moved to the south-
west into Noricum and besieged Noreia. They were repelled but entered
Helvetian territory and subsequently were to join the Helvetii in their abortive
migration westwards through Gaul. The alliance of the Boii and Helvetii posed
apotential threat to the kingdom of Noricum and it may have been for this rea-
son that Noricum forged a diplomatic bond with a Germanic tribe, the Suebi,
by marrying the sister of Voccio, the king of Noricum, to the German leader
Ariovistus. In such a circumstance it is possible to understand why, at this stage,
Ariovistus was classed as ‘king and friend’ to Rome and why the Helvetii felt
under threat from all sides. Ariovistus was also involved in Gaulish politics as
anally of the Arverni and Sequani against the Aedui and had, by 61 s, settled a
large group of his people in the territory of the Sequani (modern Alsace), fur-
ther fuelling the tension and instability of the region. The complex situation in
the Alps and its western fringes provided Caesar with ample excuse to begin his
wars of conquest in Gaul.

Itisdifficult to judge how unusual the situation in the 60s of the first century
e was. The classical sources are sufficiently detailed to provide a picture of
social disruption and migration. It is quite possible that this was a new devel-
opment caused by the Dacian expansion and exacerbated by population pres-
sures among the Germanic peoples of the north. But it may have been little
more than the inherent instability of the Celtic tribal system brought into sharp
focus by the sudden interest of the Roman world in the affairs of its northern
periphery.

Intensification, Production, and the Emergence of Oppida

The century and a half after 200 e saw a series of far-reaching changes in the
Celtic world which are represented in the archacological record as a dramatic
increase in production and the rise of large nucleated settlements usually

223


===== PAGE 251 (index-254_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

referred to as oppida (Map 26). The definition and significance of oppida have
occasioned a considerable literature and there is little doubt that the debate will
provide a fruitful area for continued investigation for years to come. The rea-
son why there is so much uncertainty about these sites is that archacologists
haveattempted to reconcile a categorization used, but not defined, by Caesar—
the word oppidum—with a broad group of large settlements, usually defended,
about which there is surprisingly little tangible archacological evidence. Few
‘oppida’ have received more than a cursory archacological examination and
very few have been examined on a scale appropriate to the questions being
asked of them. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that there is confusion and dis-
agreement not only about the social and economic processes which led to the
development of these sites but even about the functions they performed.

Caesar’s use of the word oppidum relates specifically to the Celtic sites he
encountered during his Gaulish campaigns in the middle of the first century se.
Itis, therefore, specific to time and place. He uses it to distinguish the larger set-
tlement locations from villages (vici) and farmsteads (aedificia). Among these
larger settlements he further distinguishes the towns within the Provincia,
which he calls eivitates, and a few other important locations, such as Gergovia,
Alesia, and Avaricum, for which he uses the word urbs, from the general mass
of oppida. Even in the light of our present imperfect archacological knowledge
itis clear that the word oppidais used to cover a number of sites of different size
and different functions spread among tribes of very different social organiza-
tion. There is no suggestion that oppida were necessarily tribal capitals: among
the Helvetii there were twelve and the Bituriges had twenty. Even the small cliff-
castles of the Armorican tribes ‘on the far ends of spits and headlands’ were
described as oppida. Caesar, therefore, uses oppida as a convenient portman-
teau word and as such it may be used by archacologists.

Within this very broad category it is possible, archacologically, to distinguish
aclass of large developed oppida. These may be defined as areas of land (usually
in excess of 10 hectares) defined by a continuous boundary, man-made or nat-
ural, within which a variety of social, religious, and economic functions were
performed of the kind needed to enable the systems, binding large communi-
ties, to articulate. A definition of this kind takes with it the implication that the
oppidumwasa focal centre in a larger territory (not necessarily that of the whole
tribe): it had a political legitimacy and may have been a centre of regional
authority.

The oppidum of Bibracte, in the territory of the Aedui, exemplifies this
definition. It was prominently sited on a hilltop commanding an important
route nexus., The defended area covered some 135 hectares and required over 5
kilometres of ramparts to be built and maintained. It was, Caesar said, ‘by far
the largest and richest oppidum of the Aedui’. Here envoys from other tribes
were received by the chief magistrate and most of the tribal councils met during
Caesar’s Gallic campaigns, and here, in 52 ¢, Vercingetorix was confirmed as
supreme war leader by Gauls who had gathered from all over the country. Its

229


===== PAGE 252 (index-255_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

significance was such that the next year Caesar decided to spend the winter
there. Excavation has shown that occupation began in the second century B
and continued until about 20 Bc, by which time the focus of activity had moved

to the newly founded Roman town of Augustodunum (Autun) 20 kilometres

away.

The oppidum of Manching, in the Lower Danube Valley in Bavaria, exemp-
lifies other aspects of this type of settlement. It too was large, occupying some
380 hectares enclosed by a massive timber-laced rampart some 7 kilometres in
length. Something of the communal effort involved can be appreciated when it
is said that to make the nails which clenched the timbers is estimated to have
required 60 tons of iron. This, together with the massive mobilization of
resources needed to fell and carry the timber, hew the stone, and assemble the
rampart and gates, gives some idea of the vitality of the community and the
coercive power of the authorities. Within the enclosed are

the central part was
densely occupied with houses and other buildings laid out in an ordered man-
ner bounded by paths and streets. Between this area and the ramparts was an
open space which could have been used for pasturing livestock.

When it is remembered that only about 4.5 hectares of the site have been
of arte-

excavated (less than 3 per cent

, the size and quality of the assemblag
facts recovered are remarkable. The tools reflect all the major craft and agricul
tural processes and there is clear evidence of manufacture on a large scale: iron

extraction and forging; bronze-working to make a range of personal jewellery;

the large-scale production of high-quality pottery; the manufacture of poly-

9 The opp
Mo
Sadne-ct-Lare, France, was

Bibrac

the capital of the Aclui at
the time of Cacsar's


===== PAGE 253 (index-256_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

Abowr: The
of Manching, I
Germany, is onc of the best
known of the appida of
temperate Europe, as a result
of an extended campaign of

excavation which exam
alarge sample of the densely
setthed arca of

erior.

181 Above, right: Ap excava
tion conducted within the
ppidum of Manching 1965
in advance of construct
work The p
and ditchy
marks cut into

s post-holes,
howing as dark
hoedrock,
clearly demonstrate the
regular rectilinear layout of
the boundaries of the first
century ne settlement

2 Right: The nucleated
setthement which dev
on the banks of the Rhine
(beneath the site of Rasle.
Switzerland) in the first
century G was first an open
setthement. Laser, after about
50 1, the occupation moved

o a new defended location
on Cathedral Hill

"
b
S



===== PAGE 254 (index-257_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

chrome bracelets and beads from imported raw glass; and the casting of pellets
of gold and silver from which coins were struck. There can be little doubt from
the items produced, and from the distribution of the more distinctive types,
that the craftsmen working in Manching reached an impressively large market
area. In this sense Manching functioned as
a service centre for its hinterland.

The excavations at Manching have been
on a sufficiently large scale to provide some
evidence for the development of the site.
Occupation began in the third century with
an agglomeration of small farms with their
fields and pastures. Throughout the second
century the population increased, and at
the same time craft specialization and coin
production speak of greater complexity.
Some time in the 13081208 BC, a time of
insecurity exacerbated by the wanderings
of the Cimbri and Teutones, there is evi-
dence of destruction and a total rebuilding,
this time within the protection of the mas-
sive defensive perimeter, Thereafter, for
seventy or eighty years, the oppidum con-
tinued to develop, the defences being re-
built or repaired on two occasions. After
the middle of the first century s decline set
in, occasioned presumably by the rapidly
changing political scene and the economic
reordering consequent upon it.

The development of Manching provides
a convenient yardstick for comparing the
archacology of oppida and for showing the way in which such sites might
develop from simple rural village beginnings, but it should not be taken as the
only model for the evolution and functioning of oppida: different economic
pressures and different political histories will have produced a variety of pat-
terns.

Zavist, in the valley of the Vitava, south of Prague, offers a slightly different
scenario. Here a hill fort flourishing in the fifth and fourth centuries sc pro-
vided a focus for the development of a much larger oppidum, in the second cen-
tury covering an area of 150 hectares with a perimeter of 9 kilometres. The
history of the site appears to have been troubled, and several phases of destruc-
tion have been noted, requiring one of the main gates to be rebuilt on five occa-
sions. The population seems to have grown rapidly during the first century s¢,
when new enclosures were successively added to the original nucleus. Internal
organization, like that at Manching, was controlled and regular streets were

227

183 The oppidum of Zavist,
Bobemia, Czech Republic,
has been the focus of a long
campaign of excavations
which has allowed the
complex development of the
defences to be disentanghed.


===== PAGE 255 (index-258_1.jpg) =====
XIX Facing The city of
Pergamum, in Acgean
Turkey, was the capital from
which the Atalid dynasty
led the struggle against
Celtic war bands in the third
century ne. To monumen-
talize their victories they
created many great build-
ings ornamented with
sculptural compositions
often depicting their
enemics, particularly the
Celts. One of the most
impressive of these was the
great Altar of Zeus
cxcavated in the nineteenth
century. All that now
remains is the sad ruin of its
stepped foundation: the
superstructure is on display
in Berlin.

184 Befow: The oppidum of
Kelheim, Bavaria, Germany,
occupies a large area, but
this is achieved by making
good use of the River
Danube and its tributaries
in liew of ramparts.

THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

maintained. Structures identified as farms occurred alongside other houses and
there was ample evidence of craft production particularly of ironwork and the
minting of gold and silver coins. Occupation ended in a disastrous fire in 25 or
20 BC, which may be associated with the Germanic penetration of Bohemia.

The sequence observed at Levroux (Indre) provides another example, like
Manching, of an oppidum which begins as an open undefended village and was
succeeded, some time about 80-70 Bc, by a strongly defended settlement of
some 20 hectares in extent. The difference is that at Levroux the two settlements
are about 1.5 kilometres apart. The situation at Basle is much the same. Herean
undefended settlement on the plain, on the banks of the Rhine, began in the
third century Bc. It seems to have been abandoned some time about 60 Bc in
favour of a fortified oppidum of about s hectares in area, 1.5 kilometres away, on
the site now occupied by the cathedral. One possible historical context for this
shift may have been the social turmoil which would have accompanied the
migration of the local tribe, the Rauraci, in the company of the Helvetii, in 58
e, and their subsequent defeat by the Romans. This same movement from
open settlement to fortified hill site is reflected in the settlement pattern at
Aulnat near Clermont Ferrand.

Whilst the evidence for the origins and development of oppidais still far from
adequate, the picture which emerges suggests a gradual growth over time,
beginning, in the third or second century e, with open village settlements,
which gradually acquired a range of spe-
cialized manufacturing skills until such
time, in the first century ¢, that the com-
munity decided, for reasons of status or
sheer need, to defend itself. Thereafter,
where local conditions permitted or dem-
anded, the defences were refurbished or
extended. The size and development of
these oppida depended on a variety of fac-
tors, among which their position com-
manding raw materials or major route
ways must have been particularly import-
ant. It is no coincidence that successful
oppida like Manching and Kelheim were
located close to rich supplies of iron, while
Trisov in Bohemia had a prolific source of
graphite in the immediate vicinity: graph-
ite was extensively used in pottery manu-
facture. Other oppida commanded major
routes: Staré Hradisko in Moravia was
astride the amber route, as the quantities
of amber found in the excavation bear
witness, while Zavist, Bratislava, and

228


===== PAGE 256 (index-259_1.jpg) =====
— . T
o AT
P T o
ot :,;1_‘;,\ ¥ P i’;ﬁé G !
S e U L
A L (f
W s g Lol : SRR


===== PAGE 257 (index-260_1.jpg) =====
y |y 1
i e I
B L ! =S


===== PAGE 258 (index-261_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

Berne could have controlled traffic along the Vitava, Danube, and Rhine, which
they respectively overlooked.

Differences in size may to some extent have reflected the different status and
prosperity of the community. Manching, at 380 hectares, is large by any stan-
dards, and the 9 kilometres of ramparts at Zavist, even though not all of the
same date, reflect the colossal surplus effort available to the community. But
enclosed area alone is not a direct measure of status, The remarkable 630
hectares of Kelheim and 1,500 hectares of Heidengraben were achieved by judi-
cious use of comparatively short lengths of man-made defences cutting off
promontories between the meandering courses of the Rhine and the Danube,
while the coastal port of Hengistbury, before recent erosion, would have
extended to some 120 hectares behind a single rampart only 600 metres in
length, which cut off the promontory.

Although a variety of defensive techniques were used, most of the large op-
pida which have been excavated fall into one of two categories: a western
European type called the murus gallicus style and a central European type
known as the pfostenschlizmaner style. Murus gallicus is the phrase used by
Julius Caesar to describe the type of fortification he commonly encountered
during his Gallic campaigns.

Wooden beams are laid on the ground at regular intervals of two feet along the whole
length of the wall and at right angles to it. They are fastened together on the inside and
covered with a thick layer of rubble; at the front large stones are used to form a facing
which fills the spaces between the timbers. When this first course has been laid and
made firm, another is added. This is set on top in such a way that, although there is a
two-foot space between its timbers as well, they do not touch those of the first course but
are separated from them by a vertical interval of two feet.  (De Bello Gallico 7. 23)

He goes on to commend the regular appearance of the wall seen from the out-
side with its alternating timbers and stones running in straight rows at standard
intervals from each other, noting that such a structure made a good defence, the
stone protecting the wall against fire while the timbers provided resilience

XXa Facing, above The

Roman triamphal arch at
. Vaucluse, in
€ was proba-
the carly first

depicted in chains bencath a
victory monumsent.

XXb Fucing, befow: The
<Hiff-castle of Lostmac’h,
Finistere, France, The multi-
ple banks and ditches
defend a promontory jut-
ting into the Atlantic.

185 Sestion through the
miures galticues defence of Le
Camp d'Artus at Huelgoat,
Finistere, France, drawn by
Sir Mortimer Wheeler. The
position of the bicing tim-
bees and the nails joining
them was clearly observed,

229


===== PAGE 259 (index-262_1.jpg) =====
186 Diagrammatic sections
through ramparts of
Fécamp type in Normandy
and Picardy. Those tested by
excavation were dump-
constructed without timber
or stone-wall strengthening.
The wide flat-bottomed
ditch is a distinctive charac-

teristic.

THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

against the battering ram. About thirty structures of this type have been found
and excavated. They are concentrated mainly in Gaul, but the style extends as
far as the Upper Rhine and the Upper Danube. Most of those excavated exhib-
ited the additional refinement of having the timbers fastened at the crossing
point by large iron nails.

The second type of defensive structure—the pfostenschlizmauer or Kelheim
type—involved creating a vertical front wall with large upright timbers set in
post-holes 1-2 metres apart with the intervening spaces filled with drystone-
work. The verticals were tied back into the ramp of soil and rubble behind with
horizontal timbers. This type of defence is characteristic of the eastern Celtic
area stretching from just west of the Moselle to Moravia. The distributions of
the two styles overlap in the Upper Rhine-Upper Danube area, and at Man-
ching the Kelheim type of wall was adopted when the carlier murus gallicus was.
rebuilt.

A third distinctive type of defence has been identified in northern Gaul, dis-
tributed mainly, but not exclusively, north of the Seine and named after the
fortification at Fécamp. Here the rampart was composed of tips of earth and
rubble without timber structuring, its front face being steeply sloped. Added
strength was provided by a wide flat-bottomed ditch. This type of rampart con-
struction (but seldom the ditch type) was adopted in contemporary forti-
fications in Britain.

The gates of the oppida were usually elaborate
structures set back at the end of a corridor or
courtyard created by inturning the ends of the
ramparts.

Itis worth focusing on the salient characteristics
of oppida. They are large nucleated settlements
exhibiting a high degree of social organization
reflecting the power of the hierarchy to mobilize
surplus labour in the interests of the community.
Many of them evolved from carlier undefended
villages and in all a high percentage of the popula-
tion was involved in productive activities generat-
ing manufactured goods for extensive hinterlands.
The documentary evidence provided by Caesar
makes clear that in some, like Cenabum (Orléans),
Roman traders had taken up residence. The major
oppida were also places where tribal assemblies
could meet and where embassies from other tribes
could be received. This list of generalizations sug-
gests that by the middle of the first century sc
many of the oppida had acquired the functions
appropriate to urban centres and we might rea-
sonably refer to them as towns.


===== PAGE 260 (index-263_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

The emphasis on command of trade routes and raw materials and on the
production of consumer durables implies that the economic imperative was a
significant factor in the emergence of oppida. It is reasonable, therefore, to sug-
gest that one of the prime causes, perhaps even the initial catalyst, for the
growth of these sites was increasing contact with Rome and the intensifying
demands of the Roman economic system for manpower and raw materials
after ¢.200 se. In other words the oppida and the economic systems which they
represented were a feature of the barbarian periphery adjacent to the Roman
world. Trade preceded the flag: within another century Rome had absorbed
most of the oppida zone.

Social Organization: Power and Prestige

For the Roman system to have been instrumental in causing change in the
Celtic world implies that what it had to offer was acceptable in Celtic society.
We have suggested above that this was indeed the case. With the raid becoming
obsolete as a mode of élite expression, new forms of aggrandizement and dis-
play were developing which involved the manipulation of commaodities, gener-
ated by systems of intensified production, either for direct use or for exchanges
yielding Mediterranean luxuries.

Some reflection of this change in the style of power and prestige is reflected
in Caesar's Commentaries on the Gallic War, which depict Gaulish society in a
state of evolution. The situation among the Helvetii is informative. Orgetorix,
we are told, was the richest and most distinguished man in the tribe, but he
“aspired to kingship' and, according to Caesar, attempted to persuade Casticus,
a noble of the Sequani, and Dumnorix of the Aedui to do the same. “The three
exchanged an oath of loyalty, hoping that when each had seized royal power
they would be able to control the whole of Gaul." However, the conspiracy was
discovered and Orgetorix was arrested to stand trial. If he were found guilty, the
punishment would be death by burning, To evade the procedure Orgetorix
called together his kin and clients (some 10,000 according to Caesar), but the
magistrates amassed a force to oppose him, and in the chaos which followed he
died, possibly by suicide. The incident is informative in that it shows that
among certain tribes government by elected magistrates had replaced kingship,
but such was the social instability that to aspire to kingship was regarded as a
very serious offence. The point is again made when Caesar mentions in passing
that Celtillus, an Arvernian and the father of Vercingetorix, had once been the
most powerful man in the whole of Gaul and had been killed by his fellow
tribesmen because he wished to become king.

The leadership of these more socially evolved tribes was in the hands of an
annually elected magistrate, called the Vergobret by the Aedui, who had the
power of life and death over his people. During his term of office the magistrate
was forbidden to leave his country, and a further rule laid down that two mem-
bers of the same family could not be appointed magistrates while both were

3


===== PAGE 261 (index-264_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

alive or indeed might not be members of the council together. These strict con-
trols were evidently designed to preventan elected representative from leading
a raiding force into another territory and to make sure that power did not con-
centrate in the hands of any one family. Regulations of this kind hint that the
change from the old system to the new had only just got underway and that the
elected magistracy was still a delicate growth.

These social changes seem to have been underway among the Gaulish tribes
closest to the Roman Provincia and are likely therefore to have been condi-
tioned to some extent by the Roman example. Elsewhere in Gaul kings were still
much in evidence, though the system allowed for war leaders to be appointed to
command the troops of more than one tribe when the need arose. Vercing-
ctorix, who led the opposition to Caesar in 52 B¢, is the prime example.

Caesar’s sweeping generalization—that in Gaul only the knights and Druids
were of any social significance—is useful in that it makes clear that the power
lay with a social élite among which the mounted warrior was still a symbol of
prestige. [t designated the class from which the tribal leader and the war leader
would be drawn. The size of the entourage which a man could call upon,
because of lineage or clientage, was the demonstration of social prowess, if not
any more of military power. His ability to maintain or enhance that following
was now largely dependent on his ability to manipulate production and the
wealth generated through trade.

The archacological identification of the élite is not easy, nor is it clear
whether or not they lived within the oppida. Rich burials which can reasonably
be regarded as kingly have been found within the bounds of the oppidum of
Camulodunum (Colchester), suggesting that in south-eastern Britain, in the
carly first century Ap, the top echelons of the élite were closely associated with
the growing urban nucleus. But not all of the aristocracy were oppida-centred,
if the burial evidence can be taken as indicative. In south-cast Britain there
appears to be no close correlation between oppida and rich burials. Much the
same can be said of burials found across northern Gaul. In the territory of the
Treveri, for example, the élite burials of Goeblingen-Nospelt (Luxembourg)
(Pl. XXIla) were 17 kilometres from the oppidum of Titelberg.

Rich burials of the types just referred to were not evenly spread throughout
the oppida zone but are restricted to a peripheral zone in west and north-west
Europe (Map 25). Within this region, from the late second century s, warriors’
tombs, some of them provided witha rich array of grave goods, begin toappear.
Most contain fittings appropriate to the feast, such as amphorae of wine, jugs,
basins, and paterae, frequently imported from the Roman world, as well as fire-
dogs and other hearth furniture. A few were provided with parts of chariots or
chariot fittings.

In Britain it is possible to recognize a hierarchy of burials, The simplest are
cremations in pots, sometimes accompanied by other pottery vessels. Next
come those provided with bronze-bound wooden buckets and occasionally
other luxury items such as imported Roman bronze vessels. These are named

32


===== PAGE 262 (index-265_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

after the type site at Aylesford in Kent. Rich female burials, of the same social
level, were provided with decorated mirrors and sometimes bronze bowls.
More elaborate are the Welwyn-type burials arranged in pits with amphorae
and imported tabletvare. Finally there are the kingly burials such as Lexden,
Colchester, and Folly Lane, St Albans, where the exceptionally rich grave goods
were ritually destroyed, presumably at the point when the lying in state of the
dead king was over and the body was ready for cremation.

In Gaul, especially in the central and western part of the territory, the richer
burials were often accompanied by short swords with anthropoid hilts. Such
swords are widely distributed from Hungary to Britain and may have been an
emblem of a particular social class.

The appearance of this broad zone of élite burials from south-eastern Britain
and western France across to Luxembourg suggests that the social system which
they represent may have differed from that which had developed in the core of
Europe, where the large oppidaflourished. If so, then the totality of the evidence
available to us might be taken to indicate three broad social zones: a core zone
of tribes or early states which were adopting governments of clected magis-
trates; an intermediate zone of polities ruled by kings where large oppida, like
those of the first zone, had developed; and a periphery where élite status was still
being expressed in the ancient manner with sumptuous burial rites. Beyond, up
to the Rhine, in central, western, and northern Britain and in Ireland, old social
systems continued much as they had done for centuries. The army of Queen
Boudica in Ap 60 and that led by Calgacus in northern Scotland in Ap 84 appear

233

187 Elite buriaks of the Late
La Téne period chuster ina
broad zone from Kent to
Germany. They arc charac-
terized by their use of
impoarted wine-drinking
‘equipment and wine
ampharac coming from
northern laly and reflecta
type of prestige goods econ-
omy developing in the sec-
ond half of the first century
nc. In Britain burials of this
kind continue into the mid-
dle of the first century Av.


===== PAGE 263 (index-266_1.jpg) =====
THE DEVELOPED CELTIC WORLD

1o have been organized in much the
same way as the Celtic forces which
met the Romans in Italy three cen-
turies earlier,

Clearly, any such model is a gen-
eralization. The situation in the sec-
ond and first centuries nc was by no
means static. Society was changing.
The tribes living in areas more dis-
tant from the influence of the
Roman world inevitably evolved at a
different rate from those in direct
daily contact.

After 60 sc the pace of change,
which hitherto had been regular

188 Map indicating the with its own momentum and trajectory, was dramatically dislocated as Rome
different social zonesinthe  began its accelerated expansion northwards.

carly first century ne.

34


===== PAGE 264 (index-267_1.jpg) =====
12
The Celtsin Retreat

During the third century the Celtic world reached its greatest extent. In
northern central Spain the Celtiberians had developed asa strong military force
whose influence extended westwards to the Atlantic. To the north the Celtic
language had long been spoken as far west as the Atlantic shores of Ireland, and
elements of La Téne culture were well established among many of the Insular
communities. South and east the Celts who had settled in the Po Valley and in
central Asia Minor were harrying the Graeco-Roman world and earning their
reputation as ferocious fighters. Smaller communities had spread around the
northern shores of the Black Sea and others had penetrated northwards
through the Carpathians into southern Poland. Isolated war bands had reached
Delphi, mercenaries were operating in Egypt, and ambassadors had followed
Alexander to Babylon.

The Second Punic War completely altered the balance of power in the Medi-
terranean. Rome moved into an expansive mode. From the end of the war in
202 se until the capitulation of Numantia in 133 the Celtiberians and Lusitani
were gradually brought under control. The first two decades of the second cen-
tury saw the Roman armies win a series of major campaigns north of the Apen-
nines paving the way for romanization, largely completed within a century. In
Asia Minor the Celts of Galatia were brought to heel by the Roman army in 189
e, after which, though still nominally free, their powers were progressively cir-
cumscribed.

In 133, the fall of Numantia in the west and the ‘gift’ of the Pergamene king-
dom to Rome in the cast, following the death of Attalus II1, established Rome as
aworld power. Within a decade southern Gaul had been annexed, marking the
first step in the systematic encirclement of the Mediterranean. At about the
same time campaigns in the eastern Alps had extended Roman influence deep
into central Europe. Along this immensely long interface, from the Pyrenees to
the mountains of Hlyria, the Roman world confronted Celtic tribes.

235


===== PAGE 265 (index-268_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

The Unstable Equilibrium: 130-60 BC

For seventy years or so the Roman frontier with the Celtic world retained a
degree of stability, while complex systems of interaction developed. Trade, as
we have seen, expanded quickly, while a host of treaty relations negotiated with
individual tribes established a delicate network of obligations and expectations
which could be manipulated to the advantage of any party with the wit to do so.
It was a time of bonding and learning.

Inevitably there were tensions, and these erupted into bouts of outright
aggression. In Transalpine Gaul, the initial campaigns against the Ligurians,
the Salluvii, and the Vocontii in 124 and 123 B¢, which led to the annexation of
the coastal region, had quickened, to be followed up in 122 and 121, when Cn.
Domitius Ahenobarbus routed the Allobroges and Arverni bringing under
Roman control the Rhone Valley as far north as Geneva. The creation of a port
on the lakeside with timbers felled between 123 and 120 se is almost certainly to
be seen as a native response to the new commercial opportunities which the
Roman presence offered. Some years later a firm control was taken of the west-
ern trade corridor—the Carcassonne Gap and Garonne—when in 106 Caepio
was sent with an army to put down a revolt among the Volcae and Tectosages.
Asaresult Tolosa (Toulouse) was sacked, and thereafter the town and its terri-
tory were absorbed into the Province.

Old Greek cities of the coastal zone, new Roman creations like the colony of
Narbo Martius (Narbonne) founded neara native town in about 118 8¢, and the
commercial annexation of important native centres like Tolosa, Vienna
(Vienne), and Geneva provided the infrastructure necessary for the aggressive
trading ventures of the Roman entrepreneurs who flooded into the Gaulish
province. An interesting insight into these times is provided by the court case in
which Cicero defended Fonteius, practor of Transalpina, in 75-3 nc, against
charges of extortion made by members of the local community. The details are
slightly obscure, but in essence Fonteius stood accused of levying an unofficial
tax, in hisown interests, on the movement of Italian wine destined for the Celtic
market. In his defence of Fonteius, Cicero is at pains to denigrate the accusers,
playing on all the prejudices of a Roman Celtophobe—they are noisy and arro-
gant, their manners and language are uncouth, and they wear trousers! More to
the point, their ancestors attacked Rome and Delphi. Thus they are barbarians
and cannot be considered on the same level as a Roman citizen. If a civilized
man like Cicero could present the Gauls in this way, evenallowing fora lawyer's
distortion, what must have been the attitude of petty officials and merchants?

A little later, in 63 B, the Allobroges sent commissioners to Rome to com-
plin of maladministration. The discontent among Celtic tribes was well
known in Rome and an attempt was made to involve them in the conspiracy of
Catiline, but in the event the Allobrogian emissaries decided against rebellion.
The incident is interesting in that it shows how Roman factions might choose
to manipulate Celtic discontent in their own interests, but it also demonstrates

236


===== PAGE 266 (index-269_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

the reluctance of tribes who had experienced only two generations of roman-
ization to disrupt the equilibrium which had emerged, even though they had
serious grievances.

The situation in the fringes of the eastern Alps is less clear. The close rela-
tionship which had been established with the kingdom of Noricum created a
degree of stability in the western flank of the region, but the main axis of com-
munication which led northwards from Aquileia to the Sava Valley and beyond
remained in the hands of native tribes, principally the Taurisci and lapodes.
When, from time to time, the flow of trade was threatened, Roman troops were
sent in to restore order. In 129 ne a force reached Siscia (Sisak), but without
attempting to take control of the land. Policing of this kind continued until the
middle of the first century gc. In 88 the Roman commander Scipio Asiagenus
moved further cast against the Scordisci, who were decisively defeated but with
no territorial advantage to the Romans.

For the last two decades of the second century many tribes in central and
western Europe suffered disruption from the migratory movements of the
Cimbriand Teutones, the names which classical authors give to a mobile horde
which originated somewhere in the territory north of the Lower Rhine. While
the composition and exact ethnic origins of these peoples remain unclear, that
they emerged from the land broadly known to the Romans as Germania gave
rise to the belief that they were Germans and thus were distinct from the Celts.
The divide was a convenient one for commentators like Caesar and Tacitus to
use, and for them the Rhine marked the boundary between the two peoples.
The actual situation was far more complex and it is doubtful if any significant
ethnic divide existed at least before the middle of the first century ne. Celtic
tribes had long occupied the Middle Rhine, Bohemia, and Moravia, and Celtic
enclaves had established themselves in southern Poland. Caesar also acknow-
ledged that Germanic tribes occupied lands west of the Rhine and that there was
some admixture with the northern groups of Belgae who lived between the
Seine and the Rhine. While in terms of material culture, socio-economic struc-
ture, and language the inhabitants of the North European Plain differed from
the Celtic communities further south, there was a wide zone between where
one graded into the other.

One way to view Europe in the second century ac, as we have argued in
Chapter 1, is to see it as a series of peripheries of decreasing social and eco-
nomic complexity as one moved away from the Mediterranean, Close to the
Roman frontier the groups were oligarchies practising an advanced market
economy. Further out they were kingdoms focused on oppida. These graded
outwards into a zone where status was still expressed by prestige goods burials
and where many defended settlements suggest a more fragmented organiza-
tion. Beyond this in the northern parts of Belgica and the North European Plain
organization seems to have been simpler and the people more warlike. This last
zone, broadly speaking, is that which the classical writers designated as ‘Ger-
man’. What can be deduced of Germanic society from Julius Caesar, and from

37


===== PAGE 267 (index-270_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

189 Map toillustrate the
changing boundary between
“Celts” and “Germans”.

the more specific accounts of Tacitus written 140 years later, gives the impres-
sion of communities differing little from the Celts of the fourth and third cen-
turies. In other words, degree of social complexity cannot be taken as a
distinguishing factor between Celt and German. If a single characteristic is
required, it can only be language. But apart from recourse to chronologically
ill-focused maps of Celtic and Germanic place names, there is no sure way of
distinguishing which tribes were German-speaking. All we can do is to accept
the ethnic identifications made by the Roman commentators.

The movement southwards of the Cimbri and Teutones is the first recorded
movement of Germanic peoples into the territory of the Celts. It reflects an
carly stage in a series of southward expansions which culminated in the massive
migrations between the third and the fifth centuries Ap. Caesar’s often-quoted
rationalization, that Gaul would have to be taken over by the Romans if it were
not to become Germanic, may have been an unbiased interpretation of the evi-
dence he had before him.

In Gaul the situation reached a critical point when a German tribe, the Suebi,
led by Ariovistus, crossed the Upper Rhine to support the Sequani in their
struggle against the Aedui. The event helped to precipitate Cacsar’s interven-
tion in Gaul. It was at precisely this time that Burebista led a huge force of
Dacians westwards across the Great Hungarian Plain into Transdanubia, dev-
astating the Boii and Taurisci, and establishing control of the crucial route
westwards of the Danube Bend.,

These two events, coming together in 60-59 Bc, caused turmoil among the
Celtic tribes of the Alps and Gaul.

The Conquest of Gaul: 60-50 BC

In 59 BC Julius Caesar was given command of the province of Cisalpine Gaul
and Ilyricum for an exceptional period of five years (which he later had
extended for a further five years in 55 8c). To this province the Senate added
Transalpine Gaul at the urging of Pompey. Thus in one stroke Caesar was pro-
vided with a brief that gave him control not only of the full sweep of the land

238


===== PAGE 268 (index-271_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

approaches to Italy but also of virtually the entire frontier between Roman
territory and the surrounding Celtic tribes. He was, therefore, able to choose
whether to focus first on the Germanic threat in the western Alps or the Dacian
threat in the cast. His choice of Gaul may have been conditioned to a large
extent by his perception of the immediacy of the problem, but it is difficult to
believe that he was not influenced by his knowledge of geography, which would
have told him of the circumscribed nature of Gaul and the ease, therefore, with
which the entire territory could be annexed for Rome.

Another factor was surely economic. Gaul, as we have seen, provided Rome
with an immensely valuable market where slaves and other commodities could
be had in plenty in exchange for Italian agrarian surpluses especially wine,
Some indication of the volume of this trade is given by the tens of thousands of
Italian wine amphorae which found their way into free Gaul before the con-
quest. When Cicero wrote, ‘all Gaul is filled with
traders, is full of Roman citizens', it was probably a
fair reflection of the state of things. The threatened
instability caused by Ariovistus’ interference, to-

gether with the imminent migration of the Helvetii

and their followers, which would also have left a

dangerous vacuum on the doorstep of Cisalpine
Gaul, provided ample reason for Caesar to inter-
vene. By driving the remnants of the Helvetii back to

their Alpine homeland and winning a decisive battle

over the massed Germanic tribes commanded by
Ariovistus, he was protecting Roman commercial
interests as well as establishing a raisont d'étre for
campaigning in Gaul.

The subsequent course of the Gallic War was con-
ditioned by many factors, The prime motivation was
Caesar’s need to establish military prestige and thus
to build his power base, while at the same time
amassing booty in order to pay his debts. The way he
chose to pursue the war suggests a carefully devised

strategy designed to leave the principal markets of
central Gaul intact for the Roman entrepreneurs
while taking control of the entire northern coastal
region from the Loire to the Rhine. By doing this he
would open up new markets with the British Isles,
which were rumoured to be a prolific source of
desirable raw materials. Thus, in his second cam

paigning year, 57 a¢, he moved directly into Belgic territory, where, using the

friendly Remi as a stable base, he moved first against a massed force com-
manded by the Bellovaci, and then against the Nervii and the Aduatuci, suc-
cessfully destroying all opposition and acquiring among the booty some 53,000

239

190

it of Gar



===== PAGE 269 (index-272_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

191 & 192 The progress of
Caesar’s conquest of Gaul
during his cight-year cam-
paign.



===== PAGE 270 (index-273_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

prisoners, who were sold as slaves. Whilst the Belgic campaign was being
fought, Publius Crassus had been sent with a legion to the Atlantic seaboard,
where he received the submission of all the major tribes of Armoricaand Lower
Normandy. The stage had been set for what may have been assumed to be the
season of careful consolidation and planning needed for the invasion of Britain
in 55 BC.

In the event rebellion among the Armorican tribes upset the plan. Their sub-
mission to Crassus had been nominal, and it may well have been news of the
intended Roman invasion of Britain that sparked off the revolt. For centuries
the Armorican tribes had had a close trading relationship with Britain: its
imminent disruption by Roman intervention could have been sufficient cause
10 try to thwart Roman efforts through active opposition. In this context we
may also understand why the Aquitani chose to rebel. They too were an integral
part of the Atlantic trading system, since they commanded the crucial route
node between the ocean, via the Gironde, to Tolosa and the Mediterranean.
Any threat to siphon off the lucrative Atlantic trade was a threat to their liveli-
hood. Although Caesar does not suggest a causative link of this kind, some such
fear may well have spread the flame of revolt.

In the event Caesar had it well contained: Crassus was sent in spring to sub-
due the Aquitani, while Caesar moved against the tribes of Brittany with a spe-
cially constructed fleet, focusing his energies on the Veneti, who appear to have
been the main instigators of the uprising. Sabinus, meanwhile, was given the
task of bringing the tribes of Lower Normandy to heel. Caesar’s treatment of
the Veneti was particularly savage. All the elders were put to death and the rest
of the fighting force who surrendered were sold as slaves. ‘I decided that they
must be punished with particular severity,’ wrote Caesar, ‘so that in future the
Gauls would have greater respect for the rights of envoys.” No doubt the confis-
cated property and the proceeds of the sale of slaves were an added incentive to
his wise decision to teach a salutary lesson.

There was just time at the end of the summer for a force to be sent to the mar-
itime Belgic tribes, the Morini and Menapii, who had not previously come to
terms. The control of this territory was crucial to the successful invasion of
Britain, but it was too late in the season to complete the operation before the
winter rains set in. Had the Veneti not rebelled, the whole of the coastal zone
would probably have been firmly under Roman command and the preparation
for the invasion of Britain well advanced. As it was, ‘after ravaging all the
enemy’s fields and burning their villages and farm buildings’, Caesar put his
army in winter quarters spread out among the tribes of Lower Normandy.

At this stage in his command it was crucial for Caesar to be able to present
some spectacular successes to the Roman people and to remind them of the
potential dangers of the northern barbarians to the safety of Italy. In this way he
would beable to gain agreement to the renewal of his command for another five
years. Against this background it is possible to understand why, in 55 5¢, he
needed 1o take his force across the sea to Britain—an act which would have

241


===== PAGE 271 (index-274_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

been regarded as verging on the superhuman—and across the Rhine into Ger-
many to demonstrate not only his military skills but the ferocity of these north-
ern peoples whose ancestors had, only fifty years before, reached the Po Valley.

In the fourth book of his Commentaries Caesar begins with a sketch of the
warlike Germans, reminding his readers of the instability of the region. His
description of the expansive power of the Suebi, driving other tribes like the
Usipetes and the Tencteri from their lands to seck a new home south of the
Rhine, is probably an accurate account of the volatile situation and provides
sufficient justification for his concern on behalf of the stability of Rome. After
building up a fearful picture of the might of the Germans in battle, and throw-
ing in the incredible figure of 430,000 for the size of the enemy force, Caesar
presents the justification for crossing the Rhine—the Ubii, on the German side
of the river, had asked for Roman protection, saying thata show of strength and
support would strike fear into the rest of the German peoples and, by implica-
tion, discourage them from further southward movements. In the event,
Caesar spent only eighteen days across the Rhine, considering that he had done
all that *honour or interest required’,

The German expedition had deflected him from his planned invasion of Bri-
tain, but even though it was late in the season he decided on, what he presented
in retrospect to be, a military mission of reconnaissance. ‘I thought it would be
very useful merely to have visited the island to have seen what sort of people
lived there and to get some idea of the terrain and harbours and landing places.”
He goes on to offer the interesting observation that very few people apart from
traders crossed to the islands and they knew only the maritime regions. To pre-
pare the way, while the flect was being assembled, he sent a warship to recon-
noitre and began to establish diplomatic relations with certain of the British
tribes, using Commius, a chief of the Belgic Atrebates, as a mediator.

The campaign was not a particular success, in spite of Caesar’s attempt to
present it in a favourable light. He had clearly underestimated the strength of
the British resistance and in particular the mobility of the British cavalry and
chariots in battle. He had also seriously misjudged the effect of weather and
tides in the Channel. To add to his difficulties, the Morini, in whose territory lay
his European base port, attacked the returning troops, reflecting Caesar’s lack
of preparation. To make sure that the failures of 55 Bc were not to be repeated,
he set the army to work throughout the winter, preparing a fleet for the next
year's campaign.

The planned invasion of Britain in 54 Bc was again deflected by trouble close
to the German frontier: this time the powerful Treveri had refused to acknowl-
edge Caesar'’s authority, largely because of an internal power struggle which
was going on for leadership of the tribe. The situation was serious enough to
require Caesar’s personal intervention. Further troubles with the Gaulish nobi-
lity in his train caused additional delays, but eventually, during the summer, a
huge invasion force set off in a flotilla of 800 vessels. The size of the expedition
and the enormous input of labour that the preparations had required are

42


===== PAGE 272 (index-275_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

sufficient to demonstrate the importance which Caesar attached to the venture.
Indeed it could well be argued that his main aim from the outset of the Gallic
War had been to subdue Britain.

The picture which he provides of that part of the island through which he
campaigned was of tribes involved in continuous bouts of warfare but
sufficiently cohesive to be able to elect one of their number, Cassivellaunus, as
supreme war leader against the Roman threat. Opposition was fierce and at one
point, whilst campaigning north of the Thames, the Roman force was in danger
of being cut off from base by the concerted attack of four Kentish tribes. Asses-
sing the dangerous situation in the light of the damage which his fleet had sus-
tained in a storm and the fact that the campaigning season was drawing to a
close, Caesar decided to withdraw, having negotiated terms with Cassivel-
launus. The nature of the arrangements are not reported in detail, except that
hostages were given and Cassivellaunus agreed not to harass the Trinovantes.
The archaeological evidence for what was to follow suggests that the Trinovan-
tes of Essex were probably given some kind of special treatment by the Roman
authorities, which may even have amounted to a trading monopoly, since it is
in their territory that the greatest quantity of Roman luxury goods, hereafter,
concentrates.

On his return in the early autumn of 54 8¢ Caesar found northern Gaul ina
dangerous state, General unrest, exacerbated by a poor harvest, had flared into
a rebellion led by Ambiorix, one of the élite of the northern Belgic tribe, the
Eburones. [t was a confused period of marching and countermarching, during
which time a substantial Roman force under Sabinus and Cotta was cut off and
destroyed and only by rapid action was Caesar able to retrieve what had prom-
ised to be a rout. So serious was the situation that Caesar decided to spend the
winter with his troops near Samarobriva (Amiens).

It was a winter of discontent in Gaul. The annihilation of a Roman force had
shown that Rome was not invincible: it provided hope for dissident elements
throughout Gaul. ‘There was scarcely a time', wrote Caesar, ‘when I was not
anxious, and not receiving some report or other about plans for a rising among.
the Gauls,” What is significant is that the discontent had spread far beyond the
Belgic tribes. A force from Armorica threatened one legion based, presumably,
in Lower Normandy, while the Senones and Carnutes, strong and influential
tribes who occupied the territory between the Seine and Loire, ignored Roman
instructions and were regarded as being in open revolt. Apart from the Aedui
and Remi there was no one Caesar could trust. All the while the Treveri were
actively stirring up trouble among their neighbours and the Germans across the
Rhine, but their leader Indutiomarus was killed in a skirmish, whilst attacking
the winter camp of Labienus. After this, wrote Caesar, ‘my province of Gaul was
somewhat more peaceful’.

With the winter not yet over Caesar moved decisively against the main
centres of resistance. The northern Belgic tribes were the first to receive his
attention with a rapid thrust against the Nervii. Following this success he sum-

243


===== PAGE 273 (index-276_1.jpg) =====
XXI Facing Wooden
carvings found in the ritual
shaft and well at Fellbach-
Schmiden, Baden.
Wirttemberg, Germany,
The figures presumably
decorated o structure built
around the top of the shafi.
The paired beasts, clasped
about the waists by a central
figure now missing. are a
motif reflected in Celtic
metalwork. Late second or
early first century nc.
Wiirttembergisches Landes-
museum, Stuttgart.

THE CELTS IN RETREAT

moned the Gallic Council. The Senones, the Carnutes, and the Treveri failed to
attend—a failure which Caesar interpreted as an act of hostility. His first
response was 1o bring the Senones and Carnutes to heel by a show of military
strength, thus preventing the immediate threat of being encircled. Then he
turned his energies against the Treveri and Ambiorix. First he moved into the
territory of the Menapii at the Rhine mouth to establish control and thence to
the Treveri, from where he crossed the Rhine again to harry the Suebi and to
consolidate the subservience of the Ubii. After a brief stay he was back in the
land of the Eburones engaging in systematic destruction and plunder, in which
the Roman forces were joined by pillaging Gauls and by Germans who, seeing
an opportunity, came from across the Rhine. It was an effective way to destroy
the resistance of a people who would not come to battle.

The terror over, Caesar returned to the safety of the Remi, where he held an
enquiry into the conspiracy of the Senones and Carnutes, bringing the pro-
ceedings to an end with the public execution of the instigator of the plot. The
act was ill-judged, or at least ineffective. The unrest which had been simmering
now boiled up, the Carnutes taking upon themselves the leadership of a revolt
more serious than any that Rome had previously experienced. Caesar gives no
reason why the tribe should have been such a focus of unrest, but we learn in
another context that the annual assembly of the Druids was held there at what
was considered to be the centre of Gaul. The place clearly had power in legit-
imizing pan-Gaulish decisions. Some such meeting, possibly under Druidic
instigation, may have provided the context for concerted action. The rebellion
began with the murder of the Roman traders who had settled in the principal
oppidum of Cenabum.

News rapidly spread to the Arverni, where a member of the élite, Vercing-
etorix, set himself up as war leader. The event throws interesting light on the
changing nature of Celtic society at the time. The Arverni were ruled by a
democratically elected magistracy and, like many such tribes, were evidently
aware of the ease with which the old social system, in which power was wielded
by those who could command large entourages, could re-establish itself. The
father of Vercingetorix, Celtillus, had actually been killed by his fellow tribes-
men for wanting to become king. When Vercingetorix “called his dependants
together and had no difficulty in rousing their passions’, he was taking the first
step in clevating himself as his father had tried to do. It is understandable,
therefore, that his uncle and other leading men in the tribe should try to restrain
him. He was, in fact, expelled from the oppidum of Gergovia. But he persisted
and gradually won over other Arvernians, soon gaining sufficient power to oust
his opponents and set himself up as king. What we are witnessing, therefore, is
the resurgence of the old social order made possible by the call for Gallic free-
dom. Once established, his support among other tribes grew rapidly, and he
was acknowledged as supreme war leader.

Virtually the whole of central Gaul was up in arms against the Romans, plac-
ing Caesar in a very difficult position. His first action on reaching the Province,

244


===== PAGE 274 (index-277_1.jpg) =====
j 4 ‘* Vi N
L1119 \ . i
% b / ot
L. 3
/. LR
g\ ko


===== PAGE 275 (index-278_1.jpg) =====
| B
] . —
> 7 . R
3 T L R
% = i‘\'};"ﬂ:"\m“%"‘
LA \\fL s


===== PAGE 276 (index-279_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

at the beginning of the campaigning season of 52 B¢, was to establish the secu-
rity of the western part of Transalpina, which was most at risk. Next, by leading
his troops through the Cevennes against the Arverni, he added a further safe-
guard to the Province while causing a considerable distraction to the rebels.

Then followed a long period of marching and countermarching through
those parts of central Gaul which hitherto had been totally free of Roman mi
tary interference. One by one the major tribal oppida were besieged and fell.
Vellaunodunum, capital of the Senones, capitulated, Cenabum of the Carnutes
was taken and destroyed, and the Biturigan oppidum of Noviodunum surren-
dered. Next it was the turn of Avaricum, the largest of the oppida of the Bitur-
iges, to suffer Roman encirclement. The resistance of the townspeople was paid
for with savagery when the Roman troops entered. Of the population of 40,000
only 800 escaped. In dealing with the more urbanized tribes of central Gaul,
Caesar's tactic was simply to pick off the population centres one by one. Such
an approach would have been impossible among the tribes of Armorica and
Belgica, where this degree of centralization had not developed.

In the weeks to follow, news of the close-run battle at Gergovia and the defec-
tion of the Aedui to the rebellion caused the uprising to escalate. Robbed of
Gallic support and unable to bring in new troops from Italy, Caesar resorted to
inviting German cavalry groups to join his force. They were soon to play a
significant part in routing Vercingetorix's cavalry and forcing him to withdraw
to the oppidun of Alesia in the territory of the Mandubii.

At Alesia the Gaulish rebel force was besieged (Figs. 12 and 13). In making his
decision to defend himself on the hill, Vercingetorix was no doubt banking on
the rapid arrival of a large relieving force which was now being amassed.
According to Caesar, a Council of Gauls had been summoned but had rejected
Vercingetorix's proposal for a universal call-up, instead deciding to proscribe
the size of the force which each tribe was required to provide. Some forty-four
different tribes are named, and the company, when finally assembled, amoun-
ted to 8,000 cavalry and 240,000 infantry. The supreme command of the force
was divided between four war leaders, one from the Atrebates, two from the
Aedui, and one from the Arverni. The coercive power of the Gallic Council in
causing such a force to be created is impressive. Although it was, no doubt, due
to the uniqueness of the occasion, the facts that individual tribes respected the
will of the assembled chiefs and that so many men could so readily be called to
arms are indications that the character of Celtic society, evident in the migra-
tion period of the fourth and third centuries, had not been significantly weak-
ened by the socio-political changes which were already well underway in some
parts of the country.

The rest of the story may be briefly told. The arrival of the relieving force and
its defeat by the Roman troops were quickly followed by the surrender of the
Gaulish force in Alesia. All the captives, other than Arvernian and Aeduian,
were distributed as booty to the Roman troops and thus passed into the Roman
slave markets. The 20,000 Arvernian and Aeduian prisoners were restored to

245

193 Vercingetorix, a noble
of the Arverni, became war
leader in 52 e, spearbead
ing the revolt of the Gaulish
tribes against Caesar, He
and his followers were cven-
tually besieged at Alesia and
forced to surrender to the
Romans. After years in a jail
in Rome he was strangled as
part of Caesar’s triumph,

The coin is a gold stater of
the Arverni struck in central
Gaul €51 0.

XXlla Facirg, above: The
contents of a princely grave
(1omb B) at Goeblingen-
Nospelt, Luxembourg.
Wine was provided in large
amphorac and mixed and
drunk from imparted
bronze vessels. The bronze-
bound wooden buckets,
samilar to those found in
southern Britain, are of
local manufacture, Late
first century ne. Musée
Nationale d"Histoire et
J'Art, Luxembourg.

XXHb Facing. below: One
of the deposits of gold and
silver torcs buried in a pit
at Sacttisham, Norfolk,
England. The surprisingly
large number of deposits of
this kind concentrated in a
small area suggests that this
may have been a Jocation
sacred to the gods, First
century nc. British
Muscum, London.



===== PAGE 277 (index-280_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

194 The plateau of Alesia
was chosen by Vercingetorix
asa secure place from which
st Rome, As a result of
u,

A massive campaign
fickdwork and excavat
was mounted between 1860
and 1865, bringing to light
details of Caesar’s sicge
works. After the capitulation
of Vercingetorix to the
Romans in 52 s¢, the hill
developed as a small tawn,

their tribes as a gesture of goodwill. Caesar himself decided to spend the winter
in the Aeduian capital of Bibracte, to rebuild relations with the tribe and set
Gaul in order. Vercingetorix was shipped to Rome, where, after spending six
years in prison, he was strangled to add drama to Caesar’s delayed triumph.
The war in Gaul was not yet over. During the winter Caesar had to deal with
residual unrest among the Bituriges and the Carnutes. More serious trouble
with the Bellovaci required firmer military action, after which Caesar turned
his attention once more on the Eburones, where the rebel leader Ambiorix was
still at larg
in the area. ‘Detachments of legionary and auxiliary troops were
over Ambiorix's territory, killing, burning, and pillaging; every
troyed and great numbers of the people were either killed or taken prisoner,’
The final acts were focused in the west, where certain of the tribes of Aqui-
tania had mobilized forces. The campaign culminated in the siege of the native

ame as those used on his previous campaign
ent out all

His tactics were the

hing was des-

oppidum of Uxellodunum. When eventually the defenders surrendered, all
those who had carried weapons had their right hands cut off but their lives
spared, ‘so that everyone might see how evildoers were punished”.

Thereafter mopping-up operations in various parts of the country extin-
guished any spark of resistance which had survived. Hirtius, who wrote the
cighth book of the Commentarie.
pleted his acti
ulish leaders. ‘He did not wish to impose any fresh burdens on them. €
able to keep it peaceful by mak-
ble." The reality must have been far more

concludes by telling us that Caesar com-

ities in Gaul by handing out valuable presents to the surviving

al

was exhausted by so many defeats. Caesar wa

ing the terms of subjection more tolera



===== PAGE 278 (index-281_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

stark. Of an estimated population of 6-7 million, about one million had been
killed and another million sold into slavery. Among the remainder hardly a
family would have been left unscarred. The resentment must have been deep
and bitter.

With Gaul now brought to heel, it is likely that Caesar's attention would have
turned to the problems posed by the expansion of Burebista, whose military
ambitions had led him to annex great swaths of territory across what is now
northern Hungary and to establish control of the narrow reaches of the Upper
Danube. The Celtic oppidum of Bratislava seems to have been destroyed at
about this time and a Dacian stronghold established nearby at Devin. The main
westward thrust of this expansion came in 60-59 8¢, at just the time that Ario-
vistus was causing trouble to the west of the Alps. The fact that lllyricum was
added to Caesar's command is, in part at least, an acknowledgement that the
castern Alpine region was likely to require firm military action. After his Belgic
campaigns in 57 8¢ Caesar had hurried back to Illyricum, quite possibly to give
some initial consideration to the problems developing on the northern border
of this part of his sphere of responsibility, The fact that he had seriously under-
estimated the resistance of the Gauls meant that he could not pursue any plan
that might have been forming and at the end of the Gaulish War he was drawn
immediately into the Civil War so that the Dacian problem had to be left in
abeyance.

That Burebista remained a serious threat is, however, shown by his overtures
of support to Pompey in 48 sc. Thus, once Pompey had been overcome and
some semblance of stability restored to Rome with Caesar firmly in control,
plans fora Dacian campaign, and for the wildly ambitious conquest of Parthia,
could be pursued. Caesar’s assassination in March 44 e brought these
grandiose schemes to an end.

Consolidation and Expansion: 50 Bc-AD 10

For more than two decades Gaul was left to nurse its wounds with relatively lit-
tle interference from Rome, while the continuing Civil War claimed everyone’s
attention. During this time native systems continued. At Bibracte, capital of the
Aedui, buildings were replaced by more elaborate structures modelled on the
Roman house, the artisan quarters continued to develop, and the oppidum
began to take on the appearance of a Roman town. In the less advanced regions
of the north the Mediterranean overlay was less evident. In the Aisne Valley, for
example, the old oppidum of the Suessones at Pommiers seems to have been
abandoned for a new settlement built in the bend of the river at Villeneuve-
Saint-Germain, defended in native style by a rampart thrown across the land-
ward approach.

While systems of government and the native economies were left more or
less unhindered, except for the draining of the gold from the system by taxa-
tion, the economic demands of the Mediterrancan were having a noticeable

247


===== PAGE 279 (index-282_1.jpg) =====
195 Oppidain the Aisne
Valley showing the three
successive fo<i of popula-
tion, Pommiers was accu-
piedin the period upto
Cacsar's conquest;
Villeneuve-Saint-Germain
was a post-Caesarian devel-
opment but was abandoned
when the Roman town was.
established at Solssons by
Augustus,

196 Below: The defended
settleent of Villeneuve-
Saint-Germain, Picardy,
France, was protected on
three sides by the River
Aisne and on the fourth by a
rampart and ditch. Intern -
ally the buildings were care-
fully laid out, Occupation in
the seconsd half of the first
century Be was short-lived.

THE CELTS IN RETREAT

effect. Lyons was the hub of Gaul. It was already tied firmly to the Mediter-
rancan by roads and the River Rhone: from here new roads were set out to aug-
ment the old river routes. One road to the west linked the centre direct to the
Atlantic ports. Two other road systems thrust northwards, one to the Channel
coast at Boulogne, the other through the territory of the Treveri to the Rhine.

Both routes were of considerable economic
importance in opening up direct access to new
markets and also providing a means of rapid
contact with troop concentrations in frontier
regions. No doubt those tribes, like the Treveri
and Suessones, who were able to command the
routes, could gain benefit from the volume of
traffic and trade passing through. The distribu-
tion of the later Dressel 1B amphorae, which
concentrate in these territories, provides a
convenient demonstration of the benefits
which this northern zone were now reaping.
Many of the amphorae, together with the
Italian bronze vessels necessary for wine-
drinking, were finding their way into the graves
of the native aristocracy. Once again the buri-
als of the élite were being used to demonstrate
the conspicuous consumption of a prestige
goods economy. This system was to last in the
region until the end of the first century e,
Apart from a brief revolt in Aquitania in


===== PAGE 280 (index-283_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

+ Taerbcry occupied by Rome by S0BC  ~———== Limit of ROMan 00cupaton ¥ 50BC  ——— Major 1000% bust Gurng Augusian penod

£ Teriory added 1o Roman -
zZz o2ded o o kgl Uit of Roman sccupeion 0 ADI =t Mafor movies GG EMe tuteh

39-38 BC, Gaul appears to have remained quiet. But widespread discontent
arose in 27, when Augustus, who had successfully destroyed all opposition to
his leadership of the Roman state, began to organize a census of Gaul as a pre-
liminary to imposing a new system of taxation. The presence of the emperor
himself prevented serious trouble from erupting and thereafter romanization
moved on apace,

The regions of the Pyrenees and the Alps, still unconquered, were brought
rapidly under Roman control. The Augustan campaigns in north-western
Iberia and in particular the Cantabrian mountains from 25 to 19 s¢ tidied up
one corner, and in doing so freed larger numbers of troops from frontier dutics.

Augustus, as Octavian before becoming emperor in 27 Bc, had already
attended to problems in the eastern Alps. In 35 n¢ he had moved against the
lapodes and had pushed on into Pannonia, in the next year taking the key loca-
tion of Siscia (Sisak in Croatia), which henceforth became the springboard for
Roman campaigning in the region. In this way he was beginning to put into
play plans which must have been in Caesar’s mind. The campaign against the
Dacians was finally launched in 29-28 B¢ by Marcus Lucius Crassus. With the
Dobrudja under Roman control, much of the Balkans began to be taken in hand.

In 15 B¢ Tiberius and Drusus led a major offensive into the eastern Alps.
Noricum was formally annexed and the Rhaetians and Vindelici brought into

249

197 Map to illustrate aspects
of the political geography of
western Europe at the end of
the first century sc,


===== PAGE 281 (index-284_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

the Roman sphere. The tribes of southern Pannonia, between the rivers Driva
and Sava, were the focus of Tiberius’ campaigns between 13 and 9 ¢, during
which time the province of [llyricum was formally instituted. In this way the
Celtic peoples of Transdanubia began to be absorbed into the expanding
Roman world. In 7 sc Augustus inaugurated a victory monument at La Turbie
on the coastal road around the Alpes Maritimes. On it he recorded his victory
over forty-four Alpine tribes. The erection of the monument symbolized the
end of free Celts south of the Rhine. The incorporation of a few surviving
enclaves, such as the remaining Boii in northern Transdanubia, in the carly first
century A, brought Celtic freedom to an end in continental Europe.

The expansion of the Romans towards the Rhine-Danube frontier in the sec-
ond half of the first century Bc took place in parallel with the more gradual
expansion of Germanic peoples in the north and Sarmatians in the east. The
continued southern pressure of the populations of the North European Plain,
which Caesar was 10 stay temporarily in the s0s 5¢, continued with the Germ-
anic settlement of the Celtic regions of Bohemia and Moravia between 16 and 8
8C. The germanization of these territories effectively brought to an end the
large oppida and with it Celtic culture. Thus, while the strong Roman presence
south of the Rhine-Danube axis prevented a further southward move at this
stage, the territories on the north side of the rivers were open to settlement and
filled rapidly with new tribes of Germanic origin. The absence of a firm ethnic
frontier at the beginning of the first century sc had allowed a fluidity of move-
ment. Once the Romans had established a firm control along the two rivers, the
ethnic divide was rapidly intensified by the tide of incoming Germans building
up against the barrier of the frontier. This pressure was to continue until, three
centuries later, the power of the Romans to resist it began to give way.

In the cast the constant outflow of horse-riding peoples from the steppes,
north-cast of the Black Sea, continued with the western migration of Sarm-
atians along the Lower Danube Valley into the region of the Great Hungarian
Plain. The region was settled by a Sarmatian tribe, the lazyges, in the carly years
of the first century ap. This movement was simply echoing the western migra-
tion of the Cimmerians and Scythians before them. The new settlers will have
found themselves in an area where Celtic groups had long combined with
indigenous populations. After the new wave of immigrants from the Pontic
Steppe had established themselves little of Celtic culture remained. Henceforth
the Middle Danube, flowing between Transdanubia and the Great Hungarian
Plain, formed the boundary between the Roman world and the eastern barbar-
ians. Under the Romans some vestiges of the Celtic tribal and social systems
survived; beyond they disappeared totally.

Romanization and Rebellion: Ap 10-40

The romanization of Celtic societies in Gaul, the Alpine regions, and Pannonia
developed apace in the early first century ap. There had always been a tendency

250


===== PAGE 282 (index-285_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

toape selected behaviour emanating from the Mediterranean, and now Roman
style and manners provided the Celtic élite with a mode of expression in their
very midst. The adoption of Roman building styles by the Aeduian aristocracy
at Bibracte is a clear example, and it was not long before the population had
migrated from their hilltop fortification to the new Roman foundation of
Augustodunum (Autun) in the valley 20 kilometres away, where all the princi-
pal comforts of Roman city life were to be had and where their sons could be
educated in the Roman manner. Even in the rather more primitive north, the
oppidumbuilt by the Suessones after the conquest at Villeneuve was abandoned
for the Augustan town nearby at Augusta Suessionum (Soissons), founded in
the early years of the Principate (Fig. 195).

In the far west at Mediolanum Santonum (Saints) a triumphal arch was ded-
icated to the Emperor Tiberius and his heirsin Ab 18 or 19 by Caius Julius Rufus,
who records his ancestry back to his great grandfather—a Celt with the name of
Epotsoviridos. His grandfather Otuaneunos had been given citizenship by
Caesar and had taken the names Caius Julius. Family histories of this kind were
by no means rare among the urban aristocracy of Roman Gaul. Whereas 100
years previously a Celtic chief, like Louernius, would have demonstrated his
status by feasts and gift-giving, now the same end could be achieved by paying
for public monuments and proclaiming the fact through the Latin inscriptions
which adorned them.

There was little to prevent natives of Gaul from rising to positions of power
within the Roman state. The Narbonnese province had long provided distin-
guished men. From the town of Forum Julii came L. Julius Grecinus, who
gained the rank of senator under Tiberius. He may well have come from Celtic
stock. His son Julius Agricola, born about ap 40, spent much of his life in the
Celtic west, serving first in the army in Britain, then as governor of Aquitania.
Later, as governor of Britain, he led the army into Wales and Scotland, with dis-
tinction in the period Ap 78-84. Beyond the region of the old Province, in the
Gaul conquered by Caesar, the social advancement of the native élite was
significantly slower. It was not until a century after the conquest, in Ap 48, that
Claudius made his famous speech recommending that leading men of the
Aedui should be admitted to the Roman Senate. Even then he met with ridicule
from his peers,

For all the desire to emulate Roman ways and become part of the Roman sys-
tem, there remained a deep-seated resentment which, given the scale and feroc-
ity of Cacsar’s conquest, is hardly surprising. Natural sentiments of this kind
were exacerbated by bureaucratic abuse—an ever-present feature of Roman
civil administration. The provinces were an important source of wealth to
provincial administrators whose terms of office were short and whose rapacity
was, in consequence, intensified.

Unrest was recorded from time to time, but the most serious outbreak of vio-
lence came in Ap 20, when two members of the Gallic aristocracy, Julius Florus
of the Treveri and Julius Sacrovir of the Aedui, orchestrated an outright rebel-

251


===== PAGE 283 (index-286_1.jpg) =====
THE CELYS IN RETREAT

lion to Roman rule under the banner of Gallic liberty. The actual reasons were
more prosaic: Roman officials were behaving in an arrogant and oppressive
manner and many individuals had become bound by debt to Roman money-
lenders. The rebellion was serious but came to little. In the event Florus was
defeated during flight and committed suicide, while Sacrovir and his followers,
who had seized Augustodunum, finally killed themselves having set fire to the
town when defeat looked inevitable.

Itisdifficult to judge from the rather summary account of Tacitus how wide-
spread the revolt was, but his observation that “The seeds of rebellion were sown
in almost every Gallic community” suggests that the situation may have been
serious. These Gauls were, after all, the grandchildren of tribesmen decimated
by Caesar, and there must have been much latent anger in the stories told of
family exploits seventy years before. In the call for Gallic freedom and the sui-
cides of the leaders in the face of defeat we are witnessing the last significant
expression of the Celtic heroic ideal. The later revolt of Vindex and Civilisin Ap
6970 was an altogether more sophisticated act of political intrigue.

Into Britain: Ap 40-100

Julius Caesar's brief campaign in Britain in 55 and 54 Bc may not have achieved
a great deal from a military point of view, but the treaty relations he established
with the tribes of the cast coast, north of the Thames, had a lasting effect on the
social and economic development of the south-cast. The tribes on either side of
the Thames Estuary already had close relationships with their Belgic neigh-
bours: indeed Caesar records that before the war Diviciacus of the Suessones
had exercised authority in Britain, a fact which may suggest that Diviciacus was
recognized as some kind of high king to whom tribute was due. During the war
Britons fought with the Gauls, and the considerable number of distinctive
Gallo-Belgic E coins minted as a war currency which found their way to Britain
suggests that payment for services may have been made on an impressive scale.

With the war over these long-established links continued to be maintained,
and parts of south-castern Britain, in particular the territories of the Trinovan-
tes and Catuvellauni, developed close economic ties with their Belgic neigh-
bours, sharing the same range of imported wine and wine-drinking equipment
and the same customs of display in elaborate burial rituals. Largely as a result of
this contact, which involved the export of those goods for which Strabo tells us
Britain was famous—metals, corn, hides, slaves, and hunting dogs—that part
of the country south and east of a line roughly between the Humber Estuary on
the cast coast and Lyme Bay on the south developed systems of coinage mod-
clled on continental types, while the heart of that region, south-east of a
Solent-Wash axis, became politically and economically sophisticated with
large nucleated settlements having many of the characteristics of the continen-
tal oppida. Although this advanced core was composed of a number of tribes, by
about Ap 40 two main power blocks had emerged: north of the Thames the

252


===== PAGE 284 (index-287_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

Catuvellauni ruled by Cunobelin were dominant, while to the south the Atre-
bates held sway. Conflict between these two polities had been going on for some
while, and disputed territories seem to have changed allegiance more than
once, but the Catuvellauni were in the ascendancy and Tacitus could describe
Cunobelin as ‘great king of Britain”,

The treaties set up by Caesar, and no doubt later developments about which
we know little, established bonds of clientage between the native tribes and
Rome, and these were used to political effect. A number of British kings are
recorded as being among the admirers of Augustus, and during the first decades
of the first century ap several British rulers fled to Rome to ask for the help of
the emperor in establishing their claims to power. The last recorded refugee was
Verica, king of the Atrebates, whose flight, about Ap 42, was caused by internal
rivalries, possibly exacerbated by the increasing dominance of the Catuvel-
launi. The arrival of Verica provided the Emperor Claudius with the excuse he

198 Britain in the first cen-
tury Ap.


===== PAGE 285 (index-288_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

needed to mount a British expedition—a flamboyant gesture which had been
in the minds of the emperors since Caesar’s time. The motives behind the plan,
like those of Caesar before, were mixed. Roman economic interests would have
been to the fore, but the challenge of the island and the desire to impress were
not far behind. Whether there was any real need to interfere in British politics
to support pro-Roman factions is doubtful.

The first aim of the invasion force was to capture the Catuvellaunian capital
at Camulodunum and then to fan out across the core of the south-east to take
control of the territories which had come cither directly or indirectly under the
authority of the Catuvellauni and Atrebates. This semi-urbanized zone with its
large oppida would be easy to integrate into the Roman system. The less cen-
trally organized tribes beyond, the Durotriges, Dobunni, and Corieltolavi, were
also rapidly overcome, though not without considerable resistance from the
Durotriges, and a military frontier zone was laid through all three territories,
skewering them together with a military road—the Fosse Way—which ran
from one military base at Exeter on the Channel coast to another at Lincoln on
the east side of the island.

The organization of the province was put rapidly in hand. Most of the area
seems to have been taken under direct state control, but two client kingdoms
were created within: the Iceni of Norfolk were left under the authority of
Prasutagus, a member of the royal family, while part of the Atrebates was put
under the control of Cogidubnus, who, by virtue of his acquired names,
Tiberius Claudius, presumably received his grant of citizenship from Claudius.
Nothing is known of his ancestry but he may have been chosen from the Atre-
batic aristocracy at the time of the invasion.

The opposition to the landing was orchestrated by Togodubnus and Cara-
tacus, the two sons of Cunobelin (who had died a year or two before). Togo-
dubnus was killed and Caratacus fled beyond the frontier area, into the Welsh
mountains, where he stirred up an active resistance to Rome for a further eight
years, thus providing an example of the way in which charismatic war leaders
could assume the leadership of tribes other than their own,

To contain the military problems which the occupation of the south-east of
the island posed, the provincial authorities negotiated a settlement with a con-
glomeration of tribes, known collectively by the name of the Brigantes, who
occupied the whole of northern England from coast to coast and recognized the
authority of a single ruler Queen Cartimandua. The coalition seems to have
been unstable, and in Ap 51 Cartimandua took a decidedly pro-Roman stance
by handing over the war leader Caratacus to the Romans, The anti-Roman fac-
tion, led by her estranged husband Venutius, were no doubt incensed by the
act. In the ensuing disarray a legion had to intervene to prop up the queen’s
authority. The unstable equilibrium was maintained for a further decade until
AD 69, when Venutius gained control by fermenting a revolt among the queen’s
tribe and enlisting the help of other tribes in the anti-Roman cause.

While these events were going on, the English Midlands, Wales, and the

254


===== PAGE 286 (index-289_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

south-western peninsula were taken under military control, the only signi-
ficant opposition coming from the two major mountain tribes of Wales, the
Silures in the south and the Ordovices in the north, Fighting was tough but the
result inevitable. Far more serious was a revolt deep within the province led by
Queen Boudica of the Iceni, wife of the client king Prasutagus. There had been
aminor uprising in Ap 48 when the tribe was disarmed but it does notappear to
have been too serious. The events of Ap 60-1 were on an altogether different
scale. The immediate cause was the heavy-handed bureaucratic incompetence
which followed the death of Prasutagus, when the authorities seem to have
decided to terminate the client kingship, but the speed with which the revolt
spread to most of the rest of the province implies a far more deep-rooted
resentment caused by administrative abuses and the appropriation of tribal
lands for the colonial settlement implanted in the oppidum of Camulodunum,
A further factor, the impact of which is difficult to estimate, is that the revolt
broke out at the precise moment that the Roman armies were in north-west
Wales attacking the Druid sanctuary on Anglescy.

The revolt spread rapidly and was pursued with ferocity by the Britons, many
of whom would have experienced the trauma of the conquest only seventeen
years previously and the humiliation and abuse which had followed. The
colony of Camulodunum, the town of Verulamium, and the port of London
weredestroyed and their inhabitants slaughtered. Boudica’s plea to the goddess
Andrasta for assistance, and the subsequent impaling of female victims, suggest
that the old Celtic gods still had a firm hold on the people. The final battle, in
which the British force was soundly beaten, with its chariots, noise, clamour,
and boasting and its baggage trains from which the women and children could
geta good view, would not have been out of place as a description of Celtic war-
fare four centuries earlier. The scale of the engagement can be judged from
Tacitus’ estimate that 80,000 British died. The reprisals to follow put back the
development of the province for decades.

Meanwhile the situation in the north of Britain had deteriorated and Carti-
mandua had finally to be rescued. Thereafter Roman campaigns beginning in
Ap 71 brought much of northern Britain, up to the line later chosen for
Hadrian’s Wall, under Roman military control, and the scene was set for Julius
Agricola, as governor of Britain (oD 78-84), to complete the subjugation of
Scotland, fighting the last pitched battle against the army of Calgacus at Mons
Graupius in the far north on the south side of the Moray Firth. It was the last
occasion when a Celtic army used chariots against a Roman force. The circum-
navigation of Scotland and the acceptance of the submission of the Orkney
Islands brought Agricola’s triumphant campaign to an end. Although the
Roman hold on the north and west of Scotland was tenuous in the extreme and
a withdrawal to the Tyne-Solway line was soon considered advisable, Mons
Graupius marks the culmination of Roman military achievement against Celtic

peoples.
The old socio-economic division of Britain at the time of the conquest

55


===== PAGE 287 (index-290_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

remained a significant fact of political geography throughout the Roman inter-
lude. In the south-cast the urban pattern continued and developed, even
though the Boudican revolt caused a major disruption. Tacitus could write of
this region:

Agricola gave private encouragement and official assistance to the building of temples,
public squares and private mansions. . . . he trained the sons of the chiefs in the liberal
arts and expressed a preference for British natural ability over the trained skill of the
Gauls. The result was that in place of distaste for the Latin language came a passion to
command it... and so the Britons were gradually led on to the amenities that make vice
agrecable—arcades, baths, and sumptuous banquets. They spoke of such novelties as
‘civilization', when really they were only a feature of enslavement.  (Agricola21)

Yet beyond, in the south-west, Wales, and the north, in spite of a network of
forts and roads, the life of much of the population changed little. City life failed
to gain a hold, traditional patterns of agrarian production and settlement con-
tinued, and the Celtic language with its rich oral tradition remained strong.
Whether it was Roman lack of enthusiasm for instigating what they perceived
to be unnecessary economic changes in the far-flung fringes or native resistance
to change and a dogged adherence to traditional ways, it is impossible to say.
The fact remains that in the western and northern fringes of the islands much
of Celtic life continued.

The Free Celts: Ireland in the First Century Ap

Tacitus records the story of Agricola standing on the coast of western Scotland
and looking across to Ireland and saying that he thought it could be conquered
and held with a single legion. ‘In soil, in climate and in character and civiliza-
tion of its inhabitants [Ireland] is much like Britain.” He goes on to say that its
‘approaches and harbours are tolerably well known from merchants who trade
there’. This much is evident from the quite detailed and accurate knowledge
which the geographer Ptolemy was able to gather for his Geography in the
middle of the second century, at least of the south, east, and north coasts. That
trade with Roman Britain did take place is evident from the array of Roman
objects, mainly trinkets of various Kinds, found on Irish sites, and there is
evidence to suggest that a major port-of-trade was established on the sea-girt
promontory of Drumanagh, north of Dublin. There is, however, nothing to
imply a Roman military presence on the island and little to suggest any signifi-
cant exchange of population.

Something of the vitality of Celtic society in Ireland in the last centuries sc
and first centuries Ap can be gauged from the importance of the great ritual
centres of Tara, Emain Macha, and Din Ailinne, and, by implication, Crua-
chain. These were the social foci for huge territories and the places where king-
ship was legitimized, but outside these centres remarkably little is known of
Iron Age society and economy. Indeed recent pollen analytical work has sug-

256


===== PAGE 288 (index-291_1.jpg) =====
THE CELTS IN RETREAT

gested widespread forest regeneration in the second halfof the first millennium
u¢, which may indicate a significant decline in population during this time.

There remains, however, the wonderfully rich vernacular literature commit-
ted to writing for the first time in a final, if somewhat emasculated, form in the
medieval period. While accepting all the problems of interpretation which this
literature carries with it—whether the sagas are specifically Irish or pan-Celtic
and how to distinguish the various overlays of later material—there can be lit-
tle doubt that in the Tiin, the carliest written version of which dates to the
eleventh century ap, we have a reflection, albeit perhaps a dim and distorted
reflection, of a Celtic epic which may, in innumerable different versions, have
been told from one end of Europe to the other. The survival of so much of this
oral tradition is one of the miracles of Celtic studies.

57


===== PAGE 289 (index-292_1.jpg) =====
13
Celtic Survival

By the end of the first century Ap most of the lands occupied by the Celtic peo-
ples south of the Rhine-Danube line were under Roman occupation. To the
north of the Danube the Celtic territories of Bohemia and Moravia had become
Germanic, while further east in the Great Hungarian Plain and Transylvania
the Celtic enclaves had been absorbed either within the Dacian state or by the
incoming Sarmatian tribes. It was only along the extreme north-western
periphery, in north and west Scotland and in Ireland, that Celtic-speaking
communities continued to exist without the benefit of romanization.

Celts under the Romans: First Century s¢ to Fourth Century Ap

The treatment of native Celtic societies by Roman administrators varied from
region to region, but for the most part the newly imposed structures made good
use of indigenous systems. Thus in Gaul the Augustan reorganization which
divided the country beyond the Province (now Gallia Narbonensis) into Aqui-
tania, Gallia Lugdunensis, and Gallia Belgica was reflecting directly the ethnic
divides noted by Caesar when he distinguished between the Aquitanians, the
Celts, and the Belgae. Below this tier of administration lay the individual civi-
tates, which, almost invariably, were directly, or closely, related to existing
tribal divisions, allowing much of the economic, social, and legislative structure
of the indigenous systems to remain in place. Those native towns which were
well sited to become nodes on the newly imposed road system simply contin-
ued, while others in less favourable locations withered away to be replaced by
new towns: Bibracte gave way to Autun and Villeneuve to Soissons in the
Augustan period.

In the south-east of Britain the situation was much the same, though in the
early stages of the occupation two large tribal units were left under the direct
control of client kings. In East Anglia the Iceni were ruled by Prasutagus until

258


===== PAGE 290 (index-293_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

his death in Ap 60, and in the centre south a substantial part of Atrebatic terri-
tory was put under the control of Cogidubnus, who was styled ‘rex’ though he
had been made a Roman citizen by Claudius. Cogidubnus survived as ruler
faithful to Rome until the time of his death, probably early in the 70s. How the
client kings were chosen is unknown, but they were probably members of the
ruling native élite. In the fragmented tribal system north of northern Britain it
was left to Queen Cartimandua to attempt to maintain control under the pro-
tective eye of the Roman governor, These somewhat tenuous arrangements
were probably intended as temporary measures, and, with the deaths or (in the
case of Cartimandua) overthrow of the clients, the territories were formally
absorbed into the administrative structure.

The Roman system provided many opportunities for the native élites. The
willingness with which the Gauls took to Roman education is noted by a num-
ber of contemporary observers. In Britain, Tacitus describes the deliberate
process of romanization in a somewhat scathing passage already quoted (p.
256). The reality of all this can be seen in Britain in an impressive building pro-
gramme in the late 60s and 70s Ap, which saw the erection of the forum and
basilicaat Verulamium, public baths at Chichester, and the palatial residence at
Fishbourne, while the native temple at Hayling was rebuilt to a similar plan in
masonry and the sacred spring at Bath aggrandized on a monumental scale.

Much of the building work undertaken in Gaul in the Augustan and Tiberian
period and in southern Britain in Neronian and Flavian times would have been
under the direction of the Roman provincial authorities and may well have
used military engineers and craftsmen, but building programmes provided the
native élites with a way to demonstrate their patronage: their natural inclina-
tion for competitive display could now be channelled into public works.

The integration of native communities into the Roman system seems to have
been thoroughly achieved throughout Gaul by the first century ap. Even in the
remote west, in the Armorican peninsula, each of the main tribal territories was
provided with an urban centre laid out on a regular grid system: Condate
(Rennes) for the Riedonies; Fanum Martis (Corseul) for the Coriosolitae; Vor-
gium (Carhaix) for the Osismi; Darioritum (Vannes) for the Veneti; and Con-
devicnum (Nantes) for the Namnetes. That none of these sites is known to have
been a native centre before the Roman period, taken together with their formal
planned layouts, suggests that the urban system may have been deliberately
imposed. Some native centres, like Camp d’Artus, were abandoned altogether,
while others, like Le Yaudet and Alet, remained in occupation though at an
undeveloped level. The romanization of Armorica is evident not only in the
imposition of towns but in the development of a network of quite opulent
villas,

In Britain the situation was different. In the economically advanced south-
cast—that is, roughly south and east of the Fosse Way—the indigenous system
was easily adapted to Roman administrative needs, with flourishing civitascap-
itals developing from native centres accompanied by a rash of villa building in

259


===== PAGE 291 (index-294_1.jpg) =====
XXIHI Facing: The small
settlemsent, remarkably
preserved at Chysauster in
Cornwall, comprises a
group of celiular courtyard
houses representing a local
style of architecture which
deveoped in the first and
second centurics Ap from
native traditions and owed
nothing to Roman ideas or
techniques.

CELTIC SURVIVAL

rural areas around about. In many cases these villas evolved from settlements
dating back to the first century nc. The continuity is impressive. Yet beyond this
favoured south-eastern core, in the periphery, life was very different. Much of
Wales and the north remained in military occupation, Some easing of tension
allowed legionary bases such as Gloucester, Lincoln, Chester, and York to be
developed as coloniaeto provide civilian urban foci, while others such as Exeter
and Wroxeter developed as urban and administrative centres without the
benefit of colonial status. But over much of northern Britain and Wales the
romanized style of civilian development characteristic of the south-east failed
to take hold. The only exception was the southern coastal strip of Wales
fronting the Severn Estuary, where small towns were established at Cacrwent
and Carmarthen and a few villas developed from native settlements. In the
south-west peninsula of Devon and Cornwall
the lack of romanization, after a brief military
occupation in the first century, is particularly
striking. West of Exeter the native socio-eco-
nomic system simply continued unhindered.

In Britain and Ireland, therefore, we can
recognize three distinct zones: the romanized
core, with its focus on the commercial and
administrative centre of London, where an
urban system was firmly in place; a peripheral
zone, including the south-west peninsula,
Wales, and northern Britain up to the Clyde-
Forth line, which was under Roman author-
ity but was substantially unromanized; and a
free zone beyond, including the extreme
north of Britain and all of Ireland, where
native systems continued unhindered. The
survival of Celtic culture was directly related
to the intensity of romanization reflected in
these three zones.

In Gaul and south-east Britain it is evident
that Celtic society became heavily romanized,
both by the adoption of Roman culture and
by a mobility of population caused by trade
and military and civil service, None the less,

AD s

199 Above: The Iron Age and Roman farmstead at Whitton,
South Glamorgan, Wales, showing its development from
the carly first century Ap.

200 Below: Native scttlements of the Roman period in
Cornwall. Two examples of stone-bullt courtyard houses
constructed within enclosures (‘rounds’) which were prob-
ably of pre-Roman date.



===== PAGE 292 (index-295_1.jpg) =====
"»g{(* R ';Wﬁ 7
el 77 7 ¥ e e M{gﬁ%
s S F il
\ﬂ;.»,. ¥ Ty 9‘" mﬁ?‘%’ b,
K. ey «#f; v{%%;:s‘» ‘ﬁ:&. &‘n«‘
. s ir %ﬁ‘g&f s
5;@&%,3;, Sl 7 Mo A :
hﬁ{g\‘m“' o L i’:ﬁ '“«&',;%&L LM
kh‘%*’?ﬁg - i G Y
it L -,‘x,‘,\a‘f.vciﬁ* r;—x.;::m:r }f&':a:‘u-?«v.% B B
§r ol gx*?@hf‘”“‘gm 1*?5’
: } L ~‘ ] *”f”(w‘kwﬁmﬁwéwx


===== PAGE 293 (index-296_1.jpg) =====
" ¢ § F 7
.


===== PAGE 294 (index-297_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

elements of the Celtic belief systems remained—a reality vividly shown by the
maintenance of many Celtic religious sites of great antiquity, temples such as.
Gournay and Hayling Island and sacred springs like those of Sulis and
Coventina in Britain and Sequana in Gaul. A chance remark by Ausonius, writ-
ing in the fourth century ap, that Attius Patera, a professor in Burdigala
(Bordeaux), came from a Druidic family, might reflect the continuation of a
tradition of learning going back into pre-Conquest times. Certainly a sense of
ethnic unity would have been maintained by the Consilium Gallarium and was
put to good political use during the brieflife of the virtually independent Gallic
Empire which emerged in the turmoil of the late third century. In Armorica it
is tempting to wonder if the refortification of the old Iron Age oppida of Alet
and Le Yaudet might not have been, in part at least, a symbolic gesture recalling
a Celtic past.

A question of some interest is the extent to which Celtic was spoken in Gaul
and south-castern Britain during the Roman period. The discovery of a num-
ber of inscribed lead “curses’ at the spring of Sulis Minerva at Bath shows that
Celtic personal names remained much in evidence into the third and fourth
centuries Ap, and one example of an entire curse written in Celtic was recov-
ered. A few other examples are known from Gaul, including curses thrown into
the hot springs at Amélie-les-Bains and the spring of Chamaliéres. These few
Celtic texts are interesting but they give no sure indication of the strength, or
otherwise, of spoken Celtic in relation to the vulgar Latin which must surely
have been widespread.

Away from the areas of intense romanization, in the south-west peninsula,
Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, Celtic remained the dominant language through-
out.

Ethnic Readjustments in the Fourth to Sixth Centuries

The Germanic raids into lands south of the Rhine and deep into Gaul in the late
third century ap should be seen essentially as the continuation of south-thrust-
ing pressures created by a growing and mobile north European population
which first emerged into history with the Cimbri and Teutones of the late sec-
ond century sc. Caesar’s campaigns against Ariovistus and the subsequent cre-
ation of the Rhine frontier brought these incursions to a temporary halt but did
nothing to stop the root cause. Pressures continued to build until the spectacu-
lar break-out in the mid-third century.

After a temporary respite the germanization of the Roman west continued,
first with the deliberate settlement of Germanic peoples in frontier regions to
provide buffer zones and later, in the carly fifth century, with large-scale popu-
lation movements into Gaul and south-castern Britain. While the actual num-
ber ofimmigrants involved is difficult to estimate and the size of the indigenous
populations who survived may have been greater than was previously sup-
posed, the political, and to some extent the linguistic, map was totally changed.

261

XXIV Facing Many of the
Tron Age stelae of Brittany
continued to be revered as
sacred places well into
Christian times, Some were
moved into the precincts of
churches, while others were
carved with Christian sym
bols. This stela from Croas-
Men at Lampaul-
Ploudalmeézcan, Finistere,
had had its top removed
and replaced by a Christian

cross.


===== PAGE 295 (index-298_1.jpg) =====
as built
similar way with a ser
all chambers ope
central ¢
ugh a distinctive
nish d
dating
busic g
tothe tra
round

CELTIC SURVIVAL

By the end of the fifth century Clovis had brought much of northern and west
ern Gaul under Frankish domination, leaving the more Germanic enclaves of

Burgundia and Alamania and the Ostrogothic kingdoms to control the centre

and east. With the exception of Brittany, Latin was strongly entrenched, and in
considerable part survived as the basis of French. In Britain German settlement
had advanced rapidly across most of the romanized south-cast. Here the emer-
gence of Anglo-Saxon as the dominant language shows that the impact of ger-
manization must have been considerable

During this period of turmoil there was some movement among the surviv-
ing Celtic communities of the west. The process began with Irish raids across
the Celtic Sea against the coastal communities of Roman Britain. The Attocotti
from the Western Isles off Scotland and the Picts from north of the frontier



===== PAGE 296 (index-299_1.jpg) =====
12 The ‘Petrie Crown’, named after the

poece o
nd. The elegant decoration is fine

f Irish insular La Tenc art

second

g to the first
al Museu

prury AD. N.
Dublin

joined in, and there is a suggestion, in the contemporary historical record, that

these northern and western raiders worked together with Germans from across
the North Sea in what was called the Barbarian Conspiracy of ap 367. Whether
the raids were concerted or fortuitous in their timing, they had a devastating
effect on the Roman province. The Irish, Attocotti, and Picts were probably
Celtic peoples, although some linguists claim to be able to detect a pre-Indo
European element in the Pictish language. The reason for the raids are
unrecorded, but it is likely that simple opportunism and the prevailing atmos-
phere of ‘folk wandering' that characterized the period played an important
part.

The continuous pressure of the Irish on the western coasts of Britain, which
began as raids in the late third century Ap, led, a century later, to the establish-
ment of permanent colonial settlements. In south-west Wales, in Pembroke-

shire and the Gower, the Déisi carved out enclaves; in the Lleyn Peninsula of

north-west Wales, more Irish settlers established themselves; while in the west-

crn coastal region of what is now Scotland the Scotti, from northern Ireland,

took control of a territory which eventually became part of the kingdom of Dil

Riata extending to both sides of the Celtic Sea. These Irish settlers brought with

them their own distinct dialects of the Celtic language.

263


===== PAGE 297 (index-300_1.jpg) =====
203 The distribution of
Ogham and carly Christian
inscribed stones in Britain
reflects the penetration of
Irish settlers in the fourth
and fifth centuries ap,

CELTIC SURVIVAL

Another folk movement took place
from south Wales and south-western
Britain southwards across the Channel to
Armorica (which thereafter can be called
by its more familiar name—Brittany).
The movement may have begun in the
fourth century with the use of British
troops in the defence of Roman Gaul
against barbarian attack, but by the mid-
fifth century it had taken on the character
of a folk movement. Although the bulk of
the migrant population probably came
from Cornwall and Devon, the commu-
nities of south Wales played a significant
part in providing the leadership. There
may also have been an Irish element join-
ing the restless movements.

The leaders came from the local élites.
Some were evidently peregrini, or spiri-
tual leaders, many of whom took solace
in the remote islands off the Breton coast
or deep in the Breton forests. Others were
probably younger sons secking new lands
for themselves and their followers. Their personalities and adventures con-
tributed to the rich store of saints’ lives composed four or five centuries after the
event from surviving scraps of oral tradition. The reason behind the migration
of the western Britons was presented by Gildas in simplistic terms. For him the
prime cause was pressure from the Saxon advance from the east. While this may
have contributed to the exodus, the Irish expansion into Wales and the south-
west, internal population increases, and the new sense of freedom and adven-
ture born as the constraints of Roman government crumbled are all likely to
have played a part.

The complexities inherent in the study of the early British settlement in
Armorica are considerable, and many issues remain the source of energetic
debate. The peninsula was divided into three territories, Dumnonia (Dom-
nonée), Cornovia (Cornouaille), and Broérec. The first two may have taken
their names from the tribes of south-western Britain who settled the coastal
regions: the third was carved out by the Breton chieftain Waroc, who advanced
into the Vannetais, where Gallo-Roman culture still remained strong,

In attempting to trace the early settlement much has been made of place-
name evidence. The concentration of names containing Plou, Lan, and Tré in
northern and western Armorica has long been argued to reflect the settlements
of the Britons. A very high percentage of the Plou names are compounded with
male personal names, cither saints or laymen, and of those which can be

264


===== PAGE 298 (index-301_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

identified most have a British origin. Recent work has, however, suggested that
some of the Plou-plus-common-name places may date to the pre-migration
period. The second set of significant names are those ending in the suffix -ac.
These concentrate in the south-east of Armorica, particularly in the Morbihan,
They were believed to represent the survival of Gallo-Roman place names end-
ing in -acum, but since it has been shown that this is a modification of the
Gaulish -acos and that these names are only rarely compounded with Latin
prefixes, it is now argued that the -ac names may well reflect the survival of the
Gaulish language.

The whole question of the Breton language is equally subject to lively debate.
It is widely accepted that there are four main dialects. Three, covering
Cornouaille, Léon, and Trégor, are similar and are referred to as the Kerneu of
Léon and Trégor (KLT). The fourth, in the Vannetais, is significantly different.
This pattern has interesting similarities to the place-name distributions men-
tioned above. Two diverging hypotheses are offered. The traditional view,
championed by Joseph Loth and Kenneth Jackson, argues that Old Breton
developed from the same Primitive Brittonic roots as Cornish and Welsh,
which persisted in south-western Britain at the time of the migrations and that
the Breton dialects developed only after the eleventh century. If so, then the
Breton language was a form of Celtic reintroduced from Britain. The alterna-
tive view, that developed by Chanoine Falc’hun, argues that Breton derives
substantially from indigenous pre-Roman Celtic. He suggests that the two
principal dialect groups reflect a pre-Caesarian division, the Vannetais thus
deriving from the language spoken by the Veneti while KLT was the dialect of

265

204 Map of carly place
names in Brittany, showing
the extent of the Celtic an-
guagein the fourth-sisth
centuries AD.


===== PAGE 299 (index-302_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

the Osismi and Coriosolites. Falc'hun accepts, however, the contribution of
British Celtic in strengthening the Celtic spoken in the north and west.

These issues will remain at the centre of scholarly debate for some time to
come. There is nothing, however, inherently unlikely in the survival of Celticin
Armorica from pre-Roman times, but the close relationship between Armorica
and south-western Britain throughout the Late Iron Age and Roman period
may well have been sufficient to have maintained a degree of parallel develop-
ment in the languages of the two peninsulas during the millennium before the
British migration.

A population movement still further south into Galicia in north-western
Iberia is implied by the fifth-century writer Orosius, who refers to the Galician
city of Brigantia, which had, he claimed, a direct relationship with Ireland. The
Irish contact is further reflected in the presence of the Celtic monastery of Santa
Maria de Bretona near Mondonedo, which was included in the episcopate of
Britona. To what extent these links along the Atlantic sea-ways reflect a sub-
stantial movement of population or simply the influx of a small religious élite it
is difficult to say.

The Celtic Communities of the Middle Ages and After

The Celtic communities of the Atlantic zone survived in different degrees of
isolation throughout the carly Middle Ages. The Viking attacks which began in
the eighth century ravaged coastal areas of Scotland, Ireland, Cornwall, and
Brittany, and in Scotland and the eastern parts of Ireland settlement followed,
introducing a strong Scandinavian element into local culture. A little later the
westward advance of the Norman élite established a firm hold on Wales and
large tracts of Ireland. In Brittany following the Viking onslaught many of the
characteristics of the Carolingian system survived, and the duchy, which even-
tually came into existence, became increasingly part of the greater continuum
of Francia.

The complex politics of the Middle Ages brought the Celtic populations of
the west into direct contact with the rising power of the mongrel élites of
England and France, while the spread of Christianity in its many guises intro-
duced new value systems with new role models, mythologies, and symbolisms.
Inevitably the Celtic cultures of the west suffered some dilution, but the isola-
tion of their lands at the far extremities of the civilized world allowed much of
the indigenous pattern of life to continue behind the thin Anglo-Norman
fagade. The vibrant epics and folk tales of Ireland and, to a lesser extent, Wales
survived, albeit modified by Christianized redactors, while in Scotland,
Cornwall, and Brittany, though little of literary merit has come down to us, the
scrapsof folk talesand legends that do survive are a reminder of what there once
was. In the Law Tracts of Ireland and Wales we glimpse Celtic society in all its
intricacies.

The growing imperialism of France and England during the eighteenth cen-

266


===== PAGE 300 (index-303_1.jpg) =====
CELTIC SURVIVAL

tury, with its deliberate attempts to impose metropolitan values and rule on all
the distant peripheries, began to erase the already-weakened Celtic cultures,
but in doing so created a new spirit of resistance. The Celtic past, in all its man-
ifestations, took on a new importance as a symbol of unity. It was in this mood
of ethnic struggle that the Celtic revival, which we briefly reviewed in Chapter 1,
had its genesis. To what extent the Celticism of the Atlantic fagade is a survival
or a revival is a matter for anthropologists to debate. What is not in doubt, as
anyone familiar with Galicia, Brittany, Ireland, or Wales will well know, is the
very strong emotional appeal which the idea of sharing a common Celtic her-
itage has. Perhaps the only real definition of a Celt, now as in the past, is that a
Celtisa person who believes him or herself to be Celtic.



===== PAGE 301 (index-304_1.jpg) =====
14
Retrospect

Since the early eighteenth century the quest for the Celts has become a con-
suming passion for an increasing number of historians, linguists, folklorists, art
historians, and archacologists. Inevitably, this intensity of effort and enthusi-
asm has spilled over into the public’s understanding of the past, in part inform-
ing it but at the same time introducing imperfectly understood concepts which
are sometimes used to underpin vague notions of ethnicity and, occasionally,
to excuse extremes of political behaviour, This woolly, fey, and sometimes dan-
gerous ‘Celtic fringe” has brought the word ‘Celt” into disrepute in some acade-
mic circles, and understandably so, but it would be as well to remind ourselves
that the concept of "Celticness” exists and has existed only through the inter-
pretations which observers have chosen to put upon it, whether they be Poly-
bius or Yeats—for both of whom the Celts were real.

In this book we have chosen to take a broad view. For us the Celts comprise a
large number of ethnic groups who occupied much of central and western
Europe in the first millennium e and spoke a series of related dialects which
linguists define as ‘Celtic’. Some of these groups moved into east Europe to set-
tle. They were rapidly assimilated. Over much of the rest of the Continent
‘Celticness’ eventually disappeared in the turmoil and reformation of the first
half of the first millennium Ap and only in the extreme western fringes did the
language, and with it the memory of the Celtic heritage, survive.

Over such a vast tract of land and period of time there was, inevitably, much
variation. Tribes trekked far and wide and polities came and went. To what
extent the different entities regarded themselves as having a common heritage
we can only speculate. The huge hordes that moved eastwards in the third cen-
tury must have felt themselves to be part of a single people and so too did the
disparate tribes called upon by Vercingetorix to send troops to Alesia to oppose
the Romans. That contacts were maintained over considerable distances is sug-
gested by historical anecdotes referring to political links between the Galatians

268


===== PAGE 302 (index-305_1.jpg) =====
RETROSPECT

in Asia Minor and the inhabitants of the area around Massalia, but whether any
of this meant that individual lincages felt that they belonged to a shared inter-
national ‘Celticness’ will always remain in doubt.

The two most commonly used methods of defining Celts—language and La
Tene material culture and art—both present problems in that they represent
very different cultural attributes. Celtic languages appear to have been spoken
over wide, if discontinuous, areas of western Europe by the sixth century e,
while the material manifestations of La Tene culture reflect the emergence,
expansion, and subsequent evolution of one cultural complex for a brief period
of three or four centuries, Whilst these two aspects of Celticness overlap in time
and space, they are by no means coterminous.

To characterize the social and economic dynamics of western Europe in the
first millennium nc it is necessary to understand something of the basic struc-
tures which provide a constant framework throughout. At its simplest we may
distinguish three broad geographical zones: an Atlantic zone, a Rhine-Danube
zone, and a west Mediterranean zone, each with its own internal systems of
interaction and each interacting with the others. The Atlantic zone, stretching
from Andalucia to the west coast of Scotland, was bound by the sea, which pro-
vided comparative ease of communication between adjacent territories and
over longer distances. Besides this its greatest attribute was its metal-rich geo-

205 Furope in the Late
Bronze Age, showing the
major socio-cultural zones
into which the Late Bronze
Age communities can be

artanged


===== PAGE 303 (index-306_1.jpg) =====
RETROSPECT

logy. Galicia, Armorica, south-west Britain, south Wales, and southern Ireland
between them offered, and no doubt provided, huge quantities of copper, tin,
silver, and gold to the polities of central and Mediterranean Europe. The
Rhine-Danube zone was particularly favoured as the principal route nexus of
Peninsular Europe, where the river systems of the Rhine, Danube, Seine, and
Rhone came together. The zone sat astride the east-west routes from the Atlan-
tic zone to eastern Europe and beyond as well as the north-south routes bet-
ween the Mediterrancan and the northern Europe-Baltic (or Nordic) zone.
The west Mediterranean constituted the third system. The sea provided the
means of communication along the entire littoral zone from Italy to Andalucia
and between the many islands from Sicily to the Balearics.

The different pace of social and economic interaction between these three
zones provided the dynamics which underlay the emergence and expansion of
Celtic societies. But before exploring this in a little more detail we should
remind ourselves that Peninsular Europe, which is our prime concern, was in
contact with other major socio-cultural complexes: the Nordic zone, the east
European zone, and the east Mediterranean zone. During the first millennium
the Celtic-speaking peoples of the west interacted with these distant zones in
different ways, at different times, and in differing degrees of intensity. It was
during the Late Bronze Age, roughly 1300-750 8, that the Celtic language
developed its recognizable characteristics in western Europe. By 600 e Celtic
was spoken in Iberia, Ireland, and around the Italian Lakes, and it is reasonable
to suppose that it was also in use over much, but notall, of the intervening area.
Where and when Celtic emerged as a language distinct from other Indo-
European tongues is still a matter of much debate, but the general consensus of
linguists—that the origin lay within the Rhine-Danube zone late in the second
or early in the first millennium—is perfectly consistent with the archacological
evidence. Indeed it could be argued that the re-formations underway in the dif-
ferent zones of Europe in the Late Bronze Age, the intensification of production
and exchange, the apparent population growth, and the greater stability in the
settlement pattern provided optimum conditions for the crystallizing-out of
the major European language groups.

If the origins of the Celtic language lay within the Rhine~Danube zone, then
when and by what mechanism did it spread to the Atlantic zone? There is little
in the archacological record to suggest migration or even the spread of a domi-
nant military élite, but what is apparent is a rapid increase in the production
and movement of bronze and a change in the socio-religious systems with a
new emphasis on propitiating the chthonic deities. It is quite possible that
increasing demands for metals led to a much greater mobility among those
with pyrotechnical skills and that with this élite came new systems of religious
beliefs. In such a context it is easy to see how the Celtic language could have
spread both as a lingua franca and as the language of a technico-religious caste.
While such a hypothesis is difficult to prove, it has the benefit of being, at least,
plausible.

270


===== PAGE 304 (index-307_1.jpg) =====
RETROSPECT

e~

- =y
W s i S i g R
Conc wngueges

In the period which followed, ¢.750-450 8¢, the Celtic-speaking communi-
ties of the west developed increasingly close contacts with the Mediterranean
zone. In two core areas, the West Hallstatt region of the Rhine-Danube zone
and the Meseta of Iberia, distinctive élites emerged. The West Hallstatt chief-
tains adopted selected behaviour patterns, and the luxury goods which sup-
ported them, from the Etruscan and Greek communities of the northern
littoral of the Mediterranean, while the Celtiberian élite of north central Spain
embraced a range of traits learned from the complex Iberian culture develop-
ing at this time in south-castern Spain under the influence of Greek, Etruscan,
and Phoenician contacts.

These two innovating core zones benefited, by virtue of their position, from
contact with the Mediterranean world, and, while it is inappropriate to argue
that their development was caused by Mediterranean influence, it was certainly
facilitated by ease of access to Mediterrancan markets. Beyond both ‘cores’
there existed broad peripheries extending westwards to the Atlantic, through
which, no doubt, commodities such as metals flowed eastwards, while luxury
goods like horses and weapon sets will have been used for reciprocal exchanges.
One way of viewing these two innovating cores is to see them as benefiting from
their favoured locations between the metal-rich Atlantic zone and the metal-
demanding Mediterranean. This level of generalization is a helpful simplifica-
tion, but it should not be allowed to obscure the complexity of the dynamics

27

206 Europe in the Hallstatt
period. By this stage the
Celtic languages were
spoken over much of west
e Europe and two majoe
20nes of innovation

were developing in Iheria
and west central Furope.
Both were in active contact
with the west Mediterrancan
zone and with the metal-
rich Atlantic zone.


===== PAGE 305 (index-308_1.jpg) =====
207 Europe in the Early and
Middle La Tene period, It
was during this time that
populations from the élite
zones began to expand into
peripheral arcas away from
the territories in which
Celtic languages had been

spoken for some centuries.

RETROSPECT

involved or to suggest too close a similarity between the Celtiberian or West
Hallstatt communities, since both existed largely in isolation from each other.

It may well have been during this period that divergence in language became
apparent. Celtiberian retained much of its earlier structure, while in the West
Hallstatt zone it seems likely that developments began which were to lead to
Brythonic or ‘P-Celtic'.

The next major phase began in c.450 and lasted until about 200 b, In west
central Europe this saw the emergence of a new élite, around the northern and
western fringes of the West Hallstatt chiefdom zone—an élite which can be
characterized by the distinctive La Téne material culture. After a brief period of
development the traditional social system which had been slowly evolving for
more than 500 years collapsed. The suddenness of this and the massive social
upheaval which ensued make the events of the late fifth century sc a classic
example of systems-collapse. The causes are difficult to untangle but may in
part have been the social instability inherent in the élite system exacerbated by
population increase and reorientations within the Mediterranean economy.

What followed was an outpouring of populations into the Mediterranean
zone and the cast European zone. The expansion was temporarily halted in the
Balkans by the power of Macedonia, but, following the death of Alexander in
323 &, and the political instability which followed, Celtic-speaking peoples
thrust castwards, establishing themselves in the Middle Danube (the Scor-

FRD Torws of e mearce e gt roverants
Fary Coms somamers ——

72


===== PAGE 306 (index-309_1.jpg) =====
RETROSPECT

disci), on the eastern shores of the Black Sea (the kingdom of Tylis), in Asia
Minor (the Galatians), and probably in Moldova, Elsewhere within this broad
zone Celts settled among existing populations or served as mercenaries wher-
ever they could find employment. The numbers involved are difficult to esti-
mate but must have run into hundreds of thousands.

To what extent there was an equivalent expansion westwards is unclear.
There is nothing in the archacological record to suggest any significant disrup-
tion. Indeed it could be argued that communities of the western periphery up
to the Atlantic coast and beyond were saved from predatory attack because they
had long been bound in networks of reciprocal exchange with the élite-domi-
nated zone. Whether or not this was so, it is abundantly clear that the main
thrust of the migratory moves was to the south and cast.

The situation in Iberia is less clear but that there was some expansion to the
south and west is borne out both by the classical sources and by the distribution
of tribal names.

The migrations were largely at an end by 200 sc. This was the moment at
which Rome, freed from the threat of Carthage by her hard-won victories dur-
ing the Second Punic War, entered into a more expansive mode. Military
involvement in Iberia led to the gradual subjugation of the Celtiberians, while
increasing intensity in trade with the Transalpine Celts introduced a new range
of opportunities and the catalyst for change. Here the energies, which previ-
ously had been dissipated in aggression, were turned to more productive pur-
suits, and the social display of luxuries acquired through trade, in cycles of
conspicuous consumption, replaced the desire for prowess gained in the suc-
cessful accomplishment of a raid. In this way the Celtic tribes began to be trans-
formed into urban-based states where gifts, dues, and other exchanges were
articulated through the exchange of coins.

The transformation of the Celtic world was gradual and uneven. In the cen-
tury and a half from 200 to 50 1, the communities closest to the Roman fron-
tiers had changed dramatically, but at this point local developments were
overtaken by Germanic pressures from the Nordic zone, Dacian and Sarmatian
pressures from the east European zone, and a rapid escalation in the Roman
desire for empire. In a brief sixty years the Celtic communities of continental
Europe were completely overrun and within the century much of the south of
Britain had been absorbed as well,

Only the insular Celtic-speaking communities of the far west remained free.
Those of Cornwall, Wales, and northern Britain were loosely controlled within
the frontiers of the empire: beyond in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland
and in Ireland they lay beyond the reach of Rome and when, in the late third to
fifth century, Roman control weakened, there was a limited resurgence with
small populations moving east and south along the Atlantic sea-ways. The sur-
vival of the language, laws, and traditions of these Atlantic fringe Celtic com-
munities and the revival that began in the eighteenth century are part of a
different but no less fascinating story.

73


===== PAGE 307 (index-310_1.jpg) =====
208 Europein the Late La
Tene period. This period
saw the Celtic commumitics
under increasing pressures
particularly from the
Romans but also to a lesser
extent from Dacians and
Germans. By ap 400 Celtic
langusges survived only in
the Atlantic zone.

RETROSPECT

Survscal of Cotic anguagen ster AGK) s Exbors o Noman Emges By $40C
Z

The history of Celtic-speaking communities in Europe covers nearly two
millennia. The process began in the formative period c.1300-750 1c, when most
of Europe underwent a dramatic transformation. Then followed the emer-
gence of early chiefdoms, 750-450, as the increasing rhythms of the Mediter-
ranean economy began to impinge. The systems-collapse and diaspora of 450
200 created a warrior society which was to provide the classical world with its
stereotype of the “northern barbarian® and the archacologist with a material
culture and art which could be called 'Celtic”. Thereafter, in the final phase, the
Mediterranean-based culture of the Romans spread its influence northwards,
first through traders, then through the army, and finally, and more devastat-
ingly, through provincial administrators, until only a few insular communities,
long isolated from the developments in continental Europe, were left clinging
toa precarious freedom along the Atlantic fringes.

Sufficient has been said in this brief retrospect to remind us that Celtic-
speaking peoples have had a long and complex history: their diversity in social
and cultural terms is beyond dispute. Yet the stereotype which, for a variety of
reasons, their literate contemporaries created of them echoes across the ages.
These visions have provided, and no doubt will continue to provide, metaphors
for later generations. The ‘Celt’ is a powerful and emotive image which per-
vades our culture, and it is entirely proper that we should spend time attempt-
ing to understand it

274


===== PAGE 308 (index-311_1.jpg) =====
A Guide to Further Reading

The quantity of literature on the subject of the Celts is enormous and to guide those
wishing to go decper into the subject is not casy. In the section to follow we offer, first, a
series of books written for the general reader, which, in many cases, are attractively illus-
trated. Then follows a list of more specialist works published since about 1970.
Together, in some 200 individual papers, they provide a fair coverage of the detailed
research currently being undertaken. These volumes should be approached only by
those of resilient disposition,

Thereafter some guidance is given as to the most significant general reading on a
chapter-by-chapter basis. Wherever possible English works have been chosen, but,
where nothing suitable exists, French, German, and Spanish sources have been sug-
gested, Most of the works cited have extensive bibliographies which will help the enthu-
siast to begin detailed research on virtually any Celtic topic. It is a pursuit which can fill
many lifetimes.

General Books

Among books offering overviews of the ancient Celts, the two classic texts are T, G. E.
Powell, The Celts (London, 1958, and subsequent editions), and Jan Filip, Celtic
Civilization and its Heritage (first published in Czech in 1960 with the first English edi-
tion appearing in Prague in 1962 ). Though elderly, both texts are well worth reading for
the mastery and style of their authors. Three books, focusing more on the historical
Celts but still offering a broad sweeping approach, can be recommended: Nora
Chadwick, The Celts (Harmondsworth, 1971); Myles Dillon and Nora Chadwick, The
Celtic Realms (London, 1967); and Alwyn and Brinley Rees, Celtic Heritage: Ancient
Traditions in Ireland and Wales (London, 1961).

More recent general works include a massive tome The Celts, edited by Sabatino
Moscati and others, and published in 1991 in Milan to accompany a comprehensive
exhibition entitled “The Celts, the Origins of Europe” which was held in Venice, The vol-
ume includes a large number of papers on sites or themes, written by scholars with a
first-hand research knowledge of the subject area, and illustrated with photographs of
incomparable quality, mostly in colour. Though physically unwicldy and unindexed,
The Celts presents a brilliant kaleidoscope of Celtic achievement, A second large com-
posite volume, The Celtic World, edited by Miranda Aldhouse Green (London, 1995),
presents a valuable collection of thematic papers reflecting research. More general sin-
gle-authored books which can be recommended because of their carefully integrated
texts and illustrations are: Paul-Marie Duval, Les Celtes (Paris, 1977); The Celts of the
West, text by Venceslas Kruta with brilliant photographs by Werner Forman (London,
1985); Barry Cunliffe, The Ceitic World (London, 1979); Simon James, Exploring the
World of the Celts (London, 1993): Christiane Eluere, The Celts: First Masters of Europe
(first English edition: London, 1993); and Celts: Europe’s People of Iron, a Time-Life

275


===== PAGE 309 (index-312_1.jpg) =====
FURTMER READING

Book (Alexandria, Va., 1994). Of these the most useful as an up-to-date and compre-
hensive introduction is Simon James’s book.

More Specialist Works

An increasing number of edited compilations of specialist papers, often emanating
from conferences or colloquia and designed mainly for the specialist reader, are being
published. These contain work of varying degrees of usefulness usually concerned with
research in progress. Among those which offer a selection of interesting papersare T.C.
Champion and J. V. S, Megaw (eds.), Settlentent and Society: Aspects of West European
Prehistory in the First Millennium BC (Leicester, 1985); K. Kristiansen and |, Jensen
(eds.), Europe in the First Millennium BC (Shefficld, 1994); ). D. Hilland C, G. Cumber-
patch (eds.), Different Iron Ages: Studies on the Iron Age in Temperate Europe (Oxford,
1995); and B. Arnold and D. B. Gibson (eds.), Celtic Chiefdom, Celtic State (Cambridge,
1995).

Inaddition to these volumes, which could reasonably claim to have a European-wide
scope, there are 2 number of more regionally based compilations which may be cited as
important reference works for the specialist. These include: Catalogue: Steyr 1980, Die
Hallstattkultur; Frithform europdischer Einheit (Steyr, 1980); Symposium: Steyr 1980,
Die Hallstattkultur (Steyr, 1980); E. Jerem (ed.), Hallstatt Kolloquium Veszprem 1984
(Budapest, 1986); L. Pauli (ed.), Die Kelten in Mitteleuropa: Salzburger Landesauss-
tellung im Keltenmuseum Hallein Osterreich (Salzburg, 1980); K. Bittel, W. Kimmig, and
S. Schiek, Die Kelten in Baden-Weirttemberg (Stuttgart, 1981); Catalogue: Ljubljana,
KEATOI: Kelti in njihovi sobobniki na ozemlin Jugoslavije (Ljubljana, 1983); 1.-W,
Neugebauer, Die Kelten im Osten Osterreichs (St Polten/Vienna, 1992). J. Fitz, The Celts
in Central Europe (Székesfehérvir, 1975); Paul-Marie Duval and Venceslas Kruta (eds.),
Les Mouvements celtiques du V* au I* siécle avant notre ére (Paris, 1979); P. Drda and A.
Rybovi, Les Celtes de Bohéme (Paris, 1995); M. Szabo, Les Celtes de l'est (Paris, 1992);
Paul-Marie Duval and Venceslas Kruta, L'Habitat et la nécropole & I'dge du fer en Europe
occidentale et centrale (Paris, 1975); Memoires de la Société archéologique champenoise,
L'Age du fer en France septentrionale (Reims, 1981); 1, Collis, A, Duval, and R, Perichon,
Le Deuxiéme Age du fer en Auvergne et en Forez (Sheffield/St Etienne, 1983); A. Cahen-
Delhaye, A. Duval, G. Leman-Delerive, and P. Leman, Les Celtes en Belgique et dans le
nord de la France (Villeneuve d'Ascq, 1984); Revue Archéologie de I'Ouest, Les Ganlois
d"Armorique (Rennes, 1990); Revue Archéologie de 'Ouest, Les Celtes en Normandie
(Rennes, 1993): M. Almagro-Gorbea and G. Ruiz Zapatero, Los Celtas: Hispania y
Europa (Madrid, 1993); and Aquitania, vol. 12, L'Age du fer en Europe sud-occidentale
(Toulouse, 1994).

Chapter 1. Visions of the Celts
The most challenging work on the whole question of validity of the concept of ‘Celtic
is M. Chapman, The Celts: The Construction of a Myth (New York, 1992). It deserves
careful reading as an essential preliminary. Other writers have been quick to espouse a
politically correct disdain for the use of ‘Celt” though usually without Chapman’s depth
of scholarship.

The Graeco-Roman vision of the Celts is admirably summed up in Celts and the
Classical World by H. D. Rankin (London, 1987). The principal classical texts are use-
fully gathered in translation in John T. Koch with John Carey (eds.), The Celtic Heroic

276


===== PAGE 310 (index-313_1.jpg) =====
FURTHER READING

Age: Literary Sources for Ancient Celtic Europe and Early Ireland and Wales (Malden,
Mass., 1995). The seminal scholarly discussion of the works of the classical historian
Poseidonius with the full classical texts in translation is J. |. Tierney, ‘“The Celtic
Ethnography of Poscidonius’, Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, 60 (1960), 1892
~46. A source worthy of study, and fascinating to read, is Julius Caesar's Commentarics
on the Gallic War, of which there are many good modern translations (e.g. that of A. and
P. Wiseman: London, 1980), As the war reminiscences of an old soldier and poll
they must be treated with critical attention, but they contain much relevant detail. A
helpful discussion of Caesar as a source for the Celts is a paper by Daphne Nash,
“Reconstructing Poscidonios's Celtic Ethnography: Some Considerations', Britannia, 7
(1976), 1126,

The reawakening of the post-medicval world to the Celts and the emergence of
Celtomania is part of the history of archacology which is treated with great panache by
Stuart Piggott, William Stukeley (1st edn., Oxford, 1950), The Druids (London, 1968) and
Ancient Britons and the Antiquarian Imagination (London, 1989).

The contribution of archacology to the early years of Celtic studies is a theme too
massive to document here, but two period pieces well worthy of attention are Napoleon
11, Histoire de Jules César (Paris, 1865), and Mortimer Wheeler, Maiden Castle, Dorsct
(London, 1943). In both cases the authors show how carefully planned excavations and
fieldwork can be used to enliven, and sometimes to create, historical narrative.

Chapter 2, The Reality of the Celts

“The questions posed by the origins and development of Celtic language are extremely
complex and much of the literature is impenctrable to all but the most skilled scholar.
Two recent books, Colin Renfrew, Archacology and Language (London, 1987), and ). P,
Mallory, In Search of the Indo-Europeans (London, 1989), present the problems (from
very different viewpoints) in clear uncluttered prose and offer valuable starting-points.
A helpful overview is offered by D. Greene, “The Celtic Languages’, in |. Raftery (ed.),
The Ceits (Cork, 1967). Thereafter things become difficult! Among the more scholarly
works are |. Whatmough, A Study of the Dialects of Ancient Gaul (Ann Arbor, 1970); D,
E. Evans, Gaulish Personal Names (Oxford, 1967); and A. Tovar, Sprachen und
Inschriften: Studien zum Mykenischen Lateinischen und Hispanokeltischen (Amsterdam,
1973). The complexities of the problems are also well exposed in three review papers: K.
H. Schmidt, 'On the Celtic Languages of Continental Europe’, Bulletin of the Board of
Celtic Studies, 28 (1979), 189-205; D, E. Evans, ‘Celts and Germans', ibid., 29 (1981),
230-55; and D. E. Evans, “The Labyrinth of Continental Celtic', Proceedings of the British
Academy, 65 (1978), 497-538.

The insular tradition of vernacular literature is an immense and specialist subject.
The two central original sources are the Irish epic, the Tdin Bé Cuailnge, available as The
Tdinin elegant translation by Thomas Kinsella (Oxford, 1969) and the Welsh epic, The
Mabinogion, trans. Jeffrey Gantz (Harmondsworth, 1976), which includes a helpful
introduction. The most accessible introduction to the complexities of the Irish litera-
ture is Myles Dillon, Early Irish Literature (Chicago, 1948), which is usefully augmented
by Gerald Murphy, The Ossianic Lore and Romantic Tales of Medieval Ireland (Dublin,
1955). The classic attempt to use the Irish literature to present a picture of Iron Age soci-
cty is Kenneth Jackson, The Oldest Irish Tradition (Cambridge, 1964). Jackson’s stimu-
lating, but oversimple, interpretation has been challenged in two important papers by J.

77


===== PAGE 311 (index-314_1.jpg) =====
FURTHER READING

P. Mallory, “The Sword in the Ulster Cycle', in B. Scott (ed.), Studies on Early Ireland
(Belfast, 1981), 99-114, and ‘Silver in the Ulster Cycle of Tales', Proceedings of the Seventh
International Congress of Celtic Studies (Oxford, 1986), 31-78, The subject of the war
chariot as depicted in the Irish literature provides a fascinating insight into the prob-
lems posed by using the texts. Three papers can be particularly recommended: D.
Greene, ‘The Chariot as Described in Irish Literature’, in Charles Thomas (ed.), The
Iron Age in the Irish Sea Province (London, 1972), 59-73; Peter Harbison, "The Old Irish
“Chariot™", Antiquity, 45 (1971), 1717 and the relevant sections of Stuart Piggott’s wide-
ranging book The Earliest Wheeled Transport (London, 1983), in particular pp. 195-238.
For the law tracts, Fergus Kelly, A Guide to Early Irish Law (Dublin, 1988), is an excellent
introduction.

The contribution of archacology has been immense and the major texts will be
referred to in the pages that follow. A number of the classic works have been mentioned
in the main text and need not be repeated here. The subject of Celtic art will be consid-
ered more fully under Chapter 6.

Chapter 3. Barbarian Europe and the Mediterranean: 1300-500 Bc
As a general background to this chapter the relevant chapters of Barry Cunliffc (ed.),
The Oxford llustrated Prehistory of Europe (Oxford, 1994), will be usetul.

The subject of the early chiefdoms has excited much discussion in recent years fol-
lowing the publication of an inspiring paper by Susan Frankenstein and Mike
Rowlands, “The Internal Structure and Regional Context of Early Iron Age Society in
South-Western Germany', Bulletin of the Institute of Archacology, London, 15 (1978),
73-n2. A different approach with much background material is presented by Wolfgang
Kimmig, 'Die griechische Kolonisation im westlichen Mittelmeergebiet und ihre
Wirkung auf dic Landschaften des westlichen Mitteleuropa’, Jahrbuch des Romisch-
Germanischen Zentralmuseumns Mainz (1983), 5-78. A less detailed treatment of the same
material is given in Barry Cunliffe, Greeks, Romans and Barbarians: Spheres of Inter-
action (London, 1988), Other works of significance discussing this general subject area
include Peter Wells, Culture Contact and Culture Change (Cambridge, 1980); Patrice
Brun, Princes et princesses de la Celtique: Le Premier Age du fer (850-450 av. ]-C) (Paris,
1987); Les Princes celtes et La Méditerranée (Recontres de I'Ecole du Louvre; Paris, 1988),
and Chris Pare, ‘Furstensitze, Celts and the Mediterranean World: Developments in
West Hallstatt Culture in the 6th and sth Centuries nc’, Proceedings of the Prehistoric
Society, 57 (1991), 183-202.

In addition to these discussions there are a large number of publications dealing with
individual sites: full bibliographies will be found in the books listed above. For one of
the most recent discoveries of a chieftain’s burial, Jorg Biel's well-illustrated book, Der
Keltenfiirst von Hochdorf (Stuttgart, 1985), provides a spectacular insight. The most
important of the settlements to be excavated, the Heuneburg, is uscfully summarized in
a guide book by Wolfgang Kimmig, Die Heuncburg an der oberen Donau (Stuttgart,
1983).

Chapter 4. The Migrations: 400-200 BC

The classical sources, which provide the main ‘historical’ account of the migrations, are
conveniently brought together and discussed by H. D. Rankin in Celts and the Classical
World (London, 1987). Two other general discussions—Ludwig Pauli, ‘Early Celtic

78


===== PAGE 312 (index-315_1.jpg) =====
FURTHER READING

Society: Two Centuries of Wealth and Turmoil in Central Europe’, and Daphne Nash,
“Celtic Territorial Expansion and the Mediterrancan World', both in T. C. Champion
and . V. S. Megaw (eds.), Settlement and Society (Leicester, 1985)—add significantly to
the debate. For more specific regional studies, Venceslas Kruta's ‘Les Boiens de
Cispadane: Essai de paléoethnographie celtique’, Etudes celtiques, 17 (1980), 7-32, and
the same author’s ‘Les Sénons de PAdriatique d'apres Parchéologic (prolégomenes)’,
Erudes celtiques, 18 (1981), 7-38, present a range of evidence from the Po Valley. The pro-
ceedings of a conference, Paul-Maric Duval and Venceslas Kruta (eds.), Les
Mouvements celtiques du V* au I siccle avant notre éve (Paris, 1979) contains sixteen indi-
vidual papers, together covering much of Europe. For the Middle Danube region, Jovan
Todorovi¢, Skordisci (Novi Sad, 1974), provides a detailed coverage, while Miklos
Szabo, The Celtic Heritage in Hungary (Budapest, 1971), offers a general assessment of
Transdanubia and the Great Hungarian Plain. Evidence for Celtic culture in Poland is
discussed in detail by Z. Wozniak, Osadnictwo celtyckie w Polsce (with an English sum-
mary) (Wroclaw, 1970). Evidence for Celtic movements further east is explored in three
detailed papers: Michail Treister, “The Celts in the North Pontic Area: A Reassessment’,
Antiquity, 67 (1993), 789-804; M. B. Shchukin, “The Celts in Eastern Europe’, Oxford
Journal of Archacology, 14 (1995), 201-27; and M. B. Shchukin et al, ‘Two Finds
Belonging to La Téene and Roman Periods from the Moldavian Republic’, Oxford
Journal of Archacology, 12 (1993), 67-75. References to Celtic movements and settlement
in Asia Minor will be given under Chapter 9. The intriguing question of reflux move-
ments from east to west is examined in a detailed study by Venceslas Kruta, ‘Les Celtes.
des Gaules d'apres l'archéologic’, in K, H. Schmidt (ed.), Geschichte und Kultur der
Kelten (Heidelberg, 1986), 33-51. The classic Celtic folk movement, that of the Helvetii,
isdescribed in first-hand detail by Julius Caesar in the first book of his Commentaries on
the Gallic War.

Chapter 5. Warfare and Society

The nature of Celtic warfare and social systems can be gleaned from various of the clas-
sical texts usefully discussed in Chapters 4-6 of H. D. Rankin, Celts and the Classical
World (London, 1987). A succinct account of the archacological evidence for warfare is
offered in W. F. and ]. N. G. Ritchie, Celtic Warriors (Princes Risborough, 1985). The
sword is given thorough treatment by Radomir Pleiner in The Celtic Sword (Oxford,
1993). For shiclds and spears, see A. Rapin, ‘Boucliers et lances’, in |.-L. Brunaux and A.
Rapin, Gournay I (Paris, 1988), Works on chariots have already been mentioned in the
bibliography for Chapter 2, to which should be added Peter Harbison, “The Chariot of
Celtic Funerary Tradition', Fundberichte aus Hessen,1(1969), 34-58,and lan Stead, “The
Celtic Chariot’, Antiquity, 39 (1965), 259-65. The most ambitious attempt at recon-
structing social systems is Carol Crumley, Celtic Social Structure; The Generation of
Archacologically Testable Hypotheses from Literary Evidence (Michigan, 1974). Daphne
Nash, “Ternitory and State Formation in Central Gaul’, in D, Greene et al, (eds.), Social
Organization and Settlement (Oxford, 1978), 45575, remains a classic account of the
changes in Gaulish society as Roman influence increased.

Chapter 6. The Arts of the Migration Period
The subject of Celtic art has been dealt with extensively in a number of general books.
The classic text is Paul Jacobsthal, Early Celtic Art (Oxford, 1944), which has sct the

79


===== PAGE 313 (index-316_1.jpg) =====
FURTHER READING

scene for everything to follow, but the most up-to-date and helpful text, copiously illus-
trated, is Ruth and Vincent Megaw, Celtic Art (London, 1989), which is now the essen-
tial starting-point; the volume also has an extensive bibliography arranged
thematically. Other broadly based studies of value include: Nancy Sanders” elegant and
emotive chapter in her Prehistoric Art in Ancient Europe (2nd edn., Harmondsworth,
1985); Paul-Marie Duval, Les Celts (Paris, 1977); Paul-Marie Duval and Christopher
Hawkes (eds.), Celtic Art in Ancient Europe: Five Protohistoric Centuries (London, 1976);
Paul-Marie Duval and Venceslas Kruta (eds.), L'Art celtique de la période d'expansion:
IV and ¥ sicles(Geneva and Paris, 1982). A number of excellent regional surveys exist,
among which may be listed: Miklos Szabo and Eva Petres, A Kelet Kelta Mivészer—
Eastern Celtic Art (text largely in English) (Székesfehérvar, 1974); L'Art celtique en Gaule:
Collections des musées de Province (Ministere de la Culture; Paris, 1983); Alain Duval,
L'Art celtique de la Gaule (Paris, 1989); lan Stead, Celtic Art in Britain before the Roman
Conquest (London, 1985); Vincent and Ruth Megaw, Early Celtic Art in Britain and
Ireland (Princes Risborough, 1986); Morna MacGregor, Early Celtic Art in North Britain
(Leicester, 1976); H. N. Savory, Early Iron Age Art in Wales (Cardiff, 1968); and Barry
Raftery, A Catalogue of Irish Iron Age Antiquitics (Marburg, 1983), and La Téne in
Ireland: Problems of Origins and Chronology (Marburg, 1984). Ceramic art is seldom
dealt with as a theme, but a number of specialist papers on painted pottery will be found
in La Céramique peinte celtique dans son contexte Européen (Reims, 1991), while Frank
Schwappach provides accounts of stamp-decorated pottery in On the Chronology of the
Eastern Early La Téne Pottery (Bad Bramstedy, 1979) and in two papers, “Die stem-
pelverzierte Latene-Keramik aus den Gritbern von Braubach', Bonner Jakebuch, 77
(1977), 119-83, and ‘Frithkeltischen Ormament zwischen Marne, Rhein und Moldau’,
Bonner Jahrbuch, 73 (1973), 11, For Celtic coins, the best overview is D, F. Allen, The
Coins of the Ancient Celts (Edinburgh, 1980).

Chapter 7. Iberia and the Celtiberians

‘The question of the Celtiberian language is most simply dealt with by A, Tovar in The
Ancient Languages of Spain and Portugal (New York, 1961). A more detailed treatment
will be found in his Sprachen und Inschriften: Studien zum Mykenischen, Lateinischen
und Hispanokeltischen (Amsterdam, 1973). The standard works on the Iron Age of Iberia
and the "Celtic’ problem are: E. Sangmeister, ‘Die Kelten in Spanien’, Madrider
Mitteilungen, 1 (1960), 75-100; W. Schule, Die Meseta-Kulturen der Iberischen Halbinsel
(Berlin, 1969), and M. Lenerz-de Wilde, Iberia Celtica (Stuttgart, 1991). For a Spanish
view of their archacology, Martin Almagro-Gorbea and Gonzalo Ruiz Zapatero (eds.),
Los Celtas: Hispania y Europa (Madrid, 1993), has much to offer, most notably the
papers by: Martin Almagro-Gorbea, ‘Los Celtas en la Peninsula Ibérica: Origen y per-
sonalidad cultural’ (pp. 121-74); Luis A. Garcia Morena, ‘Organizacion sociopolitica de
los Celtas en la Peninsula Ibérica’ (pp. 327-56); Janier de Hoz, “Testimonios lingtisticos
relativos al problema céltico en la Peninsula Ibérica’ (pp. 357-408); and Francisco
Marco Simon, ‘La religiosidad en la Céltica hispana’ (pp. 477-512). Barry Cunliffe and
Simon Keay (eds.), Social Complexity and the Development of Towns in Iberia: From the
Copper Age to the Second Century AD (London, 1995), contains several papers of rele-
vance, including: Martin Almagro-Gorbea, ‘From Hillforts to Oppidain “Celtic™ Iberia®
(pp. 175- 208); Gonzalo Ruiz Zapatero and Jesus R. Alvarez-Sanchis, ‘Las Cogotas:
Oppida and the roots of Urbanism in the Spanish Meseta’ (pp. 209-36), and Armando

280


===== PAGE 314 (index-317_1.jpg) =====
FURTHER READING

Coctho Ferreira da Silva, 'Portuguese castros: The Evolution of the Habitat and the
Proto-Urbanization Process’ (pp. 263-90). Three detailed regional studies of a special-
ist nature can be recommended: Martin Almagro-Gorbea and Ana M* Martin, Castros
¥ Oppida en Extremadura (Marid, 1095); Lusis Berrocal-Rangel, Los pueblos Celticos del
Suroeste de la Peninsula Iberica (Madrid, 1992); and Armando Coelho Ferreira da Silva,
A Cultura Castrefa no noroeste de Portugal (Pagos de Ferreira, 1986).

Chapter 8. The Communities of the Atlantic Fagade

The question of the origins and development of the Celtic languages in the West is of
particular interest. Some general references have been given in the bibliography for
Chapter 2. More specific to this chapter are two important papers by John T. Koch,
‘Gallo-Brittonic vs Insular Celtic', in G. Le Mena and J.-Y. Le Moing, Bretagne et pays
celtique-langues, histoire, civilization (Saint-Brieuc/Rennes, 1992), 471-95, and “Eriu,
Alba, and Letha: When was a Language Ancestral to Gaelic First Spoken in Ireland?’,
Emania, 9 (1991), 17-27. This same volume of Entania contains a number of other papers
directly relevant to the Iron Age culture of Ireland. For an up-to-date review of Ireland,
Barry Raftery, Pagan Celtic Ireland: The Enigma of the Irish Iron Age (London, 1994), is
of incomparable value. For Brittany, P.-R. Giot, |. Briard, and L. Pape offer an overview
ofthe Armorican Iron Age in Protohistoire de la Bretagne(2nd edn. Rennes, 1995), which
can be augmented by reference to a number of specialist papers in Les Gaulois
d'Armorique (Revue Archéologique de I'Ouest, supp. 3; Rennes, 1990). Still the best
account of the fortifications of Armorica and Normandy and their historical context is
R.E.M. Wheelerand K. M. Richardson, Hillforts of Northern France{Oxford, 1957). The
question of emigration from Britain to Brittany is well covered in Nora Chadwick, Early
Brittany (Cardiff, 1969), the same author’s ‘Colonization of Brittany from Celtic
Britain', Proceedings of the British Academy, 51 (1965), 235-99, and P.-R. Giot and L.
Fleuriot, ‘Early Brittany’, Antiquity, 51 (1977), 10616, For more recent views about the
origins of the Breton language the works of Chanoine Falc'hun are challenging, in par-
ticular his Perspectives nouvelles sur histoire de la langue bretonne (Paris, 1981). The
Atlantic sea-ways have generated a considerable literature, but the principal issues (fully
referenced) are summed up in three papers: Barry Cunliffe, ‘Britain, the Veneti and
Beyond', Oxford Journal of Archacology, 1 (1982), 39-68; Sean M il, ‘Cross-Channel
Scamanship and Navigation in the Late First Millennium sc 2 2 (1983), 200-3371
and C, F, C. Hawkes, ‘Ictis Disentangled and the British Tin Trade', ibid., 3 (1984),
2133, For the Iron Age of Britain, Barry Cunliffe, Iron Age Communities of Britain (3rd
edn., London, 1991), provides an overview: for northern Gaul, Nico Roymans, Tribal
Societies in Northern Gaul: An Anthropological Perspective {Amsterdam, 1990), is com-
prehensive. For south-west France, two specialist monographs provide up-to-date
detail: Richard Boudet, L'Age du fer récent dans la partie méridionale de U'estuarine
Grrondin (Périgueux, 1987), and Jean-Pierre Mohen, L'Age du fer en Aquitaine (Paris,
1980).

Chapter 9. The Communities of the Eastern Fringes

As background reading 1o the horse-riding peoples of the Pontic region, E. D, Philips,
The Royal Hordes: Nomad Peoples of the Steppes (London, 1965), provides a wide-rang-
ingintroduction, while Renate Rolle, The World of the Scythians (English edn., London,
1989}, offers a more detailed account of one of the major ethnic groups. References have

281


===== PAGE 315 (index-318_1.jpg) =====
FURTHER READING

already been given to Celts in the Pontic region under Chapter 4, The Celtic settlement
in Asia Minor was presented from a historical view by W, M. Ramsey in his A Historical
Commentary on St Paul’s Epistle to the Galatians ( London, 1900). The most recent schol -
arly account is Stephen Mitchell, Anarolia: Land, Men and Gods in Asia Minor, i. The
Celts in Anatolia and the Impact of Roman Rule (Oxford, 1993). More detailed assess-
ments of the fortifications are given in Stephen Mitchell, ‘Blucium and Peium: The
Galatian forts of King Deiotarus', Anarolian Studies, 24 (1974), 61-75. Distribution of
Celtic artefacts are considered by A. Muller-Karpe, ‘Neue galatische funde aus
Anatolien', Istanbuler Mitteilungen, 38 (1988), 189-99. The monuments depicting Celts
set up at Pergamum are discussed by E. Kunzl, Die Kelten des Epigonos von Pergamon
(Warzburg, 1971): R. Wennig, Die Galateranatheme Attalus 1. Ein Untersuchung zum
Bestand und der Nachwirkung Pergamenischer Skulptur (Berlin, 1978); and Lise
Hannestad, ‘Greeks and Celts: The Creation of a Myth', in P, Bilde et al. (eds.), Centre
and Periphery in the Hellenistic World (Aarhus, 1993), 15-38,

Chapter 10. Religious Systems

There is a fascinating literature on Celtic religious systems. Three books stand out both
for their content and their literary merit: Marie- Louise Sjoestedt, Gods and Heroes of the
Celes(English edn,, repr. Dublin, 1994); Proinsias MacCana, Celtic Mythology (rev, edn.,
Feltham, 1983); and Stuart Piggott, The Druids(London, 1968). Others covering the sub-
ject broadly include 1. De Vries, Keltische Religion (Stuttgart, 1961); E. Thévenot,
Divinités et sanctuaires de la Gaule (Paris, 1968); P.-M. Duval, Les Dieux de la Gaule
(Paris, 1976): |.-L. Brunaux, The Celtic Gauls: Gods, Rites and Sanctuaries (English edn.,
London, 1988); Miranda Green, The Gods of the Celts (Gloucester, 1986); and Claude
Sterckx, Elements de cosmogonie celtique (Brussels, 1986). The significance of animals in
religion and in propitiatory burials is considered in Miranda Green, Animals in Celtic
Life and Myth (London, 1992); Patrice Méniel, Les Sacrifices d'animaux chez les Gaulois
(Paris, 1992), and Barry Cunliffe, ‘Pits, Preconceptions and Propitiation in the British
Tron Age’, Oxford Journal of Archaeolagy, 11 (1992), 69-83. On festivals and the measure-
ment of time, see Maire MacNeill, The Festival of Lughnasa (Oxford, 1962), and Garrett
Olmsted, The Gaulish Calendar (Bonn, 1992). A general overview of religious locations
is provided by Stuart Piggott, ‘Nemeton, temenos, bothros, Sanctuaries of the Ancient
Celts', Academia nazionale dei Lincei, 375 (1978}, 37-54. The most informative publica-
tions of the temple sites excavated in recent years, are: J.-L. Brunaux eral, Gournay I. Les
fouilles sur le sanctuaire et loppidum (1975-1984) (Amiens, 1985) and J.-L. Brunaux and
A. Rapin, Gournay II. Boucliers et lances: Dépdts et trophées (Paris, 1988); Ann
Woodward and Peter Leach, The Uley Shrines: Excavation of a Ritual Complex on West
Hill, Uley, Gloucestershire: 1977-9 (London, 1993); and W. F. Grimes and J. Close-
Brooks, “The Excavation of Caesar’s Camp, Heathrow, Harmondsworth, Middlesex,
1944', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society. 59 (1993), 303-60. A classic example of a rit-
wal deposit of weapons in a bog is Llyn Cerrig Bach: Cyril Fox, A Find of the Early Iron
Age from Liyn Cerrig Bach, Anglesey (Cardiff, 1946). For a recent study of a bog burial, see
1. M, Stead et al., Lindow Man: The Body in the Bog (London, 1986).

Chapter 1. The Developed Celtic World
An introduction to the complex interactions between the Roman world and the Celtic
north is provided in Barry Cunliffe, Greeks, Romans and Barbarians: Spheres of

282


===== PAGE 316 (index-319_1.jpg) =====
FURTHER READING

Interaction (London, 1988). The importance of wine in the developing trading systems
is considered in detail in Andre Tchernia, Le Vin de I'l1alic romaine (Rome, 1986), and
Fanette Laubenheimer, Le Temps des amphores en Gaule (Paris, 1990). The background
to the early romanization of southern Gaul is given in Charles Ebel, Transalpine Gaul:
The Emergence of a Roman Province (Leiden, 1976). The social changes in Gaulish soci-

cty at this time are examined by Daphne Nash in “Territory and State Formation in
Central Gaul', D. Greene, C. Haselgrove, and M. Spriggs (eds.), Social Organization and
Settlement (Oxford, 1978), 455-75. The complex history of relations between Rome and

the kingdom of Noricum are described by Géza Alfoldy in Noricum (London, 1974). The
archacology and protohistory of the Dacians is much less accessible, but brief treat-

ments exist in E, Condurachi, Romania (London, 1967), and D. Berciu, Daco-Romania
(Geneva, 1978). A more detailed study of social interactions is to be found in 1. Glodariu,
Dacian Trade with the Hellenistic and Roman World (Oxford, 1976). For a very broad

overview of the protohistory of east Europe, see M. Shchukin, Rome and the Barbarians
in Central and Eastern Europe (Oxford, 1989). The study of oppida has inspired a con-

siderable literature, A readable, simplified account is provided by F. Audouze and O,

Buchsenschutz, Towns, Villages and Countryside of Celtic Europe, from the beginnings of
the 2nd millennium to the end of the 1st century nc (English edn., London, 1991). Other
useful detailed studies include J. Collis, Oppida: Earliest Towns North of the Alps
(Sheffield, 1984); O. H. Frey, Die Bedeutung der Gallia Cisalpina fir die Entstehung der
Oppida-Kultur. Studien zu Siedlungsfragen der Laténezeit (Marburg, 1984); O. Buchsen-

schutz, Structures d'habitats et fortifications de Age du fer en France septentrionale
(Paris, 1984); and various specialist papers in Barry Cunliffe and R. T. Rowley (eds.),
Oppida: The Beginnings of Urbanization in Barbarian Europe (Oxford, 1976). The most
extensive excavation of an appidumt is that of Manching in southern Germany, pub-

lished in a highly detailed multi-volume monograph series of which the first sets the
scene: W. Krimer and F. Schubert, Die Ausgrabungen in Manching 1955-1961. Einfiik-
rung und Fundstellen-iibersicht, Die Ausgrabungen in Manching 1 (Wiesbaden, 1970).

There has been much theorizing about the origins and meaning of oppida. One of the
more thoughtful of the recent considerations is Greg Woolf's paper ‘Rethinking the
Oppida’, Oxford Journal of Archaeology, 12 (1993), 223-4.

Chapter 12. The Celts in Retreat

Anumber of excellent background histories exist dealing with the carly stages of Roman
contact and conquest. For Iberia: L. A. Curchin, Roman Spain: Conquest and Assimi-
lation (London, 1991); 8. ]. Keay, Roman Spain (London, 1988); and . Alarcio, Portugal
Romano (Lisbon, 1974). For Gaul: I. F. Drinkwater, Roman Gaul (Beckenham, 1983); A.
King, Roman Gaul and Germany (London, 1990); A. L. F. Rivet, Gallia Narbonensis
(London, 1988); and E. M. Wightman, Gallica Belgica (London, 1985). Caesar’s con-
quest of Gaul is dealt with in fine critical detail by C. Goudineau in César et la Gaule
(Paris, 1990). For Britain: 8. S. Frere, Britanmia: A History of Roman Britain (3rd edn.,
London, 1987): and M. Millett, The Romanization of Britain (Cambridge, 1990). For the
Rhine-Danube area: C. M. Wells, The German Policy of Augustus (Oxford, 1972); G.
Alfoldy, Noricum (London, 1974 ); and A. Mécsy, Pannonia and Upper Moesia (London,
1974). Together these easily accessible sources provide a full background to the main
events using both historical and archacological sources. Fach provides bibliographies
introducing the huge specialist literature.

2483


===== PAGE 317 (index-320_1.jpg) =====
FURTHER READING

Chapter13. Celtic Survival

The best introduction to the survival of Celtic peoples and institutions is Nora
Chadwick, The Celts (Harmondsworth, 1971), Myles Dillon and Nora Chadwick, The
Celtic Realms (London, 1967), and Alwyn and Birey Rees, Celtic Heritage: Ancient
Traditions in Ireland and Wales (London, 1961). For the most part these works deal with
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland. For Brittany the most accessible sources are Nora
Chadwick, Early Brittany (Cardiff, 1969); L. Fleuriot, Les Origines de la Bretagne (Paris,
1982); and A, Chédeville and H. Guillotel, La Bretagne des saints et des rois V=X siécles
{Rennes, 1984). A taste of the quality of the surviving literary tradition is given by K, H,
Jackson in A Celtic Miscellany (rev. edn., Harmondsworth, 1971).

284


===== PAGE 318 (index-322_1.jpg) =====
Table |

The history of the Celts

and related events

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLES

600 BC

500 8C

300 BC

200 BC

100 8C

AD 100

286

600
€560

€535
€530-520

525

44

415413

B3y

323

Wq-2q

28-202
206

149-146

@
102

0

Mediterranean
Foundation of Massalia
Foundation of Alalia on

Corsica

Battle of Alalia
Foundation of Spina and
Adria

Etruscans at war with Cumae 508

Etruscans beaten at Cumae
Athenian expedition against
Syracuse

conquers from
‘Thrace to India
Death of Alexander

First Punic War

Second Punic War
The capture of Cidiz by the
Romans

Third Punic War

Romans found the Provincia
Defeat of Teutones at Aix-
en-Provence

Defeat of Cimbri at Vercelli

400
o
3906
34

295
285-282

3

2
222

w7
91

Ttaly

End of Etruscan domination
of Rome

Celts invade Po Valley
Celts at Clusium
Battle of Allia: Celts take Rome

Rome signs peace treaty with
Senones

Celts defeated at Sentium
Roman victory over
Senones

Roman scttlement in
territory of Senones
Celtic force routed at
Telamon

Rome campaigns against Boil
Rome attacks Insubres

Cenomani sue for peace
Rome defeats Boii


===== PAGE 319 (index-323_1.jpg) =====
ng-ny

Balkans and Greece

Celts raid llyria

Celtic mercenarics in Greece

Celts meet Alexander at the
Danube

Death of Alexander

Celts invade Thrace: defeated
at Mt Haemus

Celts sack Delphi

Celts migrate to Asia Minor

Celts at Gallipoli

End of Celtic kingdom of
Tylis

Scordisci defeat C. Cato

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLES

Asia Minor and the East

Celtic embassy visits
Alexander at Babylon

Celts arrive in Asia Minor
Victory of Antioch 1 over
Galatae

Celts in army of Prolemy I in

278
75

74

c.250-240  Celts raid Aegean coastal
towns of Asia Minor
233-212 Warbetween Autalus 1and
Galatae
Celts in service of Attalus [
Celts in battle of Raphia
Celts at battle of Magnesia
Romans beat Galatians at

Olympus
Galatian attacks on
Pergamene territory

8
0y
190
189

167

2

n3-101

106
Mithridates IV slaughters
Galatian leaders 5851

4“4
7

5
13-9

AD 20
4

Western and Central Europe

Romans annex Gallia Narbonensis
Domitius Ahenobarbus routs
and Arverni
Migration of Cimbri and Teutones
Revolt of Volcae and Tectosages.
Romans annex Tolosa (Toulouse)
Caesar campaigns in Gaul, Britain,
and Germany
Julius Cacsar and Burebista
assassinated
Octavian becomes emperor
Tiberius and Drusus in eastern Alps
Tiberius in southern Pannonia.
Hllyricum becomes a province
Victory monument at La Turbie
Revolt of Florus and Sacrovir
Claudius invades Britain
Rebellion of Boudica
Battle of Mons Graupius

287


===== PAGE 320 (index-324_1.jpg) =====
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLES

Table2  Principal classical sources writing about the Celts

late 6th century e Hecatacus Quoted by Avienus and Strabo
sth century nc Herodotus Hist. 233
429-347 ™ Plato Laws1,637d-¢
84102 Aristotle Politics 26.6
€.405-330 B Ephorus Quoted in Strabo, Geog. 4.4.6
4th century sc Prolemy 1 Quoted in Strabo, Geog. 7.3.8
378308 B Theopompus Quoted in Athenaeus, Deiprosophistie 10.443b-¢
276 =196 B Eratosthenes Quoted by Strabo
3rd century nc Phylarchus Quoted in Athenacus, Deipnosophistae 4.105d-f
€204-122 8 Polybius Hist. 214-33
135,50 B Poseidonius Quoted by Athenaeus, Strabo and Diodorus Siculus
10643 Cicero De Divinatione 1.41.90
10044 BC Julius Caesar De Bello Gallico, passim, but especially 6.11-20
WIOtE €60-30 I Diodorus Siculus. Quoting Poseidonius, Hist. §.22-32
€64 C=AD 21 Strabo Probably Iarpdyqnoxmg Poscidonius, Geog, 4,113 4.4.1-6,7.
49 BC=AD 17 Livy
WIOLE AD 3750 Pomponius Mcla
AD 3965 Lucan
AD 2379 Pliny Nat. hist, 16.24: 241034 29.52: 30,13
CAD §5-120 Taciws Agricola, passim
Hist. 3.45:5.54
Annals12.40:14.30; 32, 35
late 2nd century At Pausanius Periegesis
A 1552304+ Dio Cassius Hist. 62
3rd century A Arrianus Flavinus Anabasis of Alexander 1.4.6-5.2
3rd century A Athenacus Quoting Poscidonius, Deiprosophistae 4.36-40: 6.49
CAD 330-195 Ammianus Marcellinus Hist15.9.4and 8

Tabley A concordance of frequently used archaeological terminology in western and central Europe, 1300 5c to the

Roman era

< Central. Swi North France Britain Roman Art Styles
5 3 Congquest

Late :

100 A Latestrctstyle
il B Middle Tron Age ""“x""

£ sword
%0 3
400
5008 -5

P4
600 =
700 g

Carps Tongue __

o Ewart Park/
o & - Blackmore

2 Wilbuston
woo =

2 Penard 11

F Penard |
1200

B el 0000000 RN

S5
1300


===== PAGE 321 (index-327_1.jpg) =====
2. Nurope, 1300700 b
The penod thae Sotloweed che
breakidawn of he Myceasean-
Massoun culterr of the Acgris was
a tome of massive sexcial wnd
eceonmic refarmatone n | arope
I the Medtesranean. Greek and

040 Asia Mince 10 be sned 23 mier-
ceraries m conflis between the
Assyrians wed the kieysboes of

emerged:
Urniiekd. Copper and ti were
extensively mused to make beunze
which wa traded over kg div-



===== PAGE 322 (index-328_1.jpg) =====
2 The spread of iros
The extraction of ron began in

Asia Masoe aevusd the mide of
the second mallernmium v aod
was. for 2 ong whie. a chosely
puanded secret. A few fmished

40wt of the ves of g

- S f oo ety 13800 2|
5 Rt of o o 6.4 ot 4

o b 1)
138 o

| v sy o i s



===== PAGE 323 (index-329_1.jpg) =====
s W
¢ \Yn@; vasﬁ‘,m
MO 1,;'%5‘ |
Wt o ey
23
- %ﬁgﬁ
;.: " ;=~


===== PAGE 324 (index-330_1.jpg) =====
~ £ ‘»’f‘ﬂl
omm— P4 e BN ]
e, 2% \\?{\T/ i Gl f‘*‘%‘('t—
) A3 (e IR
S O . e
RO, o (Ol K SUELT S
S IR [ Al S s
SR L “"’i\ . o J @\-\
[ (‘i% b (4 &
@ S
i it =


===== PAGE 325 (index-331_1.jpg) =====
o Loxd BN
ey 3 S
4 /
f;'-:’-':;: 2 S|
" e = N & WA


===== PAGE 326 (index-332_1.jpg) =====
o Gadie (Cadie) by 1320 we bt
there i S archarchigacal
cvbdencr of his 1 was in the bie
ointh ansd cary eighth cenmures

e s which frally erugeed
it the P Ponke War (6e- 2410



===== PAGE 327 (index-333_1.jpg) =====
. Exruscans in the
Mediterrancin

“The Etruscan coustal Gties were
beavily Emolved @ trade in the
north western Medserrancan, s
the duszriburion of the charactes
tic Back Buxcbery presery ind.
cates. The develepment of Greek
mtesests around the shaees of
southern France Began 10 confict
with the tradtonal Etrucan
nome particularly afer 349 1
Etruscan attemges 10 develop 4
spbere of mterest in southern
saly were rapadly halted by the
Rrorwng power of the cites of
Magia Geecla. Pardly as a result
ok these comntrainis the Liruncarn
began 10 estend shrough the
Apetines e the Po valley.



===== PAGE 328 (index-334_1.jpg) =====
9. Rhodian flagons

Rhodian flagons, which were probably made in Greek workshops in southern Italy, were used for pouring wine, In
the first half of the sixth century s a number of them were used. possibly as gifts, in the trading relationships that

were beginning to develop between the western Greek colonies and native communities in southern Spain and west-
«ern central Europe.

‘Wine manufactured in the Greek coastal zone of southern France was transported in distinctive amphorae. The
distribution of sherds of sixth century sc amphorae in western central Europe indicates the zone receiving wine as a
luxury product.



===== PAGE 329 (index-335_1.jpg) =====
s Kﬁ}%\\ S s o
- BN e
o = LS g Ut
Ay il § B


===== PAGE 330 (index-336_1.jpg) =====
=t It L 4
bl =

PR / i)’ﬁ > %
WL-. (et .
N é’!’ W A {

e DY X
Sl Wy

3 o
o T o e e
T ey B e B oS e o B of B .


===== PAGE 331 (index-337_1.jpg) =====
ly found in the élite burials of western central Europe in the Hallstatt period. The distribution of
ol provides an inddication of the extent of the élite zone.

—
ry

It is possible 1o recognize mnmofpwtrhmmoemrdﬁumpﬂhluﬂcddummﬂﬂnﬂmm

(¢.600-480 Be). These were invariably focused on strongly fortified hﬂ'hwlnthevkﬁdlyofwhkhlichbumhunnﬂy

duncmd During this period there was some fluctuation in the power of these “seats of nobiliry” suggesting active.,
competition, lnxluemcmMplmwgkmwMeMﬂﬁnumbulkmdmade\«rnm

w
mdmn-anuymhmuﬁampduﬁlmmpo&wdgﬂdwhhmﬂmm



===== PAGE 332 (index-338_1.jpg) =====
L P e ) s |
i || )3 W\ A LSS
Pl i | N R U {0 T A S
- 7= (R o BT

e Ry o o bay
s - i


===== PAGE 333 (index-339_1.jpg) =====
7 P | e |
g PN o
l.’rwi_f‘;% { p& ‘/‘,_;g,.,_.\ b
T T
By /= i
. ) o e
=z
Y
R L T
e


===== PAGE 334 (index-340_1.jpg) =====
19. Europe in the fifth century ne

In the late Hallstart period a zone of chiefdoms existed stretching across the north-
e Alpine zone from Burgundy to southern Germany. This zone was in contact
with the Mediterranean principally along the Rhone route and through the Alpine

e fringes of the old Hallstart zone had begun to develop rich innovating chief-
doms. Here, particularly in the Mame and Mosclle regions, a new art style, charac:
terizing the carly La Téne culture, began to emenge.



===== PAGE 335 (index-341_1.jpg) =====
pomene IR ¥ S e
S W Ry Vi
I > 2l A L K gk
3 S e "0
Toloy w_‘,. } " i

S T =l W
£ 0ot NS «’\i;'\‘f\‘

b (T ) 5 3 4

% N \, 3


===== PAGE 336 (index-342_1.jpg) =====
:
m
!
E
F

3
i
3
g
£
3
£
F
&
;
£
£
W
£
&

particular concentration in the middle

Delphi was launched. In spite of the size of the raiding force and the disruption
which it caused to the Greek states, it is unrecognizable in the archacological evi-
dence. The map, showing finds of La Téne material, vividly makes the point that

Danube and Sava region, It was probably from here that, in 270, the attack on
major histoncal events need leave no archacological trace.

‘middlc and lower Danube valley, with a



===== PAGE 337 (index-343_1.jpg) =====
* Semements. & Buan © La Torw sray finds.
® Earitwonks and lets wit Colsc fnds  © Prosumed Cotc tunials & Celtc couns, and isclaled feds wnd hoards.

.
FOREST ZONE
J .

22. Celtic finds in the northern Pontic Steppe

In the latter part of the first millennium ne the Pontic Steppe was an area with a complex mix of populations
among whom there was much mobility. The quantity of La Téne material found, particularly in the west of this
region, suggests that some Celtic groups may have moved to settle in Moldova and to raid and serve as mercenaries

The production of iron intensified during the second and first centuries ne. Iron was made into ingots of various
kinds (of which the double pyramidal form is one) for trade and exchange. By drawing out the ends of the bar into
thin rods the smith was physically demonstrating the quality of the iron since impurities would cause visible cracking.

307


===== PAGE 338 (index-344_1.jpg) =====
i -
[ ¢ /
e (S 5 V4
st ST e S S
i gD ol ibadn N L] N
| TN e P Prse
i AN 2 Caieg RO
e A TR U
e [ 5 o LS T
%V?}f = AP S
i 5 —=—


===== PAGE 339 (index-345_1.jpg) =====
sz | R —
i g‘l'—‘;;"-m?‘j‘{f{&i A

RN . e GARE

SN (R Tl N

= L g


===== PAGE 340 (index-346_1.jpg) =====
e R =
S i P e
Etea e 2 AT K L[5
aEmen EE e T N IO D
S [MERR  T el
I i O NP A N IR

BB DR NS
>/ L;(_v‘—,"{i\’i’-\-" et P
T i - 7% LR


===== PAGE 341 (index-347_1.jpg) =====
ppne e = |

e e [

o - “’:,i{i' ' \\*T B i 3
. e S = AN


===== PAGE 342 (index-348_1.jpg) =====
n2

28. Dressel 1 amphorae

Amphorae were commonly used to transport wine. After the middle of the second
century nc there developed an extensive trade in wine between the producers of
northern Italy and the distributors along the southern coast of France who dealt
with the Gauls further inland. Two characteristic types of amphorae mapped here,
Dressel types 1A and 1B, emphasize the major trade routes in operation

c.150 e and AD 10, The importance of rivers and the Atlantic are clearly apparent.



===== PAGE 343 (index-349_1.jpg) =====
R rr i) A Y =
== E f ™ & )
Z /,/// 7 o\
e 2 .


===== PAGE 344 (index-350_1.jpg) =====
#rl

0. Eueope in the middle of the
fst century 3t
The Celtic sribes of Europe weee
speeeand berween theve forces:
the Dactans in the cast. the
Germum in the north, and the
Ramamm in the wiseh, I the brief
persad from ¢ 2 3¢ 1 10 8¢ the
Celte commumstics of
Continental Durope were langely
overrun by the Romuans, lesvisg.
oy Beitain sed Hredaed el frve

| B8 o et
| 77 o anpman s hrwonte.

It e e
’ e



===== PAGE 345 (index-351_1.jpg) =====
[ustration Sources

The editor and publishers wish to thank the following who have kindly given permission to repro-
duce the illustrations on the following pages:

2

ERTE N

w

e

35
¥
2

29
»n

% %5

Museo Nazionale, Rome/Alinari
Staatliche Museen Antikensammiung
Prewssischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin

fohn Speed, Historie (1611)

Raphacl Holinshed, Chronicles (1578)
William Stukeley, Stomnehenge (1740)
Musée d'Alesia, Société des Sciences
Historiques et Naturelles de Sémur-en-
Auxois/E. Rabeisen

Mansell Collection

Agence Roger-Viollet

Napoleon 111 Historie de Jules César
11865)

Napoleon 111, Historie de fules César
(1865)

Musée des Antiquités Nationales, Saint-
Germain-en-Laye/Lauros-Giraudon
A Forestier, The Glastonbury Lake
Village (1911)/Somerset Local History
Library, Taunton Castle Museum
Musée Calvet, Avignon

Museo Gregoriano Vaticano, Rome
Museo Civico Arqueologico Giovio,
ComofSoprintendenza Archeologica di
Milano

Prahistorische Abteilung der
Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien
Society of Antiquaries, London
Prahistorische Abteilung der
Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien
Paul Vouga, La Tene (1923)

Paul Vouga, La Tine (1923)

Paul Vouga, La Tene (1923)

1. Filip, Keltove ve stéedni Enropé (1956)
Léon Morel, Albwm de la Campagne
Souterraine . ., dans la Marne (1898)/
Biblioteque d"Art et d'Archéologic,
Fondation Jaques Doucet, Paris
Peabody Muscum, Harvard University
Everhard-Karls-Universar, Tobingen;
Institut fur Ur- und Frithgeschichte
Everhard-Karls- Universat, Tobingers:
Institut fur Ur- und
Frahgeschichte/Fischer

Historisches Museum, Berne/S.
Rebsamen

Landesdenkmalampt Badem-
Wurttemberg, Stuttgart
Everhard-Karks- Universat, Tubingen;

a©

+

&

4

46

%

49

0

s:

-

59
b0

6
6
65

Institut fur Ur- und Frithgeschichte
Everhard-Karls-Universis, Tobingen:
Institut fir Ur- und Frithgeschichte
Everhard-Karls. Universat, Tobingen:
Institut fur Ur- und Frahgeschichte

3 Luftbildarchiv A. Brugger/Schnep,

Stuttgart

Stuart Piggots, Ancient Europe (1984 );
courtesy of Edinburgh University Press
1. Biel, Der Keltenfiirst von Hochdorf
(Stuttgart)

1. Biel, Der Kelrenfiirst von Hochdorf
(Stuttgart)

Wiirttembergisches Landesmuseum,
Stuttgart/ Landesdenkmalampt Baden-
Warttemberg; Archacologisches
Denkmalpflege, Stuttgart
Wikrttembergisches Landesmuseum,
Suttgart

Wirttembergisches Landesmuseum,
Stuttgart

Warttembergisches Landesmuseum,
Switgart/Landesdenkmalampt Baden-
Wisrttemberg; Archaeologisches
Denkmalpflege, Stutgart
Warttembergisches Landesmuseum,
Stuttgart/Landesdenkmalampt Baden-
Warttemberg; Archacologisches
Denkmalpflege, Stuttgart

Museo Civico Argueologico, Bologna
Magyar Nemzeti Muzeum, Budapest
Musée de Saint-Raymond, Toulouse/J.,

Rouge

Magyar Nemzeti Muzeum, Budapest
British Museum

Mortimer Wheelee, Muiden Castle
(1943), PLCIV A/Society of Antiquaries/
RCHM/National Monuments Record,
Crown®

RCHM/National Monuments Record
Air Photographs, Crown®©

Mortimer Wheeler. Maiden Castle (1943)
Giraudon

ionalmuseet, Copenhagen

National Muscum of Ircland, Dublin
British Muscum

(above) Museul National de Istorie a
Rominiei, Bucharest

(below) British Museum/Werner

s


===== PAGE 346 (index-352_1.jpg) =====
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OF PICTURE SOURCES

Forman Archive

Nationalmusect, Copenhagen
Biblioteque Nationale, Paris

Ashmolean Museum, Oxford
Nationalmusect Copenhagen

Musée Cantonal d'Archéologie,
Neuchatel, Switzerkand

British Museum

British Museum/Wemner Forman
Archive

Musée des Jacobins, Morlaix

Musée des Antiquités Nationales, Saint-
Germain-en-Laye/RMN Paris

National Museum of Ireland,
Dublin/Wener Forman Archive
Museum Carolino Augusteum, Salzburg
Bernisches Historisches Museum, Berne
British Museum

The Ganls: Celtic Antiquities from Framce
(British Muscum Pubs. ), fig. 4

90 Historisches Museum der Plalz, Speyer

v

100

103

104
105,
109

"o
n

"
ns
ne
ny
"
120
m
29

Schweizerisches Landesmuseum, Zurich
Bibliotéque Nationale, Paris
Waorttembergisches Landesmuseum,
Stuttgart/Landesdenkmalampt Baden-
Wirttemberg, Archaeologisches
Denkmalpflege, Stuttgart

Rheinisches Landesmuscum, Bonn
Landesbildstelle Wirttemberg, Stutigart
Wirttembergisches Landesmuseum,
Stuttgart/Landesdenkmalamypt Baden-
Wirttemberg, Archaeologisches
Denkmialpflege, Stutigart

Musée des Antiquités Nationales, Saint-
Germain-en-Laye/RMN Paris

Musée des Antiquités Nationales, Saint-
Germain-en-Laye/RMN Paris
Institute of Archacology, Oxford
Institute of Archacology, Oxford
Museu Nacional de Arqueologia ¢
Etnologia, Lisbon/Arquive Nacional de
Fotografia

Dr G. R. Zapatero

Musen Nacional de Arqueotogia ¢
Etnologia, Lisbon/Arquive Nacional de
Fotografia

Museo Arqueologico Nacional, Madrid
Museo de Prehistorico de Valencia
Musco Municipal de Cordoba

Museo Ary ico Nacional, Madrid
Museo Municipal de Cordoba

National Museum of reland, Dublin
British Muscum

Musée Nationale d"Archéologie. Saint-
Germain-en-Laye/Werner Forman
Archive
University of Cambridge Collection of
Air Photographs

Werner Forman Archive

Wisbech & Fenland Museum,
Cambridgeshire

35
136
137

153

162

163

165

i
2zl
79
"

185
190
193
194
a0
202

Ashmalean Museum, Oxford

British Museum

National Muscum of Scotland,
Edinburgh

University of Cambridge Collection of
Air Photographs

Prof. Dr Armando Coelho Ferreira da
Silva, University of Porto, Portugal
Viadimir Vitanov Agency USA
Narodnija Archeologiceski Museg, Sofia
Ashmolean Museum, Oxford

Dr Stephen Mitchell, University of
Swansea, Wales

Service des Antiquités, Cairo: courtesy of
Prof. Stuan Piggott/Edinburgh
University Press.

British Museum

Roman Baths Museum, Bath

Musée de la Civilisation Gallo-Romaine,
Lyon/Christian Thoc

Musée de la Civilisation Gallo-Romaine,
Lyons/Christian Thox

British Muscum

Prof. Barry Cunliffe

Rheinisches Landesmuseum, Bonn
Prof. Barry Cunliffe

Musée Archéologique de Dijon/Erch
Lessing

Musée &' Archéologie et d'Histoire,
Geneva

Bayerisches Landesamt fur
Denkmalpflege, Munich/Otto Braasch,
archiv no: 8134/006, 23 Dec 1984
Landesdenkmalampt Baden-
Wiirttemberg, Archacologisches
Denkmalpflege, Stuttgart

Musée d"Archéologie Mediterranéenne,
Marscilles/Piero Baguzzi

Musée d"Archéologie Mediterranéenne,
Marseilles.

Musée des Antiquités Nationales, Saint-
g i ye/RMN

Cambridge University Collection of Air
Photographs

Cambridge University Collection of Air
Photographs

Prof. Barry Cunliffe

Musée de Saint- Raymond, Toulouse
Dr René Goguey, Talant
Romisch-Germanische Kommission;
courtesy: Prihistorische Staatssamm-
Tung, Munich/Franz Schubert

Society of Antiquaries, London

Museo Fatnese, Rome/Alinari

Agence Roger Viollet

Dr René Goguey, Talant

English Heritage/Skyscan

National Museum of Ircland, Dublin

Picture research by Sara Waterson


===== PAGE 347 (index-353_1.jpg) =====
The page numbers of black and whits

oppasite in iralic, followed by (P1).

Académie Celtique 13
Achichorius 81-2

Adriatic region 51, 66,72, 220
Aduatuci 239

Acdui 108, 223, 231, 238, 243, 245-6,

251-2

sec also Bibracte
ACgean region 39-41. 42, 50,171
see also Asia Minor: Greece
Acolis 41,84
Agricola, Julius 93, 251, 255, 256
Ahenobarbus, Domitius 236
Aigosages 84

‘Albion’ 3,146

Alesia 13, 13, 15,18, 245, 246

Alet 259, 201
Alexander the Great 80, 131,173,172
Alexandrian school ¢
Allobroges 236

Alps 51,62, 70, 21213, 218, 250
castern 36, 65-6

and migrations 78

and Urnfield culture 43-4
amber 65, 66, 220, 228

Ambiorix 13, 236, 244, 2456
Ammianus Marcellinus 109
amphorac 21819, 219, 220, 248
Ancona 76

Ancyra 84,85, 577,179
Andalucia 46, 145 149

Andrasta 255

Anglesey:

Liyn Cerrig Bach 194,199
Roman attack on sanctuary 101,191,

192, 198, 255

Antigonus Gonatus 82
Antiochus | 83

Aquileia 220,221

Aquitani 150, 165, 241, 246, 24849
Archaeologia Britwrnicr 23
archacology:

carly 16-18, 20, 27-36
limitations 1=

maodern 3%

Ariovistus 110, 223, 238, 239
Aristotle 4

Index

Armorica 150, 152-3, 136-8, 160
BOO-200 W 152,153-3, 153,154
Camp d’Artus 229, 259
language 22,146, 264-5, 265, 266
and Rome 245, 243, 259, 261

see also Atlantic fringe; Brittany
Arrian 80
an 17-18, 36-8, 11-32

carly aristocratic 115-19, 120

4thcentury ne 19-21

srd-and century m 12143

British 161, 162

Free Graphic Style 122

Free Plastic Style 12243

Gracco-Etruscan influence 73, n6, 117,
148, 11819, 126, 128

Hallstatt influence 16

head motifs 13, 15 16,126-7,129,
143,200, 203

LaTene 86

Iyre motifs and S scrolls 122,123,126,

129

Scythian and Thracian influence
1235

symbolic nature 123

triskele monif 187

Vegetalstyle 19, 120,320,121, 221,161,
162

see also coins; metalwork: pottery:
sculpture

Asia Minor 39, 41, 42, 80,1712

migrations to and settlement of 82,
B35, 113

see also Galatians; Pergamum

Athenacus 8,92, 108

Atlantic fringe 42, 46,135, 14567, 2734

$00-200 8 149-54

archacology 154-5

Bronze Age 147-9

cultural zones 145, 147

language 145-7.155-6

seealso individual regions

Attalid kings 7.84,91,177. 235

Atrebates 253,254, 259

Attic ware 57,64, 65,66,71, 116

Attocotti 263-3

Hlustrations are given in italic; colour plates are indicated by the numbser of the page

Augustodunum 251, 252, 268
Augustus 249, 250, 253

Aulnat 228

Ausonius 10, 261
Austria, se¢ Noreia; Noricum: Vienna
Autun, see Augustodunum
Avaricum 245

Avienus, Rufus Festus 2-3,149-50

Babylonians 41,50

Balkans migrations 80-2

Barbarian Conspiracy 263

bards 14,106

Bade 226,228

Basque language 24

Basse-Yutz flagons 116 (PL). 16

Bastarnac 175, 221, 222

Bath springs 198,199, 259, 261

Bathanatos 86

Battersca shicld 68 (PL), 98,106, 13,
194

battles:

Aix-en-Provence 222

“Flephant’ 83

Mons Graupius 255

Salamis o

the Sambre 103

the Sardinian Sea s0

Telamon 4-5, 778, 99, 102, 103, 104

Vercellae 222

seealo warfare

Belgica 237, 230-41, 245, 252

Bellovaci 239, 246

Beltane 189,190

Berne 228-9

Berru helmet 17, 149 (PL)

Bertrand, M. 6

Bibracte 219, 224-5, 225, 246

exXCavations 13,19, 3§-6

Romanization and replacement by
Autun 247, 251, 268

Bituriges 245, 246

boarsymbolism 85 (PL), 98, 12, na-13,
15,128

body painting 107, 15,123

“bog butter’ 197

N7


===== PAGE 348 (index-354_1.jpg) =====
INDEX

bogs 197,199

burials 192, 193
Bohemia 35, 48, 66

ant §s(PL), 17, 128, 200
migrations 74,75, 79

sanctuary 204

Trisov 228

see also Ducheov; Zavist

Boii 72.73.86

art g

and power of the head 210

and Rome 77,78, 89, 90, 212, 250
and tribal conflicts 222,223,238
Bolgius 8o0-1

Bologna 51, 70,71, 78
Bosch-Gimpera, P, 16

Botorrita plaque 24,138, 138
Boudica 12,13, 13,99, 104, 110
revoltby 191,192, 23354, 255
Bourges 65152
Bragny-sur-Sabne 57-8, 62,70
Bratislava 228-9, 247

Brennus $1-2,104

Brigantes 254

Brigit 186,157, 189

Britain 3, 4,910, 92, 1456, 28§
BOO-200 B0 151,155,154

art 130,161

Bronze Age 147,148,149
burials 209, 232-3

classical writers on 14950
hill-forts 162-3, 164, 165
Ranguage 22,146,155, 156

links with Brittany 264-6
Middle Ages 266-7

pottery 129

Roman campaigns 241, 242-3, 2526
in Roman cra 25861, 2624
sacred sites 198,199, 204-5
settlements 158-9, 160-1, 162-4
trade with Rome 219-20

use of chariots 100

women in 109

see also Atlantic fringe; Dancbury;

Maiden Castle; Scotland; Wales

Brittany 12,16, 219

British settlers in 2646
Bronze Age 147

language 22,146, 264-5, 263, 266
pottery 112, 128-9

settlements 156-8, 229 (PL)
stelae 157-8, 158, 208

after Vikings 266

see also Armorica; Atlantic fringe
brochs 160, 161

bronze 42

Atlantic industry 114, 148

ns

beaked flagons 116 (PL), 16
dises 17121

trade 1489

working methods 1ny-14

see also metalwork
Bronze Age 42, 43 44. 46-7, 51, 269, 270
and Atlantic fringe 147-9

Iberian 134,135, 139

link with Hallstatt culture 33
Brutus, Decimus 166, 213
Brythonic, see P-Celtic
Bulgaria, sec Mezek tomb
Bulliot, | Gabriel 13,36

Burebista 222-3, 218, 247
burials 32,34-5, 42, 43, 44,151, 20810
barrows 52,53

bogand pit 192, 193

British 161, 2333

Bronze Age 147

changing patterns 74-5.79-80, 87-8
females 87, 117-18,233

Hallstate C 478, 48 52,52, 64
Hallstan Dr 52-3.64

Hallstate D2-3 53,57, 58, 58-64, 64
Iberian 140

LaTeéne 63-4.65-6, 235
inPoValley 73

in Roman era 232-3. 245 (PL), 248
Seythian 170

Thracian 169,173-5

see also excarnation: vehicle burials
Buxton springs 198,199

Clddiz 46,134,135, 147, 149, 213
Cacpio 87,194,236

Calgacus 93,103, 104, 2334, 25§
Callimachus 7
Cambrian Archacological Association

5

Cambry, Jacques 12

Camden, William 10

Ca'Morta burial 62,70
Campd'Artus 229,259
Camulodunum 232, 233, 254, 255
Canosa di Puglia 37(PL), 76,120,129
Cappadocia 85,180

Caratacus 254

Carnutes 190,191, 243, 244, 245, 246
carnyxes, seetrumpets
Carpentrasarch 229 (PL)
Carthage 46, 50-1,135,150, 213

see also Punic Wars

Cartimandua 101, 110, 254, 285, 259
Cassivellaunus 100, 243

Casticus 2y

Castro culture 165-6, 13
Catacomb culture 42

cattle 73
Cattle Raid of Cooley, see Titin BS
Cuailnge

Catuvellauni 252, 253, 254
cauldrons 105, 123

see also Gunderstrup Cauldron
Celtiberians, see Iberia
"Celticoess’, definitions of 268-9
Celtillus 231, 244
Celtomania 1-16.19

“The Celts, the Origins of Europe”

(exhibition) 18-19

cemeteries, see burials
Cenabum 230, 244, 245
Cenomani 72,73, 78212
Cernuunos 187

chain mail 7 69(Pl), 98
Champagne 16, 32, 34,75, 87, 128
chariots 27, 99101, 101, 104-5, 255
British 163-4

see also vehicle burials

chevaux de frise 159,166, 196 (PL)
Chlum burial 17
Christianity 10, 266
Chysauster 260 (PL), 262
Cicero 236,239
Cimbaules 80
Cimbri 142, 221, 222, 227,237, 238, 261
Cimmerians 42,46-7,370, 172
Citadiia de Sanfins 166
Ciumesti 95,98,112
classical writers, see Graeco-Roman his-
torians
Claudius I 255, 2534, 259
cheruchs 18
clientage 108
cliff-castles 157,158,159
Clovelly Dykes 159
Clovis 263
Clonoura shicld 97,98
Clusium 75-6
Cogidubnus 254, 259
coins 37 (PL), 100, 131, 175, 190, 245, 252
development of 130-1, 217, 218
from appida 237,238
Colchester, see Camulodunum
Coligny calendar 185, 188-9, 190
Commius 242
Como $y, 62,78, 212
COPPET 44,134,147, 149
see also metals
Corinth 45
Cornwall 15,158, 260, 260, 262
Corsica 45,50
Crassus, Publius 241


===== PAGE 349 (index-355_1.jpg) =====
Crete 39,40
Cumae 45,51
Cunobelin 253, 254
curses 261
Cyclops 4

Cyprus 40, 4%

Dacians 216, 221, 222-3, 238, 247,
249-50

Dagda 185-6, 1%9

Dancbury 96,163, 192, 195,196, 197, 205

Danicl, Samuel 10

Danube 3,42, 47

migrations along 78-80, 878

sev also Middie Danube Valley:
Transdanubia

death lore 20810

Déchelette, Jascph 32, 36

Detotarus 179-80, 180

Delphic

attackon 5,7, 81-2,87, 172

treasure 36,87, 194

Denmark, se Gunderstrup caubdron;

Hijortspring

Desor, Emile 32

Devon 158, 159, 260

Diodorus Siculus 8, 109, 118

on Celtiberians 136-7

on curation of heads 209

onwarfare 92,94, 96, 98, 100,

Dionysius of Syracuse 76

Dis Pater 187

Diviciacus 108, 191, 252

Donn 187

dress 107

inwarfare 77-8,99

drinking horns 116,124

Druids 107, 187, 190-1, 192, 208, 210, 244

inGalatia 178

historians’ perceptions of 4,8,9, 10,
2

Roman attack on Anglescy sanctuary
103,191,192, 198, 255

Drunemetom, 177,178

Duchcov 32, 33,79

Ducheov-Mansingen culture 79

Dumnorix 108, 110, 25

Dun Aengus 15960, 196 (PL)

Dun Ailinne 206, 207, 207, 256

duns, seebrochs

Durotriges 264

Darrnberg 81, 66, 116,117

“The Dying Gaul’ {sculpture) 6,7,13.84

Eburoncs 243, 244, 246
economics 18
secalsotrade

Egypt 4o, 49, 180-2

Eisteddfod 12

‘Elephant Battle” 8y

dlite systems. 155,160

dress 107

Hallstatt 47-8, 52-8, 57, 58-64

LaTene 63-4.65-6

warfiors 74

Emain Macha, see Navan Fort

Entremont;

sculptures 137, 200, 203

10WN 213, 204, 214

Ephorus 3

epic narrative 25-6,109, 357, 266

Epona 187

Eratosthenes 136

Enstfeld rings 1718, 119

Este culture $1

Esus 185,191

Etruria, soc Ftruscans

Etruscans 36-7, 456, 49, §2. 85

conflict with Celts 69, 70, 71, 756

influence on Celtic ant 73, 116, 117, 18,
18-19, 126

links with Carthage so-1

and Rome 75,77

trade 16, 45, 48, 61-3, 64-5. 66, 67

Euffigneix 12, 112, 128

Eumenes | 8¢

Eumenes1l 85

Europe:

modern perceptions of Celts 18-19

Europe, central:

migrations 78-80, §6-8

sec also Bohemia; Dacians

Danube; Germany; Hallstatt cultare:
Hungary: La Téne culture; Mosclie
Valley: Urnfield culture

Europe, castern:

Celtic setthement 17

definition 168

pre-Celtic 16871

relations with Rome 220-1, 250

see also Thracians; Transylvania

Evans, Arthur 3>

Evans, David Ellis 25

Evans, Evan 14

excarnation 157, 139, 209

fathi 190

feasts 1057
Fellbach-Schmiden 200, 201
Felsina, sce Bologna

ferrum Noricum 28

Filottrano torc 121

INDEX

fire-dogs 1, 11, 115
Flag Fen 194
Florus, Julius 104, 2412
folk tradition 12,14
Fonteius 236
Forestier, A. 1
forts:
stone 159-60
see also hill-forts
Fosse Way 254
fosterage 108-9
France 32,34
an 1201, 121,126-9
and Celtomania 1314, 18,19, 34
Hallstatt finds 57,61.150-3
and La Tene culture 646,878,153
from Middle Ages 266-7
western 164-5
sec also Alesia: Armorica: Bragny-sur-
Sadne; Champagne; Entremont;
Gaul; Marne Valley; Roquepertuse
sculptures; Somme-Bionnes Vix
burial
Franks, Augustus Woolaston 33, 16
Furtwangler, Adolf 37

Gadir, see Cadiz

Gaesatac 72.74,77.79

Gaius Marius 222

Galatians 5, 83,172, 176-80, 215, 235
defeatof 7,84-5,178-9, 215, 235
fighting practices 99,1789
language 21,146
massacre of the Tetrachs 107,178, 15

Garonne Valley 87, 87,58

Gaul 9,145,233, 249

and cavalry 105

and clientage 108

and Dacians 223

carly links with Rome 212, 213-14,
2819

and fosterage 109

Gallic Council 189, 245

and Germanic tribes 222

language 21, 21, 24-5, 146, 155, 156

and migrations 75, 87-8

oppida 224,228, 229-30

Roman conquest 96, 96, 216, 238-47

after Roman conquest 247-8, 250-2,
258, 259, 260-1, 262

sacred sites 199, 200, 202, 204

social organization 231-2

use of name 2

9


===== PAGE 350 (index-356_1.jpg) =====
INDEX

see also France
Geneva 199, 200, 236
Genthe, Hermann 36
Germanic tribes 221-3, 2578, 238, 242,
250, 261-2, 263
Germany:
and Hallstatt culture 52-64
and La Tene culture 63-5
Rhincland 75,79
sacred sites 200, 200
sculpture 126, 127
see also Kelheim; Manching:
Waldalgesheim
Glastonbury 17,130
goddesses 26,185-7,199, 255
triple 187, 187
gods 184-8
offerings to 155, 194-7
shape-shifting ny
Goidelic, see Q-Celtic
Golasecca culture 51, 62,65, 66, 702
gold 113,134, 135,149, 150, 165, 221
buffer-headed tores 121
coinage 130
as gauge of wealth 73
in Hallstar burdals 57
hoards 195-6, 196
Maoselleart uy
seealso Erstfeld rings: metalss
Snettisham gold
‘Golden Age’ 8
Gorsedd 12
Goulvars 156
Gournay-sur-Aronde 202, 204, 261
Grichwil 53,53
Graeco-Roman historians
68-9,91-3
on Iberia 136-7
see also individsal writers
Grafenbihl burial 63,64
graphite 228
Gireat Hungarian Plain 47, 48, 78-9, %0,
86,170, 260
Greece:

110, 20,

BOO-650 1. 44-6

Celtic invasion of 5,7, 81-2
and Celtic migrations 80-2
"Dark Ages' 40
and castern Europe 168,169,170, 17t
and Iberia 134,135
Persian Wars 50
and raids 88
secalso Aegean region
groves 197-8
Gunderstrup cauldron 98,99, 103,125

320

Hallstate:

excavations 28, 28, 29, 31, 32, 35. 36
(PL)

Hallstatt culture 37, 43, 45, 78,271, 271

nological divisions 3z, 33, 51-2

47-8, 64,1501

s

D' 523,64

D2-3" 53-64, 64, 65,66

decline 66-7

Hannibal 104, 212

Hawkes, Christopher 17

Hawkes, Jacquetta 19

Hayling Island 204, 205, 205, 259, 261

head, importance of 127-8, 209-10

see alsoart, head motifs

Heathrow ambulatory 205, 208

Hecataeus of Miletus 3

Heidelberg head 126, 127

Heidengraben 229

Helden disc 125

helmets 8¢(PL), 98, 98, 112, 17, 149
(PL)

Jockey-cap 119-21

Helvetii 89-90, 233, 224, 228, 231

Hengistbury Head 219-20, 239

Heracles 4

Herodotus 3, 42,49, 91,155

on Iberia 136

on Scythians 170

Heuncburg 53, 54, 55,57, 61,63

Hieronymus of Cardia 81,91

Hildebrant, Hans 32

hill-forts 44,164

British 162-3, 164, 165

Hallstatr 56, 57, 63, 634

Iberian 165-6

see also Dancbury; Heuncburg:
Maiden Castle

Himiko 150

Hirschlanden 63, 63126

Histoire de Jules César 13, 14, 15

Hittites 40

Hjortspring 96, 97,195,199

Hochdorf s7, 59, 60-1, 62,63

Hohenasperg 634

Hohmichele burial 52, 53

Holinshed, Raphacl 1

Holzgerlingen statue 126, 127

Holzhausen 200

Homer 40, 41,169

horse cultures 412, 44, 45, 478, 78-9,
123,170,250

see also Hallstatt culture

haspitality 73,107,137

hostages 108

Hounslow helmets 85(P1.)

Hubert, Henn 36

Hungary 43.47

art 19,1212, 123, 123,129
seealso Great Hungarian Plain
Hyperboreans 184

lapodes 221,237, 249

Theria 3. 4,9, 16, 46,3344

archacology 140-2

background 133-6

Bronze Age 149, 150

CONEMPOrary sources 136-7

carly Celts 139-40

expansion of culture 1423

Irish settlersin 266

language/place-names 16, 21, 24,134,
1371578, 139, 141, 142,155

north-west 1657

and Rome 107, 143~4, 1667, 212, 213,
235,249

andtrade 42,134

seetlso Numantia

feeni 264,255, 248

“lerne’ 3,146

Hlyria 8o

Hliyricum 247,250

imbolc 189

Indre, see Levroux

Indutiomarus 108

Insubres 71,72,77.78, 212

Interceltic Congresses 16

International Congress of Prehistoric
Anthropology and Archacology
(1871) 32

invasionist theories 16-17

lonians 41,45

Ipf 56

Treland 15,20, 104, 105,109, 1456

$00-200 1 150,151

AD 100-500, 3567, 260

bronze work 114, 114

Clonoura shield 97, 98

CPIC narratives 257, 109, 257, 266

language 22, 25,146,155-6

law texts 27,109, 266

migrants in Iberia 266

post-6th century isolation 154,155-6

raids on Britain 262, 263

religion 185-7,189, 192, 199

sacred sites 208, 204-8, 246

settlements 159-60

Vikings and Normans in 266

iron:

Ar 1S, 115, 124, 1245

from Noricum 218

production 40

Tron Age 43



===== PAGE 351 (index-357_1.jpg) =====
nArmorica 156-7

and Hallstatt C culture 48

studies of 28, 32, 334, 35, 30

Istri an

ftaly 24,434

an 120,12

and Celtic migrations 75-8

see also Bologna: Canosa di Puglia;
Frruscans; Po Valley

Jackson, Kenneth 26

Tacobsthal, Paul 37,1y
Jerome, St 21,85, 146
Jewellery 114,122
horse-and-nder fibulae 12, 142
Jones, William 23

Julian Alps 220-1

Tulius Caesar &, 10, 212, 223, 239
on Armorica 157

and Bibracte 224-5

British campaign 242,252,253
on Britons 107, 109, 146

and cavalry 105

an Celtic warfare 92,96, 100, 103
conquest of Gaul 23847

on Druids 190-1, 208

French studics of 13, 14,14, 15
on Gallic religion 183,185, 186, 187,192
onGauls 2,9, 108,109, 145,165, 177,

231,20

and Germanic tribes 237-8

and Iberia 142, 213

map of Gaul 75

on migration of Helvetii 89-90
on oppida 224, 239-30

Kaikos, Springs of 85
Kelbeim 228,228, 220, 230
Keller, Ferdinand 32
“Keltoi" 2

Keltos (giant) 4
Kércthrios 81,82
Kernavest 152

Kingship 231, 232, 244
Kleinaspergle burial 64, 16
knights, see warriors
Kokaios of Samos 49,134
Kopp, Hansli 31

Kotys 169

lakes 199

language 16, 215, 85, 145, 1467, 270,
a7 e

in Atlantic fringe 155-6

Basque 24

Bretan 22,146, 264-5, 265, 266

Continental Celtic 21,24

Iherian 16, 21, 24, 134, 137-8,139, 141,
142,155

Indo-European 23-4

insceiptions 2i, 22

Insular Celtic 23-4

Lepontic 21,24, 35,70

P-Celtic 22, 24, 25,138,155

Pontic place-names 175

Q-Celtic 22, 24,138,188

after Roman conquest 261, 262

Languedoc 53-8

La Tene:

cauldron 108

excavations 3o, 31, 34, 32,33, 36 (PL)

ritual finds 194,199

spears 94

La Téne culwre 16, 25, 26, 36, 63-7, 80,
269,270, 270, 274

‘A’ 63,63

AN 11,105, 120, 126, 128, 128,129

in Asia Minos

and Atlantic fringe 145, 1534

divisions 32,33

carly centres of 7445

French finds 34

and Iberia 140, 141, 142, 143

late burials 245

and migrations $6-§

in Pontic region 17§

in Thrace 173

La Tour-d'Auvergne, Malo Corret de
”

La Villemargué, Vicomte Hersart de
12,1406

law texts, Irish 27,109, 266

Le Fevee, Jean 10

Leland, John 10

Leonorios 81, 83,177

Lepontic 21,34, 25,70

Levant 40, 41,46

Levroux 228

Le Yaudet 259, 261

Lhuyd, Edward 23-3, 24

Libenice sanctuary 204

Ligurians 3,136,200, 202, 210, 212, 214,
236

Lindow bog man 192, 193

literature 357,109, 257, 266

Livy 6,32, 10

on Galatians 177,179

O Migrations 689, 70,71, 72, 75, 76,
81,83, 84

onwarfare 92,102

London 255,260

Longinus, Cassius 221

Los Cogotas 140, 141

Lostmach 229 (PL)

INDEX

Loucrnius 106, 216, 251

Lough Crew 114, 114

Low Countries 151, 153, 154
Lucan 9,185,191, 198

Lugh 185,186,187, 189
Lugnasad 185,189,190, 197
Lusitanians 107, 144,155, 213, 235
Lutorius 8, 83,177

Lyons 248

MacCana, Proinsias 185, 186
Macedonia 80-1,104,131,171, 273
Macpherson, James 12,14
Magicws §
magistrates 231-2, 233
Maiden Castle 18, 94, 95,96, 163, 205
Mallory, James 26
Manching 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230
Manlius ‘Torquatus’ 99,103
Manlius Vulso, Cn. 84,1789
Maponos 185, 186-7
Marne Valley 65,73, 745,87
art 104, 15, 10617, 112, 118, 119,120, 149
(PL)
Fuffigneix 1, n2, 8
pottery 129, 130
marriage 109-10
Marseilles, see Massalia
Martial 9,136
Marzabotto 16,32, 51
Massalia 3, 36, 49, 49, 50, 53,61, 62,134
Massitlior Periplues 3,135,146, 149
Mecklenburg, Grand Duchess of 35, 35
Mediterranean region 1, 3, 271-3
and Atlantic region 150, 154-5
and Iberia 134-5,166
sec also Grooce; Phoenicians
Megara Hyblaca 45
mercenarics 4, 70,78, 82,84
cavalry 104
in Egypt 180-2
Gacsatae 72,74,77,79
Iberian 134, 143
and Rome 217
metals:
from Atlantic fringe 135,149, 152
from Iberia 134,165
Roman demand for 216
trade 42, 45. 46, 148-9,150, 153,
26970, 2712
metalwork 1,36-7
methods 13-15
see alsoart; bronze; iron
Mezek tomb 1781734, 174,178
Mezixsat 47
Middle Danube Valley 2, 43, 250
contact between Celts and Thracians

3


===== PAGE 352 (index-358_1.jpg) =====
INDEX

124
language 2

rescttlement 86
migrations 689, 71, 72, 77. 83, 272-1
300-100 b $6-5

and Asia Minor 82,835
causes and evidence 73-5
complex nature 79

and Danube corridor 7880

and Greece and Balkans 8o-2
and ltaly 75-8

mechanisms 88-90

and North Pontic region 85-6
and Po Valley 70-3

principal routes 73

Minoan culture 39-41
Mithridates IV 107,178, 215
Moldova 175,221

Mondragon statue 8¢ (PL)

Mont Beuvray, see Bibracte

Mont Lassois 57,61

Montelius, Oscar 32

Morcau, Frédéric 34

Morel, Léon 34

Morganwy, folo, see Williams, Edward
Morini 241, 242

Morrigan 185-6, 187,189

Mortillet, Gabriel de 32

Mosclle Valley 64,65,74.75

art 11§, 116, 17, n§

moustaches 107

Msecké Zehrovice 85,128
Munsingen burial 32,79

Musce des Antiquités Nationales 13-4,

i
Mycenaean culture 19-41,88

Nages 214, 214, 18

Napoleon Bonaparte 13

Napoleon HI 13, 14, 14, 34, 35-6

Narbonne (Narbo) 3,236, 251

nationalism 13-14,16

Navan Fort 206, 206-7, 256

Neckar Valley 63,64

nemeton 198

Nervii 103, 104, 239, 243

Nicomedes of Bithynia &2, 83,177

“Noble Savage' 11,92

Noreia 3,223

Noricum 217, 217-18, 223, 225, 237,
249-50

Normans 266

Noves, “Tarasque’ of 128

Numantia 144, 144 213, 235

‘Nyrax" 3

Odrysae 169,171,172

322

“Oestrymnides” 3,149

Ogham 264

Ogmioc 187

Olbia 170,171,375

oppida 35-6, 21617, 223-31
Fecamp type 230, 250
murus gallicus 229-30
Pplastenschlizmaner 230
and social organization 232, 253
Ora Maritima 2-3, 146,154
Orange 96,96, 222
Ordovices 255

Orgetorix 107, 110, 231
Orléans, see Cenabum
Orosius 266

Ortagion 178

Ossian 12

P-Celtic 22,24, 25,038,155
Pannonia %0, 81, 249-50
“parasites’ 106
PISSIEE graves 147
Pausanius 2,6.7.81,82

on Egypt 81

on warfare 91,100
Peabody Museum, Harvard 35
Peium 179-80, 150

Penaflor 142
peregrini 364

Pergamum (Pergamon) 91,99, 104, 23§
acropolis g, 7 8 21 (PL), 85, 228 (PL)
defeat of Galatians 7, 84-5,178-9, 215,
238

“The Dying Gaul’ 67,1384
massacre of the Tetrachs 107,078, 215
teeaty with Galatians 177

Persians 41,50, 168, 172

Pessinus sanctuary 178,179

Petofi, Sandor 12

Pezron, Paul Yves 1

Plalzfeld 126,126

Phocacans 49. 50, 82,134

Phocians 81

Phoenicians 41, 42, 45, 46, 49, 501
and Bronze trade 149

and Iberia 46,134,138

Phrygia &4,372.177.180

P, L L 35

Picts 262-3

Pithecusae 45

Plato 4

Pliny 45,69, 150, 190

PoValley 2,3,32.4

art ng

and Etruscans 51,62

language 21

and migrations 70-3,74,75

and Rome 78,81, 112
and trade 65,66
Polybius 2,6, 32,91,

On Migrations 69,71, 72-3, 74, 75. 76,

77.78,82,83

on warfare 912,94, 49, 102
Pompeii 103

Pompeius Trogus 69,87
Pompey 223, 238, 247

Pontic Steppe 412, 45, 407, 48, 123,

250

Celtsin 175-6

north 85-6

see also Cimmerians; Scythians
population growth 74
Portugal 140, 142-3, 166

see also Iberia

Poscidonius 7-9.11,92,109
ondress w7

on feasts 105, 106-7, 216

on religion 191-2, 208
Postumus 210

potlatch system 106-7, 216
pattery 1212830
Armorican 152

British 158

Hungarian 123, 123
Prasutagus 254, 245, 2689
‘Pretani’ 3,146

Protogencs 175

Prolemy 1l Philadelphos 180-1
Polemy IV 181-2

Punic Wars:

First 77,138

Second 78, 104, 143, 2012, 235
‘Pyrene’ §

Pyri so

Pytheas of Massalia 4,135,150

Q-Celtic 22, 24,138,155

raiding 74, 76, 88-9, 89, 216
Ramsauer, Johann Georg 28, 28
raths 158, 159

Rauraci 228

Reinach, Salomon 12, 36
Reinecke, Paul 33,37

religion 183-210

animal sicrifice 1967
binary oppositions 188
complexity 183-4

death lore 208-10
depositions 155.194-7
festivals 185,186, 18890

of Galatians 178

gods and goddesses 26, 13, 1848, 199,

55


===== PAGE 353 (index-359_1.jpg) =====
human sacrifice 185, 191-2, 25
practices 190-7
after Roman conquest 261
sacred sites 197-208
triplism 187
seealso Druids
Remi 108, 243, 244
Rhone route 36,50,53.57, 62
Rhys, John 24
Rodenbach arm ring 117, 118,124
Roman Empire 1. 4-5,9. 39,273, 274
alliances with Celts 217, 236
and Bath sanctuary 198
British campaigns 241, 2423, 2526
conquest of Gaul 238-47
and Dacians 223
carly conflict with Celts 68, 76, 77-8
economy 2416
CXPansion 21114, 2848, 247-50
and Galatians 1789
and Germanic tribes 222
and Iberia 142, 1434
late 25561
and oppida 2m
rebellions and consolidation 250-2
relations and trade with Celts 21721
Roman historians, see Gracco-Roman
historians
Romania, see Ciumesti
Transylvania
Romerhogel burial 63,64
Roquepertuse sculptures 127-8,
148 (PL), 200, 202, 203
Royal Institution of Cornwall 15
Royal Irish Academy 15
Rubobostes 222
Rufus, Caius Julius 251

Sabinus 241, 243

Sacrovir, Julius 104, 2512

Salamis 48

battle of 50

Salluvii 236

salt 66

Samain 186,189, 197

sanctuafies 202, 204-8

San Martino burial 7

Sardinia 40,45, 46

Sark metalwork 123

Sarmatians (Sauromatac) 170-1,176,
22,250

Scaliger, Joseph 23

Schleicher, Augustus 23

Schwarzenbach barial 37, 17,124

Scipio Asiagenus 237

Scordisci 82,86, 124-5, 222,257

Scotland 15, 160, 161, 262-3

language 22
Romeand 255,260
Tores pony cap 163
Scott, Walter 15
sculpture 6-7,125-8
Scythians 42, 170-1, 172,
arrowheads 94
art 37,17, 18,123,124
and tattooing 107
Scaof Azov 176
“Sea People’ 40
Seleucid kings 84
Senones 72,7377, 81, 243, 244, 245
ant ngan
Sequani 108, 238
Sequanna sanctuary 199, 199, 260
Sesto Calende burial 62,70
shiclds &¢(PL). 96, 97, 98,104,137
Battersca 68(PL), 98,106, 113,194
Wandsworth 162,194, 197 (PL)

Silures 255

silver 134, 149

coins 13

Iberian 46

in Ulster Cycle 26

single combat 102, 105

Siscia (Sisak, Croatia) 249

slaves 212,215, 216, 220, 221, 247

slings 94,94, 95,96

Slovenia 35

Snettisham gold 99, 106, 196,198, 245
(PL)

social hierarchy 107<10

of Galatians 177-8

in Roman era 2314, 234, 2378, 244

Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 15

Socicty of Cymmrodorion 15

Soissons 241, 268

Somme-Bionne 34, 34,65

disk 1y

Sopron 220

souterrains 156-7, 157, 158

Spain, see Iberia

SPEArs 94,94

Speed. John 10

springs, sacred 1989, 259, 261

standing stones, see stelae

Staré Hradisko 228

staters 37(PL), 100

stelac 157-8, 158, 159, 208

Stoffel, Colonel E. 13, 14, 15

Stonchenge 184, 200

Strabo 8, 87,92, 150, 166, 2

on Alexander's meeting with Celts 80

INDEX

on Dacians 222
description of Celts 93

on Galatians 177,178,179

oa religion 190, 191-2, 208

on Toulouse treasure 194
Stradonice 33, 30

Stukeley, William 11, 12

Suebi 238, 242, 244

Suessones 247, 248, 251, 253
Switzerland 32, 44, 53, 53, 226, 2289
ant 1718, 19, 19, 122

sev also Geneva; Helvetii; La Téne
swords 94,151,233

Celtiberian 137, 140, 1401
scabbards 1213

Szob kantharos 86, 86

Tacitus 9,92, 93, 106, 238, 252
Agricola manuscript 10
onattack on Druids 191,198
on Britain 253, 256
on warfare 103
Tdin Ba Cuailnge 25-6,109, 257

Tara 205, 206, 256

Taranis 185,186,191

Tartessos 46, 49, 134, 140, 14950

Taurisci 77,86, 221, 222, 237, 238

Tavium 179

Tectosages 83, 84,165,177.179
and Volcae 36, 87,104,236

Temenos 202, 204

temples, seesanctuarics

Tetrachs 107,178, 215

Teutates 185,191

Teutones 221,227, 237, 238, 261

Thames finds 97, 98, 98, 162, 194-5, 195,

197(PL)

Thomsen, C. . 28

Thrace 21415
Celtic forces in 80-1,82
Celtic settlement in 1724, 211
and Phrygians 172
pre-Celtic 168-70,171

“Thracian’ culture 79

Thracians 221
allied with Celts 8
artistic influence 124,125,168-9, 160
defeat of Celtic enclave 82
in Egypt 181

Tiberius 249, 250, 251

Tiberius Gracchus 144

Tischler, Otto 32,33

Timacus 4,931,150

Timber Grave culture 42

€N 3, 4134, 149, 135,150, 165
trade 150
seealso metals

£


===== PAGE 354 (index-360_1.jpg) =====
INDEX

Togodubnus 254

Tolistobogii 83, 84,99, 177, 1789

torcs 87, 88, 99,121, 124, 1245

French 165

Iherian 140, 141-2

Snettisham 99, 196

Toalouse (Tolosa) 81, 88,195, 244,
2819, 236

and Delphi treasure 87,194

Tovar, Antonio 24

trade 269-70,271-2

and Acgean 40, 42, 43

and Atlantic fringe 42,46

Baltic amber 65,66, 220, 228

and Britain 252

between north and south 87

changesin sthcentury 67

and Etruscans 36, 45, 48, 61-3, 64-5,
66,67

and Greeks 45,578, 61

and Hallstatt culture 61-3

and Iberia 42,134

and La Tene culture 64-5, 66,67

and Mediterrancan 48-50

inmetals 42,45, 46, 148-9, 150, 152,
269-70,271-2

and Phoenicians 41, 45. 46

and Po Valley 65, 66

and Rome 212, 216, 21820, 239

trade routes 220-1, 228-9, 236, 241, 248

cast Alpine corridor 65-6

Rhéne corridor 36, 50, 53, 57,62

Transalpina, Province of 214, 245

Transdanubia 86,123, 250

Transylvania 80,836,170, 221, 222

Treveri 108, 146, 242, 243, 244. 251

Trichtingentore 124, 1245

Trinovantes 243, 282

Trisov 228

Trocmi 83, 84,99, 177, 1789

trumpets 102-3, 103, 144

Turoe stone 159, 160

Tylis 172-3

34

Utfington Castle 164

Ukraine 175, 176, 221

Ulster Cycle 24-7

Urnfield culture 424,47, 48,57
and bronze 148

and Iberia 135,139, 140

links with west 150

Utica 46

Vaccaei 137

Vacheres statue 69

Valerius 102, 12

vates, see fathi

vehicle burials 48, 64, 65, 66, 743,100

in Atkantic region 153,161

Vekerzug culture 78-9,123

see also Scythians

Veneti 65,66,72.76, 241, 359

Venutius 101, 254

Vercingetonx 13, i3, 224, 232, 244, 245,
245. 246, 268

Verica 253-4

Verulamium 255,259

Vienna 214,236

viereckschanzen 300, 201

Vikings 266

Villencuve-St-Germain 247, 248, 251

Viollier, David 32

Viriathus 13,144

Virunum 28

Vixburial s7, 8,61

Vojvodina &8

Volcae 86, 87,104, 236

Vorduchcov culture 79

Waldalgesheim 37,19
Waldenbach sculpture 126, 127
Wales 15,20

bards 14, 106
Cerrig-y-Drudion 129,153, 153
Irish raids and setthements 263
language 146

Llyn Fawr 199

Middle Ages 266

and Rome 285, 2156, 260, 260

settlements 158-9, 159

see also Anglesey

Walesland Rath 158, 159

Wandsworth shicld 162,194, 197 (PL)

warfare 27.77-8,93

battles 1015

cavalry 104-5

chariots 27,99-101, 101, 104-5, 1634,
255

cries and trumpets 102-3

dress 77-8,99

equipment 93-8, 104

Galatian 178-9

single combat 102

Sources gi-3

trimarcisia 100-1

Waroc 264

warriors 107,232

wealth:

and marriage 109

sacrifice of 106-7

weapons 93-%

wells 21819, 239

Werth, Emst 367

Wetwang Stack 161

Whatmough, Joshua 25

White, john 10-1

Whitton, Wales 260

Williams, Edward (lolo Morganwy) 12,
"

Witham, River 194

shield 12, ny, 07

Wittnauer Horn 44

women 109, 110

graves of 87,117-18,233

Worsaae. ). ). A. 28

Yorkshire 94,161,162, 209

Zavist 66,79,227,237-8, 229
zones, Celtic 269-74


===== PAGE 355 (index-361_1.jpg) =====
UK
CAN
us

the picty
riginal (

the tru

that emenges,
elts and crilse

ifentity of th

[
53190
12195

whilled crs
ns. He ir
be Ceit

with current ancha

ol the

inte Th

nfbrm:

VORI i

In this ceudite and engaging ill

miratod hintory, P

wii 1 contrusts thei
far us Boaoa and the Cac
wradicional und

tnber. their
cxamined. From

Literary Sapplement

Hestary/Archassingy
wew prisguie con

<

