                                                         Chapter 2




                Archaeological Integration
                                                  AREA   SYNTHESIS

The integrative units described in the preceding section are well
adapted to express the extraordinarily complex and fluid relation-
ships of archaeological phases over wide geographical areas, but
they cannot furnish the rigid spatial-temporal frames that archaeolo-
gists seem to find so reassuring. For these we generally turn to
some system of matching phases from region to region, expressing
the results by means of a diagram in which the regional sequences
are arranged in parallel columns with their phases stacked up like
boxes, scaled against a real or imaginary vertical time band at one
side. Illustrations are available in current archaeological literature
in great profusion and variety. The appearance of an archaeological
report without such a diagram would in fact be something of a curi-
osity today. This is what Rouse, in the paper already cited, has
called “distributional correlation of phases,” and the resulting dia-
gram, of which he presents an excellent model,! is often referred to
as an “‘area chronology.”
  We have expressed agreement with Rouse that so far as possible
such a scheme should be effected by means of independent, extra-
cultural cross-dating, e.g., radiocarbon dating, dendrochronology,
river-channel and river-terrace sequences, discrete geological and
meteorological     events    (volcanic     eruptions,    droughts,   etc.)—in
short, any available techniques of dating that do not involve as-
sumptions about culture. Unfortunately, in the present stage of

   1. Rouse, 1955, Fig. 2, p. 716.


                                           METHOD AND THEORY    44
                                     IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
archaeological development in the Americas we rarely, if ever, have
sufficient dates of this kind; consequently it is difficult to find in the
literature examples conforming to Rouse’s model. Even in the
Southwest, where tree-ring dating has made such remarkable prog-
ress, it appears that dates are still insufficient for interregional cor-
relation.? Therefore, present area chronologies in the New World
do not scruple to employ any sort of correlation data that comes to
hand—descriptive, distributional, or genetic. They are often
dressed out to look like real chronologies by the addition of a few
calendrical dates, usually guesses, marking off the “periods” on
one side of the chart. These seldom date more than one of the
phases that are correlated to form the “period,” the correlation
being really based‘on cultural similarity, horizon phenomena, trade
objects, etc., and the well-worn assumption that these reflect con-
temporaneity. In other words, the correlations are not based on in-
dependent dating so much as the dating is based on the correla-
tions. A casual glance through the literature of American archaeol-
ogy of the past twenty-five years will reveal numerous examples of
such charts. The Peru-Bolivian, or central Andean, area is especial-
ly well represented.’ For Middle America it is also easy to cite
similar chart presentations.‘
   Outstanding examples of area schemes that are virtually without
benefit of dating are to be found in the southeastern United States.
Here, owing to the failure of independent dating techniques to de-
velop as rapidly as in some other areas, it has become a habit to
equate widely separated archaeological units on strictly formal
principles, and, whether as cause or effect, there prevails a sweep-
ing assumption of synchrony of culture change throughout the
area. Does culture A have plain fiber-tempered pottery? If so, it
equates in time with culture B, which has plain fiber-tempered pot-

   a, \WVinentey WOE Toe Sze
   3. Kroeber, 1944, p. 112; Willey, 19482, p. 9; Bennett and Bird, 1949, p.
112. These are but a few samples.
  4. Armillas, in Kroeber, 1948, p. 116; Kroeber,   1940, pp. 484-85;   Mac-
Neish, 19545, p. 623; Wauchope, 1950; Sorenson, 1955, pp. 54-56.



                               ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION   45
tery. The possibility that the relationship may be genetic, and there-
fore not necessarily synchronous, is not entertained. We are so fond
of this method of reasoning in the Southeast that we tend to ignore
the few independent (radiocarbon) dates that we have. As a recent
example, William H. Sears’s excellent final report on excavations
at the Kolomoki site in southwestern Georgia contains an elabo-
rate correlation of southeastern sequences against a calendrical
scale, but no radiocarbon dates appear on the chart, nor are they
mentioned in the text.®
   There is an unfortunate tendency in area chronologies of this
culturally correlated variety for the periods to take on some of the
characteristics of developmental stages. The larger the area, the
more likely is this to happen. The best example in recent literature
is the scheme for ‘Eastern United States”’ as set forth in the monu-
mental Cole Anniversary Volume under the editorship of James B.
Griffin.’ The area, which takes in everything from the Plains to the
Atlantic, is too large, in our opinion, for any practical archaeologi-
cal purposes. Nevertheless, Griffin addresses himself to the heroic
task of correlating hundreds of phases and cultures in this vast area
into a succession of “culture periods,”’ defined, as the term implies,
both chronologically and culturally but necessarily in such broad
terms as to be little more than general stages in the development of
American culture. In some of the contributions to the volume, the
terms “period,” “‘culture,” and “‘stage”’ are used interchangeably,
depending on the exigencies of the moment. Deliverance from this
kind of semantic ambiguity will come when current techniques of
absolute dating have reached a point of such dependability that we
can place a given unit within a temporal frame, on the one hand,
and in a developmental sequence, on the other, without confusing
the two operations.
   We are forced to conclude that the pure area chronology based
on distributional criteria alone is, in the New     World at least, a

   5. Sears, 1956, p. 80.
   6. Griffin, 1952a.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY    46
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
presently unattainable ideal. But, with the rapid accumulation of
radiocarbon and other types of independent dating now taking place,
it 1s a certain possibility in the future. In the meantime we must be
content with the sort of hybrid area schemes now in vogue. There
is no harm in them so long as we are clear about how they are made
and what they mean, but, when they lead us to think that we have
discovered something about the way culture “‘works,”’ it is time to
be on guard. In any case, it will be entertaining to compare them
with true area chronologies when these are available.

                                  MAXIMUM     UNITS:   CULTURE
                                              AND   CIVILIZATION

   We have tried to show that area chronologies express the spatial-
temporal relationships between archaeological phases, while hori-
zons and traditions express their culture-historical relationships.
These are unquestionably their primary functions, but, on a more
abstract level of interpretation, all these units and devices may be
considered means by which the archaeologist gropes for the major
segmentations of culture-history. There is clearly an irresistible
urge to relate cultural forms to their largest possible contexts, ex-
pressed in the terms “‘culture”’ or “‘civilization’”’ as used by students
of culture-history when they are referring to events on a world-
wide scale. We did not sufficiently take account of this urge in our
first paper, which was conceived in terms of practicable archaeologi-
cal methods and was not particularly concerned with ultimate ends.
We found in the phase an operationally manageable unit, 1.e., a
unit small enough in spatial and temporal dimensions to be manipu-
lated in area correlations and sequential schemes. Phases were to be
related in larger culture-historical organizations by means of con-
cepts such as the horizon and the tradition, but it was ruled that
these were strictly integrative units and that the phases were not
to lose their identity in these larger formulations. But the urge for
totality was at work, with the result that the definition of one of
these concepts, the tradition, was so broadly stated as to include
the “full cultural tradition,’’ which is, in effect, a self-sufficient


                             ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION   a7.
archaeological unit more like the phase, with greatly amplified
spatial and temporal dimensions, than like a mere device for ex-
pressing relationships, as advertised. In short, here was a serious
contradiction, which we now find it necessary to remove.
   The solution we have chosen has already been described: to cut
back the concept of tradition to something like its original scope,
taking from it the expanded connotation of “‘full cultural tradition”
and returning that connotation to the unit concept of “culture” or
“civilization,” where it has always lodged. Thus, the phase re-
mains the manageable unit; horizon and tradition remain the inte-
grative units for expressing relationships between phases; culture
and civilization, the maximum units reflecting the major segmenta-
tions of culture-history. In a strictly methodological context, and
subject to the developmental relativism which applies to all unit
concepts, culture and civilization can be treated as equivalents. As
a somewhat arbitrary specification, however, applicable to the New
World only, we suggest that “culture” be used to denote maximum
units on all stages up to and including the Formative, reserving the
term “civilization” for such units on the Classic and Postclassic
stages.

                           THE   SOCIAL   ASPECTS   OF ARCHAE-

                                              OLOGICAL   UNITS

   We have described a number of archaeological unit concepts and
discussed their working relationships, but we have allowed ques-
tions of their social meaning to accumulate in the belief that these
can be more sensibly dealt with under a single heading. The task
of finding social equivalents for archaeological units is beset by the
most formidable difficulties, most of which stem from the fact that
the kinds of data archaeology depends on are precisely those ele-
ments of culture that diffuse most readily across social and political
boundaries. Consequently, we seldom experience the satisfaction of
feeling that our units are coextensive, either spatially or temporally,
with corresponding social units, even in the simplest and most ex-
plicit of archaeological situations. However, we must remind the


                                    METHOD AND THEORY      48
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
reader that, according to our theoretical position, archaeological
units are formulated on the descriptive level of organization with a
view to their use on the explanatory level and, to qualify for the
latter, must be intelligible in both the cultural and the social aspects
of the behavior that is our subject matter. So we are obliged to keep
in mind the possibility of social equivalents to our unit formulations,
even when we cannot say with any degree of assurance what they
are?
    In the case of archaeological units of the smallest magnitude,
however, we are on fairly solid ground. The social equivalent of the
component is the “community,” as defined by Murdock and others:
“the maximal group of persons who normally reside together in a
face-to-face association.”” Murdock’s three types of community—
band, neighborhood, and village—manifest themselves archaeologi-
cally in the component, and it is even possible sometimes to tell
which type is represented. So far, so good. The equivalent of
phase, then, ought to be “society,” and in a good many cases it
probably is. The fact that, in practice, phases often consist of a
single component need not disturb us; on the lower levels of cul-
tural development the society likewise may consist of a single com-
munity. At the other end of the developmental scale, however, so-
ciety becomes a larger concept, spatially at least, than phase. We
shall return to this point presently in discussing the social aspect of
our maximum units, culture and civilization. For the purposes of
the immediate discussion, let us think of society in its minimal
sense, as “‘a group of people acknowledging a single political au-
thority, obedient to a single system of law, and in some degree or-
ganized to resist attack from other such societies.”® How does this
relate to the concept of phase? Logically the correspondence 1s
reasonable. Such a society comprises a number of communities; the
phase comprises a number of components; component equals com-
munity; therefore, phase equals society. Unfortunately, in practice
it does not work. We have no means of knowing whether the com-
  7. Murdock, 1949, p. 79.
  8. M. A. Smith, 1955, p. 4.


                             ARCHAEOLOGICAL INTEGRATION   49
ponents we group together into a phase are the same communities
an ethnographer (supposing such a person happened to be on hand)
would group into a society. We cannot be sure that the individual
members of these communities would recognize themselves as be-
longing to the same “people.” They might not even speak the same
language. Ethnography offers abundant examples of different so-
cieties sharing a material culture that would be impossible to differ-
entiate archaeologically. It would be only slightly more difficult to
find examples in which the material culture of individual communi-
ties within a society diverged sufficiently to cause them to be classi-
fied archaeologically in separate phases. A frontier garrison com-
munity, organized specially for defense, might be a case in point.
   More vexing, perhaps, are questions having to do with the stabili-
ty of material and social culture through time, a dimension happily
ignored by the ethnographer. We have laid down the rule that the
temporal dimension of the phase must be kept within manageable
limits, but this is admittedly in terms of the somewhat prodigal view
of time held by the archaeologist. We are not forgetting that the
life-span of our phases 1s ordinarily determined by the persistence
of material traits which can be remarkably stable. Within such a
span it is conceivable that social changes might be sufficient to en-
able our hypothetical ethnographer to speak of several societies.
Conversely, under special conditions, even a primitive population
may exhibit revolutionary changes in material culture without
losing its identity as a society. We have abundant examples of this
in recent colonial history.
   In sum, it looks as though the present chances are against
archaeological phases having much, if any, social reality, but this
does not prevent us from maintaining that they can have and that in
the meantime we may act as if they did have. We have already ex-
pressed a similar attitude in connection with artifact typology.
Just as, with the inevitable refinement of archaeological techniques,
it will become increasingly possible to define types in terms of so-
cial behavior, it will become likewise increasingly possible to de-
fine phases in terms of social structure. This possibility must be


                                     METHOD AND THEORY    50
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
reckoned with, but it is not really the point of the present discus-
sion. We do not maintain that every, or even any, specific phase
is the archaeological expression of an extinct society. We simply
call attention to the fact that there is a certain conceptual agree-
ment between phase and society. Both are intelligible units of their
respective fields of study. They have similar roles and similar
scales, and in this crucial matter of scale both exhibit the same rela-
tivism with respect to the level of cultural development. This con-
gruence, we contend, qualifies the phase as the intelligible unit of
comparative study and, thus, offers the best hope of incorporating
archaeology into general anthropological science.
   The integrative units, horizon and tradition, because of their
incomplete cultural content, cannot be regarded as self-sufficient in
the cultural aspect; so there is an a priori case against their intelli-
gibility in the social aspect. This is not equivalent to denying that
they are socially transmitted. These units are the archaeological
expressions of the processes of diffusion. They have come into exist-
ence in response to an awareness that particular forms and systems
of forms—as distinct from whole, functioning, cultural units—flow
through geographical space and time in a manner seemingly inde-
pendent of the cultural matrices in which they are found. It is be-
side our purpose to investigate the mechanics of diffusion, or the
question of how they may be detected in archaeology—a subject for
a lengthy treatise in itself—but we suppose that in the main they
operate through the agency of individuals or organized groups, such
as trading companies, religious bodies, armies, and migrating popu-
lations, which, with the exception of the last, are not complete and
self-sufficient social units. In general, therefore, horizons and tra-
ditions fail to meet the test of intelligibility in the social aspect, and
no more need be said about them here.
   When it comes to the social aspect of the maximum units, cul-
ture and civilization, we are on more difficult terrain. Here the
problem of stage-relativism becomes acute. We have arbitrarily de-
fined the culture as the maximum unit on all developmental stages
up to and including the Formative. Even with this specification,


                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION    51
there is still a tremendous variability in its connotations, both cul-
tural and social. On the lowest stage, the Lithic, the term “culture”
usually refers to single technologies or “assemblages” reflecting a
similar economic adjustment shared by a large number of social
groups. The content of such a “culture” is seldom sufficiently com-
plete or physiognomic to suggest that a single homogeneous society
is responsible. Put the other way around: on this level we are un-
able to infer the existence of social units large enough to be coex-
tensive with these “‘cultures.’”’ It would perhaps be preferable to
organize these incomplete data—all archaeological data are in-
complete, but Lithic data are more so—in terms of phases and tra-
ditions, eschewing the term ‘‘culture” altogether. We do not really
expect this wholesome suggestion to be followed, but, if we could
at least eliminate “cultures” represented by a single type of pro-
jectile point, it would be progress in the right direction.
  On the Archaic stages of development, the situation is a little
different. Archaic phases are generally richer in cultural content;
spatial and temporal dimensions tend to be smaller. It seems to be
possible in some cases to organize the data into larger units than
phases, for which the term culture stands without benefit of quota-
tion marks. It is difficult to say, however, what the social equiva-
lents of such cultures might have been. We have inferred elsewhere
that social organization in the Archaic stage had not generally pro-
ceeded beyond the level of complexity represented by the tribe, but
this is a gratuitous assumption that might not stand up under investi-
gation. In short, it remains to be shown whether or not the unit,
culture, is intelligible in the social aspect on the Archaic stage of
development.
  The Formative is by definition the stage of the appearance of new
economic patterns, and these we assume to have been accompanied
by the formation of societies of greater scale and complexity than
existed theretofore. Ethnohistory furnishes examples in the numer-
ous confederacies, and we have abundant evidence of the existence
on this stage of religious and ceremonial organizations far exceed-
ing in scope anything that could be represented by a phase in ar-


                                     METHOD AND THEORY    5D
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
chaeology. This would seem to be the stage on which the unit, cul-
ture, becomes intelligible in the social aspect. However, it is diffi-
cult, even in an ethnohistoric context, to make satisfactory equa-
tions between archaeological and social units on this level of cul-
tural development. In the case of the Iroquois Confederacy, for ex-
ample, we can equate specific archaeological phases with the indi-
vidual member tribes, but the unit “Iroquois culture” seems to have
been shared by tribes that were not only outside the famous con-
federacy but in some cases not even afhiliated linguistically. In a
context that is largely prehistoric the difficulties are even greater.
As a trial example we may consider the Coles Creek—Plaquemine
culture, a Formative continuity in the lower Mississippi Valley
lasting from about a.p. 900 to a.p. 1731 (date of the final dispersal
of the Natchez tribe). We regard this as a unit because the elements
of continuity from phase to phase seem to be stronger than the ele-
ments of change. Now what would be the social equivalent of such
a continuity? Projecting back from ethnohistoric data, we know
that there were several phases of this culture in the seventeenth cen-
tury and that these phases pertain to discrete tribal groups, such as
the Natchez, Taensa, Houma, Tunica, or Yazoo. There is no evi-
dence that these tribes were united into a political federation. In
fully prehistoric times it is possible that some sort of hegemony may
have been imposed on these groups, but, if the pattern of oppor-
tunist warfare and ephemeral alliances that we see in historic times
is any index to what happened earlier, it is inconceivable that any
such hegemony could have embraced the full geographical range, or
time span, of the Coles Creek—Plaquemine culture.
   So far, in the discussion of possible equations between archaeo-
logical cultures and larger social units, our implicit definition of a
social unit has been essentially a political one. We have also seen
that it is extremely difficult to identify the correlates of political
structure in an archaeological record. Leaving aside for the mo-
ment, then, the question of political forms, let us simply ask what
kind of archaeological evidence might be indicative of larger social
units. This, we feel, is the most fruitful starting point in the search


                            ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION   5 3
for archaeological and social equations; and, in seeking evidence of
this order, it is also our opinion that the Classic and Postclassic cul-
tures of the New World offer more potentialities than the Forma-
tive.
   One of the characteristics of Classic cultures in both Middle
America and Peru is the possession of great art styles. These styles
are symbolic systems. Their content and the contexts in which they
are presented assure us that they permeated much of their cultural
setting and that they were a part of the conscious awareness of the
peoples of these cultures. For example, the recognition and appre-
ciation of an art style like that of the lowland Maya imply a realiza-
tion upon the part of the beholders that they are affiliated with other
peoples who also recognize and believe in the symbolism of this
same style. Such a sense of affiliation must necessarily have had so-
cial significance. It is difficult, perhaps impossible, to define the
exact nature of the bonds giving coherence to such a social order or
society in the large. They may, or may not, have been political.
We have no definite knowledge about the ancient Maya political
structure. Maya ceremonial centers from the Usumacinta to the
Motagua may have been held together under a single authority, or
each may have maintained a completely independent sovereignty.
Religious ideology was undoubtedly one of the ties that held Maya
society together. Not only does the art style suggest this, but wide-
spread diffusion of uniform calendrical and hieroglyphic lore sup-
ports the interpretation. Yet the Maya bonds appear to have been
more than the interchange of religious and astronomical ideas among
a few priestly elite from the great centers or cities. Such may have
been the mechanism of their original dissemination, but there are
numerous signs that the ordinary Maya villagers who sustained the
centers and the theocratic leadership also participated in, and had
at least a peasant’s understanding of, the ideas of the upper classes.
These ideas, in so far as they were generally accepted, probably
became much more than purely religious dogma. It is likely that
they were assimilated into the values and beliefs of Maya peasant
culture and that these values and beliefs were shared by Maya


                                     METHOD AND THEORY     54
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
society in the same way that the art expressing these values was
also shared by that society.
   If we argue that stylistic unity may demonstrate social as well
as cultural cohesion, for what other prehistoric American art styles
can we build a case similar to that for the Maya? Teotihuacdn?
Zapotec (Monte Alban)? Mochica? Nazca? These four have the
requisite qualities of greatness and pervasiveness. For each the im-
print of the style is unmistakable, whether rendered in stone, pot-
tery, wall painting, or textiles. Also, all four have the relatively
tight territorial integrity which suggests a unity of a social kind.
All four lack, however, those continuities into the ethnohistoric pe-
riod that the Maya case possesses in some degree, and this makes
it more difficult to be assured of common language, custom, and
belief. What of the still older styles, Olmec and Chavin? For these
the circumstances of remote antiquity and great geographic range
lessen the possibility that the social dimension can ever be approxi-
mated. It may be, as has often been surmised, that Olmec and Cha-
vin style occurrences, in their respective Middle American and
Peruvian spheres, signify only religious, ideological, or cultist
diffusions and that the ideas behind these styles never penetrated
the receiving cultures to the extent that general values and beliefs
were substantially modified. If so, there would be less reason to be-
lieve in the coherence and homogeneity of an Olmec or Chavin so-
ciety. Perhaps these two styles represent an earlier stage in the
civilizing process of social enlargement and homogenization that
we have inferred for lowland Maya culture and society. To con-
tinue this same line of speculation, it is possible that such a horizon
style as the Southern Cult of the southeastern United States is de-
velopmentally prototypical to Middle and South American great
styles in the same way that southeastern Formative cultures are
prototypical to the Mexican and Peruvian Classic civilizations.
  Civilization has been characterized, both qualitatively and quan-
titatively, by Childe, Redfield, and others.° The chief requisites
are city life with its concomitants of large population size and
  9. Childe, 1946, pp. 82-105; Redfield, 1953; Braidwood, 1952.



                             ARCHAEOLOGICAL   INTEGRATION   55
density, formalized religions, class systems, craft specializations,
the beginnings of codified learning and science, and great artistic
traditions. Inferentially, it is our opinion that a consciousness of a
larger social order is also a feature of civilization. In other words,
the societal basis of a civilization differs from that of a culture, both
quantitatively and qualitatively. In quantity, it is larger, it en-
compasses more people, it overrides community and tribal barriers.
In quality, it demands beliefs in, and allegiances to, ideas and
values that are abstract and remote from the individual and his
tribal hearth.
   The foregoing review of the various archaeological unit con-
cepts in their social aspect has brought out several interesting but
highly tentative possibilities. First, it appears that the basic units,
component and phase, are theoretically capable of intelligibility in
the social aspect on all the lower stages of development up through
the Formative, but the difficulties of close equations are not to be
minimized. Though the question of just what the social equivalents
of these smaller units might be in the more highly organized Classic
and Postclassic societies has not been investigated, it is nevertheless
easy to foresee that the difficulties of doing so would be formidable.
Second, while the integrative units, horizon and tradition, have been
rather summarily dismissed because of apparent lack of complete-
ness and self-sufficiency in both the cultural and the social aspects,
this is a rather arbitrary exclusion which, needless to add, requires
further investigation. Third, in testing rather more thoroughly the
maximum units, culture and civilization, we seem to have stumbled
upon a valuable insight which is at the same time a useful criterion
for distinguishing between these units. For, while it has proved to
be difficult to envisage any social equivalent for the culture, it ap-
pears that the really definitive characteristic of the civilization is
that such a possible equivalent does exist.




                                     METHOD AND THEORY     56
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
                                            Summary
In so far as the foregoing definitions and stated relationships can be
formalized as a program for the integration of New World archaeo-
logical data on the descriptive level of organization, they may be
summarized as follows:
  1. The primary emphasis should continue to be placed on the for-
mulation of basic units, component and phase, in local and regional
sequences under stratigraphic control.
   2. Phases should be studied intensively in their cultural and natu-
ral contexts.
   3. Their external spatial and temporal dimensions should be kept
within manageable limits of magnitude.
  4. Their external relationships should be studied and expressed
by means of the integrative units, horizon and tradition.
   5. Large-scale integrating syntheses should be kept within the
limits of the ‘‘area,”’ as defined herein, and horizontal correlation
of phases in such schemes should be effected so far as possible by
means of independent extracultural data.
   6. On the basis of these integrative studies, phases should be
combined when possible to form the maximum units, culture and
civilization.
   7. Constant effort should be made to invest all units of what-
ever magnitude with the greatest possible intelligibility in both the
cultural and the social aspects.




                                              SUMMARY    57
                       Part II




FAlistorical-Developmental
             Interpretation
               —
                   ~




   baiyea
cec pean ng beieee     (1
rind FULT
                                                      Chapter 3




       The Historical-Developmental
              Approach in American
                        Archaeology
                              TOWARD A SYNTHESIS OF NEW
                                       WORLD PREHISTORY
Culture-historical integration, as we have seen, is the descriptive
process concerned with cultural forms, with plotting these forms
in space and time, and with defining their relationships and inferred
functions. There is, we think, common agreement that these are
archaeology’s primary tasks, on the descriptive level of organiza-
tion. It is with these tasks in mind that we have attempted to formu-
late intelligible archaeological “units” for study. The questions of
how such units may be named and defined and how they may be
related one to another are, we maintain, the foundation of theoreti-
cal formulations on the explanatory level of organization, i.e., in
the fields of culture-continuity and culture-change. Of the various
trial examinations and hypotheses that might be built upon this
foundation, a synthesis of New World archaeology as a whole is
one that falls short of the higher level of organization, occupying a
sort of gray borderland between description and explanation. The
historical-developmental interpretation presented in the following
pages is an attempt at such a synthesis.
   We have already spoken of the tendency for large-scale area
chronologies   to   take   on   the characteristics    of developmental
schemes. It might then be supposed that the difference between the


                THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH     6l
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
synthesis of an area and the synthesis of a continent, or a hemi-
sphere, is just a matter of scale, but this does not seem to be the
case. Judging by the record, there seems to be a tacit agreement
among Americanists that, whereas archaeological reconstructions
of localities, regions, and areas may be treated in unified systems,
we are unable to extend these systems to continental or hemispheric
dimensions. This fact, in itself, is a highly interesting aspect of
New World culture-history. That the great American art styles
rarely, if ever, pass beyond the geographical limits of the areas of
their characterization is surely a key to cultural understanding.
Similarly, the relative scarcity of specific objects, “trade items,”
native to one area hearth and transmitted to another is a clue to the
areal isolation of New World cultures. What, then, is the nature
of the historical evidence that links the various American areas?
   Let us narrow the question somewhat by asking which, if any,
of the large-scale unit concepts defined in the first part of this
study may be used to integrate archaeological data on an interareal
basis. Our so-called maximum units, cu/ture and civilization, fail to
qualify, for the reason stated in the paragraph above. Archaeologi-
cal areas in most cases owe their existence to previous formulations
of those maximum units with which their boundaries are, initially
at least, thought to be coterminous. Often, room has subsequently
to be made for other cultures and civilizations, and thus the areas
tend to be subdivided. Only rarely are they combined into larger
areas owing to a discovery of cultural distributions wider than first
supposed, and this again is a significant commentary on the isolable
nature of American cultures.
   But what of the integrative units, horizon and tradition? The
horizon is characterized by its relatively limited time dimension and
its significant geographic spread. It is usually expressed by an art
style or a very specific complex of features of unmistakable histori-
cal uniqueness. As we have just noted, such phenomena do not fre-
quently pass outside the major areas in which they originated. The
horizon clearly has little utility in multiple-area syntheses. What


                                    METHOD AND THEORY
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY   62
then of the tradition? We have defined the tradition as “a (primari-
ly) temporal continuity represented by persistent configurations in
single technologies or other systems of related forms.” Attention
is called to the fact that, apart from the temporal factor—the essen-
tial characteristic of all traditions is persistence in time—this defi-
nition is extremely flexible. We were purposely vague about the
behavior of traditions in the spatial dimension—and still are.
Transmission of traditions through generations of people living in
the same place is so obvious as to require no further comment, but
how are they transmitted to other people living in other places?
This is a question that is surely in need of further investigation.
Does a tradition become diffused widely enough and rapidly
enough to be usable as an integrating device in culture-historical
schemes of larger than areal scope? American maize agriculture
may be taken as an example of the sort of tradition we are talking
about. It has distinctive content (Zea mays and its hybrids) as well
as technical skills and utensils associated with its cultivation and
preparation. Its tremendous spatial and temporal range in the New
World makes it unsuitable for tracing out detailed interareal rela-
tionships; nevertheless it has an important historical unity. It is an
American tradition whose diffusion has overridden areal boundaries
and whose presence establishes common ties. Pressure flint-chipping
and pottery-making are traditions of even broader scope, so broad
as to be almost without historical significance. There are other tra-
ditions, however, whose range is more restricted and whose ap-
pearance might, therefore, be taken to indicate a higher degree of
historical intimacy. The metallurgical techniques which extend
from the south Andes northward to the southwestern United States
furnish an example. They cross at least five major archaeological
areas but are almost certainly a historical unit. The resist-dye
painting of pottery (negative painting), the ceramic mold, curious
and complex vessel forms such as the stirrup-mouth jar—all these
are multiple-area phenomena, each presumably of single historical
origin.


               THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH   63
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   But can traditions, of whatever kind, be integrated into an effec-
tive historical system for the Americas as a whole? Horizons, as
we have shown, enable us to equate local and regional phases in a
reasonably precise spatial-temporal scheme for a particular area.
Horizontal equivalence on the space-time chart means approximate
contemporaneity. It might be supposed that traditions of the wide-
spread sort referred to above would have a similar usefulness on a
scale larger than that of the area, would operate in effect as super-
horizons, but such does not appear to be the case. Maize agriculture,
for example, did not commence at the same time, or even at approxi-
mately the same time, throughout its range of distribution; nor can
the Peruvian and Mexican cire-perdue casting be established as
contemporaneous. There is, in short, no device (except calendrical
dating) by which cultures can be temporally equated on a continen-
tal or hemispheric scale. Iraditions and horizons are, we repeat,
the most effective units for the presentation and interpretation of
intra-areal relationships, but this is the limit of successful spatial-
temporal integration.
   For larger syntheses, another type of formulation must be re-
sorted to, one that is free from strict limitations of space and time
yet has a general historical validity in the widest sense. The only
possible kind of scheme that meets these requirements, so far as
we can see, is a series of cultural stages in what we have chosen to
call a historical-developmental sequence. These stages will of
course be founded on common participation in important historical-
ly derived traditions, but their formulation is a procedure distinct
from the methods of systematic historical (spatial-temporal) inte-
gration as laid down in the first part of this book. The historical-
developmental sequence remains, however, as we shall attempt to
demonstrate, essentially on the descriptive level of organization.
   Possibly because of the strong reaction in this country against
what is disdainfully referred to as “nineteenth-century evolution-
ism,” overt developmental classifications are comparatively new in
American archaeology. There were, however, perspicacious stu-
dents who saw what was the true nature of area “chronologies”


                                    METHOD AND THEORY     64
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
then current.! Such recognition is reflected in the increasing use of
nomenclature emphasizing development, e.g., Frank Roberts’
modification of the Pecos classification, using terms like ‘“‘Develop-
mental,’’ “Great,” and “Recessive Pueblo” in place of Roman nu-
merals,’ but these were still conceived as chronological periods,
and archaeologists felt obliged to define them in strict calendrical
terms. The Ford and Willey scheme for the eastern United States,
published in 1941, was a succession of “‘stages” rather than peri-
ods, but these were based on “chronological profiles,” and the
style of the paper is narrative and historical.? James B. Griffin’s
slightly later synthesis of the same area showed no concern to
differentiate between cultural development and chronology. “Suc-
cessive cultural stages throughout the eastern United States can be
erected on the basis of local stratigraphy, the interchange of specific
cultural items and the common possession of definite cultural con-
cepts at specific chronological periods.”*The scheme put forward in
the gigantic Cole Anniversary Volume, Archeology of Eastern
United States, under Griffin’s editorship, shows the same disinclina-
tion to differentiate between “‘stage’”’ and “‘period.”’ The terms are
in fact interchangeable, as in this passage: “The description of
these periods will emphasize a generalized cultural picture of the
major features which characterize each of these stages by and large
throughout the entire area.”> About the same time, the authors of
the first comprehensive textbook of North American archaeology
organized the eastern          data into four “chronological            stages,’
   1. See Kluckhohn and Reiter, 1939, p. 159: “Probably the single fact of
greatest general import which has emerged thus far from the Bc 50-51 excava-
tions is that the various stages recognized by the Pecos Classification (and very
commonly referred to as ‘periods’) do not, necessarily, represent separate and
clear-cut time periods, even in the same geographical locality.”
   2. Roberts, 1936, 1937.
   3. Ford and Willey, 1941.
   4. Griffin, 1946, p. 39. (Italics ours.)
   5. Griffin’s own contribution, “‘Culture Periods in Eastern United States
Archeology,” in Griffin, 1952a, p. 352. (Italics ours.)
   6. Martin, Quimby, and Collier, 1947, p. 232.



                  THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH         6 5
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
thereby having it both ways. More developmental in terminology,
and to a certain extent in implication, are a number of Middle
American and Peruvian syntheses of more recent appearance.’
With one exception, to which we             shall presently return, these
schemes are all on an areal scale and adhere to their supporting
chronology more closely perhaps than the North American schemes
just mentioned. Nevertheless, they show a new awareness of the
possibility, not to say necessity, of distinguishing between stages
in the development of cultures and archaeological periods. In his
summary of the 1947 Conference on Peruvian Archaeology, at
which a number of these syntheses were presented, Kroeber was
impelled to say: “Another query that began to strike me as Bennett
read his paper, and that kept recurring during our two days, was
how far schemes of development like these also exemplify or imply
general schemes of historic evolution of civilizations—the most
famous and complete example, of course, being that of Toynbee.”®
   From the developmental standpoint, nearly all area schemes that
have so far appeared are subject to the same difficulties. They have
followed in the wake of archaeological chronologies and have found
it impossible to break free of them. Their strength has derived
largely from the supporting chronology, and this very fact has led
to misunderstanding. Cultural development has a time dimension,
but this dimension is not necessarily uniform for all localities or re-
gions of an area. When stage and horizon (or period) lines are
represented on a chart as straight and horizontal, confusion is in-
evitable. A similar difficulty arises when we attempt to extend de-
velopmental stages from one major area to another, except that
within the area the time discrepancies probably will not be so great.
Students of Andean and Middle American archaeology have ra-
tionalized the problem by insisting upon the homogeneity of the
“area co-tradition” and by believing that developmental change
will be more or less uniform         throughout   the area, with no re-
   7. Armillas, 1948; W. C. Bennett, 1948; Larco Hoyle, 1948; Steward, 1948;
Strong, 19484; Willey, 19484; Caso, 1953.
   8. Kroeber, 1948, pp. 115-16.


                                         METHOD AND THEORY
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY    66
gional retardations. This is an unlikely possibility, certainly not a
demonstrated fact.®
   The scheme for eastern North America, referred to above (Ford
and Willey, 1941), employed stage lines rising obliquely from
south to north, and, apart from the circumstance that some of these
lines now appear to have been sloped the wrong way, it is likely
that this conception better fits the facts of chronology and develop-
ment. However, when all chronology is relative, as in this particu-
lar scheme, there are no firm landmarks for establishing relative
rates of cultural change from region to region. This will be one of
the important roles of true area chronologies based on independent
dating.
   When we shift from an areal to an interareal consideration of the
New World data, we note that only two comprehensive develop-
mental schemes have been formulated with recent archaeological
evidence.!° Julian Steward’s “functional-developmental” classifica-
tion of American high cultures is a scheme for equating the major
developmental stages of Middle American and Andean civiliza-
tions. These equations are made on the basis of technology for the
earlier stages and upon what might be called general configuration
in development for the later. Although Steward’s primary interest
in this particular paper was the areas of American high cultures (or
civilizations, as we have chosen to call them), his classification has
much wider applicability. He defines six “periods” which are in
effect developmental stages:        (1) “Pre-agricultural”;      (2) “Basic
Agricultural Beginnings”’; (3) “Basic or Inter-areal Developmental
or Formative’; (4) “Regional Developmental or Formative’’; (5)
“Regional Florescent”’; and (6) “Empire and Conquest.” In a later
article Steward proposes a similar classification of world-wide
   9. Extension of the concept of area co-tradition to the North American
Southwest by Martin and Rinaldo (1951) ran into immediate difficulties on this
account. See critiques in Rouse, 1954; Willey, 1954.
   10. Steward, 1948, and Krieger, 1953. Pedro Armillas has recently prepared
a synthesis of New World culture-history for the “Program of History of the
Americas” of the Pan-American Institute of Geography and History (MS of
September, 1954).



                 THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH        67
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
scope. With some changes in terminology, and with a considerable
expansion of later “eras,” this revised scheme is basically the same
as the first.!! Steward, in effect, sees the following major stages
(which he terms “eras’’) in the development of native American
civilizations: first, a pre-agricultural hunting and gathering stage;
second, the beginnings of agricultural experimentation; third, the
establishment of agriculture and permanent village life with spe-
cial ceremonial and political institutions, fourth, a climax of the
agricultural pattern with resultant artistic and technical elaborations
and the maximum development of “religious states’’; and, fifth, the
rise of urbanism, the secular state, and the formation of empires.
   Alex Krieger has recently proposed a somewhat similar classifi-
cation. At the International Symposium on Anthropology held by
the Wenner-Gren Foundation in New York in 1952, he read an in-
ventory paper on the archaeology of “Anglo-America,” in which
an immense amount of recent data was presented but without any
formal chronological or developmental structure. The latter he
supplied in the discussion period in a statement, subsequently re-
vised for publication, which not only presents the first adequate
developmental scheme for North America as a whole but also con-
tains the clearest discrimination between the concepts of stage and
period that we have yet seen in print:
    For present purposes, I will consider a “stage” to be a segment of a his-
torical   seat Wek   in a given area,   ehacaciericad: by a dominating       pattern   of

economic existence, The general economic life and outlines of social struc-
ture of past peoples can often be inferred from archaeological remains and
can be related to similar phenomena, whether the dates are known or not.

    11. Steward, 19492. In this study the eras are listed as: (1) “Hunting and
Gathering”;    (2) “Incipient Agriculture’;       (3) ‘‘Formative’”’;   (4) “Regional
Florescence”’; (5) “Initial Conquest’; (6) ‘Dark Ages’’; (7) “Cyclical Con-
quests”; (8) “Iron Age Culture’; and (9) “Industrial Revolution.’ Era 3 com-
bines Periods 3 and 4 from the first classification. Era 4 is the same as Period 5
in the first classification. Eras 5, 6, and 7 parallel Period 6 of the first classifica-
tion. Eras 8 and 9 are beyond the developmental range of New World civiliza-
tions,
    12. Krieger, 1953.



                                              METHOD AND THEORY         68
                                        IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
The term “period,” on the other hand, might be considered to depend upon
chronology. Thus a stage may be recognized by content alone, and, in the
event that accurate dates can be obtained for it inagiven area, it could be
said that the stage here existed during such-and-such a period. Further, the
same stage may be said to appear at different times or periods in different
areas and also to end at different times. A stage may also include several
locally distinctive culture complexes and minor time divisions. A great
deal of discussion is needed on these points.}*
Krieger’s scheme employs four major stage divisions: ‘“Paleo-In-
dian’’;4“Food-gathering”’; ““Food-producing”’; and “Urban Life.”
Tt will be noted that, although his main concern is still with “Anglo-
America,” i.e., North America north of Mexico, the classification
is one that would accommodate Middle and South American data
as well. His definitions parallel those of Steward rather closely.
“Paleo-Indian” does not have any real counterpart in Steward’s
scheme, evidence of this order of antiquity in the high-culture
areas being so slight at the time of Steward’s formulation. Krieger’s
“Food-gathering” is approximately equal to Steward’s ‘‘Pre-agri-
cultural,” with an overlap into “Basic Agricultural Beginnings”
perhaps, depending on where one prefers to put the emphasis in
cultures of mixed gathering—food-producing economy. Krieger’s
“Food-producing”’ would then take the rest of Steward’s “Basic
Agricultural Beginnings” and both his “Formative” stages, and
Krieger himself has made it explicit that he would bracket Stew-
ard’s “Regional Florescent”’ and “Empire and Conquest’’ together
in the stage he has designated as “Urban Life.”
   A comparison of the two classifications brings out the somewhat
different interests of the two classifiers. Steward was focusing his
attention on the areas of “high civilization” in the New World.
Krieger, while allowing for data of this type, was thinking in terms
of the simpler cultures of North America. The discrepancy be-
tween his “Food-gathering” and Steward’s “Basic Agricultural Be-
ginnings”’ reflects this. Steward, with the Peruvian sequence data
   13. Krieger, in Tax et al., 1953, p. 247.
   14. Krieger has recently proposed the term “‘Paleo-American” in place of
“Paleo-Indian” (Suhm and Krieger, 1954, p. 15).



                 THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH     69
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
on the Huaca Prieta premaize agriculturists in mind, conceived
of this stage as a slow transition from hunting and gathering to
agriculture. Krieger, to judge from his examples, was considering
the California cultures and the Archaic cultures of the eastern
United States as representative of the “Food-gathering”’ stage.
Actually, either concept might accommodate both the South and
the North American data. The Huaca Prieta culture of the Peruvian
coast depended for food on gathering as well as on agriculture; and
there is a reasonable possibility that some of the Archaic cultures of
the eastern United States were experimenting with plant domestica-
tion.
   To date, neither the Steward nor the Krieger scheme has been
applied to New World data in complete detail. These authors may
eventually do so. We make no claim that our effort here is a substi-
tute for the particular interpretations of either. The ideas they have
proposed, however, are of such wide and general interest to Ameri-
canists that additional points of view are desirable. In our previous
paper we put forward our particular scheme and subjected it to a
trial run by projecting a considerable amount of data against it.
This we propose to repeat here with certain modifications that we
will describe presently.
  Before doing so, however, we think it necessary to enter the
controversial domain of culture-evolutionary theory far enough at
least to demonstrate our contention that ours is not an evolutionary
scheme. In a paper written after the ones quoted above, Steward
defined with considerable precision three evolutionary approaches
in anthropology: unilinear, universal, and multilinear.2* It does not
seem necessary to support with long-winded arguments the state-
ment that the developmental classification proposed in these pages
conforms to neither of the two first-named approaches. The skepti-
cal reader is advised to read Steward’s paper, and if he still thinks
that what we are describing is unilinear or universal evolution (as
therein defined), then we have completely failed to explain what we
   15. Bird, 19482, 19485.
   16. Steward, 1953.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY    "
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY        O
are about. Whether it be multilinear evolution is a more difficult
question. In the general sense that we are concerned with a line of
cultural development in one part of the world, while recognizing
that there are other quite unrelated lines of development in other
parts of the world, this might be called multilinear evolution.
   But, if we understand Steward correctly, particularly his applica-
tion of the theory in recent publications,!” he is concerned with
tracing multiple lines of evolutionary development leading to
specific kinds of cultural features or whole cultures (his “culture
types”) wherever these may be found. His formulations are limited
in scope, more so than ours perhaps, but they are universals in the
sense that they are unrestricted geographically or chronologically.
A “theocratic irrigation state’’ can be designated as such whether
found in Peru or Mesopotamia, and the stages leading up to such
a culture type—if truly parallel—are reflections of inherent cul-
tural causality. Historical causality is important only in that it has
to be eliminated from the equation. Thus, in terms of basic theory,
as expounded in the introductory section of this book, Steward’s
multilinear evolution is on our explanatory level. We, on the other
hand, as already hinted, are classifying cultures in a sort of theoreti-
cal twilight. Cultures A and B are classified as Archaic because
they possess certain common denominators that we have chosen as
criteria for that stage. Their common possession of these features
may be the result of historical contact, environmental determina-
tion, homotaxis in a truly evolutionary sense, or any two or all
three of these. In other words, the system, if it can be called a sys-
tem, is not rigged to exclude any particular kind of explanation.
This is why we have stated that, although it seems to lie outside
the domain of culture-historical integration, above the descriptive
level of organization, it cannot claim to operate on the explanatory
level. This is also why we have chosen to call it “historical-develop-
mental” interpretation, which sounds like a contradiction in terms
but which expresses the fact that our stage concepts are not wholly
abstracted from the historical matrix. Within the geographical
   17. Steward et al., 1955.



                    HE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH   71
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
frame, large as it is, contact and diffusion may have played a larger
role than set deterministic relationships within the province of cul-
ture alone. Man’s biological and subcultural psychological and emo-
tional reactions cannot be omitted from the equation, nor can the
reality of the social groups in which he exists be denied its forma-
tive role. Environment and increases or decreases in size and dis-
tribution of population, reflected in cultural-ecological adaptations,
are also significant factors exerting strong influences on the nature
and direction of cultural change.

                         STAGE   DEFINITIONS   AND   FORMULATIONS

   In selecting criteria with which to define the stages of New
World culture-history, it is obvious, from the foregoing review of
the Steward and Krieger schemes, that there are but two broad
divisions of a fundamental          technological and economic nature:
hunters-gatherers and agriculturists. This is analogous to the broad
division in the Old World between the Paleolithic-Mesolithic
stages, on the one hand, and the Neolithic and later stages, on the
other. As in the Old World, these two general patterns of life have
a sequence relationship, with the hunters-gatherers preceding the
farmers. And, as is also the case in the Old World, there is a con-
siderable chronological overlap, with hunting-gathering cultures
persisting in some regions into periods of contemporaneity with
farming cultures. It should be recognized that no other differentia-
tion between stages with which we will deal has the same pro-
fundity and significance as this one. In this we are in agreement with
Robert Braidwood!® and Robert Redfield!’ who see the Old
World “urban revolution,” or “dawn of civilization,” as something
that was made possible by the establishment of agriculture several
millenniums earlier, but not as marking a technological and econom-
ic shift as profound as the one from food-gathering to food produc-
tion. This point of view is reflected in our stage criteria and termi-
nology. The criteria for dividing pre-agricultural stages are essen-
   18. Braidwood, 1952.
   19. Redfield, 1953.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY      2
tially technological. They refer to artifact types and traditions in
technology. The criteria for dividing stages above the threshold of
agriculture take reference in much more complex data. They per-
tain to social and political organization, religion, aesthetics—to the
whole of what Redfield has termed the “moral order.”
   Our method of formulating stages was to review archaeological
sequences from all parts of the New World in local and regional de-
tail, on an area basis and with reference to cross-areal comparisons.
Our first concern was to set up a series of trial stages by seeking
for clues to generalization between areas. We drew generalizations,
tested them by going back to primary sources on the regional and
local levels, and thus came to recognize certain ‘common denomi-
nator” criteria for each of the stages. Needless to add, with a pro-
cedure of this kind, our trial stages and the criteria of definition
changed constantly. This was true during preparation of the first
published article,?° and there is testimony to the fact that changes
have continued in this present version. In 1955 we proposed six
historical-developmental stages. We are now proposing five stages,
with some changes in terminology and in criteria of definition. A
quick comparison of the two schemes may be set down as follows:
                      1955                       1957
            Postclassic stage              Postclassic stage
            Classic stage                  Classic stage
            Formative stage                Formative stage
            Preformative stage
            Archaic stage                  Archaic stage
            Early Lithic stage             Lithic stage

The present ‘“‘Lithic” corresponds almost exactly to the former
“arly Lithic”; reasons for dropping the “early” will be given in
the next chapter. The “Archaic” stage remains about the same,
except for some modifications resulting from the elimination of
the “‘Preformative.”” Phases and cultures formerly assigned to the
“Preformative” have been divided between the “Archaic” and the
  20. Willey and Phillips, 1955.


                THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH        7 3
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
“Formative.” Otherwise the ‘“‘Formative,”’ “‘Classic,’”’ and ‘‘Post-
classic”’ are essentially unchanged in so far as archaeological con-
tent is concerned;   in definition and emphasis upon criteria, there
have been some changes.
   Before we set forth our definitions of these stages, it may be well
to consider briefly a difficulty that inheres in all developmental in-
terpretation, to wit, the familiar problem of cultural lag. We have
found it useful to differentiate between two kinds of lag situations:
belated and marginal. The first is one in which a culture shows the
essential characteristics of a given stage long after the time general-
ly considered to be appropriate to that stage. This is in effect a
temporal marginality, often referred to as a “late marginal situa-
tion.” The second kind of situation, to which the term “marginal”
applies primarily in a cultural sense, is one in which a culture shows
significant characteristics of a given developmental stage in a con-
figuration which, as a whole, fails to measure up to the definition
of that stage. In the first, it is primarily a matter of persistence
without change; in the second, it is a matter of change that, from
the standpoint of the developmental criteria employed, is one-sided
or incomplete. This second type of cultural, as opposed to merely
temporal, marginality can also under certain conditions be the re-
sult of developmental regression, as we shall have many occasions
to point out.
  Marginal cultures are usually belated as well; so, in effect, the
distinction we are trying to make is between cultures that are sim-
ply belated and those that are both belated and marginal, in the sense
in which we are using these terms. Figure 2 is a very crude expres-
sion of the relationship, which may be clarified by the use of ex-
amples. Culture 4 in this figure is a belated Lithic culture, some-
what theoretical, it must be confessed, because our definition of
Lithic is not so unrestricted temporally as some of the other stages.
This would be a culture late enough to have received influences
from Archaic (or later) stage cultures but sufficiently immune to
such influences to permit us to classify it as Lithic without any
qualifications beyond those implied in the term “belated.” is


                                    METHOD AND THEORY
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY    74
simpler language, some Archaic elements may be present, but these
are not sufficient to raise any classificatory difficulties. Certain
late Lithic cultures in the North American Great Plains might be
used as examples. Culture B, on the other hand, is marginal Archaic
in the sense that it has incorporated sufficient Archaic elements to
take it out of the Lithic category but not enough to qualify fully
as an Archaic stage culture. Many, if not all, Plains Archaic cul-




                                           or

             (=)

    Lithic

 Fic. 2.—Belated and marginal cultures in relation to developmental stages

tures appear to be of this character. Culture C is a belated Archaic
culture, and here we are on firm ground, for there are many ex-
amples available, some coming right down to very recent times.
Most of the ethnographic cultures of the peripheral areas of North
and South America could be classified as belated Archaic. Culture
D, marginal Formative, is well illustrated by many of the Middle
Woodland cultures of eastern North America, which received sig-
nificant elements of the Formative Adena-Hopewell culture with-
out profound modification of their essentially Archaic pattern.
There are many marginal Formative cultures of the regressive type.
Since Formative culture presupposes a stable economic base, usually


                THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH       7 5
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
agricultural, movement of cultures into areas unfavorable to that
base or an unfavorable change of climate will often result in re-
gression to an Archaic stage of development. Culture E on the dia-
gram is belated Formative. This is the situation of many New
World Formative cultures. Classic and Postclassic stage cultures
are all so late that it does not add anything meaningful to distinguish
some of them as belated, and so these are not shown on the dia-
gram. Marginal Classic, F in the diagram, is well represented in
lower Central America, in cultures such as Nicoya, Costa Rica,
etc. Culture G is a rather special case intended to show that develop-
mental marginality may, under certain conditions, “skip” a stage.
An example is to be seen in the Quebrada de Humahuaca region of
northwestern Argentina, where Inca influence operating on an es-
sentially Formative level has produced a culture of marginal Post-
classic type.
    The point of this apparent hair-splitting is that a vast number of
New World cultures are belated or marginal in the sense here given
these terms, and in many cases their classification hinges on our
ability to say which. There is probably no such thing as a pure be-
lated culture, i.e., one that fails to show any elements of higher de-
velopmental stages whatever, and there is probably no such thing
as a marginal culture that is not belated to some degree. So it usual-
ly comes down to the question of the number of developmentally
significant elements and their relationships to the total configura-
tion, which will in fact determine whether we classify a culture as
a belated culture of a given stage or a marginal culture of a higher
one. These qualifiers are designed to enable us to hedge on difficult
classificatory decisions, and they will be used pretty freely in the
pages to follow. This will perhaps contribute little in the way of
culture-developmental understanding but will at least point up some
of the difficulties of large-scale developmental interpretation.
   The remaining pages of this book will be devoted to comprehen-
sive definitions of the five stages enumerated above, to their identi-
fication, examination, and evaluation in terms of archaeological se-
quences and syntheses. Before we start this trial run, let us make it


                                     METHOD AND THEORY
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY      6
very clear that we are under no illusion that this is anything re-
motely resembling a natural system. There is nothing inevitable
about five stages; there might as well be four, or even eight. Nor
is there any law, evolutionary or otherwise, that says that all New
World cultures must pass through these stages one after the other in
their proper order. We cannot even say, for example, that an
Archaic stage culture will “in the natural course of events’’ pass
on to the Formative stage. Whether or not it will do so depends ona
multiplicity of factors, not all of which are in the domain of culture.
As we have previously stated, our basic theoretical position is that
culture is not an independent order of phenomena intelligible in
terms of itself alone (the “‘cultural superorganic’’), and from this it
follows that there are no universal, irreversible processes of cultural
development. We are not, in short, attempting to impose an evolu-
tionary or any other kind of determinism on the data of New World
archaeology. Nor can we accept the criticism that ours are not the
“right” stages, if such criticism carries the implication that “right”
stages are to be found. This attitude involves an important method-
ological distinction between what we have called culture-historical
integration and developmental interpretation, our present concern.
The aim of the first was the organization of archaeological data in
terms of a real world. However far short of attainment it falls, our
object was the formulation of archaeological units that have (or
rather had) a correspondent historical reality. It therefore seems
possible that such units may be judged as to their “rightness.” In
developmental interpretation, on the other hand, we abstract, not
only from the primary data but from the above-mentioned inte-
grated units as well, certain characteristics that seem to have sig-
nificance from the point of view of the general development of New
World culture. In a general sense the sequence is historical as well
as developmental, but the individual stages can have no correspond-
ent historical unity or reality. Therefore the test of “rightness” is
irrelevant. This also disposes of the idea that developmental stage
formulations must not be “set”’ until we know all the archaeology—
which will be never.


                THE   HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH   f,7
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   Finally, it is clearly impossible in the space available to survey
the entire field of American archaeology. The most we can do is to
sample liberally from all areas and periods in the hope that no sig-
nificant block of data is overlooked altogether. It is not to be ex-
pected that the specialist in any area will be satisfied. We may plead
in extenuation, however, that the purpose of our inquiry is not to
effect a tight classification of New World cultures but to explore
the possibilities of this kind of approach.




                                   METHOD AND THEORY    7}
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY      8
