                                                         Chapter 4




                                              Lithic Stage
                                                        DEFINITIONS

In our previous paper we designated and defined the earliest stage
of American culture as “Early Lithic.””! This stage was conceived
of as embracing two major categories of stone technology: (1) un-
specialized and largely unformulated core and flake industries,
with percussion the dominant and perhaps only technique employed,
and (2) industries exhibiting more advanced “‘blade”’ techniques of
stoneworking, with specialized fluted or unfluted lanceolate points
the most characteristic artifact types. At that time we hesitated to
use this division as a basis for setting up two separate stages in our
classification, because there seemed to be insufficient evidence of a
time differential between them. The evidence is still inconclusive,
although the case for a distinct and earlier core and flake stage is
somewhat stronger than it was. We still adhere to our original de-
cision to consider all these early evidences of man in America as
a single stage, but we recognize the good possibility of an eventual
division along the lines suggested above. In view of this possibility,
we have modified our terminology and will refer hereinafter to this
earliest New World stage simply as “‘Lithic,” allowing for future
separation into “upper” and “lower” Lithic stages, if such a course
seems advisable.
   “Lithic” is not entirely satisfactory as a name, but we have so
far been unable to come up with anything better. Its sole merit is
that the evidence on this stage is predominantly in the category of
  1. Willey and Phillips, 1955, pp. 730-39.



                                               LITHIC   STAGE   i,9
stone technology (although there is an increasing number of early
bone finds). The terms most commonly applied to this stage,
‘‘Paleo-Indian” or “Paleo-American,” are open to a serious objec-
tion, in our view, in that they imply a grand twofold division of
New World prehistory, with a “Neo-Indian” or ““Neo-American”
stage as a counterpoise. There is a grand twofold division, as we
have shown, but the hinge comes later in the sequence, viz., between
the Archaic and the Formative.
   The Lithic stage cannot be defined without reference to geo-
chronological considerations. Illogical as it may appear in a de-
velopmental scheme, we have to start with the flat assertion that
the Lithic is the stage of adaptation by immigrant societies to the
late glacial and early postglacial climatic and physiographic condi-
tions in the New World. The effective working criteria are, there-
fore, associations of artifacts and other evidences of man’s activity
in geological deposits, or with plant and animal remains, reflecting
these times and conditions. When types so established are found
without such associations, which is more often the case, the rela-
tionships are inferred in the normal archaeological manner, with
the result that an immense corpus of Lithic stage data is available
in the literature but has not so far been subjected to effective inte-
gration and synthesis.
    The nature of these finds has led to the assumption that the pre-
dominant economic activity in this stage was hunting, with major
emphasis on large herbivores, including extinct Pleistocene forms,
and that the general pattern of life, like that of the animals on which
it depended, was migratory in the full sense of the word. The possi-
bility of a measure of circularity entering into this assumption can-
not be investigated here but certainly should not be ignored. In any
case, upon this basis many American students have erected a simple
historical and typological dichotomy: an early hunting stage fol-
lowed by a gathering stage, each with its own characteristic tech-
nological traditions. In the present classification, although we have
not been able to avoid this attractive simplification altogether, we
will try to maintain a critical attitude toward it. An early non-agri-


                                    METHOD AND THEORY     SO
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
cultural society would presumably make the best possible use—
within the limits of its culture—of whatever animal and vegetal
resources were available; consequently, the relative importance of
hunting and gathering would be a function of the ecological and
technological balance in a particular place and time. Quite pos-
sibly, however, the natural conditions in the late glacial and early
postglacial times postulated for the Lithic stage may actually have
been more favorable generally to hunting than to gathering, and
technological limitations (lack of milling techniques and imple-
ments?) may have contributed to tip the balance further. We would
say, then, for purposes of definition, that the Lithic is pre-emi-
nently a hunting stage, though other economic patterns were cer-
tainly present whose local dominance, under certain conditions,
is not precluded.
   Known details of culture in the Lithic stage are few. Lithic
stone technology covers an immense range of rough- and chipped-
stone traditions? but does not include the practice of grinding and
polishing. Work in bone and horn is assumed to have been impor-
tant, but the evidence has largely disappeared.* Settlement and habi-
tation patterns were such as to leave few traces in the ground. Cor-
related with the absence of house remains is the scarcity of deep
refuse deposits. Sociopolitical inferences for this stage are hazard-
ous in the extreme. A small-scale kinship type of organization is
postulated, but, within this generalization, great variability and a
high degree of specialization must be allowed for. The data do not
support the view that because Lithic cultures are relatively simple
they are also uniform. Let us not forget that the major portions of
both American continents were “pioneered” on this stage.
    2. “Rough” refers to artifacts shaped by use rather than design; “chipped,”
to artifacts shaped by techniques ranging from crude percussion to controlled
pressure flaking and fine-edge retouching.
   3. Sufficient evidence of early bone finds has been summarized        by Krieger
(19514; 1953, p. 242) and by Cotter (1954, p. 65) to suggest that, if condi-
tions were   more   favorable   for preservation,   traditions   of bone technology
might rank with stone in the definition of Lithic stage culture.



                                                      LITHIC STAGE     81
                         A POSSIBLE   EARLY    PERCUSSION    STAGE
                                         OF STONE    TECHNOLOGY

   Before considering the better-known Lithic cultures of the New
World, we may as well first get the problem of the putative “lower”
Lithic stage out of the way. There is considerable documentation
for such a stage, but its evaluation is extremely difficult for the
present writers, in whose fields of specialization stone technology
plays a distinctly minor role. It seems to us that, if this is ever to
be more than a theoretical stage in the development of American
culture as a whole, certain questions have to be answered in the
affirmative: (1) Have stone complexes of this nature been found
unmixed in specific sites under controlled conditions? (2) Do they
constitute true assemblages, i.e., can the possibility be ruled out
that they represent only partial inventories of the total tool com-
plex owing to special conditions? Tools from a quarry site or a
butchering station, where only a segment of the total economic ac-
tivity is represented, might be cases in point. (3) Finally, and most
importantly, can it be shown that there is a time differential be-
tween these percussion industries and the more specialized indus-
tries that would be classed as “upper’’ Lithic if such a division
were made? This does not mean, of course, that al] percussion as-
semblages must be early but that some of them are is a minimum
requirement.
   The outstanding proponent among Americanists for this early
percussion stage is Alex Krieger, who referred to some of the evi-
dence in its favor in his paper at the International Symposium on
Anthropology in 1952. More recently he summarized the evidence
in greater detail at an informal meeting of American archaeologists
held at Andover, Massachusetts,          in April, 1956.4 The finds re-
garded as significant by Krieger are briefly as follows: (1) Heavy
percussion-flaked tools and sharpened bone splinters found at Te-
quisquiac in the Valley of Mexico in 1870, deep down in the Up-

    4. We are grateful to Alex D. Krieger for allowing us to use this informa-
tion and to Frederick Johnson, of the R. S. Peabody Foundation, who supplied
us with a transcript of the meeting.


                                        METHOD AND THEORY       82
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
per Becerra formation only two feet above the caliche layer that
separates it from the Lower Becerra—caliche estimated by geolo-
gists to be of mid-Wisconsin date.' (2) An obsidian flake, crude
choppers and scrapers, and a split and pointed bone implement, from
Tule Springs, Nevada.® Charcoal thought to be of human origin from
this site was dated as older than 23,800 years.” Faunal associations
included mammoth, horse, and (mostly) camel. (3) Worked bones
including a bone tube from the famous Potter Creek Cave in north-
ern California, excavated by paleontologists in 1870. The deposit
contained an abundant middle to late Pleistocene fauna. After con-
siderable controversy,® the finds were rejected as “water-worn
bones,” but they have been seen recently by Krieger, who declares
them to be artifacts.* (4) Very crude chipped stones of possible hu-
man workmanship and a bone tube found with a rich late Pleisto-
cene fauna in Friesenhahn Cave in south-central Texas.!° The bone
tube, found beneath the skeleton of a saber-toothed cat, is similar
to the one from Potter Creek Cave and may, in Krieger’s opinion,
help to authenticate the otherwise dubious human origin of the
stone objects. (5) Three rude sandstone heads found underneath
twenty-six feet of gravel near Malakoff, Henderson                       County,
Texas," not generally accepted by archaeologists but believed by
Krieger to be “probably” of human workmanship. If so, there is
not much to be said for the skill of the workman. (6) Basin-shaped
hearths on Santa Rosa Island, off the southern California coast,
containing masses of split bones of dwarf mammoth but no un-

    5. The artifacts are mentioned and illustrated in de Terra, 1949, pp. 46, 66,
Pls. 9f, 105. Radiocarbon dates earlier than 6000 B.c. have been obtained from
the top few inches of the Upper Becerra formation; according to Krieger, the
artifacts must be considerably older than this date.
   6. Harrington, 1955.
   7. Sample No. C-914 (Libby, 19542).
   8. For a selected bibliography of the dispute over the Potter Creek finds see
Sellards, 1952, p. 123.
   9. Krieger, 1953, p. 240.             10. Sellards, 1952, p. 94, Fig. 43.
   11. Sellards, 1941; 1952, pp. 99-105, Fig. 47.



                                                  LITHIC   STAGE   8 3
mistakable artifacts, which yielded a very early radiocarbon age
of about 30,000 years (not yet published). A number of other
finds of this putative pre-projectile-point category were rejected
by Krieger because of uncertainty of their status as artifacts, lack
of dating, or both. These include: G. F. Carter’s La Jolla and San
Diego finds;!? the Imlay Channel finds in eastern Michigan;'* the
Black’s Fork culture of southwestern Wyoming;'* the Malpais
industry of the Mohave Desert in southern California;* and the
Death Valley finds in the same region.’ This list might be extended
to include the Albuquerque, Comanche Springs, and Rio Puerco
finds in central New Mexico;"7 the Tolchaco complex of the Little
Colorado River in Arizona;!8 and the Farmington complex in the
foothills of the Sierra Nevada of central California. It is manifest-
ly unfair to list all these finds together without comment, as though
they were all of equal standing. Some of them, especially the two
last named, appear to be valid assemblages that are typologically
“lower” Lithic, but confirmative evidence of early date is lacking.
   Our timid conclusion is that none of the finds cited by Krieger,
or those added by us, fully answers the requirements of the classifi-
catory problem. Some of them indicate a strong probability of the
presence of man on the North American continent at a considerably
more remote period than the “end of the Pleistocene’ usually at-
tributed to the better-known “upper” Lithic cultures. But there is
a possibility that these cultures, too, have to be pushed farther back
into the past. Radiocarbon ages for the Sandia culture in excess of
20,000 years have been recently published though not generally
credited.?° Clovis, the earliest known culture sharing the fluted-
point tradition, has not yet been satisfactorily dated, so far as the

  12. Carter, 1949, 1950, 1952, 1954.

  13. Baggerly, 1954.

  14. Renaud,   1938, 1940.             17. Hibben, 1951.

  15. M. J. Rogers, 1939.               18. Bartlett, 1942, 1943.
  16. Clements and Clements, 1951.      19, Treganza, 1952.
  20. Sample Nos. M-247, M-349 (Crane, 1956). Cf. p. 91, n. 47.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY      84
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
present writers are aware. A partial overlapping contemporaneity
with Sandia is not an unreasonable hypothesis.2 Even when this
possibility is disregarded, however, and the temporal priority of
the finds that Krieger has assembled is accepted, it nevertheless re-
mains a fact that the evidence in the form of artifacts associated
with these remote cultures is insufficient to support the assumption
of a prior state of percussion technology. To be sure, there are no
points or other artifacts that suggest a “higher” stage, but in no
single instance among the datable occurrences is the artifact sample
large enough to be conclusive.
   One of the complications of this problem of dividing the Lithic
into two stages is that, in the Greater Southwest and contiguous
areas, where most of the early finds have been made, the percussive
techniques and characteristic tool types seem to have persisted
with little change (to our unpracticed eyes) and with continued
dominance into cultures that we have classified on other grounds
as Archaic. Thus, the precise classificatory difficulty is to distin-
guish between Archaic cultures and Lithic cultures that would
be “lower” rather than “upper,” if such a division were to be
made. It is this, perhaps as much as the uncertainties of dating,
that has kept us from making such a division.
   We conclude, then, about as in our 1955 paper: The possibility
of a “lower” Lithic stage of technology in the Americas remains
an intriguing hypothesis. The case for temporal priority has grown
stronger but remains to be proved, whereas persistence of such a
percussion technology into post-Lithic times is more certain than
ever. The general impression, from a world-wide standpoint, is one
of marginal survival rather than technological regression, and we
still feel that Linton’s suggestion that the industries in question
represent a belated survival of very early technological traditions
distantly related to the lower Paleolithic cultures of Southeast
Asia is an exciting possibility. Nevertheless, we are both unwilling
    21. Compare the finds at the Lucy site, in central New Mexico, where San-
dia points, including fluted examples, were found in the same “blowouts” with
typical Clovis points (Roosa, 1956).



                                                LITHIC STAGE   85
and unable to set up the “lower” Lithic as an independent stage in
the present classification.
                                                  NORTH AMERICA
   We move onto surer ground with the cultures that would be
“upper” if a division of the Lithic were made. The best-known
areas for finds on this stage are the central and southern North
American High Plains and adjacent eastern foothills of the Rocky
Mountains, home of a series of early cultures sometimes collec-
tively referred to as Folsom-Yuma, on account of the highly spe-
cialized projectile points that bear those names. Available data
consist of a few thin habitation sites, a larger number of game
“kills” and butchering stations, and innumerable surface finds in
“blowouts,” where they are associated with other objects of all
ages, and in isolated spots, without associations of any kind. The
nature of the finds is such as to yield a fragmentary and incomplete .
view of the total archaeological culture and, except in one or two
lucky instances, even of the total stone assemblage. The conse-
quent emphasis on projectile points—the various types of which
are used for identifying the “cultures” —and on knives, scrapers,
and other tools supposedly used in butchering, skinning, and pre-
paring skins, has undoubtedly resulted in a one-sided view expressed
in the frequent designation “early hunting cultures.”
   The earliest cultures of this category are Clovis and Folsom,
with their celebrated fluted projectile points and extinct faunal as-
sociations.” Clovis is not only stratigraphically older than Folsom??
but is consistently associated with remains of mammoth and other
Pleistocene fauna,?4 whereas Folsom is usually found with an ex-
    22. The Folsom site in northeastern New Mexico will long be famous as the
scene of the first association of human artifacts with remains of extinct fauna
in an incontestable early postglacial geological context, probably the most im-
portant “breakthrough” in the history of American archaeology. See Cook,
1927; Figgins, 1927; Roberts, 1935, 1936a.
   23. At Blackwater No. 1 site near Clovis in eastern New Mexico (Sellards,
1952, pp. 29-31).
   24. Figgins, 1933; E. B. Howard et al., 1935; Sellards, 1952; Haury, 1953a;
Roosa, 1956.



                                        METHOD AND THEORY
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY        86
tinct bison that differs only slightly from modern forms. Clovis
points are more generalized in form and distribution; Folsom seems
to represent a late climax of the fluted-point tradition that is con-
fined to the Plains. The Folsom culture has been dated around
8000 B.c., a date which appears to be consistent with the geological
and climatic conditions.* Since there is a rather complete shift in
faunal associations between the two cultures, Clovis must be very
considerably older. Thus we have to reckon with the possibility of
a very early beginning and an immensely long time span for the
fluted-point tradition in North America.”
   Considerably more recent, but still on the Lithic stage, is the
tradition of fine parallel flaking on points that used to be called
Yuma but now are more often referred to as Eden-Scottsbluff. This
culture, or cultures—it is difficult to apply consistent terminology
to assemblages of which only the projectile points have been ade-
quately described—is stratigraphically younger than Folsom,?’ and
this relationship is to a certain extent confirmed by radiocarbon
dates of 4000-5000 B.c.?8
   The older dichotomy between fluted and parallel-flaked tradi-
tions, expressed in the terms “Folsom” and (now largely super-
   25. 7932 + 350 B.c. at the Lubbock site in northwestern Texas (sample
No. C-558 [Libby, 1951]).
   26. An unexpectedly early radiocarbon date of 35000 B.c. plus for Clovis
has been recently published (Time magazine, August 6, 1956, p. 42). This re-
markable date was obtained by the Humble Oil Company laboratory on char-
coal from a hearth at the Lewisville site, near Dallas, Texas. A typical Clovis
point was found in close proximity to the hearth. Qualified archaeologists who
have investigated the finds accept the association, but the date is altogether out
of line with previous estimates, a consensus of which would give to Clovis an
age of about 12,000 years.                ;
   27. At the Finley site in southwestern Wyoming (Moss et al., 1951) and
the MacHaffie site near Helena, Montana (Forbis and Sperry, 1952).
   28. At the Horner site in northwestern Wyoming. Actual dates are 4925 +
250 B.c. (sample No. C-302 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]) and 4966 + 500 B.c.
(sample No. C-795 [Libby, 1954a]). Scottsbluff-like points at the Ft. 41 and Ft.
50 sites in the Medicine Creek locality of Nebraska are dated considerably ear-
lier, but the final report on the stratigraphy and association has not yet ap-
peared (Schultz and Frankforter, 1948; Davis and Schultz, 1952; Davis, 1953).



                                                   LITHIC   STAGE   8i
seded) “Yuma,” has given way before an increasing accumulation
of typologically intermediate forms, which may have been inter-
mediate in time also. We refer to various point types which at
first were called “unfluted Folsom” because of their general re-
semblance to Clovis and Folsom in shape but which exhibit a
flaking technique more like a crude approach to the fine parallel
flaking of Eden-Scottsbluff. The best-documented points and “‘cul-
tures’’ of this general intermediate category are: San Jon,”* Plain-
view,?0 Long (or Angostura),*! Portales, and Mailnesand.3* A
general continuity of these cultures with Clovis-Folsom, on the one
hand, and Eden-Scottsbluff, on the other, is indicated by the other,
less characteristic implements associated with these point types,
which further suggests an intermediate temporal position, and the
faunal associations and few available radiocarbon dates are in agree-
ment.4
   Thus we appear to have in the Great Plains an immensely long
continuity of culture based primarily on the hunting of large mam-
mals—from wholly extinct Pleistocene forms down to the modern
bison—marked off into archaeological units mainly by changes in
projectile-point forms. This obviously oversimplified picture masks
an actual situation of great complexity that is in need of further or-
ganization.
   Many of the point types referred to above, particularly those
of the fluted-point tradition, have a near-continental distribution.
The Clovis-like points have such general distribution that it is un-
safe to specify any major unglaciated areas in North America
where they are not found. They seem to be relatively scarce, how-
ever, on the Pacific Coast and in the nearby intermontane plateau
and desert areas, and only doubtful specimens have been reported
from Mexico and farther south. They also tend to diminish north-
   29. Roberts, 1942.
   30. Sellards, Evans, and Meade, 1947.   32. Sellards, 1952, pp. 72-74.
   31. Hughes, 1949.                        33. Sellards, 1955.
   34, 5122 + 300 B.c. for Plainview and Long (Angostura) points at the
Allen site in southwestern South Dakota (sample No. C-604 [Libby, 1951]).



                                       METHOD AND THEORY      88
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
ward, a circumstance unfavorable to any theory of specific Asiatic
origin. Perhaps the greatest total of fluted points have come from
the Mississippi Valley and the East, but until fairly recently very
little could be said about associated complexes, Now sites are being
reported, and we can begin to speak of phases and cultures. In the
Enterline culture of the Middle Atlantic subarea, we have Clovis-
like fluted points and a complete stone assemblage with some char-
acteristics that are not found in western fluted-point cultures.3° The
recently reported Bull Brook        site near Ipswich, Massachusetts,
shows relationships to both Enterline and Clovis along with indi-
vidual features of its own.**. Some of the fluted points from Bull
Brook are said to be practically indistinguishable from the points
found inside the carcass of the Naco mammoth in faraway Ari-
zona.’7 Fluted points from another New England site, the Reagan
site in northwestern Vermont,        show considerable variance from
western norms, however.*§ An important center for surface finds,
the lower Ohio Valley and Tennessee-Cumberland regions pro-
duced the first eastern fluted-point site, the Parrish site in western
Kentucky,*? and it seems possible that the well-known “Ohio” or
“Cumberland” fluted point may be the marker type for another, as
yet unformulated, culture which may also include recently dis-
covered sites in northern Alabama.*? It is commonly held by west-
ern archaeologists that the eastern distribution of the fluted-point
tradition represents a belated extension of early western hunting
societies forced out of the High Plains by the advent of arid condi-
tions in the altithermal period. Since there are no extinct faunal as-
sociations and practically no dating of any kind for eastern fluted-
point cultures, this theory is not directly refutable. However, the
present trend of dating in the East is pushing the later Archaic stage
   35. McCary, 1951; Witthoft, 1952.
   36. Eldridge and Vacaro, 1952; Byers, 1954, 1955.
  37. Byers, 1956, p. 9, citing personal communication from Emil Haury.
  38. Ritchie, 1953.               39. Webb, 1951a.
   40. Lewis and Kneberg, 1951; Lewis, 1953; Kleine, 1953; Soday, 1954;
Mahan, 1954-55.



                                              LITHIC STAGE   89
cultures back to a point that leaves little if any time for such a move-
ment to have taken place.
  Some of the point types that we have tentatively placed in an
“intermediate” category, especially Plainview, also have been re-
ported widely in the East, but, since the forms are more generalized,
the nature of the relationship to their western counterparts con-
tinues to be questionable. Complaints of uncritical use of western
point typology by eastern archaeologists usually have to do with
this category of types. “Plainview” points, for example, have been
reported from many sites and complexes in the East, often on the
basis of superficial resemblances that may have no culture-historical
significance whatever. The contexts are usually Archaic, which al-
lows us to sidestep the problem momentarily.
  Parallel-flaked points of Eden-Scottsbluff types are less often
reported in the East. Their general distribution in, North America
seems to be more northerly than that of the earlier fluted-point
types, which possibly reflects a northward drift of the early Plains
hunting cultures and their quarry with the slow retreat of the late
Wisconsin ice.
  In the areas considered so far, most if not all of the early finds
pertain to hunting cultures, and the relationship between hunters
and gatherers is not a problem. On the other hand, when we turn
to the Southwest and the contiguous Basin and California desert
areas, we find an environment which, for a period that extends very
far back into the past, fostered a gathering—small-game-hunting
way of life, for which “Desert culture” is a commonly accepted
term. For reasons that will appear later, we have relegated the
Desert cultures en bloc to the Archaic stage, even though some of
them show evidences, including radiocarbon dates, of comparable
antiquity to Folsom and other Lithic cultures of the Plains. In the
Southwest proper, the best-known Desert culture is the Cochise.
In our first paper we classified the earliest phase of Cochise,
the Sulphur Spring “‘stage,”’ as Early Lithic because of its extinct
faunal associations and what at that time we regarded as early radio-
  41. Sayles and Antevs, 1941.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY   90
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
carbon dates.*” These dates are no longer too early for Archaic,
and there is even some question about the association of the ex-
tinct fauna.*? Furthermore, projectile points, formerly thought to
be non-existent in Sulphur Spring, have since turned up in subse-
quent excavations, and these are the same Pinto-like points that oc-
cur in the later Chiricahua phase.‘ It appears that, notwithstand-
ing the time gap indicated by carbon 14 dating between Sulphur
Spring and Chiricahua—which is certainly Archaic—the con-
tinuity in artifact types is more pronounced than the differences.
   That there is an indisputable Lithic stage in the Southwest, how-
ever, and that it is chronologically early is evidenced by the re-
mains of hunting cultures similar to, and in some cases specifically
related to, the “upper” Lithic cultures of the Plains and the East.
Perhaps the earliest is the Sandia culture, first encountered in a cave
in the Sandia Mountains near Albuquerque, New Mexico. This
culture, with its characteristic asymmetrically stemmed (Solutrian-
like) points, was associated in the lower levels of the cave with a
rich Pleistocene fauna in a geological context estimated by an emi-
nently qualified geologist to be of Wisconsin interstadial age,* and
was stratigraphically overlain by younger deposits containing a late
Folsom or an “intermediate” stone complex that also had extinct
faunal associations. Radiocarbon ages of over 20,000 years for
mammoth ivory from the Sandia level have been recently pub-
lished,*? but, notwithstanding these combined evidences of high
antiquity, the temporal position of Sandia is still in question.*®

   42. Dates for Sulphur Spring Cochise are: 5805 + 370 B.c. and 4259 +
450 B.c. (sample Nos. C-216 and C-511    [Arnold and Libby, 1951]).
   43. Information by J. Charles Kelley given at the Radiocarbon Conference»
Andover, October, 1956.
   44. E. B. Sayles (verbal communication,   1955).
   45. Hibben, 1937, 1941.              46. Bryan, in Hibben, 1941.
   47. Sample Nos. M-247, M-349     (Crane, 1956). For an impression of the
uncertainty surrounding these important dates see Hibben, 1955, and Crane,
1955.
   48. Johnson, n.d.



                                                 LITHIC   STAGE   9]
   Recent evidence from the Lucy site in central New Mexico sug-
gests Sandia’s possible overlapping contemporaneity with Clovis,
Sandia’s principal rival for the distinction of being the oldest pro-
jectile-point-bearing culture in the Americas.*? From the stand-
point of continental distribution, however, Sandia has proved a
disappointment. Unlike Clovis and Folsom points (particularly the
former), which, once properly recognized and defined, turned up
in great numbers all over the country, Sandia points are still ex-
tremely rare, and occurrences outside the type locality are typologi-
cally dubious.°°
   Other evidences that the Southwest was not lacking in early
hunting cultures classifiable as Lithic were found in the lower level
of Ventana Cave in south-central Arizona—a somewhat impover-
ished Folsom-like culture with abundant extinct faunal associa-
tions, in a “humid” deposit referable to one of the later substages
of the Wisconsin glaciation®*\—and in a large number of surface
finds more specificially related to the Lithic cultures of the Plains.
More spectacular was the discovery of typical Clovis points in-
side the carcass of a mammoth at Naco in southwestern Arizona.
It has been suggested that such finds may reflect a seasonal hunting
aspect of cultures which in their entirety would conform to the
prevailing Desert pattern.** If true, this would be very embarrass-
ing, because we would be found to have classified two activities of
the same culture in separate developmental stages. As a hypothesis
   49. Roosa, 1956.
   50. Hibben, 1946; Wormington, 1949, p. 75. The difficulty of identifica-
tion is that asymmetrically stemmed points or “‘knives’” are found in many
North American stone assemblages of various ages. Within the range of vari-
ability of this class of artifacts, individual specimens might easily approximate
the Sandia type without any culture-historical significance. See M. W. Hill,
1953, Ritchie, 1953, Kleine, 1953, and Lewis, 19544, for examples that come
close to Sandia forms. There is also an early(?) Archaic lozenge-shaped point
that tends to look like Sandia.
   51. Haury et al., 1950.
   52. Hurt, 1942; Haynes, 1955.
   53. Haury, 1953a.         54. Cressman, 1951, p. 294; Haury, 19534, Paleo



                                         METHOD AND THEORY        9 2.
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
it cannot be ignored; in a transitional phase like Sulphur Spring
Cochise it might be a reasonable expectation. However, the present
trend of dating appears to support the contrary view—that the
finds really do pertain to an earlier, predominantly hunting stage of
culture in the Southwest.
   In a brief summary of our discussion of the Lithic stage thus far,
the following points may be emphasized: (1) The principal stage
criteria are rough- and chipped-stone artifacts. (2) The natural
context is that of the late glacial and early postglacial environments
of the New World. (3) The areas where these evidences are most
complete are western North America, particularly the High Plains
and the Southwest. (4) Iwo major technological traditions, or
groups of traditions, are postulated: one characterized by pressure
flaking and lanceolate blades, the other by percussion chipping and
crude choppers and scrapers. (5) There are indications that the per-
cussion chopper-scraper traditions may have earlier beginnings than
the pressure-flaked-blade traditions, but this remains to be demon-
strated as a fact. There is certainly good evidence that the two
existed contemporaneously for a long time. (6) The pressure-
flaked-blade traditions are clearly best adapted to the ancient grass-
land environment of the Plains and the East and to the hunting of
large mammals     now   extinct,   whereas   the percussion      chopper-
scraper traditions seem more at home in the semiarid environments
of the Greater Southwest, where they are associated with gather-
ing economies. This is not an iron-clad separation, however, and in
some instances both may be exemplified in the archaeological as-
semblage of a single culture. (7) It should be understood that both
groups of traditions, the early forms of which are markers for the
Lithic stage, show continuity into later cultures of the succeeding
Archaic stage. This is particularly true of the percussion chopper-
scraper traditions, which carry on into the Archaic Desert cultures
of the Greater Southwest.
   So far we have drawn examples from Lithic stage cultures in the
Southwest and the Plains, with a brief side glance at the East.
There are in the rest of North America, so far as we can see, no


                                             LITHIC STAGE   93
other Lithic cultures of comparable ponderability to Clovis, Fol-
som, Enterline, and Eden-Scottsbluff. A long catalogue of widely
scattered finds of artifact types related to these better-known cul-
tures could be compiled, but it would not add anything but dis-
tribution to the picture already given. The balance of our survey
of the North American Lithic can be taken at a swifter pace.
   The Great Basin area, comprising western Utah, all of Nevada,
south-central Oregon, and large portions of southern California,
has produced as many chronologically early finds as any other area
of comparable size in the New World, but, for reasons which we
hope will appear to be sound, we are putting most of them into the
Archaic. The precise difficulty is that many sites with early radio-
carbon dates show a dependence on gathering from the lowest
levels on, with hunting in a secondary role and no remains of ex-
tinct Pleistocene fauna. If the dates are correct, the shift to modern
conditions must have taken place earlier in the Great Basin than
in other areas so far considered.®® Extinct faunal remains have been
found, however, in sites on the peripheries of the area. On the
northern periphery, in south-central Oregon, at Paisley Five Mile
Point, food bones in the lowest level of a cave included horse and
camel, but there were no diagnostic artifacts in association.® At
Lower Klamath Lake, in the same region but just over the Califor-
nia line, horse, camel, and probably mammoth were found, the last
in direct association with fragmentary obsidian tools of indetermi-
nate type. Not iz situ, but believed to have come from the same
geological deposit, were several beveled-bone foreshafts similar to
the one found at Clovis, New Mexico, possibly a marker type of
the Clovis culture. Unfortunately, manos and post—Lithic-type
projectile points were also in this deposit.*7 No fluted or other
Lithic stone types were found in either of these sites. On the
southern periphery of the Great Basin, at Gypsum Cave in south-
eastern Nevada, ground sloth and possibly horse and camel were
found in association with an artifact complex whose characteristic
   55. Jennings and Norbeck, 1955, p. 4.
   56. Cressman et al., 1942, p. 93.        57. Ibid., pp. 99-100.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY      94
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
“Gypsum point” is one of the marker types for the Archaic.*8 The
problem of Gypsum Cave is aggravated by early radiocarbon dates
well within the range of time assumed for the Lithic,®® but we can-
not regard the culture as anything but Archaic in terms of the defi-
nitions used here.
   Other finds in the extreme southern part of the Great Basin and
contiguous lower Colorado River and southern California desert
and coastal regions confront the would-be classifier with even more
vexing problems, but some of the cultures involved appear to be
Lithic and cannot be overlooked. The San Dieguito—Playa (or
San Dieguito I) culture seems to reflect a hunting pattern, not-
withstanding its lack of characteristic point types,°? and its close
relationship with the Ventana culture indicates a date that would
satisfy the chronological requirements of the Lithic stage.®! In the
Lake Mohave complex (which includes too many types for com-
fort) the San Dieguito—Playa percussion choppers, planes, scrapers,
etc., are associated with points vaguely reminiscent of Sandia,
Clovis, San Jon, and Plainview.*? The Mohave and Silver Lake
points have wide distribution but are not consistent or stable in
their association.® An almost complete lack of milling stones in the
Lake Mohave sites indicates a primarily hunting culture, and there
is a good possibility that some, but certainly not all, of the material
is early enough to qualify as Lithic.** A site subsequently reported
by the same investigators, the location of which was not specified
but was presumably in the same region, revealed a “pure’’ Folsom-
like complex with rather striking similarities to Lindenmeier in
   58. Harrington, 1933, 1934.
   59. Dung of giant sloth from Gypsum Cave was dated at 8504 + 340 B.c.
and 6576 + 250 B.c. (sample Nos. C-221, C-222 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]),
but the association of dung and artifacts is not beyond question (Heizer, 1951a,
p. 24; Cressman, 1951, p. 306).
   60. M. J. Rogers, 1939.
   61. Haury et al., 1950, p. 531.
   62. E. W. C. Campbell et al., 1937.
   63. Wormington, 1949, p. 85.                   64. Brainerd, 1953.



                                                  LITHIC STAGE   95
artifacts other than points.® This, on typological grounds alone, we
would classify as Lithic.
  The relative infrequency of remains attributable to the Lithic
stage on the Pacific Coast of North America appears to confirm
the widely held assumption that early migration southward from
Alaska was mainly in the intermontane and High Plains “corri-
dors” on either side of the Rocky Mountains. Estimates of con-
siderable antiquity have been made for the earlier manifestations
of the La Jolla culture® and the Topanga culture,*’ of the San Diego
and Los Angeles regions, respectively. The lowest level in the se-
quence at Malaga Cove, also in the Los Angeles region,** has been
compared to Rogers’ Dieguito and is thought to be early, but it
includes a microlithic “flake drill” type that is remarkably similar
to the characteristic “‘perforators”’ of the Poverty Point culture of
the lower Mississippi Valley on a late Archaic or even Formative
level.69 The enigmatic Oak Grove culture of the Santa Barbara re-
gion”? is also difficult to fit into our definition of Lithic. The four
last-named cultures have been recently gathered together, along
with material from the Little Sycamore site in Ventura County,
under the designation “Early Milling Stone Cultures of Southern
California” and have been assigned a guess date of 3000-2500 B.c.7!
This convenient generalization has encouraged us to put them all
into the Archaic stage.
  Farther north, in central California, well-developed sequences in
the San Francisco Bay and Sacrainento Delta regions have no Lithic
phases; the earliest cultures are clearly Archaic in terms of the
definitions used here. The Farmington complex has already been
mentioned as a possible “lower” Lithic stage culture, but there is
no dating to support the assumption. North of San Francisco Bay,
  65. Campbell and Campbell, 1940.
   66. M. J. Rogers, 1929, 1945; Harding, 1951; information given by
Clement Meighan at the Andover Radiocarbon Conference of April, 1956.
  67. Heizer and Lemert, 1947; Treganza and Malamud,    1950.
  68. E. F. Walker, 1951.                  70. D. B. Rogers, 1929.
  69. Ford, Phillips, and Haag, 1955.      71. Wallace, 1954.


                                      METHOD AND THEORY     906
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
at the controversial Borax Lake site,” there seems to have been an
early component that included rather dubious fluted points and
Lindenmeier-like scrapers and gravers, but, if this existed as a
complex, it was not clearly differentiated stratigraphically from a
culture more like the milling-stone cultures referred to above. In
view of this uncertainty, it would seem preferable to classify all of
Borax Lake as Archaic.
   From here on up the Pacific Coast, our sources of information on
the Lithic diminish rapidly. In the northern California, Northwest
Coast, and Plateau areas, finds attributable to the Lithic are very
scarce, partly because of ignorance no doubt, partly because we
are getting farther away from the bases of our criteria and are un-
able to recognize Lithic materials when we see them. A few pos-
sibly early sites have been reported but in no case fully published.”
North Pacific archaeology is clearly not well enough known to per-
mit generalization, nevertheless, it may be suggested that this is
an area quite unsuited in nature to the migratory hunting-and-col-
lecting way of life characteristic of Lithic cultures elsewhere.
   This brings us to the Arctic. We can hardly expect to fit Arctic
data into our scheme of classification without difficulty. As one of
the outstanding Arctic specialists has recently said: “The pattern
and development of Eskimo culture are the result of a combination
of geographical, ecological and cultural factors that are truly
unique.”’4 This would apply equally to any cultural pattern in the
Arctic, since the unique geographical conditions can be projected
indefinitely into the past, and with them the special cultural adjust-

   72. Harrington, 1948.
   73. The Lind Coulee site in eastern Washington may have a Lithic phase
(“Notes and News,” American Antiquity, 16, 290; 17, 281; 18, 189, 297). A
date of 6746 + 400 B.c. (sample No. C-827 [Libby, 19544]) certainly indi-
cates that kind of occupation. Three fluted points found some time ago in Ore-
gon and Washington have recently been identified as Clovis in type (American
Antiquity, 21, 451). In British Columbia a very good Eden-Scottsbluff point
was recently received by the Provincial Museum, purportedly from the vicinity
of Lake Windermere (Duff and Borden, 1954).
   74. Collins, 19536, p. 201.



                                                LITHIC   STAGE   9 i
ments required to make life endurable in such an environment.
Apart from marginal phases of Indian cultures whose centers lie
farther south, no major cultural configuration other than Eskimo
has been conclusively shown to have occupied the area. The only
culture that might represent a pre-Eskimo configuration is the well-
known Denbigh “flint complex’’ first encountered at the Iyatayet
site on the north Bering Sea coast of Alaska.” Denbigh shows con-
nections of a tenuous nature with late Lithic stage cultures of the
Plains, but its more significant affiliations appear to be with eastern
Siberian cultures that are variously regarded as Mesolithic or Neo-
lithic. The latter are assumed to be the source of the burin and
microcore-and-blade (“polyhedral core and lamellar flake’’) tradi-
tions so characteristic of the Denbigh complex. These Mesolithic
traditions,   particularly     the microcore-and-blade      technique,    are
widely but erratically distributed in northern and eastern North
America on a time level that is by no means early. The single
fluted point from the Iyatayet site is a poor example that cannot
be classified with any established type, but the fine parallel-flaked
points would seem to be typologically related to the Eden-Scotts-
bluff culture of the Plains. Radiocarbon dates for the Denbigh level
at Iyatayet, however, are considerably later than those for Eden-
Scottsbluff.”* This lends support to Henry Collins’ belief that fur-
ther information about the non-lithic aspects will bring out the es-
sential Eskimo character of the Denbigh culture.
   No other complex that might be considered Lithic has yet been
   75. Giddings, 1951, 1952.
   76. Radiocarbon dates for the Denbigh level at Iyatayet are:       1546 +
230 B.c. and 2705 + 220 B.c. (sample No. C-792 and C-793 [Libby, 1954a]).
Giddings, who collected the samples, declined to accept the dates and adhered
to his original estimate of 8,500 years ago (1955, p. 376). A good deal has
been made of the date of 4042 + 280 B.c. (sample No. C-560 [Libby, 1951])
obtained from a sample of twigs from the lower level of the Trail Creek Cave
on Seward Peninsula which also contained Denbigh type material. According to
Helge Larsen, who excavated the cave, these twigs could not be positively as-
sociated with the Denbigh artifacts and might even have been brought into the
cave by hibernating bears (statement made at the Andover Radiocarbon Con-
ference, October, 1956).



                                        METHOD AND THEORY      9 8
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
reported in the Arctic area. A few scattered fluted points have bee
reported from various localities in Alaska, but most are without
associations and reliable dating criteria.77 The general impression
is that they are relatively late and marginal to the main centers of
the fluted-point tradition farther south. In the Canadian subarctic,
an area of extreme difficulty for archaeology, the Yukon and
Mackenzie valleys are crucial because they are the most likely
diffusion routes in the Lithic stage. A few significant finds have
been made,”® but, in so far as they can be related to Lithic traditions
elsewhere, they seem to be relatively late in the scheme of things.
We have to conclude that remains pertaining to the earliest immi-
grants from Asia either have not been found or, if found, have not
yet been recognized. The origins of Lithic cultures in North Ameri-
ca are still completely obscure.

                                  MIDDLE   AND    SOUTH     AMERICA

   We can, therefore, hardly expect clarification of the problem of
Lithic origins in Middle and South America. Any theory of popu-
lation-spread into these areas must assume north-to-south move-
ments of peoples and cultures in a Lithic stage of development. In
Middle America there is now ample confirmation of the presence of
man with extinct fauna, including mammoth, in upper Pleistocene
formations in the Valley of Mexico, but the associated artifact as-
semblages are incomplete and the relationships with North Ameri-
can Lithic cultures remain to be worked out. The San Juan “‘in-
dustry”? of Helmut de Terra, consisting of ten artifacts from three
sites,”? has received some slight reinforcement from finds asso-
ciated with the two Iztapan mammoths, among them three classifi-
able points, of the Eden-Scottsbluff, Angostura, and Lerma types,
respectively.®° The fact that these types are relatively late and
heretofore not associated with mammoth              may indicate that the
   77. Hibben, 1943; Solecki, 1951; Collins, 19535.
   78. Johnson, 1946; MacNeish,   1951, 1953, 1954a.
   79. De Terra, 1949.
   80. Aveleyra and Maldonado-Koerdell,    1953; Aveleyra, 1956.



                                                 LITHIC   STAGE   99
mammoth survived in central Mexico long after its extinction in
the United States. It may also give slight additional meaning to the
fact that good fluted points have not so far been found south of
Durango. The poor example from Costa Rica is of doubtful sig-
nificance.®! Another important evidence of Lithic stage culture in
Mexico is to be seen in the Canyon del Diablo sequence of southern
Tamaulipas,®? of which the first two phases, Diablo and Lerma, are
said to represent hunting cultures; but the material has not yet been
thoroughly described, and comparisons with Lithic material north
of the border cannot be made. The occurrence of a Lerma point
with the second Iztapan mammoth, referred to above, is a strong
indication that both Diablo and Lerma belong in the Lithic stage.
From Mexico on south through the Maya area and lower Central
America, scattered and isolated evidences of man’s presence in late
glacial or early postglacial times could be cited, but they do not
add up to anything of cultural significance and may be omitted here.
   Identification of Lithic remains in South America is beset with
difficulties. Technological similarities between North American
Lithic traditions and those presumed to be of comparable date in
South America are, for the most part, of a very general kind. An
even greater source of trouble is the limited geological and paleon-
tological criteria for temporal equation with North American Lithic
cultures. Nevertheless, there are a number of finds in South America
that may be considered relevant. One of the best-substantiated
claims for a South American Lithic stage is to be found in the
Magellanic sequence.** The lowest level, Period 1, in the Palli
Aike and Fell’s caves on the north side of the Straits, contained,
along with remains of horse and sloth, pressure-flaked points of
ovate triangular shape with broad tapering stems, a single un-
stemmed Plainview-like point, crude chopping tools, bone flakers
and awls, and some rude disk-shaped pieces of lava. Bird’s original

  81. Swanger and Mayer-Oakes, 1952.
  82. MacNeish,     1950.
  83. Bird, 1938.



                                  METHOD AND THEORY   100
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
modest estimate of 1000-3400 B.c. for this culture has been con-
siderably extended by a radiocarbon date of 6688 + 450 B.c.*4
   Other researches into the problem of early man in the southern
part of the South American continent may be compared and con-
trasted with the Palli Aike and Fell’s caves Period 1 discoveries.
In some instances there are indications of even earlier materials.
M. A. Vignati’s stratigraphy on the Argentine coast of Tierra del
Fuego® reveals a three-part sequence in which the earliest phase
has only retouched cores and flakes or bifacial percussion-flaked
blades and choppers. In the second level, he recovered a “‘knife”’ or
point similar to those of Bird’s Period 3, and in the third, or top,
cultural layer there was a point similar to those of Bird’s Period 4.°
It is to be noted, however, that crude bolas stones are found even in
the first period of the Vignati sequence.®” Along the Atlantic coast
of Patagonia, Menghin has correlated site occupations with a series
of rising coast lines and has defined an earlier Oliviense complex,
characterized by retouched flakes and scrapers, and a later Sola-
nense complex, featuring single-notched-base projectile points.
Geological dating here suggests that both these complexes ante-
date Bird’s Period 1. Menghin has also described Patagonian cave
stratigraphies the lowest levels of which (Toldense complex) ap-
pear to correlate with Palli Aike-Fell Period 1, on the basis of
lanceolate Plainview-like points, though they include also crude
bolas stones.8® The upper levels in these same caves (Casapadrense
complex) resemble Bird’s Period 2 at Palli Aike in the absence
of stone points and the presence of numerous bone implements along
with crudely retouched scrapers and blades. This order, of course,
tends to reverse the percussion chopper to pressure-flaked point
    84. Sample No. C-485 (Libby, 1952).        85. Vignati, 1927.
    86. This last identification was made by Bird (personal communication,
 1956).
    87. It is interesting to note that the rude percussion industries of southern
and Baja California have “charmstones” which may also have been bolas
stones, although the similarities to South American types are not close.
    88. Menghin, 19525.                         89. Menghin, 1952a, 19525.



                                                  LITHIC STAGE    101
 (“lower’”’ to “upper” Lithic) sequence. This Casapadrense phase is
dated, in relation to volcanic activity in the region, as subsequent
to 6000 B.c. It appears to relate to a somewhat similar phase (Tan-
dilense) in Buenos Aires Province.*°
    Possibly within the range of our Lithic definition is the Ayampi-
tin phase of the Cérdoba and San Luis hills in northwestern Argen-
tina. Here A. R. Gonzalez has obtained a stratigraphy at the Gruta
de Intihuasi in which the Ayampitin assemblage, with its lanceo-
late points and crude grinding utensils, underlies the later, Archaic-
like Ongamira phase. The Ayampitin projectile points are closest
to Bird’s Period 3, but the radiocarbon dating supports a Lithic
assignment.°
   We cannot leave Argentina without commenting on Ameghino’s
claims for the antiquity of man in Buenos Aires Province.% The
geological basis for these claims of what seems an excessive age is
still in dispute,    and   the characteristic   artifacts,    battered   and
splintered pebbles suggestive of crude hand-ax or chopper forms,
have uncertain associations. In some of Ameghino’s sites they
seem to have been found with pressure-flaked points, grinding
stones, and even pottery. Bird has reported similar implements
from northern Chile in contexts that are relatively late.%
   In Brazil the artifacts associated with the longheaded Lagoa
Santa skeletal type,*4 also found in some of the sambaquis of the
southern coast,® have been considered relevant to the problem of
early man’s presence in South America, but we have relegated
them to the Archaic stage for reasons given in the next chapter.
   From the great corpus of archaeological data pertaining to Peru
and Bolivia, few finds could conceivably be on the Lithic stage.
The only possibilities that might be mentioned are: (1) the long
   90. Menghin and Bormida, 1950.
   91. Gonzalez, 1952. A recent radiocarbon date on the Ayampitin phase is
in the neighborhood of 6000 B.c. (A. R. Gonzalez [personal communication,
1956].
   92. Ameghino, 1911.                 94. Walter, 1948; Evans, 1950.
   93. Bird, 1943.                     95. Serrano,   1946.




                                     METHOD AND THEORY        102
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
tapered-stem points and other implements from the Chicama Valley,
which seem to have no connection with later preceramic and ceram-
ic phases in the region;* (2) the seemingly unrelated complex
featuring stemless and diamond-shaped points found in the non-
ceramic refuse of certain inland rock shelters near Huancayo;%
(3) the chipped-stone complex which Strong has reported from the
south coast;*8 and (4) recent discoveries from Viscachani in the
Bolivian highlands.°® From the northern Andes there is even less.
Discoveries have been claimed as evidences of man in geologically
early periods, such as the Punin skull,!°° or the Alangasi mastodon!®!
(this claim recently demolished by Gross) ,!° but no artifact com-
plexes that can be measured against our criteria for the Lithic stage.
In Venezuela, J. M. Cruxent and Irving Rouse have recently re-
ported a quartzite assemblage from sites in the locality of El Jobo
in the northwestern part of the country. This has not yet been
formally described, but specimens from it have been examined by
a number of North American authorities; the consensus is that
the assemblage definitely represents an early culture—the speci-
mens are closely related to artifacts found with the second Iztapan
mammoth—with more distant but probably significant relation-
ships to some of the later Lithic cultures of North America.1%
    In this résumé of South American data two things stand out:
first, the tendency for Lithic finds to be concentrated in the tem-
perate (southern) and arid portions of the continent, perhaps the
only favorable areas for cultures primarily based on hunting;1%
second, the fact that there are few specific resemblances to early
cultures in North America, and those that do appear are with pro-
jectile-point forms of the later post-fluted-point cultures of the
Lithic stage.

  96. Larco Hoyle, 1948, pp. 11-12, Pl. 1.
  97. Tschopik, 1946.                   101.    Uhle, 1930.

  98. Strong, 1954.                     102. Gross, 1951, p. 104.

  99. Menghin, 1953-54.                 103. Cruxent and Rouse, 1956.
   100. Sullivan and Hellman, 1925.     104. Bennett and Bird, 1949.



                                               LITHIC   STAGE   103
                                                      Chapter 5




                                        Archaic Stage
                                                     DEFINITIONS

Our previous use of the concept ‘“‘Archaic” for the second stage of
New World historical-developmental interpretation is here re-
tained in its essentials. The term was introduced into the archaeol-
ogy of eastern North America by William A. Ritchie, who applied
it to his Lamoka phase in central New York.! Soon after, the rich
preceramic culture of the northern Alabama and Kentucky shell
middens was revealed by the extensive excavations of W. S. Webb
and his associates. Relationships to Lamoka were noted, and the
term “Archaic” was extended accordingly, with a “‘pattern”’ sig-
nificance in the Midwest taxonomy.” About the same time, re-
examination of earlier shell-midden investigations in the far South-
east? and excavations on the Georgia coast‘ expanded the Archaic
still further geographically and also slanted it toward the concept
of a “Shellmound” culture. Similar extension was going on all over
eastern North Ainerica, and there were suggestions that cultures
as far away as California were somehow related.> However, it was
also becoming clear that the concept had outgrown its specific
historical implications, and Griffin in his first synthesis of eastern
   1. Ritchie, 1932. Alanson Skinner had previously designated certain pro-
jectile points from shell middens in the vicinity of Manhattan as ‘“‘archaic’’
(1919, 1920), but Ritchie was apparently first to use the term in a full cul-
tural sense.
   2. Webb and DeJarnette, 1942.       3. Wyman,    1868, 1875; Claflin, 1931.
   4. Unpublished work by Preston Holder and A. J. Waring, Jr.
   5. Haag, 1942; Beardsley, 1948.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY       104
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
archaeology made an attempt to jettison it.6 Failing in this, he and
his co-workers reinstated it as a “period” in what might be re-
ferred to as the new midwestern chronology.’ As it was our con-
tention—and still is—that periods in area chronologies of wide
geographical scope lose their temporal significance and become, in
effect, developmental stages, we have chosen to use “‘Archaic’”’ as a
stage designation, making use of its broad typological implications
and expanding the concept to its ultimate hemispherical limits.$
   For some time North American archaeologists have found it
convenient to speak of “early” and “late” Archaic, but there is a
remarkable lack of agreement about what these terms mean. In
preparing our first classification, we considered making a similar
division into “upper” and “lower” Archaic stages but abandoned
the idea for two reasons: (1) the difficulty of finding criteria that
would hold for all major areas of New World archaeology and (2)
the belief that the concept of a Preformative stage following the
Archaic would take care of many of the cultures generally regarded
as “late” Archaic. This did not work out quite as expected—the
precise difficulties will be discussed later on—and, with the elimi-
nation of Preformative in the present scheme, the need for sub-
division of Archaic seemed more pressing than before. There had
also taken place in the interval the conference of North American
archaeologists at Andover in April, 1956, at which a twofold sub-
division of the Archaic was generally agreed upon. We tried very
hard, therefore, in preparing the present version of our classifica-
tion, to follow this lead—and failed again.
   6. Griffin, 1946.             7. Griffin, 1952a.
    8. ‘‘Archaic’”’ was used much earlier in American studies by Boas (1913),
Spinden (1928), and others to refer to the beginnings of settled agricultural vil-
lage life in Mexico and Central America. This connotation is, of course, en-
tirely different from the use and meaning here. Our ‘‘Formative”’ is the ap-
proximate equivalent of the Boas and Spinden “Archaic.” Our decision on this
terminology was influenced by the current and firmly intrenched North Ameri-
can usage of “‘Archaic’’ and by the fact that such names as “Formative’’ and
“Preclassic” have now replaced “Archaic” as the designation for early New
World village agriculture.



                                               ARCHAIC STAGE     105
   The Andover classification, if we may call it such, is of narrower
scope than ours. The problem was limited culturally to stone
technology and geographically to North America. Within this
frame of reference it seemed possible to a majority of the conferees
to distinguish two broad stages of Archaic technology, with the
presence or absence of ground- and polished-stone artifacts as the
governing criterion. We made a serious effort to expand these
technological stages culturally and geographically but finally con-
cluded that expansion was neither possible nor desirable. In the
perspective of New World archaeology as a whole, polished-stone
technology does not seem to have any consistent developmental or
even temporal significance. One must conclude that polished-stone
artifacts were desirable things to have, perhaps even essential in
certain environments, but that many groups got on very well with-
out them. For example, the first successful efforts toward agricul-
tural food production seem to have been made in cultures lacking
polished stone. To have to call such cultures “lower” Archaic
would be disconcerting. On this point we were better off with our
Preformative.
  Even in the restricted frame of reference of North American
stone technology, it may be questioned whether subdivision of the
Archaic along the lines suggested at Andover is entirely feasible.
It is, of course,   a methodological   principle   that developmental
classifications and chronological classifications do not of necessity
march together, but, when we compare concepts of “early” and
“Jate’’ Archaic in the literature with concepts of “lower”        and
“upper” Archaic proposed at Andover,          we find scarcely any
agreement at all. It seems best, therefore, to leave Archaic as a
single stage allowing for the use of qualifiers, “lower” and “upper”
(or “early” and “‘late’”’), by area specialists according to whatever
criteria seem best to fit the case.
    To define Archaic as a single stage, however, is not without its
difficulties. So far as we can tell from the meager remains charac-
teristic of most early Archaic cultures, there is no important shift
in economic and social patterns from the previous Lithic stages. It


                                   METHOD AND THEORY    106
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
would be convenient if, following the lead of some Americanists,
we could simply designate the Lithic as the stage of early hunting
and the Archaic as the stage of early gathering cultures. We have
already inveighed against this simple division. For purposes of
large-scale integration, concepts of hunting versus gathering cul-
tures are useful only as convenient rubrics. We found that we had
to accommodate both in our definition of Lithic, and we are obliged
to do the same for the Archaic. Nevertheless, it does seem possible
to see a shift in emphasis between hunting and gathering, in favor
of the latter, and there certainly were differences in the plants col-
lected and the animals hunted.
   With these points in mind, we may briefly define the Archaic
as the stage of migratory hunting and gathering cultures continuing
into environmental conditions approximating those of the present.
With the extinction of the large Pleistocene mammals hunted by
Lithic stage peoples—and this extinction is assumed to have been
virtually complete by the beginning of the altithermal period—there
is now a dependence on smaller and perhaps more varied fauna.
There is also an apparent increase in gathering; it is in this stage
that sites begin to yield large numbers of stone implements and
utensils that are assumed to be connected with the preparation of
wild vegetable foods. In most Archaic cultures these are shaped by
use rather than design and do not, therefore, fit into the category
of ground and polished stone, which is one of the often-referred-to
criteria of the Archaic stage. The specialized techniques of gather-
ing and preparation of wild foods, especially in areas where these
consisted mainly of hard-shelled seeded forms, suggest a medium in
which early experimentation in plant domestication could take
place. As a result, it is in some rather primitive, and surprisingly
early, Archaic cultures that the first evidences of New World
agriculture are to be found. These we designated as Preformative
in our first classification. We have since come to the reluctant con-
clusion that the mere presence of agriculture, though of enormous
importance historically in terms of the growth of particular Ameri-
can patterns of culture, is not of primary significance from a more


                                        ARCHAIC   STAGE   107
abstract, developmental point of view. It becomes so only when it
can be seen as dominant in the economy and integrated socially to
produce the stable settlement patterns that we have postulated as
the sine qua non of the Formative stage. Furthermore, certain cul-
tures that we classified as Archaic in our first paper because they
had no agriculture appear to have achieved stable settlement pat-
terns and other prerequisites of the Formative without that stimu-
lus. Lack of agriculture, therefore, is no longer a negative criterion
in our formulation of the Archaic stage.
   The point of departure for the description of Archaic stage cul-
ture in North America is commonly a level of stone technology
marked by the addition of grinding and polishing to the earlier
techniques of percussion and pressure flaking. This is no longer an
adequate approach, for archaeologists tend increasingly to consider
the possibility of an “early”’ Archaic prior to the adoption of ground
and polished stone. Although we are not attempting to set up such
a stage, for reasons already given, we shall refer to many cultures
in the following pages that lack ground and polished stone alto-
gether. Nevertheless, it is appropriate to begin our description with
this category, which certainly represents a technological innovation
of immense significance.
   Of primary interest as stage criteria are the heavy ground-stone
woodworking tools generally regarded as prerequisite to the suc-
cessful occupation of forest environments—axes,        adzes, wedges,
gouges, etc. Highly characteristic, but less useful as criteria, are
implements and utensils used in the preparation of vegetable foods—
milling stones, metates,   mortars,   manos,   pestles, pounders,   etc.
Some of these have already appeared in the Lithic but usually in
the guise of rough-stone artifacts, i.e., objects fashioned principally
by use rather than design. These carry over into the Archaic, but
there is an increasing tendency toward more specialized forms and
careful workmanship. Particularly characteristic of the Archaic in
some areas are stone vessels, precursors of pottery. Their presence
reflects the greater stability of occupation postulated for some of the
later cultures of this stage. Migratory peoples are not partial to


                                   METHOD AND THEORY    108
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
stone vessels for obvious reasons. Other Archaic elements of sig-
nificance in particular areas are ground slate points and knives;
polished atlatl weights of various forms; plummet-like objects
 (variously referred to as “plummets,”     ‘“‘charmstones,”   ‘‘fusos’’) ;
stone tubes, which may in some cases have been smoking pipes;
stone beads; and an array of other objects of purely ornamental or
problematical function. Thus, the addition of a new way of handling
stone resulted in an immense increase in variety and complexity of
the archaeological inventory.
   In the chipped-stone category it is noteworthy that the high
standards characteristic of many Lithic cultures are not generally
maintained in the Archaic. Many of the older forms, however, per-
sisted with little modification, particularly in the chopper and scrap-
er categories. A new tool that seems to have had little if any sig-
nificance in the Lithic is the drill. Drills are found in some Archaic
 cultures in great profusion and variety, a matter doubtless related
 to the fact that many of the ground and polished forms mentioned
above are perforated and to the emphasis on beads and pendants of
stone, bone, shell, and other materials that is a common feature in
this stage. In some areas the older lanceolate projectile forms of
 the Lithic are carried over into the Archaic, but in general there
 is a greater variety of points, with emphasis on stemmed, corner-
 notched, and side-notched forms, roughly in that order. In areas
 where ground- and polished-stone artifacts are rare or absent, such
 points are of crucial importance in classification. Certain specific
_types, such as Pinto and Gypsum, have been used, perhaps too
 freely, as markers for the Archaic in many parts of North America.
The increased variety of forms is matched by an increase in the
variety of materials used. In some areas, notably eastern North
America, Archaic cultures tended to specialize in the use of stones
other than flint.
   We would be able to record a number of Archaic determinants in
the rough-stone category if we had this class of objects under bet-
ter control. Plain, pitted, and faceted hammerstones, anvil stones,
notched pebbles (usually called “sinkers”), saws, abraders, whet-


                                         ARCHAIC   STAGE   109
stones, polishing stones, etc., are consistently reported from Archa-
ic sites. We know little about the history of these forms—some of
them probably go back to the Lithic—but the association of a num-
ber of forms together, and in quantity, is a fairly reliable general
criterion of the Archaic stage. Finally, of doubtful status as arti-
facts but extremely characteristic of Archaic sites in the Americas
are masses of fire-cracked stones used in pit roasting and stone
boiling. In areas where stones were unobtainable, objects of baked
clay were used for the same purpose.
   Artifacts of bone, horn, and ivory, present but not abundant in
the Lithic stage—a fact partly due, no doubt, to unfavorable fac-
tors of preservation—assume a major importance in assemblages of
the Archaic. These materials, for the first time, vie with stone as
materials for many implements and ornaments, such as points,
knives, scrapers, tubes, beads, and pendants, but in the main they
were used for objects that have no counterparts in stone. Most im-
portant numerically are awls, perforators, and needles, generally
regarded as adjuncts to the technologies of basketry and work in
skins. An equally large number of forms—gorges, leisters, har-
poons, fishhooks—testify to the importance of fishing and marine
hunting activities for which there is little evidence in the previous
stage. Shell makes its first significant appearance as a material,
largely in articles of personal adornment, especially beads and
pendants, except in certain coastal and island areas where it was
used for implements normally made of stone. Other materials that
seem to have made their first appearance in the Archaic, but only in
regions near the sources of supply, are copper and asphaltum. Final-
ly, although the word “Archaic” is often used interchangeably with
“preceramic,”’ many of the cultures classified as Archaic in this
study have a well-developed pottery technology.
   The above-named artifacts are found in village-site refuse and
with burials, and in a very important sense these conditions are
themselves criteria of the Archaic. In suggesting that burials first
appear on this level, we do not mean to imply that Lithic peoples
had no formalized modes of disposing of their dead but simply that


                                   METHOD AND THEORY    110
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
it is only in the Archaic and later stages that we can say what they
were. There is, as might be expected, too much variety to permit
generalization on a hemispherical scale, but certain modes and fea-
tures, such as flexed inhumation in round graves, partial cremation,
and the use of red ocher in burial rites, have wide distribution on
this level.
   Habitations do not appear to have been any more permanent than
in the Lithic, though, possibly, greater use was made of caves and
rock shelters, where accumulations of refuse from (probably) brief
and intermittent occupations suggest a degree of stability and con-
tinuity that may be illusory. Houses of sufficient durability to leave
traces in the ground are still generally lacking, as are storage pits
and other appurtenances of settled existence. Settlements are char-
acteristically small in extent, but the depth of deposit often indi-
cates considerable temporal continuity, from which a sedentary or
at least seasonal type of occupance may be inferred—quite different
from the nomadic way of life assumed for the Lithic stage. This, of
course, could be made possible only by the development of special-
ized subsistence economies in favored localities. As an example, it
seems to be in the Archaic that fishing, and especially shellfish-
collecting, became important in the economic picture, an adapta-
tion to coastal and interior waterside environments clearly evi-
denced by the distribution of Archaic cultures. Another sharply
contrasting example is the widespread seed-gathering or “Desert”
economy of the North American Great Basin and Southwest, which
also, to a lesser extent perhaps, tended to anchor populations in
favored localities and, by conditioning them to greater dependence
on vegetal foods, prepared the way for the adoption of agriculture
at a later time.

                                            NORTH     AMERICA

  It seems appropriate to begin our survey of Archaic cultures in
eastern North America, where the concept originated, but it must
be confessed that the task of organizing the masses of available data
is entirely beyond our competence. Use of the concept in a broad


                                         ARCHAIC   STAGE   ll1
developmental sense is going to oblige us to call many cultures
Archaic that have not been so designated before, but we will leave
these aside for the moment in order to concentrate on those about
whose status there can be no serious disagreement. Of these, we
will start with the cultures that would be “early,” or “lower,”
Archaic if we had chosen to make such a division. Even here there
is an embarrassment of riches, so far as raw data are concerned, but
a remarkable paucity of organization.
   An initial difficulty, which will surprise no one who has tried to
classify cultures in this way, is the separation of Archaic from Lith-
ic, or ‘‘Paleo-Indian” as this stage is most frequently called in the
East. ‘‘Paleo-Indian” has been indiscriminately applied to all sorts
of cultures that are (1) reasonably early and (2) not “Archaic” in
the older and narrower sense of ‘‘Eastern Archaic.” The trouble is
not all semantic, however. Lithic stage artifact types, including
fluted and parallel-flaked points practically indistinguishable from
their western counterparts and with characteristic basal grinding,
have a disconcerting tendency to turn up in Archaic complexes in
the East, and it is usually not clear whether they originated there
or not. The explanation that they were “picked up” from earlier
Lithic stage sites by thrifty or curious Archaic hunters does not
seem to cover the situation. The fact that some of the marker types
for early Archaic cultures in the East—such as Nebo Hill, Dalton
(Meserve), Starved Rock, or Guilford—continue the lanceolate-
point tradition of Lithic cultures on the Plains is a further indication
that the criteria for the separation of Lithic and Archaic stages have
to be sought outside specific point typology. For this we are obliged
to fall back on more tenuous criteria, such as (1) increased variety
in point types and the inclusion of stemmed and corner-notched
forms that are not in the lanceolate tradition and (2) increased evi-
dence of gathering activities in the form of milling stones, mortars,
cupstones, etc.? Geochronological criteria are almost entirely lack-
   9. The presence of heavy chipped ax- or adz-like tools that could be re-
garded as forerunners of the ground and polished axes and adzes of the “later”
Archaic has been suggested as a criterion for the Archaic beginnings, but the
proposition requires further investigation.


                                      METHOD AND THEORY        112
                                 IN AMERICANJARCHAEOLOGY
ing; faunal associations, when known, are invariably confined to
modern forms; and radiocarbon dating is not extensive enough to
be helpful but has in fact increased our classificatory difficulties, as
we shall see.
   The above remarks apply particularly to cultures in the eastern
Plains and the prairie borderlands of the Middle West,!° sometimes
referred to as “Late Paleo-Indian.”” Pending better stratigraphic
separation of these mixed Lithic-Archaic cultures than we now
possess, it seems advisable to classify them all as Archaic. The
lower levels of the Starved Rock site on the Illinois River," the
Modoc Rock Shelter in southern Illinois on the Mississippi,!? the
Hidden Valley Shelter on the Missouri side of the river below St.
Louis,!° and Graham Cave in central Missouri'* are by no means
identical in content, but they are examples of the transitional or
mixed Lithic-Archaic cultures and are in all cases overlain by de-
posits containing what we shall have less difficulty in identifying
as typical “Eastern Archaic.”
   Although dating is not supposed to be of crucial importance in a
developmental scheme, we cannot refrain from mentioning the
problem raised by the early radiocarbon dates from some of these
middle western sites. The Modoc site yielded dates ranging from
about 7000 B.c. to over 9000 B.c. for the middle and lower levels—
with the earliest dates actually in the middle.!® Dates from Graham
Cave are only slightly later.!* These dates fall well within the time
   10. Evidence that the prairies formerly extended farther east and that this
was significant in the spread of late “‘Paleo-Indian”’ cultures is given by Lewis,
1953, 1954a.
   11. Mayer-Oakes, 1951.                _12. Fowler and Winters, 1956.
   13. R. M. Adams, 1941; Chapman, 1948, pp. 140-42.
   14. Logan, 1952; Chapman, 1952.
   15. Dates in question are: 8993   + 900 B.c. for Level B2; 9246       + 800 B.c.
for Level B3; 8697    + 650 B.c. for Level C1; 7147       + 440 z.c. for Level C2
(sample Nos. C-904, C-905, C-907, C-908 [Libby, 1954]).
   16. Dates in question are: 7744 + 500 B.c. and 6874 + 500 B.c. for Level 6
(6-7 ft.) and 5944 + 500 B.c. for Level 4 (4-5 ft.) (sample Nos. M-130,
M-131, M-132 [Crane, 1956]).



                                                ARCHAIC    STAGE   113
range of Lithic stage cultures in the Plains. Nevertheless, on the
basis of the preliminary reports available, a considerable portion of
the materials associated with these dates is typical of fully de-
veloped Archaic cultures elsewhere in the East. In short, all these
dates seem excessively early. It will not do to discount them entire-
ly, however, because we are going to run into the same problem in
other areas, notably in the Great Basin, where comparable dates
have been obtained for cultures that we are also cheerfully classify-
ing as Archaic.”
   The early Archaic picture in the East is further complicated by
the fact that, east of the Appalachians, such dubious late or transi-
tional Lithic cultures are scarcely in evidence, and instead there is
a series of cultures showing a preference for non-flint materials,'®
with a ruder aspect in consequence, not unlike the Desert cultures
of the Great Basin and the Southwest, and a bewildering array of
projectile-point types. Prominent among the latter as possible
stage markers are lozenge-shaped points vaguely reminiscent of
Gypsum and single-shouldered, Sandia-like points (or knives).
Testimony to the complexity and long duration of the Archaic in
this part of the East is provided by the well-known but as yet un-
documented Badin site on the Yadkin River in the North Carolina
piedmont.!° Here in a deep (eighteen feet) stratigraphic column, a
deposit containing the long, narrow Guilford point was underlain
by a succession of levels, each with its own characteristic point
type and all within the Archaic stage as defined in this study.
    17. Since the above was written, a popular account of excavations in Rus-
sell Cave in northeastern Alabama has appeared (Miller, 1956). Projectile
points from the bottom level, dated as 6204 + 300 B.c. (laboratory not given),
are clearly Archaic in type, not unlike material from Graham Cave and the
Modoc Shelter.
    18. An example is the Old Quartz “industry” of the South Carolina pied-
mont (Caldwell, 1954).
    19. Excavations at the Badin site have been briefly reported by Joffre Coe
at meetings of the Southeastern Archaelogical Conference, and the final re-
port is awaited with great interest.
   20. There was no “‘Paleo-Indian”’ level in the Badin site, but fluted points
were found in the St4 site directly across the river.


                                        METHOD AND THEORY       114
                                  IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
    Turning now to the later and more typical Archaic cultures of
the East, we are still plagued by a plethora of unorganized informa-
tion. Everyone will agree that the cultures we are about to consider
are Archaic, but probably no two easternists would organize them
in the same way. One possibility would be to set up the old ‘“East-
ern Archaic’! as a major cultural continuum, but our feeling is that
too much time and space have been built into this unit and that
ultimately a considerable number of separate cultures will have to
be formulated within it. A “Southeastern Archaic,” preferably
with another name, could be organized around the well-documented
shell middens of the Tennessee River in northern Alabama” and
the Green River in Kentucky.” Temporal phases of this continuum
will have to be worked out, however, for there is a good possibility
that more than one major cultural unit is represented even here.
“Southeastern Archaic” is generally understood to include also the
fiber-tempered pottery traditions on the Savannah River,”4 Georgia
coast,”> and St. Johns and Indian rivers in Florida,”® but it might
prove to be more sensible to make fiber-tempered pottery the basis
for a separate far Southeastern Archaic culture. The St. Johns and
Indian River phases also show the influence of the very distinctive
Glades culture of lower peninsular Florida, which remained on an
essentially Archaic level throughout most of the span of its exist-
ence.”’ The spread of Southeastern Archaic culture from the nuclear
Kentucky-Tennessee        region eastward      up the Tennessee       River
seems to have been slight.?8 To the north and west it includes the
   21. Ford and Willey, 1941.
   22. W.S. Webb, 1939; Webb and DeJarnette, 1942, 1948a, 1948, 1948c,
1948d; Webb and Wilder, 1951.
   23. W.S. Webb, 1946, 1950a, 1950b, 1951a; Webb and Haag, 1939, 1940,
1947.
   24. Claflin, 1931; Fairbanks, 1942; Miller, 1950.
   25. A. J. Waring, Jr. (personal communication).
   26. Goggin, 1952; Rouse, 19510.           27. Goggin, 1949.
   28. Kneberg, 1952. A thorough survey of the Norris Basin of the Tennessee
River in eastern Tennessee failed to reveal any Southeastern Archaic sites
(W. S. Webb, 1938).



                                             ARCHAIC   STAGE   l 15
early Eva phase on the lower Tennessee River,”® perhaps the Faulk-
ner phase,*? and the phase represented by prepottery sites near
Carbondale*! in southern Illinois. So far, no Southeastern Archaic
sites have been reported from the lower Mississippi. The ‘Iche-
functe phase*? has often been mentioned in this connection and is
certainly Archaic in terms of our definition, but it would be better
to leave the cultural affiliation of this phase in suspension until its
relationships with other early cultures in the lower Mississippi have
been clarified. How far up the Ohio River the concept of a South-
eastern Archaic culture can be carried is hard to say—probably as
far as the extensive but poorly documented shell middens about
the falls of the Ohio at Louisville.*?
   Chronological estimates for Southeastern Archaic, formerly held
within modest limits, have been very considerably extended by ra-
diocarbon dating. It now appears that the culture was well estab-
lished by 3000 B.c. and may have begun a good deal earlier.** Its
terminal date is less easy to fix, some authorities maintaining that
the culture persisted locally down to a late prehistoric period.
   The idea of a “‘Northeastern Archaic’’ culture is sometimes re-
ferred to in the literature but does not seem to have found favor with
the archaeologists of that area. The pioneer Archaic phase, the
Lamoka of central New York,*® is still rather isolated as far as
direct relationships are concerned. It also remains the earliest
   29. Lewis and Kneberg, 1947; Kneberg, 1954.
   30. MacNeish, 1948; Cole et a/., 1951.            32. Ford and Quimby, 1945.
   31. Maxwell, 1951.                                33. E. Y. Guernsey, 1939, 1942.
   34. Radiocarbon dates from two sites of the Green River phase of South-
eastern   Archaic   are   as   follows:    5423   + 500   B.c.,   3198 + 300    B.c., and
2949 + 250 s.c. from the Annis site (sample Nos. C-180, C-116, and C-251
[Arnold   and Libby,      1951]);   3351   + 300 B.c.     from    the Indian   Knoll   site
(sample No. C-254 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]). The sample dated 5423 +
500 B.c. from Annis was from a higher level in the midden than the other two
samples dated from that site, and the date is therefore considered to be in error
(Webb, 19514, p. 30). However, a recently published date (5194 + 500 B.c.)
from the Eva phase on the lower Tennessee River is comparable (sample No.
M-357 [Crane, 1956]).
   35. Ritchie, 1932.



                                            METHOD AND THEORY            116
                                      IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
manifestation of the Archaic in the Northeast, with radiocarbon
dates somewhat later than those for Southeastern Archaic referred
to above.*® A broader, if somewhat insubstantial, formulation is
the later Laurentian, which, as the name implies, is thought to have
been intrusive into New York from the St. Lawrence Valley?’ and
also into New England, where it incorporates the famous Red Paint
phase of coastal Maine.38 To the west, Laurentian has relationships
of an uncertain character with the Old Copper culture of the upper
Great Lakes region.*® Until recently regarded as little more than
a technological tradition, the Old Copper culture has now become
one of the most intriguing Archaic cultures in eastern North Ameri-
ca, as a result of radiocarbon dates of surprising antiquity, which if
substantiated would make this the earliest metal-using culture in the
Americas and one of the earliest in the world.‘° Laurentian is also
of interest because of a special flavor contributed by ground- and
polished-stone gouges, rubbed slate points, and semilunar knives,
formerly attributed to Eskimoan influence but now thought of as
relating to an ancient circumpolar distribution.”
   A coastal “‘substratum’’ extending from southern New England
down through the Middle Atlantic states has been suggested as a
possible point of departure for another Archaic continuum.” There
may be another “Boreal Archaic” culture, or series of cultures, in
the Northeast (which would include the Red Paint phase already

   36. Radiocarbon    dates    from   the Lamoka     site are   as follows:   2418   +
200 B.c. and 3432 + 250 B.c. (sample Nos. C-288 and C-367 [Arnold and
Libby, 1951]); 2484 + 400 B.c. and 2574 + 400 B.c. (sample Nos. M-26
and M-195 [Crane, 1956]).
   37. Ritchie, 1944, 1951a.
   38. Willoughby, 1898, 1935, pp. 16o3 Ls Moorehead,            19224; B. L. Smith,
1948.
    39. Ritzenthaler and Scholz, 1946; Miles, 1951; Wittry,            1951; Ritzen-
thaler and Wittry, 1952; Wittry and Ritzenthaler, 1956.
   40. 3646 + 600 B.c. and 5556 + 600 B.c. (sample Nos. C-836 and C-837,
C-839 [averaged] [Libby, 19544]).
   41. Gjessing, 1944; Spaulding, 1946, Ritchie, 19510.
   42. MacNeish,     1952; Sears, 1954.



                                                   ARCHAIC STAGE     Ly
mentioned), based on the taiga of northern New England, the Mari-
time Provinces, Newfoundland,        and southern Labrador, but the
idea is still in an unformulated state.
   This by no means exhausts the material that has been called
“Archaic” in the eastern United States, but it is enough to serve as
a basis for the concept of an Archaic stage. There are other cultures
in the area, however, that we are compelled by the logic of our
definitions to relegate to this stage. About these there may be some
disagreement. Lack of space forces us to hypothesize in a rather
sweeping fashion. As a vehicle for generalization we will use the
current Griffin chronology.** This scheme, in brief, classifies east-
ern cultures into a series of “periods,” which are at the same time
large-scale cultural units, as follows: Paleo-Indian, Archaic, Early
Woodland, Middle Woodland, and Mississippi (which includes
Late Woodland).
   Our hypothesis starts with the assumption that the basic adapta-
tion to the modern forest and waterside environments is represented
by the various Archaic cultures already considered and that their
ultimate sources lie in the boreal cultures of the Eurasiatic Meso-
lithic and Neolithic stages. Upon this substratum, we further hy-
pothesize, was grafted one or several pottery traditions, also of
northern Eurasiatic origin, resulting in the Early Woodland cul-
tures of the Griffin scheme. Whether the same northern influences
were responsible for the introduction of the earliest burial mounds
is not yet clear. Certainly, at this time we can see evidence of the
gathering together of mortuary ceremonialism that climaxed later
in the mound-building (Middle Woodland) cultures of the Ohio
Valley.44 The incorporation of pottery (and possibly burial
mounds) did not bring about any changes of significance from a
developmental point of view. For the most part these Early Wood-
land cultures must be regarded as Archaic in terms of the defini-
tions used here.*® We also have to reckon with the possibility that
  43. Griffin, 1952a.                 44. Ritchie, 1955.
  45. This is by no means a new idea (cf. Griffin, 19524, p. 356). The sug-
gestion made by William H. Sears (1948) that Archaic is merely Woodland



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      118
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOT OGY
agriculture, already present in northeastern Mexico and the South-
west for a long time, was beginning to percolate into the East in
the Early Woodland period, but, if so, its effect on the general cul-
tural pattern was plainly insufficient to shift the cultures into the
Formative stage. Examples of middle western Woodland cultures
that we would be inclined to classify as Archaic may be seen in the
Black Sand and Red Ocher phases of the Illinois Valley,*® the Crab
Orchard and Baumer phases of southern Illinois,” and the Glacial
Kame “culture” of Ohio.48 On the other hand, the Adena culture,
often designated as Early Woodland in the literature, we are going
to designate as Formative for reasons that will be developed later.
Examples from the Southeast might include the Watts Bar and
Candy     Creek    phases    in eastern      Tennessee,#?     Mossy     Oak    in
Georgia,®° and Deptford in Georgia and northwestern Florida. In
a strictly taxonomic sense these Early Woodland cultures are transi-
tional from Archaic to Middle Woodland, but in the developmental
terms used here they lack all the essential characteristics of the
Formative.
   The Middle Woodland period of the Griffin scheme is marked
by the rise of a number of traditions, mainly from local sources but
with outside contributions, the origins and extent of which are still
obscure. We assume that diffusion from the Eurasiatic north is still
going on, but there are now influences from the south to be reck-
oned with. These are of overriding importance for us, because now

without pottery arose from the same observation that we have made above, to
wit, that the addition of pottery had little if any effect on the configuration of
the culture as a whole. We are simply turning his statement around to read:
Early Woodland is merely Archaic with pottery. Fairbanks was expressing
the same idea in pointing out that Early Woodland cultures in the Southeast
are in effect merely transitional from Archaic to Middle Woodland and that
no change in basic economy was involved (1949, p. 59).
   46. Cole and Deuel, 1937; Cole, 1943; Wray, 1952.
   47. Maxwell,   1951; Cole et al., 1951.
   48. Cunningham, 1948; Morgan, 1952.              50. Fairbanks, 1952.
   49. Lewis and Kneberg, 1941, 1946.               51. Willey, 1949.



                                                ARCHAIC STAGE     119
certainly they are involved with the spread of agriculture and as-
sociated elements, and they do involve significant changes in the
older cultural and economic        patterns.   Middle    Woodland,     then,
marks the shift to the Formative stage in eastern North America,
but, since it is primarily a temporal period, it does not necessarily
follow that all cultures classified as Middle Woodland in the Griffin
scheme are Formative in ours. Wherever Middle Woodland cul-
tures came into contact with pre-existing Archaic or Early Wood-
land cultures, they tended to dominate in the resulting accultura-
tion, except on the peripheries where this dominance was incom-
plete, resulting in cultures that would be classified here as mar-
ginal Formative. Excellent examples of this kind of developmental
situation are to be seen in the Middle Woodland cultures of the up-
per Ohio Valley® and New York State.5? Such acculturation was not
only incomplete but decidedly impermanent, it seems, and there fol-
lowed a re-emergence of simpler Woodland patterns, the Late
Woodland of the Griffin scheme. This late regressive marginality
is, of course, complicated by influences from the Mississippi cul-
tures of the Formative stage, which by this time were flourishing
to the south; it is to be noted that Mississippi and Late Woodland
are essentially the same period. How to classify these Late Wood-
land cultures developmentally is a rather tricky question. Are they
belated Archaic or marginal Formative? Beyond this uncertain and
probably fluctuating dividing line, which is in effect an expression
of the northern and eastern limits of successful maize agriculture,
are the vast forest areas in which the culture remained on an Archaic
level down to the ethnographic present.
   Classification of Archaic stage cultures is even more difficult in
the Plains than in the East, owing to a conservatism that probably
reflects a long persistence of ancient hunting traditions and a reluc-
tance or inability to take up the features, especially ground- and
polished-stone technology, that characterize the Archaic stage in
   52. Mayer-Oakes, 1955.
    53. Ritchie, 1938, 1944, 19514. Specific reference to the New York Hope-
wellian or Geneseo phase.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      120
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
other areas.54 Practically all Plains Archaic cultures show a mixed
Lithic-Archaic typology, and in some cases the specific Archaic
relationships are with the later “typical” Archaic cultures in the
East. Nevertheless, owing to the conservatism postulated here, the
general configuration of these cultures, so far as it can be discerned
in the meager remains, is closer to our concept of Lithic. For ex-
ample, Signal Butte I and II in western Nebraska show a persist-
ence of lanceolate-point types of generalized Lithic stage character
in a context that includes Archaic stemmed and notched forms,
drills, and a few ground-stone implements.                   A     bison-hunting
economy is indicated, and there can be little doubt that the culture
reflects a strong continuity from the ancient Lithic stage cultures
of the area. At the same time there are definite affiliations with
Eastern Archaic, and the only available radiocarbon date is well
within the time range of such cultures.
   The same general observations apply to the Frontier complex
found at the Medicine Creek             (Allen) site in south-central Ne-
braska, with interesting affiliations, on the one hand, to certain
Desert cultures in the Great Basin and, on the other, to the Clear
Fork culture in Texas, both of which will be classified as Archaic
when we get to them.*” The deeply buried Lime Creek sites in the
same locality, not yet adequately reported, may be in the same
Archaic category, although some of the points are said to be more
    54. In emphasizing cultural continuity in the Plains, we are in effect reject-
ing a very attractive theory proposed by Krieger (1953), to wit, that the
altithermal was a period unfavorable to hunting in most of the Great Plains.
The Pleistocene mammals were gone. Only with the return of favorable condi-
tions in the medithermal period was man able to occupy the Plains again, living
off the great herds of bison that now roamed the area, but with a different cul-
ture, a much larger range of implements, many of them comparable to Eastern
Archaic forms. It seems to us that the evidence suggests rather a gradual re-
placement of the older fauna by modern forms and that the life of the later
hunters differed little from that of the earlier.
   55. Strong, 1935; Bliss, 1950.
   56. The Signal Butte I phase is dated at 1494 + 120 B.c. (sample No.
L-104A [Kulp, Feely, and Tryon, 1951]).
   57. Holder and Wike, 1949.



                                                ARCHAIC STAGE     121
specifically related to Lithic stage types (Plainview and Eden-
Scottsbluff).58 Radiocarbon dates from both Medicine Creek and
Lime Creek sites are of the same order of magnitude as those for
Archaic sites in the Middle West, i.e., well within the range of
Lithic cultures in the Plains.** If they are correct, and if they date
the material described—which is uncertain in the case of the Medi-
cine Creek site—we have here a significant instance of temporal
overlap of Lithic and Archaic stages in the same area.
   The diffusion of Woodland pottery into the central Plains,
though assumed to have taken place later than in the East, does not
seem to have marked any significant advance in cultural develop-
ment. The very large number of sites in the Valley phase, for ex-
ample, indicate an intense and widespread occupation of the stream
valleys at this time, but their small size and meager refuse deposits
suggest a continuation of the migratory hunting-gathering econo-
my of the area.S° The distinctive Sterns Creek phase of eastern
Nebraska is also designated as Woodland of this same ‘“‘Middle”
period; it furnished evidence at the Walker-Gilmore site of squash
and gourds (no corn), but otherwise failed to present a configura-
tion that we could classify as Formative.® This is the first of many
examples we shall consider in which limited agriculture is present
in cultures that otherwise remain essentially on an Archaic level.
Not until the later emergence of the Plains Village type of culture
beginning about a.p. 1200 can we begin to speak of a Formative
stage in the central Plains.
  The sequence for the northwestern Great Plains, recently pro-
posed by William Mulloy,® fits our classification very neatly. In
   58. Schultz and Frankforter, 1948; Davis, 1953.
   59. Site Ft-50 (Medicine Creek) has a date of 8542 + 1500 B.c. (sample
No. C-470 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]), but the sample came from below the
occupation zone (Roberts, 1951, p. 21). Average of two runs on a sample from
Site Ft-41, one of the Lime Creek sites, was 7573 + 450 B.c. (sample No.
C-471 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]).
   60. Hill and Kivett, 1940; C. S. Smith, 1949, pp. 298-99; Kivett, 1952;
Wedel, 1953, p. 506.
  61. Sterns, 1915; Strong, 1935; Champe, 1946.       62. Mulloy, 1954.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      12
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY           2
his “Early Prehistoric” period the area was occupied by small, mi-
gratory, hunting groups with a Folsom or Yuma-type culture, 1.€.,
our Lithic stage of development. Following an interval of uncertain
length for which evidence is lacking, the ‘“‘Middle Prehistoric”
shows an economy more strongly oriented toward plant-gathering
and small-animal-hunting. The big bison have disappeared, but the
modern American buffalo (Bison bison) is not yet in evidence. The
two levels at the McKean site in northeastern Wyoming reflecting
early and late phases of this Middle Prehistoric culture are related
to Signal Butte I and II, respectively, and are plainly Archaic in
general configuration and typology.®* Mulloy’s ‘““Late Prehistoric”
seems to reflect, in part at least, a culture rooted in the ceramic-
agricultural traditions of the East, whose bearers, on moving out
into the High Plains, abandoned agriculture and took to a nomadic
hunting way of life, the modern buffalo having now appeared.
Here seems to be an example of the regressive type of marginality
described in chapter 3. Whether such cultures should be regarded
as Archaic or marginal Formative is a question of emphasis, and its
determination is a matter for the area specialist.
   On the eastern border of the central Plains, lanceolate points
continue to predominate in “Plains Archaic” cultures, but there
is a greater admixture of Eastern Archaic forms. For example, the
Nebo Hill assemblage, known from surface sites in the vicinity of
Kansas City, has points that are very closely related typologically
to some of the unfluted, Lithic stage types (Plainview, Angostura,
etc.) but includes grooved axes.* If the association is valid, this
would be a very difficult culture to classify. Farther east, in central
Missouri, the distinctive trianguloid Dalton point is associated with
lanceolate forms of the same general character.®
   The archaeology of the Ozark Plateau, a region with a highly
    63. The single radiocarbon date of 1333 + 600 B.c. (sample No. C-715
[Libby, 1954a]) from the upper level compares closely with the date for Signal
Butte I, cited above. Both would be late in the time range of Eastern Archaic
cultures.

   64. Shippee, 1948.               65. Chapman, 1948.



                                             ARCHAIC STAGE    iv 3
characteristic environment, has important bearings on the concept
of an Archaic stage, but is a little difficult to generalize upon. Ex-
cellent survey reports by Carl Chapman and others afford an abun-
dance of data, but they are organized in terms of the midwest
(Griffin) sequence, a classification which is imposed on the material
instead of deriving out of it. Better for our purposes is the formu-
lation of David Baerreis, in which the evidence, largely drawn from
open sites in northeastern Oklahoma (the Grove focus), has been
interpreted as reflecting a long continuity of basic stone artifact
types, notwithstanding an apparent shift in the economic base from
hunting and gathering to horticulture.*’ The later phases of this
Grove continuum are thought to pertain to the famous Ozark Bluff-
dweller culture, which, thanks to conditions unusually favorable
for the preservation of perishable materials, is known in great but
insufficiently documented detail.** This has led to spurious com-
parisons with the Basket Maker culture of the San Juan Anasazi
region of the Southwest, another instance of fortunate preserva-
tion. Baerreis believes. that the more significant relationships are
with the Archaic cultures of the East. The preceramic Bluff-dweller
culture is overlain by a later ceramic phase, not covered in Baerreis’
summary, in which can be seen faint emanations of influence from
the late Formative stage in the Mississippi Valley. This ceramic
phase corresponds to Harrington’s “Top-Layer’’®® and Robert
Bray’s “Marginal Mississippi.’’7° For our purposes it is sufficient
that the entire Ozark Bluff-dweller culture, notwithstanding the
abundant remains of domesticated plants in the later phases, re-
mains essentially on the Archaic stage of development as defined
in this study. It is a remarkable fact that the culture of a region so
close geographically to the centers of maximum intensity of Forma-
   66. Chapman, 1948, 1954, 1956; Chapman, Maxwell, and Kozlovich, 1951.
   67. Baerreis, 1951.
   68. Harrington,   1924;   Gilmore,   1930;   Dellinger,   1936;    Dellinger   and
Dickinson, 1942.
   69. Harrington, 1924.
   70. Bray, 1956.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY             124
tive development in the Mississippi Valley has been so impervious
to cultural influences from those centers. This would provide an
extremely nice frame for a study of culture-environmental inter-
action.
   Identification of an Archaic stage in Texas is easy enough—
where would Texas archaeology be without it?—but we are con-
fronted with the same difficulty, reference to which is beginning to
sound repetitious, of separating it from Lithic. Conditions favoring
a predominantly hunting type of economy persist in much of the
area, and there is the same disconcerting tendency for Lithic point
types, specifically Plainview and Angostura, to turn up in Archaic
contexts. Further, there is an almost complete lack of ground and
polished stone in Texas Archaic cultures; so we are deprived of
this handy criterion. An outstanding example is the Edwards Pla-
teau culture of central Texas, known from open camp sites and
“burned-rock middens’ (accumulations of fire-cracked hearth
stones) containing refuse indicating a hunting-gathering economy
with more dependence on deer than on bison. Plainview and Angos-
tura points are found too consistently in these sites to be regarded as
accidental intrusions.”: Otherwise the chipped-stone assemblage
is typically Archaic, with a wide variety of stemmed points, knives,
axes, choppers, picks, and large drills (mostly made-over projectile
points). Ground milling stones and manos are common, and there
are a few minor artifacts of polished stone, including crude boat-
stone atlatl weights. It is evident that this culture persisted for a
long period of time. Of the three documented foci of this culture,
the Clear Fork, featuring a specialized end-scraper (the “Clear
Fork gouge”), has long been the center of a dating controversy,
with estimates running as early as 8000 B.c., but general typological
considerations favor the more conservative figures of 4000 or
2000 B.c. (depending on certain alternative geological correlations)
to about A.p. 1500.72 The Round Rock focus is thought to have
   71. Suhm and Krieger, 1954, pp. 104-5; Suhm, 1955.
   72. Kelley, 19474. More recently Suhm and Krieger have extended the be-
ginning date of Clear Fork to “not later than 4000 to 5000 B.c.”’ (1954, p. 106).



                                               ARCHAIC STAGE     12 5
been approximately coeval with Clear Fork,” but the Uvalde focus
occupied only the last two or three centuries of this long interval
of time.”4 The important point for us here is that this continuum
comes down to a very late period—late enough to receive intrusive
types from east Texas cultures on the Formative level—without
departing significantly from the original Archaic pattern. The
Trinity culture of north-central Texas, nearer to the source of east
Texas intrusives, is nevertheless equally Archaic in its general con-
figuration.”
   The belated character of Texas Archaic is perhaps even more
conspicuous on the coast, where, in the Tonkawa, Karankawa, and
Coahuiltecan tribes comprising the so-called ethnological sink, we
have an opportunity of viewing a low-grade Archaic way of life in
ethnohistorical detail.7®
   The Big Bend aspect of the trans-Pecos region, in the extreme
western part of Texas, is known from rock shelters as well as open
sites and has in consequence a larger cultural inventory, including
many perishable items, and a more southwestern flavor.”’ The early
Maravillas focus of this culture has been compared with Ventana-
Amargosa I of south-central Arizona; the intermediate Pecos River
focus has Gypsum-type points; and the later Chisos focus has
Pinto and San Pedro types.’$ In other respects the stone assemblages
compare closely with that of Edwards Plateau, and the time range
is thought to be similar, except that the terminus of the Big Bend
culture may be slightly earlier. This is a culture extremely impor-
tant, from our point of view, as a bridge between the Archaic cul-
tures of the East and the Desert cultures in the Southwest, which
we are about to designate as Archaic.
  Before doing so, however, it might be well to pause at this point
to consider at greater length a general classificatory question al-
ready touched upon in connection with the Plains and the Ozark
  73. T. N. Campbell, 1948.                   74. Kelley, 19476.
  75. Suhm and Krieger, 1954, pp. 76-80.
  76. Swanton, 1924; Newcomb,    1956.
  77. Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940.     78. Kelley, 19476.



                                   METHOD AND THEORY
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY   12 6
Plateau. With regard to the Big Bend culture, which we have con-
sidered as essentially Archaic, it should be noted that two of the
later foci, the Chisos and the Livermore, have furnished evidence
of agriculture. In our previous paper we classed these two later
foci as ‘“Preformative.” Our concept of a Preformative stage had
been developed to take care of the many cultures that possessed
domesticated maize but do not yield substantial evidence that this
possession was of primary, or even significant, economic impor-
tance. In the present classification we have dropped the Preforma-
tive, admitting the presence of domesticated food plants on Archaic
levels where it is reasonably obvious that such agriculture was not
of importance in the development of stable, sedentary village life.
In this connection ‘it is of interest to note that these early occur-
rences of plant domesticates in North America are mostly from the
arid or semiarid areas of the continent. The fortuitous factor of
favorable conditions for preservation may be involved here, but it is
also likely that the seed-gathering and seed-grinding cultures of
these areas assimilated a trait like maize as they would numerous
wild plants and with little more immediate cultural effect. Hence we
classify these Texas cultures possessing corn as Archaic, because
in all other respects they seem to have that kind of conformation.
This is a preview of a situation that will be encountered again in dis-
cussing the cultures of the Southwest and northern Mexico.
   Generalization about the Archaic in the Great Basin and the
Southwest involves a continuation of the difficulties foreshadowed
in the Lithic section. These have to do with that great continuum
of basin and range Desert cultures,’® which, because of the preva-
lence of grinding stones in the archaeology, are so often contrasted
with the early hunting cultures in the literature. In our first attempt
at classification we chose to play down this division between hunters
and gatherers and, without really committing ourselves, suggested
that the earliest phase of this Desert continuum in the Southwest,
the Sulphur Spring phase of the Cochise culture of southeastern
Arizona and southwestern New Mexico, might be regarded as
  79. Jennings and Norbeck, 1955.



                                         ARCHAIC STAGE   127
Early Lithic—or Lithic, as we would now call it. We have al-
ready given reasons        for abandoning       this position*® and now
prefer to call all three phases of the Cochise               culture Archaic.
Chiricahua is involved in another division, that between gatherers
and farmers,®! and this antithesis too has probably been overdone.
The early corn in Bat Cave, on the St. Augustin Plains of west-
central New Mexico, was associated with a stone assemblage that
differs little from Chiricahua Cochise.’ Radiocarbon dates from
corn-bearing levels in the cave run as early as about 4000 B.c.,%*
but data on the association of the corn and the charcoal samples
dated have not yet been published. The earliest Bat Cave corn is
exceedingly primitive—it cannot be said with certainty that it 1s
not a wild variety—but reliable evidence of domestication comes
early in the sequence, and we can infer that it was well advanced
by 2000-3000 B.c. The same story of evolving corn in a retarded
Chiricahua-like culture is seen in the Tularosa Cave in the same
region of New Mexico.* There are said to be evidences of a re-
newed importance of hunting in the late San Pedro phase of Co-
chise,®* which might be taken as further evidence that agriculture
was not decisive in the patterning of Cochise culture. Cochise ap-
pears to have been the basis for both the Mogollon continuum of
the mountain region of southeastern Arizona and southwestern New
Mexico and the Hohokam of the southern Arizona desert, which we
shall classify later as Formative.
   To the west, in the lower Colorado River and California desert
regions, the Amargosa continuum parallels Cochise with some dif-
ferences, but these are not significant from a developmental stand-
   80. See p. 91.                           81. Kirchhoff, 1954.
   82. Mangelsdorf
                 and Smith, 1949; Dick, 1952.
    83. Earliest ofa long series of dates are: 3654 + 290 B.c. and 3980 + 310
B.c. (sample Nos. C-571, C-573 [Libby, 1951]).
   84. Martin et al., 1952. Radiocarbon dates on Tularosa corn are: 272 +
200 B.c., 194 + 160 B.c., 349 + 200 B.c. (sample Nos. C-584, C-585, C-612
(Libby, 1951]).
   85. Campbell and Ellis, 1952.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY     1? 8
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
point. Amargosa II, or Pinto-Gypsum as it was formerly called,*
correlates roughly with Chiricahua Cochise in time®” but shows
no signs of agriculture and not much of collecting; hunting is still
(or again) the dominant mode. Stone types are what we have come
to regard as Archaic in character. Whether or not it is correct to
equate Gypsum and Pinto temporally is a question we do not have
to go into. Both types seem to be widespread horizon markers on
the Archaic level for large portions of the Southwest and Texas and
on into the eastern United States. How this is to be reconciled with
the extinct faunal associations at Gypsum Cave and the early radio-
carbon dates of sloth dung in the cave deposits is difficult to see.*8
Amargosa III, equating roughly with San Pedro Cochise, is also
classified here as Archaic.
   At Ventana Cave, in south-central Arizona, Amargosa and Co-
chise traditions mingled in an excellent stratigraphic sequence that
has provided most of the evidence for the correlations referred to
above.8® Above the deposit containing the Lithic stage Ventana
complex and the discontinuity that is believed to mark a long period
of erosion and abandonment of the cave was a thin, red-sand deposit
containing artifacts of the Amargosa I phase, previously postu-
lated but not isolated in the lower Colorado River region. The
characteristic broad, stemmed points, somewhat similar to Borax
Lake points,®° are well within the typological range of Eastern
Archaic forms. This was followed by thick midden deposits, the
lower portion containing both Amargosa and Cochise types, called
Chiricahua-Amargosa II, the upper portion containing San Pedro
Cochise. The upper terminus of this midden was marked by an-
other disconformity, followed by. deposits containing Hohokam of
the Colonial and Sedentary periods. Amargosa              I, Chiricahua-
Amargosa II, and San Pedro are Desert cultures on an Archaic
stage, and the Hohokam phases are Formative. In this cave we have
   86. M. J. Rogers, 1939.                87. Haury et al., 1950, p. 534.
   88. Harrington, 1933. The sloth dung has been dated at 8504 + 340 B.c.
and 6576 + 250 B.c. (sample Nos. C-221, C-222 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]).
   89. Haury et al., 1950.               90. Harrington, 1948d.



                                          ARCHAIC STAGE    129
in vertical stratigraphy the full range of our developmental se-
quence from Lithic through Formative.
   A number of other cultures would have to be considered in any
complete description of the Archaic stage in the Southwest, a few
of which may be briefly mentioned. The San José culture, found in
fossil sand dunes in the Grants region in northwestern New Mexi-
co, has points in the Pinto tradition.*t The dunes are associated
with the altithermal period, a date which agrees with the general
time position of other early Archaic cultures in the Southwest.
Closely related to San José is the Concho complex from undated
surface sites about one hundred miles away in east-central Arizo-
na.* The general character of the artifacts and many of the spe-
cific forms are also Archaic as defined in this study.
    Pinto-type points have been recently reported from the San Juan
Anasazi region.* It may be assumed that when the elusive Basket
Maker I is finally run to earth it will be a culture of Archaic type.
Basket Maker II, formerly classified as Preformative, we are now
obliged to demote to the Archaic. Although agriculture was well
developed—there is nothing comparable here to the primitive corn
of Bat Cave—it does not seem to have become the central theme
of the culture, perhaps was not even the principal food resource.
Hunting and collecting are still much in evidence. Characteristic
settlements are small, unorganized groups of very crude, unstand-
ardized-surface, or shallow pit-houses of “brush and timber ma-
sonry’’ and stone-slab-lined storage cists. There are as yet no spe-
cialized religious structures (kivas) and in general only the faintest
indications of developing ceremonialism. Thanks to favorable con-
ditions for preservation in those regions where dry caves and
shelters were utilized as storage, burial, and camp sites, there is an
unusually large body of information about basketry, cordage,
finger-woven bags, sandals, wooden implements, and weapons, in-
   91. Bryan and Toulouse, 1943; Bryan and McCann, 1943.
   92. Wendorf and Thomas, 1951.
   93. Reported by J. Charles Kelley at the Andover Radiocarbon Confer-
ence, April, 1956.



                                   METHOD AND THEORY       |
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY           30
cluding the atlatl but not the bow. Pottery, however, has not yet
appeared, though presumably already in use in the Mogollon and
Hohokam     regions. In sum, as a cultural phase that has adopted
agriculture without profound modifications of settlement patterns
or other branches of technology, Basket Maker II remains essen-
tially on the Archaic level.** Basket Maker III, on the other hand,
also classified as Preformative in our first effort, is now promoted
to Formative; so we can again face our southwestern colleagues
without fear of personal violence.
   In sum, the general southwestern picture in the Archaic stage
is one of basic uniformity, reflecting an over-all environmental
homogeneity, with collecting as the most characteristic economic
pattern. There are marked local and temporal variations in the role
of hunting and, in the southeastern portion of the area, an early ap-
pearance of maize agriculture unaccompanied by any recognizable
changes in the technological inventory.
   An impressive accumulation of finds in the central and northern
Great Basin relates to another, perhaps even more fundamental,
Desert continuum, for which the name “‘Bonneville’’ has been sug-
gested. The cultures involved appear to be on an Archaic level.
These include Deadman,%* Promontory and Black Rock,®” and
Danger’ caves in the Great Salt Lake region; Lovelock Cave®? and
Leonard Rock Shelter! in the Humboldt Sink region of western
Nevada; and Catlow, Roaring Springs, Paisley Five Mile Point,
and Fort Rock caves in south-central Oregon.! General typologi-
cal affiliations are with the Amargosa and Cochise cultures already
discussed, but the remarkably early radiocarbon dates for some of
these sites, running as early as 9500 B.c. at Danger Cave, raise
   94. Kidder and Guernsey, 1919; S. J. Guernsey, 1931; Amsden, 1949;
Morris and Burgh, 1954.
  95. Jennings, 1953, p. 208; Jennings and Norbeck, 1955.
  96. E. R. Smith, 1941, 1952.
  97. Steward, 1937, 1940.               99. Loud and Harrington, 1929.
  98. Jennings, 1953.                    100. Heizer, 1951.
  101. Cressman et al., 1942; Cressman, 1951.



                                           ARCHAIC   STAGE    i3l
some very serious classificatory problems. Until the discrepancies
between some of these dates and the local geological correlations
are resolved, and until the temporal phases of this “long and placid”
continuum have been worked out and described, our relegation of
practically all these Basin cultures! to the Archaic stage must be
regarded as tentative. If the dates are correct, it would follow that
the Desert pattern was already in existence in the Great Basin in
a period occupied by Lithic cultures elsewhere and, if so, was prob-
ably basic to all the Desert cultures in the Greater Southwest.
Whether this would negate the assumption of temporal priority of
Lithic over Archaic stage cultures in western North America is a
question that can be neither settled nor ignored. We have already
referred to certain eastern “lower”? Archaic dates that pose the
same problem.
   Archaic cultures in the southern part of the Great Basin have
already been touched upon. The assemblage at Gypsum Cave in
southeastern Nevada,!° notwithstanding the possible extinct faunal
associations and early radiocarbon dates, seems to represent a
typical Desert culture and provides in the Gypsum point a useful
marker type for wide areas in North America. The Pinto point,
which takes its name from a series of surface finds in the Pinto Basin
of southwestern California,!°* has an even wider distribution on
the same level. The temporal relationship of Gypsum and Pinto has
been hotly debated; for our purposes it is sufficient that both are
in the Archaic stage. Farther north, the Little Lake (Stahl) site in
Inyo County, California, with Pinto, Lake Mohave,                      and Silver
   102. The first radiocarbon dates from the lowest culture-bearing levels at
Danger Cave were: 9502 + 600 B.c. and 9200 + 570 B.c. (sample Nos. C-609
and C-610 [Libby, 1951]). These were subsequently confirmed by dates of
9044 + 700   s.c.   and   8444 + 700   B.c.   (sample   Nos.   M-118   and   M-119
[Crane, 1956]). Sandals from the Fork Rock Cave gave a date of 7102 +
350 B.c. (sample No. C-428 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]).
    103. A few possible exceptions have been mentioned above in the Lithic
section.
   104. Harrington, 1933.
   105... burt, 1953p. 215.             106. Campbell and Campbell, 1935.


                                       METHOD AND THEORY
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY          13 a
Lake points, has provided one of the rare evidences of house con-
struction on the Archaic level in North America.!°7 The association
of Pinto with Lake Mohave and Silver Lake points on this site
throws a little extra doubt upon our tentative classification of the
Lake Mohave complex as Lithic. Possibly Lake Mohave ought to
be called Archaic as well.
  Turning to the southern California coast, we have already dis-
cussed a number of finds, thought to be early, and dismissed their
claims to be considered Lithic. These are the “Early Milling
Stone” cultures,!°% a “culture type” which includes the Little
Sycamore site in Ventura County,!°? Oak Grove in the Santa
Barbara region,!° the Topanga culture from the Tank site just
north of Los Angeles,!" Level 2 at the Malaga Cove site near
Redondo Beach in Los Angeles County," and the La Jolla complex
localized near San Diego and extending for an uncertain distance
into Baja California." Somewhat more distantly related are
Buena Vista Lake near the south end of the San Joaquin Valley"
and the controversial Borax Lake site north of San Francisco Bay.™
Relationships outside the California area are said to be with Pinto
Basin, Chiricahua-Amargosa II, and Chiricahua Cochise, which we
have already defined as Archaic. These coastal California milling-
stone cultures have some polished-stone artifacts, specifically con-
sisting of simple and rather crude charmstones and discoidals; there
are said to be remains of houses in at least one of them, the Oak
Grove; and in several of them burials assume a considerable im-
portance in the archaeological record. It is not unlikely that early
gathering communities on the California coast were somewhat
more stable than those of corresponding development in the in-
terior. This was certainly the case in later times.
   107. Harrington, 19482, 1948c, 1951.
   108. Wallace, 1954.
   109. Ibid.                             111. Treganza and Malamud, 1950.
   110. D. B. Rogers, 1929.               112. E. F. Walker, 1951.
   113. M. J. Rogers, 1929, 1945; Harding, 1951.
   114. Wedel, 1941.                      115. Harrington, 1948¢.



                                              ARCHAIC STAGE    13 3
   Among the best-documented archaeological cultures of North
America are those of the Sacramento—San Joaquin Delta and San
Francisco Bay regions of central California.“® It is mainly in
reference to these that comparisons with Eastern Archaic have
been made,!!7 but such discussions have usually had to do with
the possibility of historical connections, which is not germane to
our present purpose. The relationships from the culture-develop-
mental point of view are indubitable, whatever the causes may
have been.!8 According to Beardsley, the elements that support
the theory of an actual historical connection are for the most part in
the early and middle “horizons”’ of the three-part central California
sequence.
   The California late horizon, particularly in its climax Cosumnes
phase,"° shows a density of population and relatively advanced
level of cultural development made possible by a stabilized food
supply in the form of a highly specialized acorn complex. In our first
paper we took note of this economy in the following terms: ‘““This
might be regarded as an alternative to agriculture in its capacity to
produce conditions for a Preformative or even Formative stage,”
but we were bound by the logic of our classification and consigned
the late horizon, along with the early and middle, to the Archaic
stage. Now, with the shift of emphasis consequent upon the elimi-
nation of the Preformative, amounting to a downgrading of agri-
culture as the indispensable economic basis for Formative stage
culture, we are inclined to think that some at least of the late cen-
tral California cultures should be ranked as Formative. The same
   116. Schenck,   1926; Gifford and Schenck,   1926; Schenck and Dawson,
1929; Heizer and Fenenga, 1939; Lillard, Heizer, and Fenenga, 1939; Heizer,
1941, 1949; Belous, 1953.
   117. Haag, 1942; Beardsley, 1948.
    118. “Although basing their description of an Archaic stage primarily on
eastern data, Willey and Phillips (1955) have presented a summary which con-
forms in nearly every detail to the California picture as well’? (Clement
Meighan, in “A Review ofthe California Archaic,”’ read at the Andover Radio-
carbon Conference, April, 1956).
   119. Lillard and Purves, 1936.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY      l
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY          34
possibility must be extended to the final phase of the parallel three-
part Canalino sequence in the Santa Barbara region of southern
California.!2° This late phase has been identified with the historic
Chumash occupation of the region. Village populations, according
to estimates of the early discoverers, were as high as one thousand
people living in eighty houses, which suggests a degree of concentra-
tion a good deal more intensive than we think of as characteristic of
the Archaic. It must be noted, however, that both this and the Co-
sumnes phase mentioned above are climax phases; it by no means
follows that all late California cultures had advanced beyond the
Archaic level. The significant thing about these climactic food-
gathering cultures is that they seem to have been the end products
of extremely long and gradual internal development, without ob-
servable stimuli from outside. They have become Formative the
hard way, so to speak. This situation offers an interesting compari-
son to what seems to have happened farther up the Pacific Coast.
   Revision of our scheme of 1955 also gives us an opportunity to
renege on our classification of all Northwest Coast cultures as
Archaic, a position which elicited some not entirely unanticipated
criticism. W. C. McKern put the case in the clearest possible man-
ner, and it must be acknowledged that his intervention had some-
thing to do with our change of outlook:
    The authors’ difficulty would seem to be that of selecting agriculture as
the most significant culture criterion everywhere; selecting a measuring
device for Middle America and attempting to apply it universally. The real
contributions of agriculture, a sedentary life and security, can be provided,
within certain developmental limitations, by patterns of life other than
the agricultural. I submit that the Northwest Coast fishing-gathering
pattern produced for its peoples a richer, more complex social and eco-
nomic manner of existence than that enjoyed by the importantly agricul-
tural [roquois.'"
   Ome     ee Orral943, alo 2.
   121. McKern, 1956, p. 361. McKern’s further suggestion that an ecological
variant must be taken into account in developmental taxonomy has undeniable
merit but would involve an operation entirely different in scope and level of
abstraction from what we are attempting here. The object of the present in-
quiry is to see whether a gross classification of all New World archaeological



                                              ARCHAIC STAGE    13 5
   On taking a second look at some of the Northwest Coast
archaeology for the purpose of this revision, however, we have the
same impression of its essentially Archaic flavor. Unlike the
archaeology of California, it does not seem to provide a deep and
adequate basis for the climax development that we know ethno-
graphically as Northwest Coast culture. The latter we are now pre-
pared to call Formative, but it remains an interesting problem to
locate in the rather meager archaeological record the shift from
Archaic to Formative configurations. The best available data seem
to be in the Gulf of Georgia region, where a number of sequences!”
have revealed substantially the same general pattern of cultural
change: an early chipped-stone culture (lacking ground and
polished stone) with evidence in some localities of a land-hunting
economy,     followed in at least one locality by a maritime                   sea-
mammal-hunting “Eskimoid” culture with emphasis on ground
slate, followed again by an “Intermediate” period featuring the
reintroduction of land hunting and the use of ground-stone tools
testifying    to a well-developed         woodworking        industry of pre-
sumed interior origin, and finally the amalgamation of this with
the earlier maritime culture to produce a culmination. According
to Bryan, it was in the “Intermediate” period that the culture be-
came adapted to a// the natural resources of the area, both land and
sea, and it is here that he would place the first evidences of cul-
ture configurations classifiable as Formative.!? Substantiation of
this hypothetical sequence must await further investigation.
    In the meantime, while agreeing perfectly with McKern in
theory, we continue to feel uneasy about the classificatory situa-
tion. We cannot escape a feeling of unreality about the discussion, a
sense of factors missing from the equation. All developmental inter-
pretation is subject to this malaise, but it is especially apparent

data into a small number of broad developmental stages is possible and, if pos-
sible, useful. Introduction of the ecological variant would result in a classifica-
tion of entirely different nature which would answer neither of these questions.
   122. King, 1950; Borden, 1951, 1954; Carlson, 1954; A. L. Bryan, 1955.
   123. A. L. Bryan (personal communication, October, 1956).


                                         METHOD AND THEORY        13 6
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
when we move out to, and possibly beyond, the limits of what
might be called the nuclear American “diffusion sphere.’”24 The
sad fact is that our definition of the Formative stage has only
nominal value in peripheral situations. Whatever we think of the
importance, or lack of importance, of agriculture as a criterion, the
concept is nonetheless based very largely on configurations near the
center. This is particularly true in the case of Northwest Coast cul-
tures, the sources of which, wherever they ultimately turn out to
be, were almost certainly not to the south. The present tendency
seems to be to discount the role of Asiatic and Oceanic elements,
emphasizing rather the possibility of old Eskimo-Aleut connec-
tions.’ It seems to us, from the vantage ground of more or less
complete ignorance, that Kroeber’s views on this question have
not been superseded. “From both the northward centering and re-
cent northward trend of the climax of the whole Northwest Coast,
it is expected that more refined analysis will confirm the conjecture
that Asiatic influences perhaps were more potent than Nuclear
(Middle) American ones in the specific shaping of Northwest Coast
culture. If direct Oceanic influences have ever to be reckoned with,
they may complicate the picture.”° Archaeology, it appears, has
not yet been able to provide the “more refined analysis” mentioned
by Kroeber, perhaps never will, because the presumed Asiatic ele-
ments are such as to leave few traces in the ground.’ In any case,
whatever may be the true explanation, one senses here the presence
of forces more stimulating than mere abundance of food—forces
definitely outside the range of the more familiar (to us) patterns of
New World cultural development. It is something like the explosive °
climax of Plains culture after the introduction of the horse, a de-
velopment which would be equally hard to classify.

   124. This term was suggested by Christopher Hawkes (personal communi-
cation, 1953).
   125. Borden, 1954; Drucker, 1955; M. W. Smith, 1956. Borden has a date
of 476 + 163 B.c. for his “Eskimoid” phase in the lower Fraser River region
(University of Saskatchewan, sample No. 5-3).
   126. Kroeber, 1939, p. 31:           127. De Laguna, 1947, p. 12.



                                           ARCHAIC   STAGE   13 7
   In line with what has just been said, it might be better not to
mention the Archaic stage in the Arctic. Here we are dealing with
cultural traditions and configurations so unique as to make com-
parisons appear faintly ridiculous. There is a rapidly accumulating
corpus of finds in the Arctic that are earlier than, and possibly
distinct from, the Eskimo cultures, but the only adequately formu-
lated unit in this category is Denbigh, which, on the basis of ex-
traordinarily fine chipping techniques and specific point types, we
have already considered as a possible Lithic culture. However, we
have found similar late Lithic point types (Plainview, Angostura,
Eden-Scottsbluff, etc.) turning up repeatedly in contexts that we
have classified without hesitation as Archaic, with radiocarbon dates
considerably older than those obtained for Denbigh. Since the
original discovery at Iyatayet, burins and the associated microcore-
and-blade tradition that seem to us to be more characteristic of
Denbigh than the Lithic traits mentioned above have turned up in
many new sites and old collections in Alaska,”? the Aleutians,!%° the
Mackenzie Valley,!*! and the eastern Arctic and Canada,!* as well
as Greenland,!* in contexts that are variously labeled “Early
Man” and “Paleo-Eskimo.” The geographical and temporal di-
mensions of this tradition are not yet sufficiently understood to
make it useful as a criterion in developmental classification, but we
have a strong impression that its first appearance in New World
archaeology and subsequent associations are with cultures of the
Archaic stage, although something rather like it is found farther
south in the Formative stage.134
   With these exceptions out of the way it is surprising how many
   128. Cf. chap. 4, n. 76.
   129. See Daugherty, 1956, for summary of recent Alaska finds, and Irving,
1955, for reappraisal of Alaska Campus material.
   130. Laughlin,   1951; Laughlin,   Marsh,   and Leach,   1952; Laughlin and
Marsh, 1954.
   131. MacNeish, 1954a.
   132. Harp, 1951, 1952; Collins, 19535.          133. Melgaard, 1952.
   134. In Hopewellian cultures of Ohio and Illinois and the Poverty Point
culture of the lower Mississippi Valley. Cf. pp. 156-59.


                                       METHOD AND THEORY
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY       108 8
of the criteria of our definition of Archaic are applicable to Eskimo
and Paleo-Eskimo cultures. This is particularly noticeable in the
Dorset culture of the eastern Arctic,!*° whose relationship with
northeastern Archaic cultures is a perpetual subject of discussion.1°
But even such climactic phases as Old Bering Sea and Ipiutak'?
would, if the specifically Asiatic elements were subtracted and if
the finds were subjected to the same unfavorable conditions for
preservation, appear to be on the same level of development as
many of the well-known Archaic cultures farther south. Not only
is there a basic conformity in stone and bone technologies but there
are a great many shared artifact types of a specific nature. Until
fairly recently the tendency was to attribute the presence of such
traits in Archaic contexts to Eskimoan influence. Now, with the far
greater time depth allowed to North American Archaic, this inter-
pretation is no longer tenable.
                                    MIDDLE   AND   SOUTH   AMERICA

   The case for an Archaic stage in Mexico and Middle America is
similar to that outlined for the southwestern and Great Basin areas
of the United States. In Tamaulipas, the Nogales phase, which fol-
lows the probable Lithic stage Diablo and Lerma phases, is char-
acterized by teardrop- and triangular-shaped points, large oval
blades, chipped-stone hoes or celts, and frequent crude hammer-
stones, manos, and metates.!88 The subsequent La Perra phase is
characterized by the appearance of a primitive maize, but, other-
wise, the Archaic culture continuum is essentially unchanged.'*° By
   135. Jenness, 1925; Rowley, 1940; Leechman, 1943; Collins, 19534.
   136. Strong, 1930; De Laguna, 1946; Ritchie, 19514; Hoffman, 1952.
   137. Collins, 1937; Larsen and Rainey, 1948. The settlement of Ipiutak is
altogether exceptional from the point of view of village plan and size (575 lo-
cated house pits!). The excavators themselves were able to account for this
only by supposing that the village was occupied seasonally, with new houses
being built each year in preference to reoccupation of those previously used
(ibid., p. 47).
   138. MacNeish,    1950, p. 92.
   139. MacNeish,    1947; MacNeish,    1950, p. 87. The radiocarbon date for
La Perra is 2490 + 280 B.c. (sample No. C-687 [Libby, 1952]).


                                              ARCHAIC   STAGE   l3 9
 extension, the preceramic Chalco complex of the Valley of Mexico
is assigned to the Archaic upon the basis of its artifact similarities
to Nogales. Quite probably, the Abasolo and Repelo complexes of
the Tamaulipas coast fit into this bracket. In Coahuila the Cienegas
complex and the later Coahuila complex, both defined by Taylor,
are Archaic cultures in the Desert tradition.14°
   On the Chiapas coast, at Islona de Chantuto, the preceramic
levels of the shell middens have yielded little in the way of distinc-
tive artifacts"! and may, possibly, pertain to anything from Lithic
to Archaic; however, the nature of the site deposit suggests the
Archaic.
   In Panama, a non-ceramic and probably preceramic complex, the
Cerro Mangote, has been discovered on an old shoreline of the
Bay of Parita on the Pacific coast. Artifacts include crude pebble
choppers and grinders, rubbing stones, and scrapers. The subse-
quent Monagrillo phase of the same region sees the addition of
rather simple plain, incised, and red-painted pottery to this Cerro
Mangote complex. A third phase, the Sarigua, which may be later
than Monagrillo, lacks the stone chopping and grinding tools but
possesses pottery of a simple kind, though in a style quite different
from Monagrillo. The location of all these sites on abandoned
shorelines and lagoons and the nature of their refuse argue against
the presence of agriculture; and their general configuration is that of
the Archaic.!4%
   In South America there are several possibilities for an Archaic
stage. Among these 1s the culture, or culture continuum, represented
by the deep preceramic levels at Huaca Prieta, in the Chicama
Valley on the north coast of Peru.'# Formerly, we discussed this
Huaca Prieta phase as Preformative, basing our judgments on the
abundant remains of domesticated squash, peppers, gourds, and

   140. Kelley, MS presented at Andover, October, 1956. Radiocarbon dates
on Cienegas range from 6920 to 5450 B.c. The Coahuila radiocarbon date is
1670 B.c. See also Martinez del Rio, 1953.
  141. Drucker, 1948.              143. Willey and McGimsey, 1954.
  142. McGimsey, 1956.             144. Bird, 19482, 19485.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY     140
cotton, and seeing in this early agriculture something of a parallel
with Chiricahua Cochise or La Perra. The Huaca Prieta stone com-
plex, which consists only of crude flakes and choppers, offers few
clues for comparisons with North America or anywhere else.
Tentatively, we may consider Huaca Prieta as being on the Archaic
level, an assignment which is fairly consistent with its radiocarbon
dates of 2500-1250 B.c.14
    In northern Chile, at Arica and Pichalo, the Archaic is well rep-
resented by two sequent periods or phases. Shell fishhooks, cigar-
shaped stone sinkers, composite stone fishhooks of stone and bone,
stone mortars, and stone bowls are among the distinctive artifact
types. Rough percussion-flaked artifacts are found all along the
Chilean coast, but these are clearly associated and contemporaneous
with pressure-flaked and ground- and polished-stone implements.
In brief, there is no evidence of Lithic stage cultures antedating
those of the Archaic along the Chilean littoral.4¢ At both Arica and
Pichalo, maize agriculture and ceramics follow the Archaic periods.
In the Arica sequence there 1s some slight indication that maize may
have preceded pottery, but this is not certain.
   In southern South America, in the Straits of Magellan sequence,
Archaic stage cultures follow the Lithic stage Periods 1 and 2.147
In the Archaic artifact assemblages some of the stemmed projectile
points are not unlike Archaic points of North America. Bolas
stones, showing up in Periods 3, 4, and 5, mark the use of ground-
stone implements in this Magellanic sequence. Subsequent to this,
pottery appears as a part of the historic Tehuelche artifact complex
in this far southern region. There is little doubt that the pottery
trait spread southward into the Pampas and Patagonia in prehis-
toric times, probably diffusing from foci on the lower Parana
River. Arroyo Sarandi and El Cerrillo, near the delta of the Plate,
are representative of these pottery-making Archaic cultures of the
northern Pampas.'§ Bone implements and objects, chipped and
ground stone, and incised and punctated pottery of simple vessel
   145. Bird, 1951.                147. Bird, 1938.
   146. Bird, 1943.                148. Lothrop, 1932.


                                          ARCHAIC STAGE   141
forms make up the artifact assemblages.               As yet, preceramic
Archaic phases have not been stratigraphically demonstrated for
the Pampean or Parana regions, although certain site collections
suggest them. In general, aboriginal life on the Pampas and in sur-
rounding regions is revealed by both archaeology and ethnohistory
as varying between nomadism on the open flat country and rela-
tively stable small sites along the rivers. Land game and riverine
foods were the staples.!4° Only in very late times, with the occupa-
tion of sites like Arroyo Malo in the Plate Delta by Guarani
Indians, was an agricultural village pattern tentatively established
in the area.¥5°
   In eastern Brazil, in some of the Lagoa Santa caves, chipped- and
ground-stone celts, handstones, pitted anvils, and bone projectile
points are found in levels preceding pottery and pottery pipes.
Serrano defines an early coastal shellmound, or sambaqui, culture
as having an artifact complex very similar to that of the Lagoa
Santa caves.!! Later sambaqui phases (the ‘Middle’? and the
“Southern’”’) ¥ are characterized by numerous ground- and polished-
stone artifacts, including plummet-like stones (“fwsos’’), bolas,
mortars, axes, celts, and elaborate fish-shaped dishes. As such, they
are reminiscent of the Archaic stage in North America.
   Preceramic cultures of Archaic appearance are reported from
Manicuare,!®* in Venezuela, and from the various islands of the
West Indies.°4 The Venezuelan Archaic resembles that of the
Antilles in the possession of conch-shell tools, and resemblances of
this nature are also noted northward into Florida. West Indian pre-
ceramic levels are rather unique in their specific artifact forms, and
   149. Howard and Willey, 1948.
   150. Lothrop, 1932.
   151. Serrano, 1940a, 1946. The Araujo II sambaqui, in Parana, has an early
phase (Culture A) in which stone-grinding and stone-polishing are less well
developed than in later phases (B and C) (Orssich and Orssich, 1956).
   152. Serrano, 19405.
    153. Manicuare radiocarbon dates: 1615 + 130 B.c. and 1095 + 80 z.c.
Yale Natural Radiocarbon Measurements III, 1956, Nos. ¥-295 and 296g.
   154. Rouse, 1941, 1948, 1949, 19514; Osgood, 1942.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY       142
there is considerable variation from island to island. The preceramic
levels of Puerto Rico and the Guayabo Blanco phase of Cuba, along
with the Manicuare of Venezuela, lack polished-stone forms. On
the other hand, in such phases as the Couri and the Bay of Conch
in Haiti and the Cayo Redondo in Cuba, peg-shaped ceremonial
stones, stone dishes, and axes all reveal stone-grinding and stone-
polishing techniques.
   To summarize briefly, the Middle and South American cultures
classed as Archaic in this discussion represent numerous historical
lines whose origins and connections have not been, or cannot be,
traced. In Mexico there appear to be connections with early cul-
tures in the southwestern United States and in Texas. The Chilean
coast, another principal center           of Archaic-type developments,
shows an amazing number of parallels to the Archaic units of the
southern   California   coast.%@   In the far south, what            we   have
designated as Archaic seems to have deep roots in the old Pata-
gonian and Fuegian hunting cultures of the Lithic stage, although in
its later periods it undoubtedly assimilated various traits, including
pottery, from the Archaic cultures in the areas to the north. In
eastern Brazil, as well as in the northern Pampas and Parana River
section, there are a number of parallels to the Archaic of the
eastern United States.487 Archaic cultures in the Antilles, which
could have formed a convenient link between those of the eastern
United States and those of Brazil, are rather distinctive and highly
localized, although there are some similarities both with Venezuela
and with Florida.
   155. Rouse, 1952; Alegria, Nicholson, and Willey, 1955; Rouse, 1948.
   156. Bennyhoff, 1950; Lathrap, n.d.
   157. Baerreis, 1950; Willey, 195 1a.




                                             ARCHAIC   STAGE   143
