                                                  Chapter 6




                                  Formative Stage
                                            DEFINITIONS
In discussing the Archaic, we have already indicated the kind of
changes we have to make in our original concept of the Formative.
The latter was defined “‘by the presence of maize and/or manioc
agriculture and by the successful socioeconomic integration of such
an agriculture into well-established sedentary village life.’ As
we pointed out at the time, this definition introduced specific dif-
fused, i.e., historically derived, agricultural traditions as criteria
in a developmental classification. We were not unmindful of the
ambiguity of this procedure, but were constrained to follow along
the lines of conventional thinking in both New and Old World
archaeology.
   We were well aware of the possibility of sociocultural pat-
terns of comparable complexity being sustained by economies
other than agricultural. We thought of cultures such as those al-
ready discussed in the California and Northwest Coast areas as
marking a sort of florescence within the limits imposed by their
hunting-fishing-gathering economies; we were quite prepared to
admit that they might have attained the essential demographic
characteristics of the Formative stage, but we preferred to call
them Archaic, for two reasons: (1) they might be said to represent
the “older” (developmentally speaking) pattern and (2) it could
be argued that they lacked the potentialities for demographic in-
crease that agricultural food production normally provides. That
is to say, they were not Formative in the sense that they might go
  1. Willey and Phillips, 1955, p. 765.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY   14.
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY      +
on to a Classic stage. This is a perfectly defensible position. It is
substantially that taken by a majority of Old World archaeologists
at a similar juncture. It is well known that certain Mesolithic
sites in northern Europe exceed in size and material richness sites
of the later Neolithic cultures in the same area.2 On the other
hand, in making a survey of “Preformative” cultures in our first
paper, we found that agriculture per se was not the explosive stim-
ulus to cultural development we had supposed it to be. The early
evidences of plant domestication seem to be associated with cul-
tures that we would be inclined to think of as “lower” Archaic
if we had such a division, and in the one area where we have fairly
reliable chronological control, the North American Southwest,
there was plant domestication for a remarkably long time before
any spectacular development followed.
   This “slow-footed agricultural revolution” was actually the
principal theoretical basis for our “Preformative” stage. It was
the stage of emerging agriculture prior to its “successful integra-
tion into well-established sedentary village life.” This also is a
perfectly defensible formulation, but in practice it did not work
very well. At the lower border of ‘“‘Preformative,” i.e., when one
is trying to distinguish ‘“‘Preformative” from Archaic, the mere
presence of agriculture is detectable archaeologically only under
unusually favorable conditions; at the upper border, the termina-
tion of emerging and beginning of “successful integration’’ can be
established only by inference from settlement patterns and other
indirect evidence. Practically speaking, then, the settlement pat-
terns, etc.—not the agriculture—are the effective criteria for clas-
sification. Such being the case, it seems unreasonable to ignore the
evidence of stable sedentary organization in those instances in
which an agricultural basis cannot be inferred, either because there
is no evidence or because the environment was unsuited to agri-
culture. Thus, the elimination of “Preformative”’ may be seen as
largely a practical consideration, but a change of outlook is in-
volved, not in regard to the importance of agriculture in New
  2. Clarke, 1936, 1952.



                                     FORMATIVE STAGE   14 5
World archaeology, but in regard to its place in developmental
interpretation. We are not retreating from the position that agri-
culture was the principal formative agent in the development of
Formative cultures, but only from a rigidity that makes it the
indispensable agent. In so doing, we have shifted the emphasis
somewhat away from the historical toward the developmental side
of our hybrid “‘historical-developmental”     scheme. If, as we be-
lieve, it is thus more consistent and workable, the change may be
an improvement.
  Therefore, we now define the New         World Formative by the
presence of agriculture, or any other subsistence economy of com-
parable effectiveness, and by the successful integration of such an
economy into well-established, sedentary village life. We are deal-
ing with societies of a certain minimal complexity and stability
whose population sizes and gross groupings have been made pos-
sible by specific food economies, but, since these are preponderant-
ly agricultural, we are also dealing with a historical phenomenon—
the diffusion, or diffusions, of native American agriculture. Pot-
tery-making, weaving, stone-carving, and a specialized ceremonial
architecture are usually associated with these American Formative
cultures. These elements are not linked to American agriculture
through any inner causality, and some of them are often found in
contexts that are non-agricultural. Seldom, however, are Ameri-
can agricultural societies lacking in all of them. There are insuffi-
cient data as yet to establish the relative chronological appearances
of these trait complexes in the various New World areas, but it is
unlikely that they exploded concurrently in one locality to effect
a sudden and sweeping cultural revolution. Their significance is
less one of origins than of function. It is a practical certainty that
the origins of Formative stage cultures will be found to be extreme-
ly complex and diverse—the gradual assemblage of elements over
considerable periods of time and over wide areas to produce cumu-
lative and patterned results.
   Cultures of the Formative stage occupy a geographically central
position in the Western Hemisphere. They are found throughout


                                   METHOD AND THEORY    146
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
much of Middle America and most of Andean South America.
From these areas they extend northward, with some lacunae, into
the southwestern and eastern United States, and in South America
they run down the Cordillera to central Chile and eastward along
the Amazon and Orinocan drainages of the lowlands. Their chron-
ological span would appear to go back to the second millennium
B.c. in Middle America? and almost that far back in Peru.t As
noted above, there are early occurrences of maize in New Mexico
and ‘Iamaulipas, but there is no indication that agriculture was the
primary basis of life in these cultures or that populations were
organized into sizable, stable villages.
    Not until the first centuries A.p. were Formative-type cultures
established in the Southwest. Most authorities would agree on this
same approximate date for the Southeast. In lower Central Ameri-
ca, Colombia, and Ecuador, it is possible that agricultural village
life is of an age with that of Middle America and Peru, but there
is still little in the way of proof. In the South Andes the Formative
threshold may be as late as a.p. 1000.5 Caribbean and Amazonian
archaeological     sequences   suggest considerable         time depth for
Formative-type cultures in some regions, but, as yet, there are
few means by which to correlate these with Mexican or Peruvi-
an chronologies.
                                                MIDDLE   AMERICA

   In Middle America® the earliest known pottery-and-agriculture
phases of several different archaeological regions are representa-
   3. The date of 1359 +250 B.c. for Early Zacatenco in the Valley of Mexico
is consistent with the Valley of Mexico stratigraphy and with the majority of
the other carbon 14 dates (sample No..C-196 [Libby, 1952]).
   4. Radiocarbon date of 714 +200 s.c. for Coastal Chavin culture in north-
ern Peru (sample No. 75 [Libby, 1952]).
    5. This would be true if agriculture and ceramics were introduced into
northern Chile and northwestern Argentina on a Derived Tiahuanaco level. It
is more likely, however, that these events antedate Tiahuanacoid diffusions
from Peru (see Bird, 1943).
  6. An area to be defined approximately       as Kirchhoff    (1943)   defines
‘Mesoamerica.”



                                          FORMATIVE STAGE     147
tive of Formative stage culture. A definition of all the regional
culture sequences of Middle America is beyond the scope of this
book, but any one of several will serve to demonstrate the rise
and growth of Middle American civilization in the Formative
stage. In the Valley of Mexico and its environs the El Arbolillo 7
and the Early Zacatenco® phases are the earliest Formative mani-
festations. These phases are represented by large village sites of
deep and extensive refuse. Handmade figurines, incised or white-
on-red decorated ceramics, and metate and mano stones are char-
acteristic artifacts. There follow the successive Middle Zacatenco,
Tlaltilco, Ticoman, and Cuicuilco phases.? Although there is con-
tinuity from one phase to the next, this should not be misconstrued
as a wholly local development. Outside influences came into the
Valley of Mexico during these phases. One of the most striking of
these “foreign” waves is reflected in the Tlaltilco pottery and the
associated Olmec-style figurines. Toward the close of the Forma-
tive stage in the Valley of Mexico, the trait of platform-mound
construction appears—Cuicuilco is the outstanding example!’—as
does monumental stone sculpture. The end of the Formative in the
Valley of Mexico is marked by the beginning of the Teotihuacan
II, or Miccaotli, phase of the Classic Teotihuacdn civilization.
This Mexican highland Formative sequence is, apparently, paral-
leled by the Mamom-through-Chicanel sequence of the lowland
Maya," the series of Formative stage phases at Kaminaljuyu in
the Guatemalan highlands,” those of the Huasteca,!* and various
other sequences of southern Mexico.
   In all these Middle American regions there are general techno-
logical and aesthetic similarities which link the Formative cultures.
Ceramics show a competence of manufacture. They tend to be
plain or monochrome, or, if decorated, the decorative techniques
are frequently incision, scoring, punctation, rocker-stamping, or
  7. Vaillant, 1935.
  8. Vaillant, 1930.           11. R. E. Smith, 1955.
  9. Porter, 1953.             12. Shook and Kidder, 1952.
  10. Cummings, 1933.          13. Ekholm, 1944; MacNeish, 19548.



                                  METHOD AND THEORY     148
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
a rather uncomplicated use of painting. Handmade figurines are a
hallmark, and there are stylistic details which serve to establish
cross-regional ties. A village community, probably consisting of
from a duzen to several hundred households, was the basic living
situation of the Middle American Formative cultures. In some
regions there is evidence that this kind of settlement, alone, pre-
ceded the appearance of sites marked by public or religious archi-
tecture in the form of pyramid platforms. Wauchope has termed
such a subdivision of the stage as the “Village Formative.’”4 This
was followed by an “Urban Formative’ in which ceremonial cen-
ters, consisting of pyramid-mounds, were constructed in addition
to the ordinary villages.
   This distinction, between        a purely village life and a village
life plus ceremonial-center participation, poses a problem in stage
classification. In so far as the archaeologist is able to read a pre-
historic record, there can be little argument but that the ceremonial
center, with its public works, stands for multivillage co-operation
and for the beginnings of relatively large-scale politico-religious
organization. These, presumably, were patterns which had not
existed before. Should we not, then, fix upon this change as a stage
division by lowering the upper limits of the Formative? We admit
the validity of this reasoning but hesitate to follow it up. For one
thing, the concept of the ‘‘Formative,” the “Developmental,” the
“Preclassic,”’ or the ‘““Archaic”’—all terms which have been applied
to more or less the same span of culture development in Middle
America—is rather deeply established in the existing literature.’
This, in itself, is not cause to perpetuate the terminology and
classification; but we feel there are other arguments. The name
“Formative,” as we use it, implies the formation of the New World
agricultural village pattern. At the same time, it carries with it the
connotation that this pattern was basic to and formational toward
later and more advanced developments. The era that we think of
   14. Wauchope, 1950.
   15. Caso (1953) makes the distinction referred to by calling the earlier, or
“Village Formative,” the ‘“Archaic”’ and the later division the ‘‘Formative.”’



                                           FORMATIVE   STAGE   149
as the late Formative in Middle America was a time of rapid
growth, of new ideas and their material implementation in the form
of community construction projects. It was, in this sense, part of
the stage still formational to what we will define as the Classic.
   The extent to which the similarities between the regional cul-
ture sequences of Middle America can be attributed to inter-
regional diffusion or to developmental parallelism is not always
clear. Some cases, such as the presence of the Olmec figurine style
at Tlaltilco, in the Valley of Mexico, and Tres Zapotes, in Vera-
cruz,!® or the resemblances between Formative stage pottery of
the lowland Maya Mamom and Chicanel phases and that of Vera-
cruz and of the Huasteca, are undeniably the results of diffusion.
But such a phenomenon as the apparent increase of populations
during the Formative cannot be explained by historical forces
alone. The idea of the platform- or pyramid-mound was undoubt-
edly widely diffused in Middle America during the late Forma-
tive, but the conditions for its acceptance from region to region
were locally developed. This suggests the hypothesis that Middle
American Formative stage culture, as it developed in its various
foci, proceeded steadily but somewhat unevenly.
   Most of the great achievements of the subsequent Classic stage
are presaged by the Formative, but there is no significant regional
clustering of these elements. Ambitious stone sculpture is featured
in one region, elaborately decorated ceramics in another, and what
appear to be the beginnings of a glyphic system elsewhere.17 Cer-
tain regions may have evolved particular features because of
peculiar natural environmental circumstances or advantages. Other
cultures lacking settings with these specific potentialities may have
turned to different courses. Geographical proximities and dis-
tances or physiographic barriers undoubtedly influenced the work-
ings of diffusion, allowing an innovation or an acceleration of a
trend here, delaying it there. With such cultural growth, which
we cannot yet follow and may never be able to follow in all its
complexity of detail, the Formative cultures of Middle America
  16. Drucker, 1943.             17. Caso, 1947.



                                  METHOD AND THEORY    15
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY         0
gradually assumed what archaeologists have come to call a ‘“Clas-
sic’ status.
   Surely, one of the reasons that Classic cultures could be devel-
oped in Middle America was that there was a multiplicity of re-
gional traditional antecedents. The intertwining of the many
varied strands of the Formative produced the Classic. Individually,
these strands would have supported nothing of greater moment
than a culture like the Mississippian of the eastern United States,
with its temple mounds, or the Coclé culture of Panama, with its
fine pottery and metal craft. Together, they emerge as Middle
American civilization. This does not mean that the Middle Ameri-
can Classic stage was characterized by a single, homogeneous
culture or civilization. Regionalism persisted, but it was a region-
alism in which the various Classic cultures had assimilated enough
from each other so that all drew upon a common fund of great
depth and richness.

                                            NORTH   AMERICA

   Northwest of Middle America the distinctive patterns which
characterize that area become attenuated and eventually dis-
appear. A well-developed Formative stage, however, was attained
in all three principal subareas of the North American Southwest.
Middle American Formative elements are abundantly present in
the later phases, but even before this the general configurations
are distinct and characteristic Formative entities in their own
right. It is in the southwestern setting, in fact, that archaeology
can offer the most detailed view of continuous cultural develop-
ment from Archaic into Formative, and it was because of this that
our previous exposition of a Preformative stage relied heavily
upon data from this area.
   We are inclined to agree with J. O. Brew!® that Anasazi, Hoho-
kam, and Mogollon can no longer be considered self-contained
cultural continuities; instead, as sequence formulations of a scope
somewhere between what we have designated as regional se-
  18. Brew and Smith, 1954, p. 588.



                                      FORMATIVE STAGE   l5 l
quences and area syntheses, they offer the best opportunity for
testing our developmental hypotheses without losing us in the
superabundance of detail that southwestern archaeology offers.
Let us begin with the Mogollon subarea. We have already spoken
of the early corn in Bat and Tularosa caves of southwestern New
Mexico and their story of a protracted Archaic-with-corn stage
of development. The point at which this ends and Formative be-
gins is more than usually difficult to establish. Five separate
“branches” (regional sequences in our terminology) of the Mogol-
lon subarea have been correlated by Joe Ben Wheat, in two recent
publications, into a sequence of five numbered periods covering a
span from about 300 B.c. to a.p. 1500.!° He gives excellent sum-
maries of developments in various technological categories but not
much idea of changes in total configuration. This kind of informa-
tion is also rather hard to get from the primary sources.?° All
writers emphasize the continuity from Cochise into Mogollon,
and, apart from the incorporation of elements derived from Hoho-
kam and, later, Anasazi sources, the subsequent history seems to
have been one of slow and uneventful change. On the other hand,
it appears that, in the Pine Lawn, Hilltop, and possibly other early
phases of the Mogollon sequence, there were already small villages
of pit-houses clustered around a larger, presumably ceremonial,
structure.” It would seem that we have to accord Mogollon I a
qualified Formative status, but it is not until considerably farther
along in the sequence that the settlement patterns and general con-
figurations are comparable to Formative developments in other
parts of the Southwest,      and by this time it is a moot question
whether the culture is still Mogollon.
   In the Anasazi subarea, Basket Maker III of the Pecos Classifi-

   19. Wheat, 1954, Fig. 1; 1955, Fig. 12.

   20. Haury, 1936; Martin and Rinaldo, 1947, 1950a,      19504;   Martin,
Rinaldo, and Antevs, 1949; Martin et al., 1952, 1956. .
  21. Wheat, 1954, p. 580.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY    15 2
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
cation (or Modified Basket Maker, as it is alternatively called)?
is essentially a continuation of Basket Maker II with new features,
such as additional varieties of corn, beans, domesticated turkey,
pottery, the bow, the grooved ax and maul—none of decisive sig-
nificance perhaps from a developmental point of view, but the
general configuration is suggestive of the Formative. There is now
widespread use of substantial slab-lined pit-houses of standardized
types, with antechambers, ventilators, and other special features
that became embalmed in the small kivas of later periods. There
are also, in some localities, ranges of contiguous one-story surface
rooms of crude masonry and jacal construction that foreshadow
the agglutinated unit-type house structures of the Pueblo II and
III periods. More important, perhaps, from our point of view, is
the fact that the villages attain considerable size in Basket Maker
III, up to one hundred and fifty rooms or more, and that in some
cases large circular structures are associated with them, presuma-
bly of religious or ceremonial import and possibly prototypical of
the Great Kivas of Pueblo III.
   In the succeeding Pueblo I period, although there is progressive
development of masonry architecture, there is a tendency for vil-
lages to be smaller.28 Without knowing whether these seemingly
small settlements were organized into larger communities, we can-
not readily evaluate this kind of change. At any rate, in Pueblo
Il’* the trend toward larger villages, which started in Basket
Maker IIJ, is resumed and is accompanied by pronounced archi-
tectural improvement, both in planning and in construction. All
the specialized features of the kiva attained their characteristic
forms in this period and began to be incorporated into the village
plan in a manner that indicates foresight and design. The Anasazi
phases of the great Pueblo III and IV periods represent a climax
of Formative stage culture in the Southwest as a whole. Athabascan
incursions and Spanish conquest had serious effects upon Anasazi
culture, and the towns decreased in size and number; nevertheless,
  22. Roberts, 1929; Martin, 1939; Amsden, 1949; Lancaster et al., 1954.
  23. Roberts,   1931, 1939, 1940        24. Morris, 1939; Brew, 1946.




                                        FORMATIVE   STAGE   15 3
the culture remained viable, and a Formative type of life persisted
—and still persists—in the modern pueblos.
  Like the Mogollon, the Hohokam of the Gila Basin and Tucson
regions of Arizona appears to have grown out of the earlier
Cochise, but with the difference that the later phases of Cochise
in this subarea have not yet furnished evidences of agriculture.
As in the Mogullon sequence, the earliest phases of the Hohokam
are a sort of incipient Formative in that it is as yet difficult to judge
the significance of agriculture as a means of promoting sedentary
village life. We     are inclined, however,    to place the Formative
threshold in the Vahki phase of the Pioneer period” at an estimated
date of 300 B.c. Population increase and such features as ball
courts, canal irrigation, and a presumed        step-up of agricultural
production in the succeeding Colonial period phases** mark the
crystallization of full-fledged Formative stage culture. Undoubt-
edly the ball-game idea, along with many other elements, passed
into the Southwest from Middle America, but its adoption and the
construction of large community works in connection with it indi-
cate that Hohokam societies were developing sufficient size and
co-ordination to exploit such an idea. In the Hohokam Sedentary
period” irrigation systems were enlarged and improved; ball courts
were still in use but were reduced in size; villages became com-
pactly planned settlements of adobe houses, in some cases inclosed
by walls to form compounds. In the Classic period, beginning about
A.D. 1000, the innovations were largely architectural, culminating
in the massive, multistoried adobe structures of Casa Grande?’ and
Los Muertos.”® To some extent these architectural and settlement
changes of the Sedentary and Classic periods may be attributed to
diffusion, and even actual migration, from the Anasazi regions to
the north, yet the continued expansion of the irrigation systems
would seem to suggest steadily increasing populations. Thus, al-
though the form and style of the new settlements may have been
   25. Gladwin et al., 1937.
   26. Woodward,    1931; Haury, 1932.        28. Gladwin, 1928.
  27. Gladwin et al., 1937.                   29. Haury, 1945.


                                      METHOD AND THEORY    154
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Anasazi (or “Salado,” whatever that term may mean), the social
and cultural conditions which they reflect were, at least in part, en-
gendered within the Hohokam culture. The causes of the breakup
of Hohokam culture after a.p. 1400 are not fully understood. Soil
depletion and irrigation difficulties, internal warfare and external
pressures, are cited as possibilities. Whatever the course of events,
the prosperous agricultural villages could no longer be maintained,
and Hohokam culture slipped back from its Formative level to a
condition reminiscent of an earlier and simpler stage.*°
   In summary, the Formative stage cultures of the Southwest,
in contrast to those of Middle America, are seen in their earliest
beginnings and show the gradual steps by which marginal agricul-
tural societies may achieve full agricultural status. In an internal
sense, southwestern culture could be said to have reached a Classic
stage in such manifestations as Pueblo Bonito of the Chaco Can-
yon*! or Casa Grande of the desert region of southern Arizona.”
But from an external point of view, in the perspective of New
World culture-history, these achievements         are meager in their
over-all architectural, artistic, and intellectual attainments when
compared to Classic Middle American or Peruvian civilizations.
It has been a commonly held opinion that southwestern native cul-
tures lagged behind Middle American cultures because they were
geographically remote from the sources of American agriculture
and therefore started their climb toward a higher culture much
later. But the early dates for Bat Cave corn in the Southwest force
us to re-examine this rationalization. We have argued that a varied
natural environment and multiple regional-cultural centers in
Middle America were        significant stimuli for cultural growth in
that area. It is likely that the limitations of the Southwest in this
regard were the most important deterrents to the rise of a native
American Classic stage in that area.
  In our discussion of the Archaic in eastern North America, we
placed the Formative threshold roughly on the division between
  BOM DIResOmlo>1h 1953.
  31. Kidder, 1924; Judd, 1954.          32. Gladwin, 1928.



                                      FORMATIVE   STAGE   15 5
Farly and Middle Woodland in the Griffin chronology. It re-
mains only to give examples and the reasons for calling them Form-
ative. First, however, we must dispose of some exceptions to the
corollary generalization that all “Archaic” (in the Griffin ter-
minology) and Early Woodland cultures are below that threshold.
The Poverty Point culture of the lower Mississippi is generally
designated as “late Archaic,” because it has stone technology of
that level, baked clay objects highly reminiscent of the central
California Archaic, soapstone vessels, and no pottery. On the
other hand, there are mounds of unascertained function up to
seventy feet high, and the type site in northeastern Louisiana
has a great sixfold system of concentric octagonal earth embank-
ments three-quarters of a mile in diameter. The function of this
remarkable earthwork is likewise problematical. The only inves-
tigators who have seen something of these embankments from the
inside have found them to be composed largely of refuse, and argue
therefrom that they represent a planned village of these extraordi-
nary proportions.®* The temporal position of Poverty Point, now
fairly well established by no less than ten radiocarbon dates rang-
ing from about 1300 to 200 B.c. with the majority clustering
around 800 B.c., would be more appropriate to an Early Woodland
culture, but, from our point of view, the possibility of Formative
status must be allowed for. On the basis of the sheer size of the
mounds and earthworks, we have to infer a concentration of
population, or at least a concentration of control over a large popu-
lation, backed up by a stable food supply. So far there has been no
evidence of agriculture, but it is quite impossible to imagine any
other adequate economic basis in the geographic setting.
   The second exception to the generalization that Formative in
the East begins with Middle Woodland is the Adena culture of the
   33. Griffin, 1952a. For those who prefer the Ford and Willey scheme
(1941) the line would be between the Burial Mound I and II periods.
   34. C. H. Webb, 1944, 1948b; Haag and Webb, 1953; Ford, 1954d; Ford,
Phillips, and Haag, 1955; Ford and Webb, 1956.
   35. Ford and Webb, 1956.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      156
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Ohio Valley.** Adena has been designated as “Early Woodland”
in the Griffin classification, and is so regarded by most easternists,
on the basis of an assumed priority over Hopewell, the main
anchor of the Middle Woodland concept in eastern archaeology.
This assumption, based largely on typological and distributional
grounds without stratigraphic confirmation, was badly shaken by
the first published radiocarbon dates, which appeared to invert the
relationship.?”. More recent dates have substantially restored the
original chronology,*® however, and it has received additional sup-
port from recent stratigraphic studies in the upper Ohio Valley.*
Thus, if we set aside Poverty Point as a developmental enigma
clearly in need of further explanation, Adena probably represents
the earliest reorientation of eastern Archaic culture along lines
that we can designate as Formative. All available information
comes from the excavation of burial mounds and small sections of
village sites beneath them, and thus very little can be said about the
settlement patterns. However, the great size of mounds,*° the na-
ture and complexity of mortuary practices (suggestive of social
   36. Mills, 1902; Greenman, 1932; Webb and Snow, 1945; Spaulding, 1952.
   37. Griffin, 1951.
    38. There are now too many Hopewell and Adena dates available to be
listed here, and they are too erratic for summary generalization. The sig-
nificant dates from the point of view of this discussion are 696+170 B.c.
 (sample No. C-759 [Libby, 1954a]) and 8264410 B.c. (sample No. C-942
 [Libby, 19544]) from Adena sites in Kentucky and Ohio, respectively, both of
which are substantially earlier than 545 +300 B.c. (sample No. M-15 [Crane,
 1956]) and 385 +250 B.c. (sample No. C-152 [Arnold and Libby, 1951]),
two of a fairly neat cluster of Illinois Hopewell dates. The Ohio Hopewell
dates so far obtained run slightly later than those from Illinois.
    39. Information given by John Witthoft at the Andover Radiocarbon Con-
ference, October, 1956.
   40. The Grave Creek Mound, near Wheeling, West Virginia (Squier and
Davis, 1848, Fig. 56), and the Miamisburg Mound near Dayton, Ohio (Shet-
rone, 1931, Fig. 100), each approximately seventy feet high, and the Great
Serpent Mound of Adams County, Ohio, though they have not been satisfac-
torily excavated, are all considered on fairly good evidence to be Adena. They
may, therefore, date as early as 500 B.c. From the standpoint of mass, these
monuments will stand comparison with any other New World structures of
comparable date.



                                          FORMATIVE   STAGE   15 7
stratification), the large and substantial houses, and the high artistic
quality of some of the artifacts permit us to infer stable settlements
and an effective economic base.‘
   When we turn to cultures that have been classified as Middle
Woodland, it is impossible to avoid beginning with Hopewell.
Adena is a reasonably well-defined archaeological unit; not so with
Hopewell. The name has been much abused in the literature. There
are at least two primary centers of concentration, one in southern
Ohio, the other in the Illinois River and Mississippi River valleys
in Illinois and adjacent states, and there are a great many so-called
Hopewellian phases or cultures farther afield that we shall speak
of presently. Dates for Illinois and Ohio Hopewell range from
about 500 B.c. to A.D. 1, the Illinois sites being slightly older at
the present time. The nature of the relationship between them is
a problem about which there might be considerable diversity of
opinion, but all would agree that the climax of the culture is repre-
sented by the “big four’? Ohio sites: Hopewell, Mound City,
Seip‘4—all three in the Scioto Valley in the vicinity of Chillicothe
—and the Turner Mounds,* on the Little Miami River near Cin-
cinnati. This climax development cannot be placed accurately
within the time span indicated above, but we may assume it was
toward the end, say, in the last one or two centuries B.c. The
technological skill and artistic sensitivity attested by some of the
objects in stone, obsidian, tortoise shell, bone, copper, silver, and
meteoric iron were unapproached anywhere else in North Ameri-
ca at this time and hardly surpassed in Middle and South America.
The same may be said of the energy expended in the complicated
construction of huge burial mounds, ceremonial earth inclosures,
and fortifications.“ In our first paper we reluctantly assigned this
   41. Spaulding, 1955, pp. 19-21.
   42. Moorehead, 1922a; Shetrone, 1926.
   43. Mills, 1922.        44. Mills, 1909; Shetrone and Greenman, 1931.
   45. Willoughby, 1922.
   46. The great Fort Ancient, its name given erroneously to a later culture,
is now recognized as a hilltop sanctuary of the Hopewell period (Morgan,
1952, p. 93).

                                      METHOD AND THEORY       15 8
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
classic Hopewell phase to a “Preformative’”’ status on the grounds
of insufficient evidence of large, stable villages—excavations in
Ohio Hopewell sites have been almost entirely confined to burial
mounds for understandable but not altogether praiseworthy rea-
sons—and only very occasional direct indications of maize agri-
culture. Under our present less rigorous standards we can redress
that injustice. As in the case of Poverty Point and Adena, it seems
unlikely that the large populations we are obliged to infer could
have been supported and organized for public works of such mag-
nitude without a stable and efficient economic base. The Ohio
Valley lies well within the known historic orbit of maize agricul-
ture; in later aboriginal periods maize was of primary economic
significance. We find it difficult to conceive of an alternative wild
food supply of sufficient dependability in this region. In any case,
maize or no, the configuration of the culture is fully Formative,
as we now define the stage.
   Whether the many Hopewellian manifestations scattered widely
throughout the East should be regarded as units of a major Hope-
well continuity or as phases of other unformulated cultures linked
by a Hopewellian horizon is a complicated question that we do not
have to go into here. Our casual impression is that the various
phases in Illinois,” Indiana,** Wisconsin,*® Michigan,*° and per-
haps New York®! might be drawn in with Ohio Hopewell into a
Hopewell “culture” without stretching the formulation unduly,
but whether these also, in all cases, could be regarded as Forma-
tive is another question. Hopewellian manifestations farther away
from the nuclear centers, particularly in the South, while possess-
ing individual elements (horizon markers?), show markedly differ-

  47. Cole and Deuel, 1937; Griffin and Morgan, 1941; Deuel et al., 1952.

  48. Lilly, 1937; Quimby, 1941a.
  49. McKern,      19314; L. R. Cooper, 1933.

   50. Greenman,    1927; Quimby,   1941a, 19414, 1952.

  51. Ritchie, 1938.


                                           FORMATIVE   STAGE   159
ent configurations. Marksville,** Troyville,°* and Issaquena,* for
example, are more intelligible as phases in a lower Mississippi con-
tinuum that has yet to find a name. It does not contribute any
cultural understanding to call them Hopewellian. The kind of
excavations required to permit judgment as to whether this
Marksville-Troyville culture is classifiable as Formative have not
been made or at least have not yet been published. It would, how-
ever, be very surprising if such were not the case.
   Similarly, on the Florida Gulf Coast, Hopewellian traditions,
chiefly ceramic, entering perhaps by way of the lower Mississippi,
have combined with resident traditions to form a regional develop-
ment of great vitality and individual flavor. In its early Santa
Rosa-Swift Creek phase® this regional development lacks sufficient
site documentation for developmental interpretation, but, in the
later Weeden Island®* and Kolomoki®’ phases, particularly the
latter, it would qualify as Formative.
    Many other instances of Hopewellian intrusion into the South-
east could be mentioned. The elements that reveal such a connection
are often striking, as in the famous Crystal River mound in Flori-
da,5* but there is always the question whether they reflect a serious
orientation of pre-existing Early Woodland patterns or merely some
sort of trade relations. The same developmental uncertainty at-
taches to Middle Woodland cultures in the Southeast which seem
to have been more resistant to Hopewellian influences. An ex-
ample is the Copena             (copper-galena)      of the Tennessee River
   52. Fowke, 1928; Ford, 1936; Ford and Willey, 1940.
   53. W. Walker,        1936; Ford,    1951. The Troyville and Greenhouse   sites
covered by these reports are multicomponent sites. The ideal type site for the
Troyville phase (Baptiste, or Av-25, on the Marksville Prairie, Louisiana) has
been dug but not reported.
   54. Greengo, 1957.
   55. Willey and Woodbury,        1942; Willey, 1949.
   56. Moore, 1901, 1902, 1903, 1918; Fewkes, 1924; Willey, 19455, 1949.
   57. Sears, 195la, 1951b, 1953, 1956.
   58. Moore,    1903,    1907a; Greenman,      1938; Willey and Phillips, 1944;
Willey, 19480.



                                             METHOD AND THEORY   160
                                       IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Valley in northern Alabama.*? Here again, our information is con-
fined to burial mounds of modest proportions and their contents,
which show a level of sophistication comparable to Adena and
Hopewell, but little can be said about the kind of settlements or
the economic base.
   Middle Woodland period cultures in Georgia and contiguous
portions of adjoining states are likewise difficult to classify. These
are unified by common participation in the southern Appalachian
or Complicated Stamp pottery tradition, a ceramic development
grounded in the simple and checked stamp styles of the Early
Woodland phases such as Mossy Oak and Deptford (already clas-
sified as Archaic), which attained a sudden climax from the aes-
thetic point of view in the beautiful curvilinear style of the early
Swift Creek phase of south-central Georgia.® A parallel develop-
ment, possibly derived out of the Mossy Oak simple stamped type,
resulted in a complicated rectilinear style the best-known example
of which is called “Early Napier.’ Both curvilinear and recti-
linear styles went through a number of phases and reacted upon
each other in a very complex fashion, their influence spreading
far beyond the borders of Georgia, but the associated cultures,
so far as we can see, remained on a relatively low level of develop-
ment, until the Etowah and Lamar phases, which will be referred
to later.
   Cultural development in peninsular Florida tended to pursue a
course of its own which renders terms like ‘Early Woodland”
and ‘‘Middle Woodland” somewhat meaningless. Cultures of the
St. Johns River, Indian River, and Glades regions, where we have
excellent sequences, seem to have remained on an Archaic level
throughout most of the long spans of their existence. Elements de-
rived from Formative culture to the north appear in considerable
strength in some of the later phases, but there are few signs of
accompanying socioeconomic changes. This is almost certainly
  59. W.S. Webb, 1939; Webb and DeJarnette, 1942.
  60. Kelly, 1938; Fairbanks, 1952.
  Ole ocarss 1952.



                                       FORMATIVE STAGE   1 6l
due to the conservative influence of a highly characterized envi-
ronment which offers an abundance of fresh- and salt-water foods
but is not, generally speaking, favorable to agriculture. We are
frankly at a loss to say where Formative begins in these Florida
sequences. St. Johns II, as represented in sites like Mount Royal
and the Grant Mound,” would probably qualify, as would, possibly,
the corresponding Malabar II phase of the Indian River region.**
The climax of the Glades III phase, as exemplified in the famous
Key Marco site, is perhaps another instance of attainment of at
least a marginal Formative status on an economic base that almost
certainly did not include agriculture.®4
   Middle Woodland cultures in the upper Mississippi Valley, the
Great Lakes region, and the Northeast generally failed to reach
an unquestionable Formative level. Exception to this facile gener-
alization might perhaps be taken in favor of the Efhgy Mound cul-
ture of Wisconsin and portions of adjacent states, in which a
remarkable amount of energy was expended in raising monuments
to the distinguished dead. Excavations have disclosed that in some
cases an effigy or linear mound several hundred feet long contains
no more than the body of a single individual. Unfortunately, arti-
facts seldom accompany the burials, and we know next to nothing
of the more prosaic aspects of the culture. It has been suggested
that this unique florescence of mound-building in what otherwise
appears to be an essentially Archaic context may have been made
possible by a subsistence economy based on the abundant supplies
of wild rice in the region. If so, perhaps Effigy Mound should be
added to the short list of debatable instances of Formative cultures
based on economies other than agriculture.
   To generalize briefly on the Middle Woodland cultures of the
   62. Goggin, 1952.                  63. Rouse, 19510.
   64. Cushing, 1897; Goggin, 1949.
    65. Barrett and Hawkes, 1919; McKern,    1928, 1930, 19314; Nash, 1933;
J. W. Bennett, 1952.
   66. Cf. discussion of late phases of central California, the Northwest
Coast, and the Florida Glades.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY    162
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
East, we are conscious of the marginal nature of most of them
with respect to our concept of a Formative stage and of the inade-
quacy of the data upon which we are basing our opinions. Actual
settlement data are extremely scanty. For certain phases, such as
Ohio Hopewell and other closely related manifestations, the
earthworks and burial mounds attest to population densities and
sociopolitical organization of a sort consistent with sedentary life
based upon established agriculture, but even here the direct evi-
dences of such a life and such an economy are very weak. In other
regions, as we have acknowledged on numerous occasions, it is dif-
ficult even to infer settled economies and village life. Evidently
our statement that Middle Woodland marks the beginning of Form-
ative in the East requires a great deal of qualification. The fact
is that some of the inferred splendor of the climax Ohio Hopewell
phase has rubbed off on related and even unrelated (but contempo-
raneous) cultures, which, examined coolly on strictly developmen-
tal criteria, fail to come up to Formative standards. We are seman-
tically embarrassed at this juncture, because, if such cultures are
not Formative, or at least marginal Formative, we have to call
them “‘Archaic,” and the term has a more restricted meaning in
eastern archaeology.
   The situation, fortunately, is rather different in the succeeding
Mississippi period. The features of this period that seem reliably
reflective of an intensive agricultural village life, i.e., a full-blown
Formative stage, are the rectangular “temple” or “town-house”
mounds, the arrangement of these mounds around a central plaza,
compact villages of substantial pole-and-thatch or wattle-and-daub
houses with deep and extensive refuse (other than shell middens),
and the frequent and abundant finds of maize itself. Such features,
along with certain characteristic pottery styles and artifact types,
are known to be associated with, though not confined to, the Mis-
sissippi (or “Middle Mississippi”) culture. Many of these ele-
ments appear to have derived from Middle American sources.
They are clearly post-Hopewellian arrivals in the eastern United
States. The mechanisms and routes of their presumed diffusion


                                       FORMATIVE STAGE   l6 3
from Middle America are still completely unknown, although there
has been no lack of speculation on the subject.*”
   Mississippi is probably the best-known culture in the East, yet
one looks in vain for an integration of its manifold phases and a
description of the whole. The chief difficulty, perhaps, has been our
inability to nucleate the culture geographically. This in turn is
partly, if not wholly, due to the belief expressed above that the
source of most of its diagnostic elements is Middle America and
that we might therefore expect to find its nucleus in the Gulf
coastal, lower Mississippi Valley, or Caddoan regions. Such expec-
tations have not, in our opinion, been fulfilled.** Certain elements
that have been identified closely with Mississippi culture, notably
the above-mentioned rectangular temple mounds, do enter into
certain Gulf, lower Mississippi, and Caddoan area cultures, but,
whenever the really diagnostic Mississippi features appear in these
regions, they seem to have intruded from the north. This has led
to the hypothesis that the nuclear area for the Mississippi culture
is somewhere in the central Mississippi Valley (from the mouth
of the Missouri to the Ohio) and lower Ohio Valley or Tennessee-
Cumberland regions.® It is only in this general area that the culture
   67. Swanton, 1924; Spinden, 1931; Beals, 1932; Vaillant, 1932; Mason,
1937; Phillips, 1939, 1940; Griffin, 1944; J. W. Bennett, 1944; Krieger, 1945,
1948.

   68. This is admittedly a matter of opinion. Alex Krieger, for one, is con-
fident that such a nuclear center has been found, in the Alto phase of the Cad-
doan area (Newell and Krieger, 1949; Krieger, 19515, 1952). His arguments
in favor of the proposition have considerable appeal, and he has one radio-
carbon date of a.p. 398+175 on corncobs from the Davis site (sample No.
C-153 [Libby, 1951]), but this would require drastic revision of dating in other
areas that archaeologists working in those areas have so far been unwilling to
make (Griffin, 1950; Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951; Ford, 1951, 1952).
   69. This statement appears to be at variance with opinions previously ex-
pressed by one of the present authors (Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951, p.
451) because we are now attempting to take a more precise view of the
Mississippi culture. We now prefer to think of some of the “‘centers’’ of
Mississippi development, referred to in the publication cited, in terms of
Mississippi influence upon units that in the main belong to other cultures,
e.g., Etowah-Lamar, Fort Walton, Coles Creek—Plaquemine, etc.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY       164
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
seems to have any appreciable time depth. A number of “Early
Mississippi” phases have been identified, but the stratigraphic
evidence is rather tenuous.”? Examples are: the Old Village phase
at the great Cahokia site in East St. Louis,” the Obion phase in
western Tennessee,’? and the Hiwassee Island phase in the Chicka-
mauga Basin of eastern Tennessee.’ The Macon Plateau phase of
central Georgia’* is early Mississippi in type but is clearly an intru-
sion into a region dominated by cultures of the Complicated Stamp
pottery tradition.”* Following closely upon these scattered early
phases, the climax period of the Mississippi culture is seen in such
phases as Monks Mound,” named after the big mound at Cahokia,
Illinois, largest rectangular platform-mound north of Mexico;
Kincaid and Angel, on the lower Ohio;77 Cairo Lowland, in south-
eastern Missouri;78 Nodena and Parkin, or “St. Francis,” in north-
eastern Arkansas;7? Cumberland, in the Nashville Basin of central
Tennessee;®? Dallas and Mouse Creek, in eastern Tennessee;®
and Moundville, on the Black Warrior River in north-central
Alabama,* including the closely related Bessemer site near Bir-
mingham.® Many more phases could be cited, but these are the
most intensively Mississippian and seem to define the nuclear area
as outlined above. Here is more than sufficient material for a com-
    70. One of the puzzling anomalies of eastern archaeology is the fact that
dating estimates are as incongruent and unreliable in the later periods as in the
earlier, if not more so, a condition which is only beginning to be remedied by
radiocarbon dating.
   71. Kelly, 1933; Griffin, 1949. The recently published Cahokia        date of
A.p. 1156+200 (sample No. M-33 [Crane, 1956]) refers, we assume, to the
Old Village component in the site.
   72. Kneberg, 1952, p. 193.          _    74. Kelly, 1938.
   73. Lewis and Kneberg, 1946.             75. Fairbanks, 1952; Willey, 19530.
   76. Moorehead and Leighton, 1923; Moorehead et a/., 1929; Titterington,
1938.
   77. Cole et al., 1951; Lilly, 1937; Black, 1944.
   78. Williams, 1954.
   79. Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951; Griffin, 1952c.
   80. Phillips, 1939.                     82. Moore,   1905, 19075.
   81. Lewis and Kneberg, 1946.            83. DeJarnette and Wimberly, 1941.



                                             FORMATIVE STAGE      16 5
prehensive definition of Mississippi culture, but it is sufficient for
our purposes to note that all these phases, both early and late, are
on the full-blown Formative level as defined in this study.
   During or perhaps slightly after the climax period of the Mis-
sissippi development, an outstanding horizon style, the “Southern
Cult,” spread throughout the Southeast far beyond the boundaries
of the Mississippi culture as understood here.** This style is exem-
plified in certain designs and motifs on embossed copper plates, on
engraved shell, and on modeled,                engraved, and negative-painted
pottery, as well as in a number of highly specialized artifact types
commonly associated with these designs. The style is almost cer-
tainly of Mississippi origin and serves to measure the extent of
Mississippi influence in the late pre-contact period. It poses some
very interesting questions in culture dynamics, in that some of the
strongest centers for Cult material are not, strictly speaking, in
the Mississippi tradition. At Etowah, in northern Georgia,® the
Cult material seems to be intrusive in a culture that is dominated
by the Complicated Stamp pottery tradition of that region and is
doubtless a thrust from the nearby Tennessee-Cumberland region;
and Spiro, on the Arkansas River in eastern Oklahoma,** which
yielded the gaudiest Cult material of all, is entirely outside the Mis-
sissipp1 orbit in all other respects, as are Mount Royal (St. Johns
IIb) and other Cult centers in Florida.*’ The horizon-style concept
appears to fit the situation admirably but of course is not an expla-
nation.
   Getting back to the problem in hand, most of the remaining late
Formative stage cultures in the East can be interpreted on the
basis of some sort of relationship with the Mississippi culture.
This usually takes the form of a blend with earlier, or at least
resident, cultures, as in the mixed (Woodland-Mississippi)                      Fort
   84. Phillips,   1940;   Krieger,    1945;   Waring and   Holder,   1945;   Griffin,
19525.
   85. Moorehead et al., 1932.
   86. Burnett, 1945; K. G. Orr, 1946, 1952; Griffin, 1952.
   87. Goggin, 1952.



                                            METHOD AND THEORY         166
                                      IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Ancient, in the Ohio Valley,** and Owasco-Iroquois of central
New York,®® though it may take the form of an attenuated Missis-
sippi-like (“Upper Mississippi”) culture, of which the Oneota
furnishes a most interesting example. This protohistoric culture,
which has a very wide distribution extending from central Wiscon-
sin through Iowa and Minnesota to Missouri and even Kansas and
Nebraska,     has been identified with the Chiwere                    Sioux     in the
period of their migration from east of the Mississippi River out
onto the Plains.°° From our point of view, it is of interest that
throughout this very extensive movement the culture retained its
homogeneity and remained on a Formative level.
   In Georgia, as already indicated, Mississippi blended with the
Complicated Stamp tradition to produce a culture which, in the late
Etowah and Lamar phases in northern and central Georgia, and
in the Savannah and Irene phases on the coast,* was on its way
to becoming one of the strongest and most pervasive Formative
cultures in North America. On the Florida Gulf Coast, Mississippi
combined with Weeden Island to produce the Fort Walton phase,°*
which may certainly be classified as Formative; in the lower Mis-
sissippi Valley, it blended with the Coles Creek—Plaquemine cul-
ture in the late Deer Creek®4 and Natchez phases to an extent
that makes it difficult to say which predominates. The native cul-
tures of the Caddoan area of eastern Texas and northwestern

    88. Griffin, 1943. Fort Ancient is perhaps not a good example. The earlier
phases, such as Baum, show a mixture of Woodland and Mississippi elements,
but the later Madisonville phase is practically all Mississippi. Nevertheless,
it differs in essential respects from the nuclear Mississippi culture as defined
here.
   89. Ritchie, 1934,     1944,   1949,   1952;   Ritchie   and     MacNeish,    1949;
Ritchie et al., 1953.
   90. Hill and Wedel,    1936; Griffin, 1937; Keyes, 1942;          Berry and Chap-
man, 1942; H. G. Smith, 1951.
   91. Fairbanks, 1952.
   92. Caldwell and McCann, 1941.
   93. Willey, 1949.
   94. Phillips, n.d. (MS in preparation).           95. Quimby, 1942.



                                              FORMATIVE     STAGE    | 67
Louisiana were strong enough to resist effectively the inroads of
Mississippi culture. Whether this is because the Alto® and other
phases that make up the Gibson aspect were too early to receive
Mississippi influences, and in fact passed on to the Mississippi
some of its physiognomic elements—specifically those of pre-
sumed Middle American origin—depends on the outcome of the
dating controversy to which allusion has already been made. From
the developmental point of view, it is interesting that these earlier
phases are more explicitly Formative than the later (Fulton aspect)
phases of Caddoan culture.*” A similar change may be seen in some
of the later phases of the Coles Creek—Plaquemine culture of the
lower Mississippi Valley, particularly the Natchez.°* In both
cases we can infer, from ethnographic sources, not a developmen-
tal regression but an apparent change from a village type to some-
thing more like a neighborhood type of community organization.®®
This may in fact have been consequent on greater political stability
and internal security.
   We have already referred to the possibility of regarding the
early ‘Plains Village’ cultures as marginal Formative. The most
extensive and characteristic of these, the Upper Republican,!° is
represented by innumerable small pit-house villages strung out
along the stream terraces from South Dakota across Nebraska,
Kansas, and eastern Colorado. The culture seems to reflect the
initial adjustment of a sedentary farming economy to an environ-
ment that offered the additional resource of buffalo-hunting. The
result was a mixed seasonal way of life favorable to the growth
and persistence of sedentary communities.          Owing perhaps to
limitations of transport, the communities appear to have remained
on a rather elementary Formative level until the introduction of
the horse in early post—Spanish-contact times, when villages be-
   96. Newell and Krieger, 1949.
   97. Krieger, 1946; C. H. Webb, 19484; Suhm and Krieger, 1954.
   98. Quimby, 1942.
   99. Murdock, 1949, p. 80.
   100. Strong, 1935; Wedel, 1947; Kivett, 1949.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY    168
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
came a good deal larger. The Lower Loup phase of east-central
Nebraska,'"   for example, thought to be protohistoric Pawnee,
manifests a mature Formative stage of development as defined in
this study.
   When we look at the eastern North American Formative stage
data from a broader point of view, we see two developmental
peaks, one in the Hopewell culture and the other in the Mississippi
culture. Hopewell developed to a remarkable intensity in a rela-
tively restricted area (Illinois and Ohio) and radiated influences
far and wide, but these in the main were not of such a nature as to
lift the cultures acted upon much above the pre-existing Archaic
level. Possibly this is due to Hopewell itself being a kind of
florescent northern Archaic culture, or possibly to its strong orien-
tation about a cult of the dead. Mississippi, on the other hand, has
a typical Middle American configuration, most clearly expressed
in the temple mound and plaza assemblages entirely lacking in
Hopewell] and, indeed, in the rest of North America, including the
Southwest. There seems to be little doubt that this temple mound—
plaza complex and the idea system behind it were diffused from
Middle America, though we cannot say much about the route of
that diffusion. This complex seems to have entered, in a rather
small way, into the Gulf Coast, lower Mississippi Valley, and
Caddoan areas some time before the Mississippi climax, but not
until that climax did it develop to a point which invites comparison
with late Formative and early Classic mound assemblages in
Middle America. It is almost impossible not to regard this nexus
of traits as closely related to, perhaps dependent on, new proce-
dures in agriculture hitherto unknown in eastern North America.
We can only assume, lacking proof, that these traits found their
optimum conditions for development, not in the regions nearest
their point of entry, but somewhere farther north, in the general
vicinity of the confluence of the Missouri, Illinois, Ohio, and
Mississippi rivers, and that the culture brought about by these
innovations spread fanwise from that nuclear area, even back to-
  101. Dunlevy, 1936.



                                     FORMATIVE STAGE   169
ward the south, in the direction of the ultimate source of its
power. Whereas Formative cultures in the Southwest are limited
and confined by the small natural localities and regions that were
suitable for their growth, the Formative cultures of the Mississippi
Valley and the Southeast knew no such bounds. The widespread
horizon style, the Southern Cult, and the attempts at large-scale
geographic-political units seen in some of the protohistoric con-
federacies are phenomena comparable to Middle American devel-
opments on the threshold of the Classic stage.
   In discussing and appraising the cultures of the southwestern
and southeastern United States in accordance with the definitions
of the Formative concept, we have focused our attention on the
threshold or lower margins of the Formative. In turning to the
regions which    lie south of Middle      America,   to lower      Central
America and parts of the northern Andes, we will be more con-
cerned with the upper limits of the Formative concept. In these
regions there has been revealed, as yet, little evidence of cultures
which show the beginnings of a Formative way of life.

                                     LOWER CENTRAL AMERICA
                                         AND SOUTH AMERICA
   On a Formative level the archaeological sequences of Honduras
and Salvador reveal a number         of close relationships with both
Mexico and the Maya regions. The Playa de los Muertos, Ulua
Bichrome,'°? and Cerro Zapote!®? phases are linked closely in their
ceramics to the Formative phases of the Petén and Copan. Follow-
ing these, the Honduran        Las Flores and Santa Rita phases!
feature a Maya-like polychrome pottery, apparently deriving its
inspiration from the Tepeu! phase of the Classic stage of lowland
Maya. A still later Naco phase in Honduras has ceramic affilia-
tions with the Postclassic cultures of the Mexican highlands. In
spite of these specific historical connections and parallels, it is
questionable whether the Honduran and Salvadoran developments

   102. Strong, Kidder, and Paul, 1938.        103. Lothrop, 1927.
   104. Strong, Kidder, and Paul, 1938.        105. R. E. Smith, 1955.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY   A   @)
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
ever go beyond what we are defining as a Formative stage. Mound-
building was known in these regions as early as Yarumela III in
Honduras—an archaeological phase apparently equatable in time
with the Ulua Bichrome!*’—and mounds, or mounds and _ bal]
courts, were constructed at Tazumal,!°’ Los Llanitos,!°8 and
Naco,!°® indicating the persistence or presence of these ideas in
Salvador and Honduras in the late pre-Columbian periods. But
aside from these architectural features (which in size and elabora-
tion do not compare with the great mound sites of the Middle
American Classic), there is little to indicate that Honduras-Salva-
dor ever achieved the full-blown Classic stage. The Middle Ameri-
can contacts in themselves do not seem to have been sufficient to
produce social and cultural phenomena of Classic or Postclassic
rank.
  Archaeological regions and phases have been suggested for
Nicaragua and Costa Rica,!"° but culture sequences are lacking. In
general, mound sites here are of less impressive size and layout
than those of Middle America proper. Some mounds appear to have
been used as bases for buildings, but, apparently, the superstruc-
tures were of perishable materials. Other tumuli may have been
built solely for burials. Several types of stone statues occur, fre-
quently in association with the mounds. Ceramics are well devel-
oped, and the Nicoya Polychrome style is linked to both Classic
Maya and later Mexican styles by certain decorative motives.
Such contacts would date from perhaps a.p. 800 to a.p. 1500.
Nothing has yet been discovered in Costa Rica or Nicaragua that
would relate, specifically, to the Formative stage phases of either
Middle America or Salvador-Honduras. Yet, in spite of the fact
that the chronological equations between Nicaraguan—Costa Rican
archaeology and Middle America are with late Classic or Post-
classic phases, the archaeological remains in this part of lower
Central America suggest a level of cultural development no greater
  106. Canby, 1951.
  107. Boggs, 1944.            109. Strong, Kidder, and Paul, 1938.
  108. Longyear, 1944.         110. Strong, 19486.



                                      FORMATIVE STAGE    1y|l
than that of the Formative. In some traits, such as pottery and
metallurgy, they reveal excellent craftsmanship, undoubtedly at-
tributable to diffusions from both the north and the south. In
other aspects, particularly architecture, site size, and site layout,
they are not markedly different from southeastern North American
Formative cultures.
   Archaeological regions have been defined for Panama," and,
recently, sequence work has begun in one region."” Large villages
and extensive cemeteries      are reported.   Mounds,     apparently for
both dwellings and burials, occur, but the constructions are very
small." There is also some evidence for ceremonial precincts
formed by crude stone columns,'4 but non-perishable architecture
is minimal. There is a fine metallurgical tradition in ornamental
gold, tumbaga, and gilded copper, which clearly relates to Colom-
bian regions such as the Quimbaya. Except for the Archaic stage
Monagrillo culture of the coastal shell heaps to which we have al-
ready referred,” all indications are that Panamanian prehistoric
cultures such as the Coclé, Veraguas, Chiriqui, and the various
ceramic complexes of Darien are relatively late. The level of de-
velopment, however, appears to correlate with that of the Form-
tive cultures in Middle America and elsewhere.
   For the most part, the prehistoric remains of Colombia ‘and
Ecuador appear to be upon about the same level as those of lower
Central America. That is, everywhere we have evidences, direct
or inferred, of sedentary, agricultural village life with a compe-
tent, or even high, development of pottery.What are probably the
earliest, and the simplest, archaeological remains in Colombia per-
tain to those phases of the northeastern and north-central part of
the country such as Isla de los Indios,!° Barlovento,"? and Momil.!8
  111. Lothrop, 1948.
  112. Willey and McGimsey, 1954; Willey and Stoddard, 1954.
  113. Stirling, 1949.
  114. Lothrop, 1937-42.                  116. Reichel-Dolmatoff, 1954.
  115. Willey and McGimsey,    1954.      117. Reichel-Dolmatoff, 1955.
  118. Reichel-Dolmatoff, personal communication, 1956.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY     17 2
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
The Isla de los Indios culture has a swampland habitat along the
lower Magdalena River. It is distinguished by a ceramic complex
featuring incised and rocker-stamped decoration. Rocker-stamped
ceramic decoration, it will be recalled, is a trait of Hopewellian
cultures in eastern North America, of the middle Formative levels
in Mexico and Honduras, and of the early Formative in Peru."®
Its presence in the early Isla de los Indios complex tends, thus, to
imply an approximate contemporaneity with these cultures. That
a comparable stage of development can be argued from this con-
temporaneity is, of course, less certain. The terrain of the Isla de
los Indios sites would seem to be unfavorable for agriculture; how-
ever, we call this culture phase to attention at this time as a pos-
sible early Formative manifestation in Colombia. The Barlovento
ceramic complex features incision, punctation, and simple vessel
forms. The context is a coastal shellmound. Here, again, Forma-
tive status is questionable. For Momil, the considerably richer
ceramic inventory, including rocker-stamped pottery, suggests a
stronger case for Formative status. The two phases, or subphases,
of Momil possess several ceramic traits that are reminiscent of
Formative cultures in Middle America and Peru, and a full exposi-
tion of this site is awaited with interest.
   The presumably later and better-known archaeological cultures
in Colombia include the Quimbaya, in the Magdalena River Valley
of northwestern Colombia, which is an important metallurgical
center for the north Andes and for the New World.!”° Both tech-
niques and styles of artifacts probably diffused from this region
northward into Panama and other Central American countries.
San Agustin, in southern Colombia,         is a ceremonial and burial
site of considerable size,!”" and there are vague relationships be-
tween the stone sculptures here and stone statuary in both lower
Central America and the northern highlands of Peru. However,
nowhere in Colombia do we find ceremonial centers with the large,
   119. Willey, 1955a.
  120. W. C. Bennett, 1944a, 1946a; Banco de la Republica, 1948.
   121. Preuss, 1931.



                                       FORMATIVE STAGE    17 3
impressive architecture of either Middle America or Peru, nor are
there evidences of real urban development. The prehistoric Santa
Marta or Jairona towns in the northeast!” offer the nearest ap-
proach to urban centers and to large-scale public works (roads,
bridges, etc.); however, the total region is rather small, and the
over-all effort falls below the Middle American or Peruvian mark.
Although the Chibchans, of the Bogota Savanna, loom large in
some ethnohistoric accounts!** for their politico-military prowess,
their domain was geographically small, and their population was
probably not of great size.!?4
   A lack of well-worked-out regional sequences in Colombian
archaeology makes it difficult or impossible to appraise most of
these cultures in a sequential context. It is probable, however, that
there is substantial time depth to the pattern of relatively small,
sedentary, agricultural villages. In northeastern Colombia, appar-
ently later than the early and possibly Formative stage phases of
Isla de los Indios, Barlovento, and Momil, there are three sequent
phases in the Rio Rancheria region (La Loma, El Horno, and Por-
tacelli) that are characterized by agricultural communities and
polychrome ceramics.’ This series was, in part, ancestral to the
still later and protohistoric Santa Marta or Tairona cultures.
   The archaeological sequences for the Ecuadorian highlands show
a long continuity of Formative-type scattered farm or small village
units.!° In the central and southern highlands there is nothing in
the way of large-scale public works or monuments until the period
of the Inca invasion.
   In the Ecuadorian Guayas Basin some recently reported work of
Evans and Meggers!”” documents a ceramic sequence in which the
earlier phases show close affinities with Middle American and
   122. Mason, 1931-39; W. C. Bennett, 1946a.
   123. See Restrepo, 1895.          124. Kroeber, 1946; Haury, 19535.
   125. Reichel-Dolmatoff and Reichel-Dolmatoff, 1951.
   126. Collier, 1946; Collier and Murra, 1943; W.C. Bennett, 19465.
   127. Paper presented to the annual meeting of the American Anthropo-
logical Association, Boston, 1955.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY    ee
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Peruvian Formative cultures in such technical features as rocker-
stamping, negative painting, and white-on-red painting.
   On the Ecuadorian coast the settlement size and architectural
achievements may imply Classic stage developments following
earlier and clearly Formative cultures like the Pre-Guangala of
Guayas.!”8 At the site of Cerro Jaboncillo, just back of the Manabi
coast, hilltop platform-mounds are associated with the remains of
stone buildings which contained U-shaped zodmorphic stone
chairs, bas-reliefs, and stone statues. This Cerro Jaboncillo cul-
ture, probably contemporaneous with the Guangala phase of the
Guayas sequence, may be coeval with the middle periods at the
large Manabi coastal site of Manta. The Manta middle periods
are associated with large, stone-faced, pyramidal mounds. This
same Manta site, in its late pre-Columbian or Mantefio period,
shows extensive dwelling refuse and house-foundation remains
covering several square kilometers.!8° The early ethnographic ac-
counts of the Manabi coast support these late-period archaeological
data in describing large towns whose wealth and importance were
said to have been based upon maritime trade.
   To sum up, no prehistoric cultural phase in lower Central Ameri-
ca, Colombia, or highland Ecuador is outstanding for a coincidence
of great ceremonial construction, monumental art, craft excellence,
or urban concentrations of population. For the Ecuadorian coast
the data are poorly ordered; yet we know that the Cerro Jaboncillo
and Guangala phases and the presumed middle periods at Manta are
characterized by specialized temple mounds, monumental stone
sculpture, technically competent ceramics, a pottery figurine art of
high quality, and a metallurgical industry which produced tools as
well as ornaments. In the later Mantefio phase, at the Manta site,
there seems to have been a true urban center with extensive dwell-
ing areas surrounding temple structures. The concurrence of all
these traits argues for Classic status, but the information on these
  128. Bushnell, 1951.
  129. Saville, 1907-10.
  130. See Jijon y Caamafio, 1930; Sanders, n.d.



                                        FORMATIVE   STAGE   li]5
coastal Ecuadorian phases is, as yet, too scant for such a classi-
fication.
   In Peru a number of regional-cultural continuities are first per-
ceived on a Formative stage of development. In each of these con-
tinuities certain themes are emphasized, such as the modeled ceram-
ics of the north coast,!*" the multicolored pottery and textiles of the
south coast,!82 or the subterranean and multistoried stone architec-
ture of the Callején de Huaylas.** Yet this regionalism is interpene-
trated by common bonds of technological traits, by developmental
changes within these traits, and, also, by the diffusions of specific
styles. This kind of unity manifests itself during the early phases
of the Formative stage and is still characteristic of native Peruvian
cultures at the time of the Spanish conquest.!#4 In the early Forma-
tive phases, such as the Cupisnique of Chicama,1** the Guafiape of
Vird,!*6 and the Early Supe and Early Ancon of the central coast,!87
villages were small and few. Maize was known, but canal irrigation
probably had not commenced. Pottery and small stone carvings
were of good quality. The construction of earth and stone or adobe
pyramids or other ceremonial buildings seems to have started at this
time, as evidenced by the structures in the Nepefia and Casma val-
leys.188 An outstanding phenomenon is the widespread Chavin art
style, named after the highland site of Chavin de Huantar.'*® The
late Formative stage phases see the disappearance of Chavin art as
an organized style, but they are linked together by a number of tech-
nical traits such as the white-on-red vessel painting of Salinar,
Puerto Moorin, and Chancay or the widespread “‘resist-dye”’ or
negative-painting technique on pottery.!*° Bennett!*! has noted that
  131. Kroeber, 1926.
  132. Gayton and Kroeber, 1927; Kroeber, 1944.
  133. W.C. Bennett, 19444.
  134. W. C. Bennett, 1948.                135. Larco Hoyle, 1941.
  136. Strong and Evans, 1952; Willey, 1953c.
  137. Willey and Corbett, 1954.
  138. Tello, 1943; Carriédn Cachot, 1948; Willey, 19510.
  139. W. C. Bennett, 19444; Willey, 19510.
  140. Willey, 1945a, 1948a.               141. Bennett and Bird, 1949.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY      ib 6
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
these late Formative phases mark the advent of new food plants,
and this also seems to be the time of the first canal irrigation in
the coastal valleys and of significant population increases.!# Com-
munities remained about the same size as they were earlier, but
they increased in numbers. Sizable fortifications were also con-
structed for the first time.
   In our opinion, the line between Formative and Classic on the
north coast of Peru should fall somewhere during the Gallinazo
period,   which   succeeds    the Puerto   Moorin     and precedes    the
Mochica in the Vird Valley.!4* Huge pyramid-mounds, urban living
clusters, and a stylistic climax in Gallinazo pottery date from the
Gallinazo III phase.'*4 In the Moche and Chicama valleys, Galli-
nazo-related cultures may also mark the inception of the great
adobe mounds; if not, the succeeding Mochica periods usher in a
full-blown Classic stage. On the central coast, mound-building of
this kind dates from the Florescent or Classic Maranga 3 phase.!4
On the south coast, Nazca culture has been considered Classic in
the light of its magnificent textiles and painted pottery, and there
is a likelihood that big adobe mounds and population centers were
constructed contemporaneously. In the highlands, the Recuay!”
and Classic Viahuanaco!® cultures are considered here as marking
the beginnings of the Classic stage.
   The prehistoric cultures of northern and central Chile and north-
western Argentina present the Peruvian Formative patterns in a re-
duced form. Many of the basic food plants, the agricultural tech-
niques, and the domesticated animals (Auchenia) are the same as
those of the central Andes, but the cultural achievements of the
Chilean and Argentinian phases do not equal those of the north.
In general, the living zones of the south Andean regions—the
desert oases of northern Chile or the guebradas and valleys of the
Argentine Andes—are small and their agricultural potential limited.
  142. Willey, 1953c.
  143. Strong and Evans, 1952.     146. Uhle, 1924a, 19244; Strong, 1954.
  144. W. C. Bennett, 1950.        147. W. C. Bennett, 1944.
  145. Stumer, 1954.               148. W. C. Bennett, 1934.



                                       FORMATIVE   STAGE   i i Fi
In Chile the Atacamefian culture of the north had some of its roots
in the old Archaic stage coastal fishing cultures of the same re-
gion,'#® but, with the advent of maize agriculture, new environmen-
tal adjustments were possible and populations settled in compact
oasis villages in the interior. These communities consisted of stone
and mud houses, the whole surrounded by a defense wall. Public or
ceremonial architecture is unreported.!°° To the south, in the vicini-
ty of Coquimbo, are the settlements of the Diaguita tradition.’
The environmental conditions in the Chilean Diaguita region are
less severe than in Atacamefio country, and there is more land
suitable for agriculture. Perhaps, in consequence of this, houses
are more widely scattered. Still farther south the Araucanian
peoples! farmed the wooded central valley of Chile by clearing
small, scattered plots. Settlements were small, and there are no
central sites with impressive permanent architecture. Political
centralization of the Araucanians seems to have been effected only
in time of war. As near as can be determined from present data,
maize and pottery diffused into Chile from the north or northeast
at a relatively late time. There are some indications that this may
have been as late as the Peru-Bolivian Derived Tiahuanaco periods,
although this is by no means certain.® The plain pottery phases of
Pichalo I and II*4 and the El Molle! culture of the Diaguita region
may stem from earlier Peruvian stimuli. Whatever the duration of
native farming villages in Chile, this stage of development was not
exceeded.
  The prehistoric cultures of northwestern Argentina are related
to those of Chile, both in particulars and in general stage of devel-
opment. Chronological evidence, both direct and inferential,
though limited, makes possible some generalizations about the
area.!°6 The earliest phases, such as La Candelaria‘®’ of the central
  149.   Bird, 1943.
  150. W.C. Bennett, 194 6c.      154. Ibid.
  151. Lothrop, 1946.            155. Cornely, 1944, 1953.
  152. J. M. Cooper, 1946.       156. Bennett, Bleiler, and Sommer, 1948.
  153. Bird, 1943.               157. Ryden, 1936.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY       Len
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY             8
region and Barreales!®* of the south, are characterized by small,
scattered settlements, flimsy architecture, and relatively simple,
decorated, incised, and painted pottery types. The middle and late
phases of the northern, central, and southern regions see the ap-
pearance of compact villages, sometimes fortified or with forts
nearby, stone or adobe architecture, small ceremonial structures
within towns, the frequent use of bronze and copper, and the pre-
dominance of polychrome ceramics. Peruvian Classic and Post-
classic elements are not found, however, in the same configurations
that distinguish their appearance in Peru. Neither northwestern
Argentina nor northern and central Chile was a center of native
American urbanism comparable to Peru.
   In South America east of the Andes, Formative level culture was
established in prehistoric times along the major river systems and
along much of the Caribbean and Atlantic coasts. We refer here to
cultures of the types characterized by Steward as “Tropical For-
est” and ‘“Circum-Caribbean.”’ Steward has equated a “‘Circum-
Caribbean” level of development with Formative stage cultures
in both Middle America and the central Andes. We would also
extend the Formative concept to include the lowland forest cultures
maintaining stable agricultural villages, even though features such
as mounds and ceremonial structures are lacking. Such an extension
of our definition of Formative embraces, as we have explained, the
settled, agricultural village life of the southwestern United States
and the comparable communities of the south Andes.
   In Venezuela there are at least two major culture subareas
through which Formative stage development can be traced. In the
Venezuelan Andes and the northwest region'®® such phases as the
Dabajuro and Guadalupe reflect influences probably related to
the Rio Rancheria section of northeastern Colombia. Eastward, on
the middle and lower Orinoco, there is another traditional center,
which is characterized by an earlier white-on-red and a later
broad-line incised pottery. The white-on-red pottery idea appears
  158. Debenedetti, 1931.      160. A. Kidder II, 19482, pp. 425 ff.
  159. 1949.                   161. Rouse, 1953, Fig. 2.



                                     FORMATIVE STAGE       179
to diffuse out of the Venezuelan Saladero phase’ into the West
Indian phases of Cedros and Cuevas. The later incised pottery is
first noted in the Early Barrancas phase of the lower Orinoco; sub-
sequently, it spreads to the West Indies to mark the various late
phases of the Taino tradition in those islands.'** The climax devel-
opments of the Formative stage in the West Indies come in these
Taino phases, especially in Puerto Rico and the Dominican Repub-
lic.164 These developments include the dance plazas, ball courts, and
specialized sculptured-stone paraphernalia associated with them.1®
The Igneri, or pre-Taino, manifestations, while reflective of an
agricultural village life, do not possess these more elaborate cere-
monial features.
    At the mouth of the Amazon River the Marajoara phase,! with
its deep village refuse pits, special cemetery mounds, and elaborate-
ly painted and modeled pottery,'*? almost certainly marks the Form-
ative stage. The preceding phases on Marajo Island and in near-
by regions are characterized by much smaller sites, locations which
suggest hunting and fishing rather than agriculture, and much less
elaborate funerary rites. The ceramics of these earlier phases are
much simpler than those of Marajoard and are usually decorated
with incision or brushing. They are probably closer to Archaic
   162. Radiocarbon dates on Saladero range from 925 +130 to 615 +130 B.c.
(Preston, Person, and Deevey, 1955, Nos. Y-42-44).
   163. Recent   excavations   on    the Ucayali   River   in eastern   Peru,   near
Pucallpa, have disclosed a ceramic complex which is surely related to the
Orinoco broad-line incised tradition. Although several thousand miles distant
from the lower Orinoco, Pucallpa is on the upper reaches of the Amazonian
river system, and, thus, by water, these two locations are not impossibly re-
mote from each other, even by canoe transportation (D. W. Lathrap [personal
communication, 1956]).
   164. Rouse, 1953.
   165. Rouse    (1953) has emphasized the distinction between the cultural
climax Taino phases of the West Indies, referring to these as ‘“Circum-
Caribbean” in type, and the earlier agricultural phases, which are designated as
“Tropical Forest.” This distinction has validity in the West Indian sequences,
but in the present paper we are grouping both as “Formative.”
   166. Evans and Meggers, 1950.
   167. Palmatary, 1950.


                                          METHOD AND THEORY       180
                                    IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
than to Formative standards. It has been noted that the Marajoar4
culture disappeared from the delta region and was replaced by
cultures reminiscent of the pre-Marajoara periods. Evans and
Meggers see in this the failure of intensive agriculture on the
flooded Marajé Island flatlands and the depature of the people who
brought this new subsistence pattern to the delta.1* Such would
argue for a retreat from a Formative level to something approach-
ing the old Archaic mode.
   Elsewhere on the Amazon, at Santarém,!*? Manaos,!7° and near
Trinidad on the Mamoré,!” there are evidences of settled villagers
manufacturing    competent    pottery   and, presumably,      practicing
agriculture. On the Atlantic Coast the Guarani tradition may have
been the first diffusion of an agricultural way of life southward,
eventually reaching the Parana Delta.1”
   168. Meggers, 1954; Evans, 1955.
   169. Palmatary, 1939.
   170. G. D. Howard, 1947.
   171. Nordenskiold, 1913.
   172. Lothrop, 1932.




                                        FORMATIVE   STAGE   1 81
                                                      Chapter 7




                                           Classic Stage
                                                     DEFINITIONS

In our previous article! we observed that the criteria of the Classic
stage are, to a large extent, qualitative and relative rather than
quantitative and absolute. We listed such qualities as excellence in
the great arts, climax in religious architecture, and general flores-
cence in material culture. We adhere to these definitions, but we
wish to add one more, which overrides them in importance. The
Classic stage in New World native cultures marks the beginning
of urbanism. It is the threshold of civilization in so far as “civili-
zation” is defined as city life. Our earlier hesitancy to see the
Classic as the stage of urbanism derived largely from our caution
in interpreting the archaeological record of Middle America and
Peru. For the succeeding stage, the Postclassic, both areas provide
certain architectural evidence of large, tightly massed population
concentrations. Such fitted, without cavil, the formal and physical
requirements of an urban community. For the Classic the record
in and on the ground is much less definite. In some instances,
such as the Teotihuacan Classic in the Valley of Mexico with its
numerous closely spaced apartment-like structures, or the Gallina-
zo III subphase of north coastal Peru with its thousands of “honey-
comb” adobe-walled rooms, there is material evidence of city
living. In other cases, however, of which the Classic Maya of the
Petén lowlands is a prime example, urban dwelling clusters are
either lacking or undiscovered. Nevertheless, for the Classic Maya,
   1. Willey and Phillips, 1955.


                                         METHOD AND THEORY   18 y
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
and for other archaeological phases adjudged as Classic by our
definitions, there is strong inferential evidence of an urban society.
The attributes of civilization in the commonly accepted sense of
the term—outstanding public architecture, great art styles, class
differentiations, codified intellectual systems (preserved in writing)
and some     knowledge      of science, formal hierarchies of deities,
widespread trade in raw materials and luxury goods—are there.
That such a complex achievement could have been effected without
an urban basis of some sort is most unlikely.? Accordingly, we
characterize the American Classic stage as urban.
   In establishing standards for Classic stage achievement, our
frame of reference has been the hemisphere. As stated in the fore-
going discussions, we appreciate the historical semi-independence
of the various New World cultures and concede that a ‘“‘classic”’
stage, in the sense of a climactic point, could be defined within
the limited context of any of these cultures; such a formulation
would have meaning for a study of the culture growth of a par-
ticular area, subarea, or region. In an evaluation of the Western
Hemisphere as a whole, however, an evaluation which considers
all agricultural America as a kind of vast historic entity, only in
two areas do cultures measure up to the criteria of urban civiliza-
tion. From our point of view the Classic stage in the New World
is limited to Middle America and the central Andes.
   At the risk of some repetition we restate, then, that the Ameri-
can Classic stage is characterized by urbanism and by superlative
performance in many lines of cultural endeavor. There is evidence
not only of the mastery of technologies and arts but of their con-
   2. This view emphasizes    the finceonal: rather than the purely formal,
definition of urbanism. It may well be that such attainments as those cited
above were reached by the ancient Maya without the concomitant of massed,
house-to-house settlement that the word “‘urban”’ connotes. The crucial factor
is the number of people who could be drawn upon and organized in the interests
of the society and the culture. Maya society undoubtedly drew upon and co-
ordinated the energies of agreat many people. This would have been possible
even with primitive methods of transportation, under conditions of dispersed
settlement.



                                              CLASSIC   STAGE   18 3
junction in single cultures and societies. The various and scattered
inventions and innovations of the Formative are now drawn to-
gether into rich, diverse, and yet unified patterns. The Classic 1s
the stage of great artistic achievements in so far as greatness can
be appraised not only subjectively but by the evident time, care,
and emotion devoted to the artistic products. It is the stage of
monumental and ambitious architecture, in the form of pyramids
and special buildings which seem to have been dedicated primarily
to religious purposes. Fine, specialized craft products designed as
burial furniture, ceremonial appurtenances, or luxury items were
turned out in profusion. In the Classic cultures of both Middle
America and Peru there is evidence of strong social class distinc-
tions and of heavy pomp and dignity surrounding the ruling
classes. With the perfection of writing and astronomy, intellectual]
interests as well as the arts flourished in Middle America. Here,
also, and to a lesser extent in Peru, there was active trade between
the regional centers in ceremonial and luxury goods. In spite of
this trade, however, it is noteworthy that a strong regional ethno-
centrism is reflected in sharply differing art and architectural
styles.

                                          MIDDLE   AMERICA

  The Classic civilizations of Middle America centered in the
Valley of Mexico and its environs, Oaxaca, the Guatemalan high-
lands, the Petén-Usumacinta-Motagua lowlands, and coastal Vera-
cruz. The status of regions such as Michoacan, Guerrero, the
Huasteca, Jalisco, Colima, and northwestern Mexico is less clear.
These lie within the historical orbit of the general Middle Ameri-
can tradition, but their native cultures were probably below Classic
standards in the arts and architecture. The chronological span of
the Middle American Classic civilizations probably varies region-
ally, but the characteristic developments seem to have originated
approximately around the beginning of the Christian Era. Gauging
chronology by early dated Maya monuments (with the 11.16.0.0.0
correlation), the round figure of a.p. 300 is frequently given as a


                                  METHOD AND THEORY   184
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
starting point for the Maya Classic of the Petén.? Radiocarbon
dates on late Formative phases in the Valley of Mexico indicate
that the Teotihuacan culture of that region had its Classic inception
about contemporaneously or only a little earlier. Cross-datings
with the Monte Alban sequence in Oaxaca‘ and the Kaminaljuyu
sequence of the Guatemalan highlands® suggest that the apogee of
the Zapotecan and highland Maya traditions is roughly coeval with
the central Mexican highland and the Maya lowland Classic cul-
tures. Tajin Totonac® of central Veracruz is, perhaps, only slightly
later. The La Venta—Middle Tres Zapotes phase’ of the Olmec re-
gional-cultural tradition of southern Veracruz and Tabasco may be
earlier than other early Classic developments; but, if so, it quite
likely overlaps with them chronologically.* The terminal dates of
the Middle American Classic cultures may coincide rather closely.
The figure of a.p. 900 (11.16.0.0.0 correlation) is one postulated
closing date for the Maya lowland Classic; a.p. 650 (12.9.0.0.0
correlation) is another. The apparently abbreviated and not well-
defined Teotihuacdn IV (Tlamimilolpa) phase of the Mexican
highland Classic may have closed prior to the collapse of the great
lowland Maya ceremonial centers, or it may have run contempo-
raneously with them.® A reasonable estimate for the fall of Teoti-
huacan is about 4.p. 800. According to the best archaeological cross-
referencing that can be effected, the end of the other Middle Ameri-
can Classic cultures is co-ordinate with these. In brief, and in gross,
the Classic phases span the first millennium a.p., or most of it.
   3. The 12.9.0.0.0 correlation, favored by Spinden, would place this date
260 years earlier. Recent radiocarbon dates (Kulp, Feely, and Tryon, 1951;
Libby, 1954a) have favored the 12.9.0.0.0 correlation.
   4. Caso, 1938.                               6. Garcia Payén, 1943.
   5. Kidder, Jennings, and Shook, 1946.        7. Drucker, 1952.
   8. There is considerable debate about whether Middle Tres Zapotes—La
Venta is contemporaneous with, or earlier than, the Tzakol phase of lowland
Maya. We are inclined to believe that it is essentially earlier. Recently an-
nounced radiocarbon dates (New York Times, December 29, 1956) are as early
as 400-800 B.c.
   9. See Armillas, 1950.



                                              CLASSIC STAGE   18 5
   The content of the Middle American Classic civilizations is well
known and needs no detailed itemization in this survey account.'°
The Classic culture of the Maya lowlands has its inception with the
occurrence of the Maya corbeled vault, the initial series dates and
stelae, and the ornate and unique Maya art style as this is expressed
both in sculpture and in painted pottery." The first appearance of
this complex is in the Petén, and there is every reason to believe
that it evolved, sui generis, in this locality or in nearby regions.
During the earlier part of the Maya Classic, sometimes designated
as the Tzakol phase,’? ceremonial         centers with stelae and charac-
teristic art were first constructed in the central Petén (Uaxactun,
Tikal). From here the Classic features spread to Oxkintok,!* in
Yucatan, and southeastward to Copan in Honduras. Somewhat later
the great sites of Yaxchilan and Piedras Negras!* were established
on the Usumacinta drainage to the west. Certain ceramic cross-
datings, utilizing the basal-flanged bowl form of Tzakol and the
frescoed tripod jar of Teotihuacan II-III, indicate that during this
earlier half of the Maya Classic the other major civilizations of
Middle America were becoming firmly established. It was at this
time that the principal monuments of Teotihuacan—the Pyramid
of the Sun, and Pyramid of the Moon, and the Ciudadela—were
constructed, and the distinctive pottery and moldmade-figurine
styles of that culture      came     into being.®     Similarly, the Monte
Alban IIIa phase of Oaxaca and the Esperanza phase at Kaminal-
juyu, in that order, were the first real blossomings of Classic cul-
tures in those regions.
   Aside from the few rather specific cross-finds of pottery and oc-
casional items of architectural detail, Tzakol, Teotihuacan II-III,

   10. See Thompson, 1954; Brainerd, 1954; Linné, 1934, 1942; Caso, 1938;
Caso and Bernal, 1952.
   11. Spinden, 1913.
   12. Thompson,   1943,   1945;   R. E. Smith,   1955;   Proskouriakoff,   1950;
Morley, 1946.
   13. Thompson, 1945.             14. Maler, 1901-3; Satterthwaite, 1933.
   15. Vaillant, 1941; Armillas, 1950.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY       18
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY            6
Monte Alban IIa, and Esperanza are alike only in that each ex-
presses this first full vigor and brilliance of a regional-cultural tra-
dition. As we have stated, the art styles are all unlike. Certain gods,
or god-themes, seern to have been held in common by some of these
cultures, but the particular expressions are quite different. Monte
Alban shared the trait of writing with the lowland Maya, but the
glyphic system is distinct and less developed. Competence in sculp-
tural art was a feature of the Maya, and the Olmec of La Venta,
but was less characteristic of the other Classic phases. The trick
of the ceramic mold possessed by Teotihuacan was not shared by
other Classic cultures until later.
   From these facts it is evident that two fundamental forces were
at work in these: Classic cultures. Intercommunication existed
among them and was an important factor in their growth. They
profited from being a part of a larger community of ideas more
than did the various cultures of the Middle American Formative.
Yet this intercommunication and interchange was by no means all-
embracing. Technologies, elements, goods—these were exchanged,
but complete idea systems remained regionalized. How this stylistic
regionalism may be interpreted in terms of sociopolitical structure
is a major problem for Middle American prehistorians.
    In the late Classic of the Maya lowlands (the Tepeu ceramic
phase) ,!° the number of active ceremonial centers increased greatly.
Huge building programs were undertaken. As in the early Classic
(and the late Formative), constructions were flat-topped pyramids
and platforms grouped around rectangular courtyards or plazas.
Temples and palaces and were elaborately carved and decorated
with sculptures. In the late Classic the palace type of building—
generally containing more rooms and situated upon a lower plat-
form than a temple—became somewhat more common than in
earlier times. The function of these Maya centers seems to have
been largely religious and ceremonial. These were the integrating
points in the network of Maya culture. It was in these centers
that the peasantry of an agricultural society gathered to be in-
   16. R. E. Smith, 1955; Proskouriakoff, 1950; Morley, 1946.



                                           CLASSIC   STAGE   18 7
 structed and inspired by the priest-leaders. The Maya aristoc-
 racy—regulators of agriculture, guardians of the seasons and of
 time—was maintained by, and in turn maintained Maya civiliza-
 tion with, a remarkable pact of mutual faith rather than force.
 When this pact dissolved, so also did the structure of Classic Maya
 society.!”
    The decline and abandonment of the Classic Maya centers about
 A.D. 900 (11.16.0.0.0 correlation) probably were preceded by the
 decline of the other regional Classic cultures. Teotihuacan appears
 to have been destroyed in the second half of the first millennium
 A.D.—quite possibly by invaders identified with the Tula-Toltec
 culture.'® Bearers of this same Tula-Toltec culture moved into other
 parts of Middle America at this time or shortly thereafter.1® The
 breakdown of the old regional states or confederacies of the Classic
 stage may, in part, be attributed to these invaders or to waves of
 social and political disruption and dislocation which they set in
 motion on the northern frontiers of the high civilizations. Other
 causes for these sweeping and radical changes in the cultures of
 Middle America at the close of the Classic have also been sug-
‘gested. One of these, for which archaeologists have only partial
 evidence, is overpopulation or the pressures of steadily increasing
 population. In the Guatemalan highlands there are indications that
 the population around Kaminaljuyu at the close of the Formative
 was as great as, or greater than, the population at any time there-
 after.2° In the Valley of Mexico, at Teotihuacdn, there is little
 doubt that population was more densely massed around that im-
portant center in the Teotihuacan IV phase than in the preceding
Teotihuacan II and III phases.” In the Maya lowlands we know
that more ceremonial centers were constructed in the latter part
of the Classic than in the earlier centuries. This certainly suggests
an over-all population increase for the jungle country, and recent
   17. Willey, 1956a.              19. Tozzer, n.d.
   18. Armillas, 1950.             20. Shook and Proskouriakoff, 1956.
   21. Armillas, 1950. See also Linné, 1934; Sanders, 1956.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY        18 8
studies of domestic settlements in the Belize Valley of British Hon-
duras support this suggestion.”

                                                  SOUTH   AMERICA

   The Peruvian Classic cultures, to which we have referred in our
discussion of the Formative, include the late Gallinazo-Mochica
phases of the north coast, Maranga 3? of the central coast, Nazca
of the south coast,” Recuay® and Cajamarca II and III of the
northern highlands,” and Classic Tiahuanaco”’ and, probably, Pu-
cara®® of the southern highlands. Dating control is poorer here than
in Middle     America.   Recent    estimates,?®    while lengthening    the
Formative stage phases back in time, have still held Classic cul-
tures, such as late. Gallinazo and Mochica, to the last half of the
first millennium .p. Radiocarbon dates, however, tend to push the
beginnings of the Classic phases back to the opening of the Christian
Era or even earlier.*° Terminal dates for the Peruvian Classic are
based on guesswork plus historical reckoning.** There has been a
general and provisional acceptance of a.p. 1000 as a closing date.
If Classic beginnings are set back on the chronological scale, per-
haps this figure should also be set back. The best we can conclude
is that Peruvian Classic cultures flourished, as did those of Middle
America, during the first millennium a.p. and that they were more
or less contemporaneous.
   The regionalistic tendencies of the Peruvian Formative crystal-
lized in the Classic stage into distinctive civilizations and styles. On
the north coast the early trends toward public building were brought
to fulfilment in the massive, flat-topped, adobe pyramids and palace
   22. Willey, Bullard, and Glass, 1955; Willey, 19560.
   23. Stumer, 1954.                     26. Reichlen and Reichlen, 1949.
   24. Gayton and Kroeber, 1927.         27. W.C. Bennett, 1934.
   25. Bennett, 19440.                   28. Kidder II, 19485.
   29. Strong and Evans, 1952; Willey, 1953c.
   30. See dates on Mochica and Nazca in Libby, 1952, and Broecker,Kulp,
and Tucek, 1956.
   31. Rowe, 1945.



                                            CLASSIC STAGE    1 89
complexes of the Chicama, Moche, Vir, and Santa valleys.” At
the same time, the old north coast predisposition for three-dimen-
sional or modeled art reached full scope in Mochica ceramics. In
this same region metallurgy, which also had beginnings as early
as the Chavin horizon,** was further developed to include casting,
alloying, annealing, soldering in gold and copper, and gilding, as
well as the manufacture of copper weapons and helmets.*4 The
south coastal regional tradition produced a contemporaneous but
separate brilliance. Multicolor painting of pottery, which began
with the Formative Paracas phase, reached a peak in the Nazca
ceramics; and the emphasis on elaborate textiles, another Paracas
trait, was also maintained in Nazca. Metallurgy, on the other hand,
remained in its infancy in this south coastal section, at least until
very late Nazca times.*
  Throughout the highlands there is a strong tradition of stone
architecture. The temple at Pucara is a Classic stage example, with
its dressed-stone blocks and complex plan, its numerous compart-
ments and subterranean chambers.?7 The famous Calasasaya in-
closure, the monolithic gateway, and the great stairway at Tia-
huanaco are even more notable examples,** and the carved stone
statues of both Pucara and Tiahuanaco are the outstanding repre-
sentations of Classic art in the southern highlands. Farther north,
the stone-carving and multiple-storied stone buildings of Recuay
show the continuity of an old regional tradition.?® In this instance
the earlier stone masonry and sculpture at Chavin de Huantar ap-
pears superior to the Recuay developments. As stylistic affinities
indicate that Chavin de Huantar is approximately contemporaneous
with the Formative coastal Chavin cultures, we may have here an
example of unconformity between time-horizon and stage, at least
in so far as architecture and sculpture are concerned.
  32. Willey, 1953c.                 33. Lothrop, 1941.
  34. Root, 19494; Larco Hoyle, 1938-39.
  35. Kroeber, 1944.                  36. Root, 19494; Lothrop, 1951.
  37. Kidder, 19484; Bennett and Bird, 1949.
  38. Posnansky, 1945.               39. Bennett, 19445.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY      190
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   Concerning settlement and community size, it is of interest to
note that large population clusters first came into being during the
north coast Classic.4® And these clusters, as was the case with
Teotihuacan in central Mexico, were formed around pyramid or
temple centers. An excellent example of this is the late Gallinazo
period aggregation of thirty thousand adobe-walled rooms around
the Gallinazo pyramid in the Virt Valley. Settlement surveys have
not yet been made in many parts of Peru, but such studies as are
available tend to confirm this urbanization tendency, at least for
the north coast of Peru.*t Another Classic change in north coast
Peruvian sequences is the appearance of buildings composed of
large rooms, courtyards, and corridors. These are usually in con-
junction with, or near to, the great pyramids. They have been in-
terpreted as “palaces”’ or special public or governmental buildings.
The comparability of this trend with a similar one in Middle Ameri-
ca has been pointed out.**
   Between the Peruvian and the Middle American civilizations
we have designated as Classic there are many differences, both in
configuration and in content. Despite these, however, some similari-
ties in the wider configurations are evident, particularly with ref-
erence to the place and apparent significance of the Classic stage
cultures in each historical setting. In the Guatemalan-Mexican re-
gions, as well as in Peru, the Classic cultures take form out of a
somewhat less differentiated Formative base. That is, in each of
these two major areas there is a greater homogeneity of culture in
the Formative than in the Classic stage. Also of interest, from the
point of view of history and diffusion, this homogeneity is shared
in the Formative between these two areas.** Subsequent to the
Formative, differentiation rises in accordance with regional in-
terests. Many of these Classic interests or preoccupations can be
seen in certain tendencies manifested in the Formative, but they
are underlined and dramatized during the Classic stage.
  40. Bennett, 1950; Willey, 1953c.
  41. Schaedel, 1951.                   43. Adams, 1956.
  42. Willey, 1953¢, p. 356.            44. Willey, 19554.


                                        CLASSIC STAGE   191
   Another phenomenon may also be noted at this point. At the
same time that regional differentiation moves to its Classic com-
pleteness in the various geographical localities of Peru and Middle
America, there is a growing trend for each of these two great cul-
ture areas, or co-traditions, to diverge from each other. Thus,
despite the parallelisms, it is also a fact that the civilizations of
Middle America and Peru are more unlike each other, both in con-
tent and in pattern, during their Classic stages than at any time
previously or later. In the Formative they present a cultural simi-
larity and evenness due, presumably, to the common possession of
many historically interrelated traits of a New World sedentary-
agricultural way of life. In the Postclassic there is again a leveling
of a more complex sort, historically distinct in the two areas and
deriving, as near as we can tell, from internal social and political
causes. The Classic cultures, between the Formative and the Post-
classic, enjoy the greatest freedom and independence from either
historical or functional causality.“
  45. Willey, 19555.




                                   METHOD AND THEORY   19 a
                             IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
                                                    Chapter 8




                                 Postclassic Stage
                                                   DEFINITIONS

The Postclassic stage in Middle America and Peru is marked by
the breakdown of the old regional styles of the Classic stage, by a
continuing or increased emphasis upon urban living, and, inferenti-
ally, by tendencies toward militarism and secularism. Concerning
the leveling of stylistic regionalism, we have observed that diffusion
between regions in the Classic stage both in the central Andes and
in Middle America was either the not easily detectable movement
of technological ideas and isolated elements or the trade in actual
objects and manufactures. In the Postclassic we see the wide, in-
terregional transferences of total art and architectural styles. The
mechanisms behind these transferences are debatable, but it is rea-
sonable to interpret many of them as actual movements of large
groups of people often accompanied by military force. These
trends toward militarism and large-scale warfare are reflected in
the archaeological record by late Postclassic stage increases in forti-
fications and fortified communities in many Middle American and
Peruvian regions. The implications for a gradually increasing secu-
larization of culture and society in the Postclassic are less direct.
We would, however, argue that a decrease in the number, size, and
elaboration of pyramid mounds and other kinds of religious struc-
tures is one clue to the waning of religious authority. Another
is the aesthetic decline from Classic standards which characterizes
much of Postclassic art in Peru and Middle America. In some re-
gions this tendency is seen in standardization and mass production


                                     POSTCLASSIC   STAGE   19 3
of objects. In citing such definitions, we are attempting, it must be
remembered, to weigh and give classificatory value to trends. War-
fare and non-religious authority were certainly not absent from
either the Peruvian or the Middle American scene in the Classic
or even the Formative stages; but, in so far as we can measure such
things from the archaeological evidence, both militarism and secu-
larism were in the ascendancy during the Postclassic stage.
   We have discussed and defined urbanism in some of its aspects
in our treatment of the Classic stage, but it is from the Postclassic
level that we know most, from both archaeological and ethnohistori-
cal sources, about the native American city. These cities were
formed around politico-religious nuclei—pyramids, temples, pal-
aces—and the urban zones contained           not only the rulers, priests,
and their entourages but various craftsmen and handlers of produce.
In the Inca system all these city dwellers were governmental em-
ployees; under the Aztec many of them were independent artisans
and merchants. In brief, the native city of the New              World had
large population aggregates either within residence or within reach,
was the seat of politico-religious power, served as an economic and
social center, and maintained        complex and diverse divisions of
labor among its citizens.
                                                 SOUTH    AMERICA

   Peruvian Postclassic cultures include all those of the Tiahuanaco
horizon and of later times. Their time span is approximately from
A.D. 1000 to A.D. 1532.1 In the final years Inca sovereignty spread
over all Peru and into adjacent Andean territories,? but just prior to
this there were important regional kingdoms such as the Chimu,?
Cuismancu, and Chincha‘ of the coast and numerous smaller states
in the highlands.
   We know that in ancient Peru, cities so defined came into being
on the Classic stage, at least in some regions, such as the north and
   1. Rowe, 1945. As observed in the discussions of the Peruvian Classic, this
beginning date may have to be moved back two or three centuries.
  2. Means, 1931; Rowe, 1946.          3. Rowe, 1948.         4. Rowe, 1946.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY       194
                                In AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
south coasts. There is an important difference, however, between
the Peruvian Postclassic city and its presumed Classic stage proto-
type. The north coast Classic population aggregate appears to have
grown by accretion, somewhat haphazardly, around a temple cen-
ter, while the Postclassic city follows a planned or partially planned
layout.® It is as though the necessity for, and idea of, city life had
been accepted in Postclassic times whereas, in the earlier stage, the
problem had not yet been dealt with consciously. We are not cer-
tain of the time of the first appearance of the “planned city” in
Peru, but there are several indications that it may have marked the
beginnings of the Postclassic on the Tiahuanaco style horizon.’ By
the latter part of the Postclassic the symmetrically arranged urban
center was characteristic of north coast sites such as Chan Chan,
Pacatnamu, and El Purgatorio.’
   Coexistent with the Peruvian cities are the tendencies toward
secularism and militarism mentioned above as defining the Post-
classic stage. The big religious centers and shrines dominated pre-
historic Peru during the Formative and, particularly, the Classic.
Beginning with the castillo at Chavin de Huantar and the other
Chavin horizon temples in the Nepefia and Casma valleys,® the
temple pyramid reached gigantic proportions in Classic stage con-
structions such as the Huaca Cortada in the Chicama Valley, the
Pyramid of the Sun in the Moche Valley,® the Gallinazo and Huan-
caco mounds in the Vird Valley,!° and the Maranga pyramids in
the Rimac Valley." In the Postclassic, pyramids continued to be
built, but these were usually placed within the inclosures of large
architectural complexes.” Like the pyramids within the walls of
Chan Chan, they tended to be smaller in absolute size than those
of the Classic, and they lost still more in impressiveness by the size
   5. Willey, 1953c, pp. 396-99.
   6. Willey, 1953¢, pp. 412 ff.; Stumer, 1954.
   7. Schaedel, 1951.       8. Tello, 1943.            9. Kroeber, 1925.
   10. W. C. Bennett, 1950; Willey, 1953c.
   11. Jijén y Caamafio, 1949.
   12. Schaedel, 1951; Willey, 1953c; Stumer, 1954.



                                         POSTCLASSIC   STAGE   19 5
and numbers of the palaces and city buildings which surrounded
them. There are other trends which support these inferences drawn
from architecture. During the Postclassic, Peruvian art, as a whole,
moved away from representational or what could be interpreted
as god-themes. Following the Tiahuanaco horizon, the drift was
toward stultification and geometric decorative art. Also, we know
from ethnohistoric sources that the Inca state was highly secular-
ized. The Inca sun-god was imposed upon conquered peoples, but
there was no concerted effort made to obliterate local religions.1*
Power was conceived of as military and bureaucratic might.
   Militarism seems to have been a force in old Peruvian society
from an early time. In this, as in many other of its trends and
emphases, Peru differs from Middle America. Large fortifications
of a refuge nature have been identified as far back as the late Forma-
tive White-on-red horizon," and fortified strongholds, or castillos,
are a common feature of north coast Classic. There seems little
doubt, however, that organized warfare was stepped up at the close
of the Classic and throughout the Postclassic. The Tiahuanaco
stylistic horizon was probably propelled by military force,!® and
long-distance roads date from this time.'* Essentially, the differ-
ence between Classic and Postclassic warfare in Peru was probably
one of scope. Fighting was, undoubtedly, intense on an intravalley
or small intervalley scale in the Classic, but wide-scale geographi-
cal strategy and maneuvers belong to the later stage. This is indi-
cated by a change in the nature of fortifications as well as by ethno-
historic accounts of Inca activities.

                                                MIDDLE AMERICA
   The Postclassic centers of Middle America are those well known
in the literature of the ethnohistoric period. Aztec Tenochtitlan in
the Valley of Mexico is the most famous example.!7 Mitla in Oaxa-

   13. Means, 1931; Rowe, 1946.               15. Willey, 19482.
   14. Willey, 1953c, pp. 358-59.             16. Willey, 1953¢, p. 370.
   17. Prescott, 1843; Vaillant, 1941; Sanders, 1956.



                                      METHOD AND THEORY      19 6
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
ca,'§ ‘Tzintzuntzan in the Tarascan country,!® Totonacan Cempoala
in Veracruz, and Mayapan” in Yucatan are others. Most of these
cities were seats of power in the late centuries just antedating, or
coming up to, the Spanish conquest. Somewhat earlier, in the cen-
turies between A.D. 800 and a.p. 1200, there was another set of
centers such as Tula, in Hidalgo, and Mexicanized Chichén Itza.”
The Middle American Postclassic varies regionally in total time
range, as did the Classic. In the central Mexican highlands its be
ginnings may be considered coincident with the fall of the Teoti-
huacan IV culture and the concomitant rise of Tula (ca. a.p. 800).
Elsewhere, it may be a century or two later. The terminus of the
Postclassic is marked by the early sixteenth-century arrival of the
Spanish, who found Tenochtitlan full of vigor and Mayapan aban-
doned.
   The history of Middle American urbanism cannot be followed
in the same detail as that of northern Peru, but, as we have re-
marked, the Teotihuacan IV phase in the Valley of Mexico was a
foreshadowing of the city life seen later in sixteenth-century Te-
nochtitlan. The Aztec city, with an estimated population of sixty
thousand persons,” was supported by a thick fringe of chinampa
(floating garden) farmers on its margins and around the shores of
Lake Texcoco. Water transportation—a mobility factor—was al-
most certainly of importance in the maintenance of a community
of such size, and this same factor may well have been important in
Teotihuacén times. Temple pyramids were dwarfed by the large
and elaborate cities surrounding them in much the same fashion as
in Postclassic Peru. There is not much question that religion was
always a stronger force in the life of prehistoric Middle America
than in Peru, but there are indications that secular and military
powers were in the ascendancy during the Aztec regime. The
Tenochcas rose to dominance in central Mexico during several
  18. Parsons, 1936.                  20. Roys, 1950.
  19. Foster, 1948.                   21. Acosta, 1940, 1944, 1945.
  22. Morris, Charlot, and Morris, 1931; Tozzer, n.d.
  23. Sanders, 1956.



                                      POSTCLASSIC STAGE   19 7
centuries of bitter intercity fighting following the collapse of ‘Teoti-
huacan, and in this period the war-god rose to a commanding posi-
tion in Aztec society.”4
   Militarism, secularism, and urbanism in Postclassic*® Mexico and
Central America have been discussed at length by others; but,
apparently, these trends do not march evenly in all quarters of the
Middle American area. There are some indications that the high-
land basin environments were more favorable for urban growth
than the lowlands;?’ thus, the urban classification seems to fit better
in western Mexico, Oaxaca, and the Guatemalan highlands than on
the east coast or in the Maya lowlands. Yet there are significant
variations among the highland regions. In the Guatemalan high-
lands some of the largest site zones date from the Formative. The
Miraflores phase at Kaminaljuyu offers evidence of a great occupa-
tion zone and politico-religious center outstripping in size anything
that came later.?® Guatemalan highland late Postclassic sites are
well fortified, however, and attest to a period of widespread war-
fare and strife linked to the disruptions in central Mexico. In the
Maya lowlands at Chichén        Itza, the Tula-Toltec art and the new
constructions at an old Classic ceremonial center suggest that long-
distance conquest was a feature of the early Postclassic in that re-
gion. Just how much of an urban center Chichén Itza ever became
is not clear. There are numerous house mounds around the center,
but it is unlikely that the dwelling pattern here was comparable to
that of compact Tenochtitlan. Later, however, the Yucatecan Maya
attempted an urban center at the walled site of Mayapan. Within
the inclosing wall some four thousand household units have been
mapped over an area about two to three kilometers in extent.2? It
is the most urbanized of any known lowland Maya site, but whether
the greater part of its inhabitants lived within the walls most of the
year following non-farming occupations is still a matter for con-
  24. Vaillant, 1941.
  25. The term “‘Militaristic” has been used for this stage (Armillas, 1951).
  26. Ibid.                       28. Shook and Proskouriakoff, 1956.
  27. Sanders, 1953.              29. Ruppert and Smith, 1952.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY       19
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY            8
jecture. In any case, we can conclude that urbanization was decided-
ly less successful in the Maya lowlands than in the Valley of
Mexico.
  There is an important phenomenon connected with the Postclas-
sic stage of development that has not been significant in earlier
stages. This is, in effect, the large-scale exportation and implanta-
tion of the Postclassic features of militarism, secularism, and urban-
ism into and upon other cultural traditions where they had been
lacking. Mayapan may have been modified by such an implanta-
tion, deriving its Postclassic patterns from central Mexico. In Peru
this was certainly the case with the Inca empire. Roads, fortifica-
tions, and administrative quarters were constructed by the Inca
from Ecuador to central Chile. These traits and much of the Inca
system must have had profound effects upon the local inhabitants,
although we do not know to what extent these conquered cultures
were modified. Possibly, too, Postclassic phenomena exerted equal-
ly great, but less direct, influences in ways other than conquest and
incorporation. It has been suggested that real cities may have grown
up on the Ecuadorian    coast in response to the rich trade with the
Postclassic Chimu kingdom of the Peruvian north coast. If this is
true, the process which gave rise to some of the ancient Mediter-
ranean trading cities of the Old World would have its counterpart
in the New. Such a development is an excellent example of the in-
terlocking effects of diffusion and internal culture development.




                                     POSTCLASSIC STAGE   199
                                            Summary
We have postulated five major stages by which the culture-
history of aboriginal America may be recounted. These stages are
sequential and are derived from an inspection of archaeological
sequences throughout the hemisphere. Certain criteria were select-
ed for generalization from a detailed examination of numerous local
and regional sequences. The method is comparative, and the result-
ing definitions are abstractions which describe culture change
through time in native America. The stages are not formulations
which explain culture change. Explanation, we believe, lies in the
complex interplay of the multiple factors of natural environment,
population densities and groupings, group and individual psycholo-
gies, and culture itself. Our culture-stage constructs are fashioned
for the infinitely simpler purpose of describing types of cultures
and the arrangement of these types in sequential order in the
various parts of the New World.
    Our earliest stage, the Lithic, is characterized by chipped-stone
tools and weapons. These artifacts are found in environmental
contexts of the late Pleistocene, under conditions indicating a cli-
mate quite different from that of the present and often with re-
mains of extinct fauna. We have suggested the possibility of a
major division within this Lithic stage, an earlier era featuring
crude percussion-flaked choppers and scrapers and a later era in
which stone-chipping was much more finely finished and in which
lanceolate point forms were a diagnostic. As yet, however, the evi-
dence for such a division is not conclusive. In general, it is believed
that the period of the Lithic stage ranged from perhaps as early


                                  METHOD AND THEORY    200
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
as 20000 B.c. down to about 5000 B.c., although this later limit
varies considerably. Subsistence was based upon hunting and gath-
ering, with emphasis varying according to environmental condi-
tions. Populations were small and scattered, but by 5000 B.c., or
before, man had found his way over most of the New World. The
stage is best represented, however, in the High Plains and the
Greater Southwest of North America.
   Our next stage, the Archaic, sees the continuation of hunting
and gathering cultures into environmental conditions approximat-
ing those of the present. There is a dependence upon smaller and
perhaps more varied fauna than in the Lithic stage and, in many
places, an increase in gathering. Stone implements and utensils
used in the preparation of wild vegetable foods first appear in this
stage. Many of these were shaped by use rather than design, al-
though, in many Archaic stage cultures, techniques of stone-grind-
ing and stone-polishing were known. Domesticated plants, includ-
ing maize, are found in some Archaic contexts, but it should be
stressed that the presence of these food plants is not evidence for
agriculture in the full sense of that term. As near as the archaeolo-
gist is able to tell, the Archaic cultures in question had but slight
economic dependence upon these primitive crops. In most instances
where such domesticated plants do occur on the Archaic level, the
prehistoric societies involved seem tu have been composed of
smaller populations than the other Archaic cultures, where fishing
or gathering was the means of subsistence.
   Many Archaic stage sites of the rivers and coasts of the eastern
United States, of the California and nurth Pacific coasts, and of
the Atlantic littoral of Brazil show large, deep refuse deposits of
shell, suggesting sizable and stable populations. In addition to
numerous ground- and polished-stone implements and ornaments,
pottery is sometimes present, as are carved bone, shell, and horn
objects. Elaborate woodworking is an associated trait in many
regions. From all this it is fully evident that an Archaic-type
economy provided the basis for material wealth as well as socio-
political and religious complexity in those societies where food


                                            sumMARY    7)O l
supplies were adequate. Thus, in a sense, certain Archaic phases,
such as those of California or the Eastern Woodlands, represent
a climax for the New World hunting-gathering tradition.
   It is difficult to set meaningful date limits to the Archaic stage.
At the earlier end of the range there is obvious overlap between
cultures that we are forced to classify as Archaic and those whose
technological inventory and environmental context is of a Lithic
stage type. Thus, some Archaic cultures seem to antedate 5000 B.c.,
our very approximate and arbitrary upper limit for the Lithic
stage. At the other end of the time scale, we know that many
American cultures of the historic present subsist with an Archaic-
type economy and technology. This does not impute to them
“archaicism’” or “‘backwardness”’ in non-technological aspects of
culture but rather implies a great richness in the non-material]
fields for many of the prehistoric Archaic cultures that are known
only from the meager archaeological record.
   With the advent of the Formative stage there is, for most Ameri-
can areas, a fundamental economic shift from hunting-gathering to
agricultural food production. This is the most profound change in
our scheme of stages. The geographical focus moves from North
America to Middle America and, perhaps, even farther south to
the central Andes. All the gradual steps by which a sedentary,
village, Formative way of life was achieved are not yet clear. It is
likely that slow, steady experimentation and use of food plants by
Archaic gathering peoples, such as those who occupied the Tamau-
lipas or New Mexican caves, eventuated in village life in which the
primary dependence was upon crops like maize and beans. Agri-
cultural villages and towns appear in Middle America, in several
regions, in the earliest phases of Formative sequences and probably
date back to as early as the middle of the second millennium B.c.
In Peru similar agriculture-based village cultures are believed to
be as old as the beginning of the first millennium B.c. Presumably,
from these nuclear American centers, a knowledge of agriculture,
fully developed maize, and other plants diffused, or were carried,
over much of North and South America. By a.p. 1000, if not


                                  METHOD AND THEORY
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY    202
earlier, the southwestern and most of the eastern United States
were within this Formative orbit; and, in the other direction, the
southern Andes and much of lowland South America were fol-
lowing an agricultural, village or town tradition.
   A stable village or town life, with its potentialities for cultural
and social development may, however, be made possible by econo-
mies other than agricultural. We have noted that, in certain Archaic
stage archaeological phases, the size of the sites and the general
indications of stability and wealth approximate conditions which
are comparable to, or even surpass, those of the agriculture-based
Formative stage cultures. Hence, we have placed the emphasis of
our Formative definition upon settlement size, stability, and the
social and cultural implications which these carry, rather than upon
an agricultural economy per se. We have defined the Formative
stage for the New World “by the presence of agriculture, or any
other subsistence economy of comparable effectiveness, and by the
successful integration of such an economy into well-established
sedentary village life.” But, in so doing, we must keep in mind
that the economic potential for even the richest of the hunting-
gathering societies was definitely limited in such a way that fur-
ther development to what we have defined as a New World Classic
stage was precluded. Such a development was possible only with
agriculture and only in certain natural environmental settings.
   The agriculture-based Formative cultures are characterized by
the abundant use of ceramics. Weaving is usually well developed.
The competencies of the Lithic and Archaic stages in the chipping,
grinding, and polishing of stone are carried on. Site occupation
tends to be stable and of long duration. Houses and other buildings
are of permanent or semipermanent quality. The Formative vil-
lage is the basic sociopolitical unit, and in some regions it is of
town size. Specialized politico-religious architecture and/or sites
are frequently features of the Formative stage. These may take
the form of pyramidal mound-based temples within, or apart from,
the village or town communities,    as in Middle America or the
southeastern United States, or, as in the Puebloan Southwest, the


                                             SUMMARY   2.0) 3
special construction may be a subterranean kiva in the heart of the
settlement. In many places these special buildings or sites imply a
politico-religious organization and authority reaching beyond the
confines of a single site or community.
   The Classic stage marks the beginning of urban life in native
America. The early New World cities were built around the
temple pyramids and palace platforms of the ceremonial centers.
They would, thus, appear to be the logical developments out of
such centers and towns of the Formative stage. In many instances
they are, indeed, the same sites, showing earlier     Formative occu-
pation and architectural levels overlaid by the later habitations and
monuments of the Classic. These Classic stage cities were, most
certainly, the nuclei of political and religious governments, of
artistic and intellectual achievement, and of commerce and crafts.
The temples, palaces, and other public buildings of the Classic are
of great size and elaboration, attesting to the planning, skill, and
labor organization of the builders. The Classic stage is also charac-
terized by the appearance of great art styles, and these styles tend
to be limited to well-defined regions. Craftsmanship in ceramics,
weaving, stoneworking, carving of all kinds, and, in some places,
metallurgy is of a high order. Craft specialization is a certainty.
Differentiation in burial goods, in architecture, in the representa-
tions in art styles—all these things indicate the presence of a well-
developed class stratification.
   The Classic stage, as defined, is limited to southern Mexico and
adjacent upper Central America (the area called Middle America)
and to the Peru-Bolivian coast and highlands (the Central Andean
area). These are the two centers of aboriginal American civiliza-
tion, although it 1s possible that these Classic patterns may also be
found along the Ecuadorian coast. Middle American and Peru-
Bolivian Classic phases appear to be roughly contemporaneous and
to occupy most of the first millennium a.p.
  The Postclassic stage follows the Classic. It, too, is urban, per-
haps more so than the Classic. It is confined to Middle America
and Peru. At the onset of the Postclassic, each area sees the break-


                                  METHOD AND THEORY   2?
                            IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY     04
down of the great regional art styles of the Classic. There are evi-
dences of population shiftings and migrations, of war and troubled
times. A decline in the aesthetic level of the Classic and in religious
architecture suggests an increasing secularization of society. An
increase in fortifications and fortified cities or towns gives a mili-
taristic cast to many of the Postclassic cultures. The Postclassic
civilizations are generally dated in the last six hundred years or so
preceding the Spanish conquests of Mexico and Peru.
   This completes our survey of a rather considerable sample of
the data of New World prehistory solely for the purpose of testing
a proposed historical-developmental classification. The difficulties
of this kind of interpretation and the defects of our particular
scheme have been. candidly exposed and need not be repeated here.
In its adherence to the broad outlines of historical reality the
 scheme has a certain value as a recapitulation of American archae-
ology, but it does not provide short and simple answers to the out-
 standing problems of history and process in that field. The adequacy
 of the data selected and the extent to which they have upheld the
 scheme we leave to the reader’s better judgment.




                                             SUMMARY    WUO 5
