                                                                  Sats




                                                                                       ty
                                                                                  if

                                                                                            aE
                                                                                            Se
                                                                             Hi
                                                                                 Se




                                         a     a
                                                ei
                                         IPOD Whatley                                                                       ny
                                                                                                                            eon

                                                                                                                            Lie
                                                                                                 Hees rik           teed
                                                                                            i 1s        Hats:




                                                                                                                       Ki




                                                                     fF,
                                                                           a
                                                                           eal( Ron
                                                                                            i                   y

                                                                   HUNeast       hh
                                                                        HEHE bh gt:
                                                                  aii Panag
                                                                    ih fevit           Raa                      y

                                                                     }                      au         ‘




                  Heath
     .
         als:
           i

    Lae
     bi
    pone                       iN
                                   gis




                Mitra
2
     ett
       .                  )
                              Hy
    ey
     Nie                           ty
                 ta
     i          H




                                                          F
                                                        ; ie ee
                                                        Bele,
                                                         WANs
                                                         i)
           Digitized by the Internet Archive
               in 2022 with funding from
                Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/methodtheoryinam0000unse
Method and Theory in American Archaeology
Method and Theory
         BY GORDON      R. WILLEY

                    AND      PHILIP PHILLIPS




in American Archaeology




          THE   UNIVERSITY   OF
                                  «
                                  CHICAGO   PRESS
           Library of Congress Catalog Number: 57-11215

      Tue University oF Cuicaco Press, CHIcaco 37
Cambridge University Press, London, N.W. 1, England
   The University of Toronto Press, Toronto 5, Canada

     © 1958 by The University of Chicago. Published 1958
                                Composed and printed by
                   Tue University oF Cuicaco Press,
                                 Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.
To JAMES ALFRED FORD
                                                 Preface
 In the summer of 1952, as a result of numerous discussions, we de-
cided to set down our thoughts on certain methodological and the-
oretical questions in American archaeology. The original plan was
an article in two parts: the first, a statement of what we believed
to be the minimal aims of archaeology and the basic operations di-
rected toward the achievement of these aims, and the second, some
theoretical formulations about New World prehistory. The first
part was subsequently published under the title “Method and
Theory in American Archaeology: An Operational Basis for Cul-
ture-Historical Integration.”! The second part followed a year and
a half later as “Method and Theory in American Archaeology II:
Historical-Developmental Interpretation.”® The comments and
criticism which these papers drew from colleagues and students
have kept us interested in the subject, and, as a result, we have re-
written both original papers and combined them, along with an
introduction, originally published as a brief journal article,’ in the
present volume.
   A good many of the revisions and additions we have made to the
original papers are the result of second thoughts, which we trust
are better than the first ones. Others, by no means the least sub-
stantial, are the direct result of critical comments and suggestions
on the part of colleagues in archaeology and anthropology. To list
them all would provide a roster of impressive proportions. We
would, however, like to single out Albert C. Spaulding and Irving
Rouse for the time, interest, and advice they have expended in our
behalf.
   1. Phillips and Willey, 1953.
   2. Willey and Phillips, 1955.
   3. Phillips, 1955.



                                                        Vil
   Finally, a word about the restrictive connotation of the qualify-
ing term ‘‘American’”’ as used in our title and throughout the book.
Obviously, the methods, theories, and ideas in general which are
propounded and discussed in this work are not limited to the Ameri-
cas any more than archaeology is so limited. Many, or most, of
them have originated in the Old World with Americanists as ‘late
borrowers. We have used the qualification inasmuch as our own
experience is in the American field and all the examples and subject
matter are so confined. There is another reason for using the term.
In no other large part of the world does archaeology stand so com-
pletely on its own feet as in the New World. The historic con-
tinuities and documentation binding past to present are infinitely
weaker here than in the European, Middle Eastern, and Asiatic
areas where archaeology has been carried forward. American
archaeology complements, but is in no sense an adjunct of, history;
hence its methodology stands in somewhat sharper relief than the
methodology in many parts of the Old World. This is not a denial
of the vital importance of historical and ethnological data in inter-
preting the American past, but such considerations lie outside the
scope of this book.
                                             Gorpon R. WitLey
                                               Puitre PHILiips




                                             PREFACE   Vil 1 1
                                         Contents

   Introduction: American Archaeology and General
                           Anthropological Theory


        PART   I. AN   OPERATIONAL   BASIS    FOR   CULTURE-
                               HISTORICAL      INTEGRATION


                       1. Archaeological Unit Concepts           II

                          2. Archaeological Integration         BF

                                                    Summary      57


'PART II. HISTORICAL-DEVELOPMENTAL       INTERPRETATION


         3. The Historical-Developmental Approach
                          in American Archaeology                61

                                             4. Lithic Stage     79

                                        5. Archaic Stage       104

                                     6. Formative Stage        144

                                         7. Classic Stage      182

                                     8. Postclassic Stage      H[SD5)
                                                    Summary    200


                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY


                                               Bibliography    209




                                                               259
                                                Introduction




        American Archaeology and
   General Anthropological Theory
It has been said that archaeology, while providing data and general-
izations in such fields as history and general anthropology, lacks a
systematic body of concepts and premises constituting archaeological
theory. According to this view, the archaeologist must borrow his
theoretical underpinning from the field of study his work happens
to serve, or do without. Whether the latter alternative be an admis-
sible one does not seem to be an arguable point. Acceptable field
work can perhaps be done in a theoretical vacuum, but integration
and interpretation without theory are inconceivable.
   The above remarks apply to archaeology in general, but the sole
concern of this study is American archaeology. It seems to us that
American archaeology stands in a particularly close and, so far as
theory is concerned, dependent relationship to anthropology. Its
service to history in the narrower sense, i.e., as the record of events
in the past with the interest centered on those events, is extremely
limited, because for pre-Columbian America there is in effect no
such history. The use of traditions derived from native informants
and other documentary sources ‘of the contact period as starting
points for pushing back into the unrecorded past—the “direct his-
torical approach” —is not archaeology serving history, but the re-
verse. As a technique of investigation, American archaeology, like
archaeology generally, provides useful data for geology, paleon-
tology, climatology, etc., and it recovers valuable material for art
museums and the study of aesthetics, but it is not involved theo-


                                              INTRODUCTION     ]
retically with any of these subjects. To paraphrase Maitland’s
famous dictum: American archaeology is anthropology or it is
nothing. The American archaeologist, unless he thinks he can dis-
pense with theory altogether, is therefore obliged to take a stand
on some of the basic questions of general anthropological theory.
This we shall do briefly in the following pages.
   The methods outlined in this study, and our arguments in their
behalf, are predicated on two general theoretical assumptions: (1)
that anthropology is more science than history, and (2) that the
subject matter of anthropology is both society and culture. The
first part of this statement appears to settle out of hand the position
of anthropology in respect to the dichotomy science-history, a
question that has vexed philosophers ever since the emergence of
anthropology as a field of study. It seems to us that the force of
this antithesis is largely spent. There is now considerable agree-
ment among theorists that the world of anthropology is a mixture
of recurrent and unique events acting and reacting upon each other
in a tremendously complex fashion. The only serious disagreements
are in respect to the role and importance of the two components of
the mixture. Our view is that the part played by recurrent events,
though it may be the smaller, is the more significant; and that this
is just as true for an archaeology devoted to the service of anthro-
pology as it is for anthropology itself. Archaeology, in the service
of anthropology, concerns itself necessarily with the nature and
position of unique events in space and time but has for its ultimate
purpose the discovery of regularities that are in a sense spaceless
and timeless.' And, since it appears that a comparative method will
be most likely to disclose such regularities, it follows that the
archaeologist is faced with the responsibility of finding, in the
seemingly endless flow of cultural and social events, forms and
   1. This we hope will not be taken to mean that the events referred to take
place outside space and time. In this and all subsequent references to space and
time in this study, it is of course geographical space and chronological time
that are denoted.



                                           METHOD AND THEORY
                                     IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
systems of forms that are not only comparable to each other but
also comparable to, or at least compatible with, the forms and sys-
tems of forms of cultural or social anthropology.? We shall return
to this point later.
   The second article of belief referred to above is that the subject
matter of anthropology is both society and culture, another polarity
that is not standing up under analysis. The interpenetration of social
and cultural facts now seems to be taken as axiomatic. Following
Kroeber and others, we have chosen to regard them here as aspects
of the same basic reality. Definition of this basic reality is fortu-
nately outside the scope of the present inquiry. It is sufficient for
our purposes to characterize it loosely as patterned human be-
havior. Archaeology, of necessity, deals very largely with pat-
terned human behavior in its cultural aspect. In American archaeol-
ogy especially, we have tended to suppress the social aspect alto-
gether. Some Americanists have been drawn into the extreme posi-
tion that sees in culture an independent order of phenomena, in-
telligible in terms of itself alone—the “cultural superorganic.”
Most of us, without subscribing to the superorganic view of cul-
ture, have nevertheless operated “as if” it were a fact. In our opin-
ion even this moderate position, though operationally expedient
and to a certain extent inevitable, is ultimately detrimental to the
main task of archaeology, which is to organize its data in terms of a
real world, a world in which cultural and social phenomena (to
name only these) are inextricably mingled.
   The reader will have noted by this time that we are driving
toward an accommodation between the seemingly opposed methods
and outlook of archaeology and ‘cultural anthropology. Compari-
   2. “Social anthropology” in England, “cultural anthropology” in the United
States—these are not precise equivalents but are closer, it seems to us, than
practitioners in the two countries appear to believe. From the detached point
of view of the archaeologist, at any rate, they are practically synonymous
terms. In this study we follow the American usage but without any convic-
tions regarding the predominance of the cultural over the social aspect of our
subject matter.


                                                 INTRODUCTION      3
son may be facilitated by considering the operations of the two
disciplines on three levels of organization that are generally appli-
cable to all scientific analysis: observation, description, and explana-
tion. The accompanying diagram is a crude attempt to show how the
operations of archaeology and cultural anthropology can be con-
sidered as converging toward a synthesis from one level to the
next.

Explanation               Processual         Ethnology
                          interpretation

Description          Culture-historical         Ethnography
                     integration

Observation      Field work                              Field work
                        ARCHAEOLOGY           CuLTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY


   On the observational level, archaeological and cultural anthro-
pological field work are placed far apart on the diagram because of
wide differences in the phenomena observed. These differences,
however, can be too easily overemphasized. Cultural anthropology
observes group behavior and the products of group behavior in
their twofold aspects, social and cultural. Its primary concern is
with the social aspect, but certain categories of behavior, notably
those which are symbolized in language, art, myth, etc., may be
studied very largely in their cultural aspect. Archaeology observes
primarily the materialized products of group behavior but has con-
siderable opportunity to observe symbolized behavior in the forms
of art, iconography, and (rarely) written language, and occasional-
ly touches social behavior through inferences, as in the interpreta-
tion of burial practices, house plans, settlement patterns, roads, ir-
rigation systems, and the like. Thus it appears that the raw mate-
rials of the two disciplines are not so different after all; what is dif-
ferent is that archaeology is obliged to view its material almost en-
tirely in the cultural aspect. It has sometimes attempted to turn
this limitation into an asset by embracing the cultural superorganic,
as already noted.


                                         METHOD AND THEORY
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   The term “culture-historical integration,” as used here, covers
almost everything the archaeologist does in the way of organizing
his primary data: typology, taxonomy, formulation of archaeologi-
cal “units,” investigation of their relationships in the contexts of
function and natural environment, and determination of their inter-
nal dimensions and external relationships in space and time. How-
ever high-sounding these terms, it appears that the activities repre-
sented by them remain essentially on the descriptive level. Explana-
tory concepts, such as acculturation, diffusion, and stimulus diffu-
sion, are utilized, but the aim is primarily to describe what hap-
pened to specific cultural units at specific times and places; no at-
tempt is made (on this level) to draw generalizations from these
observations and descriptions. Culture-historical integration is thus
comparable to ethnography with the time dimension added, but we
dare not push this analogy too far, because the archaeologist’s de-
scriptive formulations, like his observations, lie mainly in the cul-
tural aspect of his subject matter. Later in this book we make a plea
for unit concepts that are intelligible in the social aspect as well,
but we are under no illusion that any except the very smallest of
them can be precisely equated with correspondent units of social
structure. Nevertheless, we have placed culture-historical integra-
tion and ethnography closer together on the diagram than their re-
spective field operations, in the belief that archaeological unit con-
cepts can and should make more sense in terms of the social aspect
than is generally supposed.
   So little work has been done in American archaeology on the
explanatory level that it is difficult to find a name for it. It might
have been left blank on the diagram to emphasize this lack. The
term “functional interpretation,” which has gained a certain amount
of currency in American studies, was used in the original version
of this diagram but is not entirely satisfactory, since it implies that
the functional is the only explanatory principle involved. We have
substituted here the broader “processual interpretation,” which
might conceivably cover any explanatory principle that might be
invoked. In the context of archaeology, processual interpretation


                                             INTRODUCTION    5
is the study of the nature of what is vaguely referred to as the cul-
ture-historical process. Practically speaking, it implies an attempt
to discover regularities in the relationships given by the methods
of culture-historical integration. Whatever we choose to call it,
the important consideration is that, on this explanatory level of
organization where we are no longer asking merely what but also
how and even why, our formulations must be viewed in both their
cultural and their social aspects.* It is not possible to go about in-
vestigating culture-historical processes and causality without ref-
erence to the efficient causes of cultural change, which are people or
groups of people, and therefore lie in the social aspect of reality.
Perhaps it is fair to say that there has been a lack of progress in
processual interpretation in American archaeology to date precisely
because unit formulations have been put together with so little
reference to their social aspect. In the same vein of optimism al-
ready displayed, we have put processual interpretation and ethnol-
ogy (which includes among its many meanings the operations of
cultural anthropology on the explanatory level) side by side on the
diagram to suggest a further convergence of aims, if not of prac-
tice. At this point, the archaeologist is in effect a cultural anthropol-
ogist,* but it is well to remember that his activities on this level are
conditioned by his formulations on the descriptive level and that
   3. To name only two of the important factors in a complex equation. Geo-
graphical and ecological factors, already present on the descriptive level, carry
over with increased importance onto the explanatory level. These have been
deliberately ignored in our diagram, which is focused on the special rela-
tionships between the cultural and social aspects of anthropology. The same
neglect of physiological and psychological factors should be noted.
    4. This point has been very well put by Walter Taylor, who also rational-
izes the operations of archaeology on a series of levels that differ in detail from
ours but can be reconciled with them, as in the following passage: ‘“When the
archaeologist collects his data [observational level], constructs his cultural con-
texts [descriptive level] and on the basis of these contexts proceeds to make a
comparative study of the nature and workings of culture in its formal, func-
tional, and/or developmental aspects [explanatory level], then he is ‘doing’
cultural anthropology and can be considered an anthropologist who works
in archaeological materials” (1948, p. 43).



                                            METHOD AND THEORY
                                      IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
these in turn have special characteristics which it is our purpose to
describe.
   Diagrams and models have the happy faculty of proving what-
ever they are designed to prove, and ours is no exception. Never-
theless, we think that this model, in spite of the crude simplification
inherent in any system of “levels,” represents a pattern that is not
wholly fictitious. As archaeology, in the service of anthropology,
moves from one operational level to the next, it is compelled to pay
more attention to the social aspect of its subject matter, until there
takes place on the explanatory level an actual convergence with
cultural anthropology and the possibility of an eventual synthesis in
a common search for sociocultural causality and law.




                                             INTRODUCTION    7
                          Part |




     An Operational Basis for
Culture-Historical Integration
                                                           Chapter 1



           Archaeological Unit Concepts
“Culture-historical integration” is the term we have chosen to
designate what we regard as the primary task of archaeology on the
descriptive level of organization. The procedural objectives of cul-
ture-historical integration have tended to be divided, in theoretical
writings on American archaeology, between the reconstruction of
spatial-temporal relationships, on the one hand, and what may be
called contextual relationships, on the other.} Operationally, neither
is attainable without the other. The reconstruction of meaningful
human history needs both structure and content.
   Cultural forms may be plotted to demonstrate geographical con-
tinuity and contemporaneity, but, when we move to establish his-
torical relationships between them, we immediately invoke proc-
esses like diffusion, trade, conquest, or migration and in so doing
shift the problem from the bare frame of space and time into the
realm of context and function. Conversely, the processes named
have no historical applicability without control of the spatial and
temporal media in which they operate. Taylor was undoubtedly
correct in stating that American archaeologists have placed heavy
    1. Taylor, in the work already cited (1948), puts these procedures on two
distinct levels of interpretation, which he calls “chronicle” and “‘historiogra-
phy.” See also Willey’s (1953a) use of the terms “historical” and ‘‘proces-
sual.”’ The latter term was used by Willey in reference to the description of
the way in which specific cultures function in specific times and places, not as
we are using it in the present study in reference to the attempt to draw general-
izations from culture-historical data. All four terms, “chronicle,” “‘historiogra-
phy,” “historical,” and “processual,” in the writings cited, refer to operations
on the descriptive level of organization as defined in the present study.


                                ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS         11
emphasis on the skeletal chronicle at the expense of the recovery
of what he calls ‘‘cultural context,’’ but a review of the recent lit-
erature indicates a strong trend in the contrary direction. We sub-
mit that this is now an area of agreement for American archaeol-
ogy: culture-historical integration is both the spatial and temporal scales
and the content and relationships which they measure. The essence of
this study’s departure, if it may be called a departure, is that these
objectives are not regarded as being on different and unequally
significant levels of interpretation or as even being capable of
effective separation operationally. It seems to us that the apprehen-
sion and formulation of archaeological unit concepts involve the
simultaneous investigation of contextual and spatial-temporal rela-
tionships.
   A method basic to archaeology on the descriptive level is taxon-
omy. Under this general heading, the archaeologist deals with two
sorts of concepts: types, and cultures or, as we prefer to say,
archaeological units.2 The former usually pertain to artifacts or
other products of technology but may be used in connection with
other categories of cultural behavior such as burial types. Some
archaeologists also apply the type concept to full archaeological
assemblages, or units as we would call them, using the designation
“culture type.” While this usage has the apparent virtue of econo-
my through elimination of the conceptual difference between type
and unit, we prefer to keep them distinct, because we think that
unit concepts have certain characteristics not shared by artifact
types and that these in turn have important methodological bear-
ings. Our interest here is centered on unit concepts, but a few re-
   2. There is a good deal to be said for and against the prevailing use of
                                                                          ‘“cul-
ture” to denote every conceivable kind of archaeological unit. It is very con-
venient in many cases where we do not really know what kind of unit we are
dealing with, but it is conducive to sloppy thinking. We shall be trying here to
confine its use to units of a certain magnitude, maximum units in fact, but are
not enthusiastic about the cumbersome “archaeological unit’’ as an alternative.
ae the context is clearly archaeological, perhaps the term “unit” will
suffice.



                                          METHOD AND THEORY        12
                                    IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
marks on the concept of type as applied to artifacts will serve to
get us into the subject.®
   There is, happily, a general working agreement among American
archaeologists about what constitutes an artifact type, though
there is still some dispute about what it signifies in terms of the
basic reality that we have postulated as the subject matter of archae-
ology. The principal difference of opinion may be crudely stated
as opposition between those who believe that types are arbitrarily
“designed” by the classifier and those who think that types exist
in nature and that the classifier “discovers” them. According to the
first view, types are simply analytical tools that are to be judged
solely on the basis of their usefulness; the second maintains that
they have, or should have, behavioral reality in the sense that they
would be recognized as norms, the “right way,” in the societies
that produced the objects being typed. Our attitude is that these
opposing views are not completely antagonistic. We maintain
that all types are likely to possess some degree of correspondence
to this kind of reality and that increase of such correspondence must
be the constant aim of typology.‘ The actual procedure of segregat-
ing types is therefore a more complex operation than is suggested
simply by such words as “design” or “discovery,” and is in effect
a painstaking combination of both.
   No less laborious than artifact typology are the procedures in-
volved in the formation of archaeological units, in which we have
to consider not only the relationship of forms as such but their
spatial and temporal relationships as well. Disregarding the latter
for the moment, we may begin our consideration of the nature of
   3. Another valid objection to the use of “culture type”’ as a synonym for
“archaeological unit” is that we need such a generalizing term when we want to
talk about a type of culture without reference to any specific time or place.
A “theocratic irrigation state’”’ (Steward et al., 1955, p. 65), for example, is
a culture type that may in theory occur wherever the necessary cultural and
natural preconditions are present.
    4. Cf. Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951, pp. 63-64, for a discussion of the
problem of the “empirical” versus the “cultural” type as applied to ceramics.
Those inclined to take sides on this question are advised to see Evans, 1954;
Ford, 1954a, 19546, 1954c; and Spaulding, 19534, 19536, 1954a, 19546.



                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS        13
unit concepts by examining their strictly formal characteristics.
We are seeking a broad definition that will cover all sorts of units,
from those whose content may consist of a very small number of
highly specialized forms to units represented by the fullest com-
pendium of cultural data that can be recovered by the most refined
techniques of investigation and the most imaginative interpretation.
It is plain, therefore, that the size or comprehensiveness of the as-
semblage is no criterion. What is required rather is that the con-
stituent forms be physiognomic, recurrent, and internally consistent.
To borrow a phrase from V. Gordon Childe, they must relate to
one another in a way that permits us to assume them to be “‘the
concrete expressions of the common social traditions that bind to-
gether a people.’”®
   So much for the formal content of an archaeological unit of
whatever magnitude. Now the particular interests of archaeology
also require that this content be placed in the contexts of geo-
graphical space and time. It is often maintained that this is some-
thing the archaeologist does after the unit has been defined. How-
ever sensible in theory this may appear, in practice it does not
work that way. The working procedure, as every archaeologist
knows, is initial formulation, investigation of spatial and temporal
dimensions, reformulation, reinvestigation of spatial and temporal
dimensions, and so on indefinitely. The operation is immensely
complicated by the fact that the fixing of these internal dimensions
is, more often than not, dependent on external relationships. We
have only to recall certain essential conditions of our unit’s exist-
ence. In the same place, but before or after it in time, were similar
units whose contents intergrade with its content in so-called transi-
tional periods that are almost impossible to establish with precision;
beside it in space were other contemporaneous units with similar
intergrading at frontiers equally difficult to draw. Yet we maintain
that the fixing of these spatial and temporal boundaries, however
difficult, is an essential part of the definition of the unit. Small
wonder that the unavoidably arbitrary nature of such operations
  5. Childe, 1950, p. 2.

                                     METHOD AND THEORY    1
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY     +
has led many archaeologists to believe that an archaeological unit
is nothing more than a fragment excised from a spatial-temporal
continuum, a fragment that could not be said to have existed as a
unit before it was named and defined.
   The same problem confronts us here that we have already dis-
cussed in connection with artifact typology. An archaeological unit,
as described above, may appear to be a rational construct in terms
of the observed facts of cultural continuity and cultural relation-
ships, but what are the chances that it corresponds in any real sense
to an intelligible unit of culture-history? In our original paper we
took the position that such correspondences may eventually be
possible but that “the archaeologist is on firmer footing at present
with the conception of an archaeological culture as an arbitrarily
defined segment of the total continuum.” In a long and exceedingly
astringent letter to the authors, Albert C. Spaulding attacked this
position with such force that we have obtained his permission to
quote a portion of it here.
   It is true that any assemblage represents a segment of a continuous
stream of cultural tradition extending back into time, but once you grant
the purpose of a scientific exposition of culture history, the process of
classifying the time stream with respect to its cultural characteristics is
anything but arbitrary. It should be classified in terms of events which are
themselves associated with a cluster of other new events so as to yield a
succession of distinct culture types. A possible exception to this generali-
zation would be a segment of a continuum in which culture change did not
occur, or in which change occurred at a uniform rate so that it could be
represented as a straight line on a graph. In the hypothetical case of no
change, classificatory subdivision would serve no useful purpose that I can
think of and would be arbitrary; in the case of a slanting straight line, sub-
division would in a sense also be arbitrary, since a complete description
would require no more than a statement of the point of origin, slope, and
point of termination (if any) of the line. In fact, the two cases are basically
the same case. However, widely accepted cultural theory indicates that
the normal pattern is one of relative stability, then rapid growth through
the introduction of a critical new element followed very quickly by a num-
ber of other new elements, then a period of relative stability, and so on.
Plotted on a time against culture change graph, this results in an ogival
growth curve, and the recognition of the sharp curves is a scientific obliga-


                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL    UNIT   CONCEPTS   15
tion of the archaeologist. The segments so recognized are certainly not the
result of arbitrary classification, the changes in slope of the line are just
as characteristic of it as is its continuous nature. So time itself is con-
tinuous and proceeds at an unvarying rate, but culture change in relation
to time probably never proceeds at an unvarying rate, and useful archaeo-
logical classifications of chronology are those which have sharp rate
changes as their limiting points. A good chronological classification yields
a number of periods, each of which is characterized by a distinctive “cul-
ture” (“culture type” in my terminology), and the proper job is to pin-
point the critical element so that the time of its invention can be made to
serve as the starting point of the new period.
    To consider a second implication of “‘space-time-cultural” continuum,
space itself is a continuum, but culture is not uniformly distributed in that
continuum. To get off a lofty crusher first, there are no archaeological sites
in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, either on the surface or on the bottom.
On a more sensible plane, archaeological materials characteristically occur
in discrete clusters [we call them “sites” in space, and the task of describ-
ing them includes discovery of their boundaries—there isn’t any arbitrary
slicing up of a uniform continuum involved in the problem. To turn now to
what I think you actually have in mind, it is quite conceivable that the
cultural characteristics of components might vary uniformly or continu-
ously (i.e. in infinitely small steps, or at a uniform slope, so that the spatial
position against cultural content graph, time controlled, shows a curve or
straight line instead of a noticeably jagged line), but I am uncertain as to
how important this is in fact. I think that ethnographic evidence strongly
indicates that if any considerable number of components over any sub-
stantial area were considered, a classification of culture type with respect
to space would reveal fairly neat clustering, not simple polarity or radia-
tion. Certainly you would concede this if sharp ecological boundaries were
involved. Discovery of clustering at the multicomponent level would elimi-
nate the claims of arbitrariness effectively. In summary, then, your vague
and sweeping talk about arbitrary slicing up of a continuum results in the
confounding of several important cultural problems and leads to methodo-
logical obfuscation, not clarification.

   Without yielding entirely before Spaulding’s assault, we are
prepared to admit that the assumption of a more or less unvarying
rate of cultural change in a spatial-temporal continuum has been
overdone, by us as well as by others. We now prefer to say that
the archaeologist is on a firmer footing with the concept of an ar-
chaeological unit as a provisionally defined segment of the total


                                          METHOD   AND THEORY      |6
                                    IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
continuum, whose ultimate validation will depend on the degree to
which its internal spatial and temporal dimensions can be shown to
coincide with significant variations in the nature and rate of cul-
tural change in that continuum. In simpler terms, it is the archaeolo-
gist’s job to be aware of the arbitrary nature of his unit concepts
and, at the same time, alert to the possibility of making them less
arbitrary.
   Absorbing as this question of cultural continuity and change
must be to all archaeologists, it is really not an issue in the present
discussion. Our object here is to show that a fundamental, unvary-
ing characteristic of all archaeological unit formulations of what-
ever magnitude is that they are arrived at by combining three sorts
of data: formal content, distribution in geographical space, and
duration in time. These three ingredients are present, though not
always explicit, in all unit concepts but may differ significantly in
the part they play in the formulation. Variations in content, general-
ly but not always a function of the limits of available information
and the archaeologist’s ability to draw inferences therefrom, need
not concern us here. Our interest centers rather on variations in
spatial and temporal dimensions and particularly on the fact that
there is no regular (or constant) relationship between variations in
these two dimensions. Probably a large share of our classificatory
difficulties and the ensuing arguments could be avoided by the gen-
eral recognition of this fact. It becomes essential, therefore, in the
definition and use of archaeological unit concepts of whatever na-
ture to understand precisely what quantities of space and time are
involved in the formulation.
   In the search for practicable units of study, American archaeolo-
gists have invented a large number of unit concepts and designated
them by an even larger number of names. Our initial requirement,
therefore, is a comprehensive nomenclature by means            of which
existing schemes and their working parts can be roughly equated.
We have committed ourselves to the proposition that all unit con-
cepts, whatever the outlook and intentions of their originators,
have implicit spatial and temporal dimensions. Therefore, they can


                           ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   17)
be differentiated by reference to the amounts of space and time
they are thought to involve. If these premises be granted, it
seems a reasonable approach to bring one of these two variables
under control before considering it in combination with the other.
The spatial factor is easier to deal with; so we may begin by setting
forth a series of geographical categories that we have found useful
in this connection.

                                           SPATIAL   DIVISIONS

   A site is the smallest unit of space dealt with by the archaeologist
and the most difficult to define. Its physical limits, which may vary
from a few square yards to as many square miles, are often impos-
sible to fix. About the only requirement ordinarily demanded of
the site is that it be fairly continuously covered by remains of for-
mer occupation, and the general idea is that these pertain to a single
unit of settlement, which may be anything from a small camp to a
large city. Upon excavation, of course, it rarely turns out to be
that simple. The site is the basic unit for stratigraphic studies; it is
an almost certain assumption that cultural changes here can only be
the result of the passage of time. It is in effect the minimum opera-
tional unit of geographical space.
   A locality is a slightly larger spatial unit, varying in size from a
single site to a district of uncertain dimensions; it is generally not
larger than the space that might be occupied by a single community
or local group. It is hardly necessary to add that such limits as are
implied in this qualification have the variability found in the size
and settlement patterns of local groups from one sort of society
to another. In strictly archaeological terms, the locality is a geo-
graphical space small enough to permit the working assumption of
complete cultural homogeneity at any given time. This is not to
say that two or more discrete archaeological units might not, under
special conditions, simultaneously occupy the same locality, or
even the same site. For example, it has long been thought that
people carrying an intrusive Salado culture occupied certain sites
of the Gila-Salt region of south-central Arizona and coexisted


                                      METHOD AND THEORY     18
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
peacefully with the indigenous Hohokam populations.® If this is
the correct interpretation of the archaeology of the sites in ques-
tion, it reflects a rather uncommon situation.
   Examples of localities well known in the literature of American
archaeology are given below in connection with the discussion of
local sequences.
   A region is a considerably larger unit of geographical space usual-
ly determined by the vagaries of archaeological history. Quite
often it is simply the result of concentrated research by an individu-
al or group. Rightly or wrongly, such a region comes to be thought
of as having problems of its own that set it apart from other regions.
Regional terms are those most often found in the titles of archaeo-
logical papers of wider scope than site reports. Through constant
reiteration they become fixed in the literature and achieve a kind
of independent existence. Regions are not altogether without refer-
ence to the facts of geography, however. In stressing the accidental
factor in their formation, we must not overlook the tendency for
environmental considerations to assert themselves. In portions of
the New World where physical conditions of sharp diversity pre-
vail, archaeological regions are likely to coincide with minor
physiographic subdivisions. An excellent example is furnished by
the Glades region comprising the southernmost portion of the
Florida peninsula. Here the relationship between culture and a
highly characterized environment has been particularly close
throughout the entire span of the archaeological record.” Many
other similar examples could be cited, and the effect would be to
show that, of the various spatial units considered here, the region
offers the most favorable field for the detailed study of the rela-
tionships between culture and environment.
   In terms of the social aspect of culture—and here we must tread
warily—the region is roughly equivalent to the space that might
be occupied by a social unit larger than the community, a unit to
which we may with extreme trepidation apply the term “tribe” or
   6. Gladwin et al., 1937, p. 13.
   7. Goggin, 1949, pp. 28-32.



                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   19
“society.” This rough equation is based on what we know of Amer-
ican tribal distributions in early historic times and must be accorded
the same flexibility that we see in the size of those distributions.
The same caution is required in attempting to characterize the re-
gion in terms of the cultural aspect. Generally speaking, it is a
geographical space in which, at a given time, a high degree of cul-
tural homogeneity may be expected but not counted on. As we
shall see later, it is quite possible for more than one archaeological
phase to occupy a region at the same time.
   An area is a geographical unit very considerably larger than a
region; it corresponds roughly to the culture area of the ethnogra-
pher. Archaeological areas, like regions, have come into existence
by common consent, but the element of historical accident is re-
duced somewhat by the fact that many individuals and institutions
are likely to have been involved in their investigation. They tend
to coincide with major physiographic divisions. That the North
American Southwest, for example, has maintained its identity as
an archaeological area through more than a half-century of intensive
investigation is certainly due in large part to culture-environment
correlations of a positive nature. It is hardly necessary to add that,
although the area as defined here may have general physiographic
integrity, its limits are not so easy to draw on a map as those of
the smaller region. The southeastern United States is a case in
point; it has to be defined afresh every time anyone writes about it.
The problem is a familiar one in culture-area studies.
    It often happens that there are territories of geographical extent
intermediate between the region and the area which possess quali-
ties and degrees of cultural unity that give them a definite useful-
ness in archaeological or ethnographical studies. We refer to such
spatial units as subareas. A case in point might be taken with refer-
ence to Middle America (or Mesoamerica), which has been defined
quite specifically as a culture area.’ Embracing southern Mexico
and upper Central America, Mesoamerica has a distinctive culture
content and patterning; yet within this sphere of common cultural
   8. Kirchhoff, 1943.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY    2O
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
likenesses there are differences of traditionally recognized signifi-
cance. As but one example, the cultures of the lowland Maya coun-
try stand in sharp contrast to those that are adjacent to them. Their
art, architecture, ceramics, calendrics, and writing bind the Maya
lowland territory into an obvious unit of history. At the same time,
these Maya lowlands are too complex and diversified to be or-
ganized as a region, as that cultural-geographical term is defined
here. Workable Maya regions might be the Petén, the Usumacinta,
the Motagua-Chamelecon, or the several divisions of Yucatan, etc.
In consequence, the useful term “Maya lowlands” signifies a sub-
area.
                                   BASIC ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNITS
   The concepts about to be discussed under this heading were re-
ferred to in our original paper as “formal or content units’’ to ex-
press the fact that the element of content is more important in their
formulation than the spatial and temporal dimensions. Use of such
a term, however, suggests that they are different in kind from what
we later describe as “integrative” and “maximum” units, which is
not strictly true. It seems preferable, therefore, to call them simply
“basic units,’ which indeed they are.
   The component, a useful term which has achieved nearly univer-
sal currency in eastern North American archaeology, has been de-
fined by W. C. McKern as the manifestation of a given archaeologi-
cal “focus” at a specific site.® Strictly speaking, in the McKern
system, the component is not a taxonomic unit. In theory the basic
unit of classification is the focus, comprising a number of com-
ponents, and the same may be said of what we designate as a
“phase.” It is a working assumption that no phase worthy of the
   9. “The manifestation of any given focus at a specific site is termed a com-
ponent of that focus. This is in no sense an additional type of culture manifes-
tation, one of the five class types; rather, it is the focus as represented at a
site, and serves to distinguish between a site, which may bear evidence of sev-
eral cultural occupations, each foreign to the other, and a single specified
manifestation at a site. In many instances several components, each at cultural
variance with the other, may be found to occur at a single site’ (McKern,
1939, p. 308).


                               ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS        »|
name will fail to manifest itself in more than one component. In
practice, of course, it often happens that a phase is initially defined
on the strength of a single component, i.e., a site or a level within
a site, but the expectation is implicit that other components will be
found and the original definition modified accordingly. It will be
noted later, however, in the discussion of the social implications of
the phase, that it is theoretically and actually possible for a phase
to consist of a single component.
   The phase is, in our opinion, the practicable and intelligible unit
of archaeological study. Choice of the term accords with prevailing
usage in a preponderance of New World areas, including the South-
west, most of South America, and all of Middle America. Kidder
has defined the phase in the following terms: “‘A cultural complex
possessing traits sufficiently characteristic to distinguish it for pur-
poses of preliminary archaeological classification, from earlier and
later manifestations of the cultural development of which it formed
a part, and from other contemporaneous complexes.’’!°
   Like Kidder, we prefer “phase” to the approximately equiva-
lent “focus”? because of its stronger temporal implication. The
emphasis cannot be placed entirely on time, however. Modifying
Kidder’s definition slightly, we would prefer to describe the con-
cept as an archaeological unit possessing traits sufficiently characteristic
to distinguish it from all other units similarly conceived, whether of the
same or other cultures or civilizations, spatially limited to the order of
magnitude of a locality or region and chronologically limited to a rela-
tively brief interval of time. It must be acknowledged that this defini-
tion gives a specious impression of uniformity. It would be fine if
phases could be standardized as to the amount of space and time
they occupy. Unfortunately, there are so many variable conditions
entering into the formulation that it is neither possible nor desirable
to define the scope except within rather broad limits. A phase may
be anything from a thin level in a site reflecting no more than a brief
encampment to a prolonged occupation of a large number of sites
distributed over a region of very elastic proportions.
   10. Kidder, Jennings, and Shook, 1946, p. 9.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY     2?
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
   It will be noted that Kidder’s definition of phase lays more em-
phasis on cultural continuity than ours, since it implies necessary
relations to what goes before and what comes after. We have freed
it of this requirement to provide for the many instances in which
we simply do not know what goes before or comes after, or for
those less frequent occasions when a new phase appears as an in-
trusion without apparent relationship to any precedent continuity.
In any case, whether as an instance of continuity or of discontinuity,
the phase most often appears as one member of a series that will be
referred to hereinafter as a “local” or “regional sequence.” These
terms will be defined presently, but let us first examine a little more
closely the spatial and temporal implications of this basic archaeo-
logical unit.
   We have already alluded briefly to the impossibility of close de-
limitation of the phase in respect to the dimensions of time and
space. It may help to clarify the problem to consider it in relation
to various levels of cultural development. In Part II of this book we
will describe a developmental scheme for New World archaeology
with five hypothetical stages: Lithic, Archaic, Formative, Classic,
and Postclassic. It is not necessary to anticipate the definitions of
these stages to point out here that the spatial and temporal dimen-
sions of phases are not likely to be the same on all stages. For ex-
ample, in the Lithic stage, in which a migratory, hunting-gathering
economy is postulated, phases can be expected to occupy more
geographical space than in the sedentary Formative stage. There 1s
no regular reduction from stage to stage, however, in the Classic
and Postclassic stages the spatial dimensions of phases may also be
larger than in the Formative but. for a different reason: the socio-
political groups are larger. Temporal dimensions, on the other
hand, may actually exhibit a regular diminution from stage to stage,
if the commonly held assumption is correct that the rate of cultural
change accelerates with increased advancement and complexity.
Without elaborating this point or further refining the definition,
we wish simply to emphasize that the concept of phase has no ap-
propriate scale independent of the cultural situation in which it is


                         ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   Ms 3
applied. This is not so great a deficiency as might appear. Looked
at internally, so to speak, phases may have very considerable and
highly variable spatial and temporal dimensions; looked at from
the total range of New World culture-history, they are very small
quantities indeed, and it is from this point of view that they assume
a sort of rough equivalence, enabling us to use the concept of phase
as an operational tool regardless of the developmental stage in-
volved.
  As typological and stratigraphic analyses become more refined,
it often becomes desirable to subdivide phases into smaller (primari-
ly temporal) units, and it seems best to regard these as subphases
and to give them numbers instead of names. It also sometimes hap-
pens that two or more phases in the same locality or region, origi-
nally set up as independent units, subsequently appear to be more
intelligible as subphases of a single unit, though they continue to be
operationally useful in sequences and area correlations. It is clearly
impossible to lay down any precise rules governing the formation
of subphases. In general, their use seems appropriate in cases where
differences apply only to a few specific items of content or where
such differences are expressible only in variations in frequency. In
other words, if it is impossible to present a sensible account of the
culture of a unit except in terms of what went before or came after,
it is probably better regarded as a subphase. It is hardly necessary
to add that subphases and components are entirely different kinds
of subdivisions of the phase.

                                            TEMPORAL     SERIES

   A local sequence in its purest form is a series of components found
in vertical stratigraphic succession in a single site. It may also, how-
ever, be a composite series made by combining shorter stratigraphic
“runs” from various portions of a site or from several sites within
a locality, or it may be derived from seriating components by vari-
ous means without benefit of stratigraphy at all. However ob-
tained, the local sequence has this important feature: it is local.
The spatial dimension, by definition, is small enough to permit the


                                     METHOD AND THEORY     24
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
working assumption that differences between components reflect
differences in time.
   We have already referred to the fact that members of a local se-
quence, though technically regarded as components, are often re-
ferred to as phases on the ground that they are local manifestations
of the larger units and, also, that it is theoretically possible for a
phase to be represented by a single component. The local sequence
may, therefore, be defined as a chronological series of components,
phases, or subphases, within the geographical limits of a locality as de-
fined in this study.
   Local sequences, which are the very stuff of archaeology,
abound. A famous example of the kind of sequence based upon a
single site is at the ceremonial Maya center of Uaxactun, in the
Guatemalan Petén. The Uaxacttin sequence was determined by
combinations of “dirt” and architectural stratigraphy revealed in
long and intensive excavations." The sequence runs the gamut of
the Middle American Formative and Classic stages and probably
represents some two thousand years of more or less continuous
human occupation. Continuity throughout all phases of the sequence
is provided by ceramics which, in spite of several marked innova-
tions, show a recognizable local evolution. The earliest Formative
stage phases are the Mamom and Chicanel, in that order, and these
are followed by Matzanel, generally considered Proto-Classic.
The Classic phases, well represented in temple and palace construc-
tion, are the Izakol and Tepeu. R. E. Smith, who defined and
named these phases, has recently subdivided the latter two into
subphases: Tzakol 1, 2, 3, and Tepeu 1, 2, 3.% A comparable, but
slightly more complex, local sequence is the one at Kaminaljuyu in
the Guatemalan highlands, near Guatemala City. This is an exten-
sive ceremonial and dwelling center, and a long Formative-through-
Classic sequence of Maya occupation and building was worked out
  11. Ricketson and Ricketson, 1937; A. L. Smith, 1950.
  12. R. E. Smith, 1955, pp. 21-25.


                           ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   25
here by the cross-matching of numerous mound, tomb, and refuse
excavations over a very large site zone.’
   Kroeber’s pioneer seriation of seventeen Zufii ruins by means of
surface pottery alone was limited to sites that could be reached in
an hour’s walk from the modern pueblo. This classic study thus
affords a striking illustration of the local sequence and the advan-
tages of keeping it local. “Particularly does the necessity of con-
centration apply geographically. A promising site here and another
a hundred miles away may show striking differences in innumer-
able respects. But in the present chaos of knowledge who can say
which of these differences are due to age and which to locality
and environment?’’!4
   We have spoken of local sequences built up by comparing stra-
tigraphies and seriations from a number of sites within a relatively
small, circumscribed territory. The Vira Valley, on the north
coast of Peru, is an example. The valley is about fifteen miles
long and three miles wide at its widest point. In prehistoric times
it was densely occupied. Although the valley is not a single site, or
site zone, there are no contemporaneous cultural differences from
one part of Viru to another. Its ceramic and architectural series
are, indeed, local. Quite likely, when more sequential information
is available from neighboring north coast valleys, it will be seen
that Vird joins conveniently with several others to form a regional
sequence. Such a regional sequence is suggested by the frequent ref-
erences to the “North Coast” on Peruvian culture sequence charts,!®
though it must be pointed out that the regional integrity of the
Peruvian “‘North Coast” is still to be demonstrated.

    A regional sequence is not merely a local sequence with larger spa-
tial dimensions. The difference can best be approached from the
   13. Kidder, Jennings, and Shook, 1946; Shook, 1951; Shook and Kidder,
1952.
   14. Kroeber, 1916, p. 21.
   15. Ford and Willey, 1949; W. C. Bennett, 1950; Strong and Evans, 1952;
Willey, 1953c; Collier, 1955.
   16. Bennett and Bird, 1949, p. 112.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY     26
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
operational standpoint. In the normal extension of archaeological
information, components, subphases, phases, and local sequences
multiply, and questions of wider relationships come to the fore.
Ideally, the archaeologists of a region come together in a harmoni-
ous session where a careful matching of local sequences produces a
new sequence of larger scope. Actually this happy event occurs but
rarely. What more often happens is that phases and local sequences
gain in scope by a sort of osmosis. They flow outward, so to speak,
often propelled by their originators, uniting to themselves their
weaker correlates over a widening circle. The process is necessarily
accompanied by a progressive generalization of definition until
much of their original usefulness to research is impaired.
   Nevertheless, we will assume for the sake of argument that local
sequences remain local and that regional sequences are the result of
correlating them—not combining them, be it noted, because in the
process the original formulations are retailored to fit the wider spa-
tial and (sometimes) deeper temporal dimensions. The phase now
appears in its widest practicable extension and at its farthest remove
from the primary data; at any rate, it is our contention that the con-
cept of phase cannot safely be extended beyond the limits here de-
scribed. With these operational conditions in mind, we may define
the regional sequence as a chronological series of phases or subphases
within the geographical limits of a region as defined in this study.
   One of the firmest sequences in North American archaeology is
that established by James A. Ford and his associates in the south-
ern portion of the Mississippi alluvial valley, centering approxi-
mately about the mouth of the Red River in Louisiana.!’ This is an
instructive example in which stratigraphy in a small number of
closely related sites at the center (Marksville locality) and seriation
of a large number of sites extending out from the center have been
skilfully combined in a regional sequence of great strength but
sufficient flexibility to permit the incorporation of new formula-
tions from time to time. The unusual vigor of the “Lower Valley”
  17. Ford, 1936; Ford and Willey, 1940, 1941; Ford and Quimby,     1945;
Quimby,   1942, 1951; Ford, 1951, 1952.




                            ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   p7
sequence is manifested by a tendency to dominate in correlations
with other sequences in neighboring regions, but it is important to
point out that its strength derives from the hard core of stratigraphy
at the center. If there is any valid criticism of this sequence, it is
that it tends to take in too much territory. Workers in the delta of
the Mississippi and adjacent coastal regions, for example, have
tried to fit their data into it, not without considerable strain, which
is scarcely to be wondered at, considering the sharp environmental
differences involved in such an extension.!® This is a case of the
“osmotic” tendency noted above. It also exemplifies another
source of difficulty, to wit, the confusion that inheres in practically
all archaeological sequence formulations between culture and
chronology. As soon as we begin to rank cultural phases in order of
time, they tend to become “periods.” As periods, of course, they
are theoretically not spatially limited; they may be extended in-
definitely. If the Marksville phase of the Lower Valley sequence is
merely the interval between points E and F on a continuous time
band (as in Ford’s recent writings), then anything that can be es-
tablished as lying within that interval, in the delta, or anywhere
else for that matter, can also be called Marksville. The catch is
that Marksville is and will remain more than a mere chronological
period. The interval marked off by points E and F is determined
by cultural criteria in the first instance; the identification of other
material as belonging to that interval (in the absence of independent
calendrical dating) is determined by those same cultural criteria.
When the latter are not sufficiently in conformity with the cultural
criteria for comfortable identification, it is a sure sign that the
limits of the particular phase in question, either spatial or tem-
poral or both, have been exceeded. We shall have considerably
more to say about this ever present problem in the sections devoted
to area syntheses.
   Another strong regional sequence, though expressed largely in
ceramics, is exemplified by the Petén region of the central part of
the lowland Maya subarea. The key local sequence is that at
  18. McIntire, 1954.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY     28
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
Uaxactun, already referred to, but stratigraphies at Benque Viejo
and San José can be correlated with ease.!® There are also indica-
tions from other sites in the same general vicinity, in both Guatema-
la and British Honduras, that ceramic types and their sequences
are in close harmony. In sum, an archaeological region of at least
fifty miles in diameter, and probably considerably larger, can be
established around Uaxactin, and the local sequence at that center
can be expanded into an equally valid sequence for the region.
   Before we leave the subject, it may be well to emphasize the
artificiality of the relationship between phase and region in a re-
gional sequence. We have said that the maximum practicable spa-
tial dimension of the phase is comparable to that of the region, but
no actual geographical coextension is implied. Such a one-to-one
relationship may occur fortuitously, because it often happens that a
region comes into existence on the heels of a phase, so to speak;
but there is no reason to expect that earlier or later phases will also
coincide with that region. In fact, the chances are that they will not
do so. As an example, there is a neat coincidence of region and
phase on the Florida Gulf Coast at the time of the Weeden Island
phase. The latter is relatively uniform in its entire extent from the
vicinity of Pensacola (if not farther west) south and east to
Charlotte Harbor below Tampa Bay.”® This correlation breaks
down, however, if we move either backward or forward in time.
On an earlier level, the Santa Rosa-Swift Creek phase seems much
more restricted in its distribution, and at a later time the old Wee-
den Island region is divided between the Fort Walton phase in the
north and the Safety Harbor phase in the south.
                                          INTEGRATIVE UNITS
   In our first paper we designated the large-scale unit concepts
horizon and tradition as “integrative devices,” but we now prefer
to call them “units” in tardy realization of the fact that they are not
radically different in kind from other unit concepts described in
   19. Thompson, 1939, 1940.
  20. Willey, 1949, chap. vi.



                           ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS   29
this study but, rather, different in the uses to which they are put.
We call them “‘integrative” because, in our opinion, they constitute
the most practicable means for effecting culture-historical inte-
gration on a geographical scale larger than that of the region. They
are not the only means, however, and, before we describe them
further, it will be necessary to consider the problem of large-scale
integration in more general terms.
   One good result of our first presentation of the nomenclature
advocated here was a paper by Irving Rouse* in which, and in
subsequent correspondence with the writers, he looks with favor
on our basic units (component and phase) and their use in local
and regional sequences but expresses some misgivings in regard to
these larger integrative units (horizon and tradition) and the
way we proposed to use them. Rouse maintains that it is necessary
to distinguish three “levels of interpretation” and three correspond-
ing methods of correlating phases in large-scale area comparisons:
“descriptive,” “distributional,” and “genetic.” The first has to do
with formal comparisons of the sort employed in the McKern
taxonomic system and does not apply to the problem of culture-
historical integration as we understand it. His “distributional cor-
relation”’ is a strictly spatial-temporal ordering of phases in which
the unifying criteria are theoretically independent and extracultur-
al—nothing more or less than position in geographical space and
time—in contrast to his “genetic correlation,’ which does not
scruple to use culturally determined criteria. We agree that our in-
tegrative units operate mainly, if not entirely, on Rouse’s genetic
level of interpretation. He defines “genetic” very broadly, apply-
ing it, if we understand him correctly, to any relationship between
discrete units resulting from some form of historical contact. We
prefer “integrative,” which we have been using in practically the
same sense, because it carries no implications of phylogeny. This
is a minor verbal difference, but, when it comes to a general evalua-
tion of the role of genetic or integrative concepts in archaeology,
  21. Rouse, 1955.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY    30
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
we find ourselves in disagreement. Rouse takes what seems to us
an overcautious view:
   For these reasons, I would suggest that the genetic approach is not in
itself an efficient method of ordering the phases, i.e. of making broad-scale
syntheses of cultural relationships, although it may be useful as a check
upon syntheses established by other means. It would seem prudent to make
one’s basic synthesis by means of descriptive or distributional correlation
and then to point out the genetic relationships only in the instances where
sufficient data are available and they indicate that this type of relationship
has occurred.”
   In our view, the only synthesis worthy of the name is a culture-
historical synthesis. We have Rouse’s own word for it that descrip-
tive and distributional correlations tell us nothing about cultural or
historical relationships; the first tells us whether cultures are like
or unlike, the second places them in space and time. How are we to
achieve by either or both of these means a “broad-scale synthesis
of cultural relationships”? It would seem axiomatic that cultural
relationships can be revealed and expressed only by means of inte-
grative concepts that are culturally determined. This may be un-
fortunate and is certainly productive of circular reasoning, as Rouse
points out, but we do not see how it can be helped. The culturally
determined integrative units that we are about to consider are ad-
mittedly inefficient and hard to handle, but they constitute, in our
opinion, the principal means for the realization of what we have
repeatedly defined as archaeology’s primary task—culture-historical
integration.

   Failure in our original paper to distinguish between the terms
horizon and horizon style, which we used interchangeably, drew
some well-merited criticism, thanks to which we here make that
distinction and offer what we hope is a more sensible discussion of
the whole subject.
   The horizon-style concept, introduced into Andean archaeology
by Max Uhle** and later formalized by A. L. Kroeber,”* has amply
   22. Rouse, 1955, pp. 719-20.
   23. Uhle, 1913.                       24. Kroeber, 1944, pp. 108-11.


                              ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   31
proved its utility in that area. It differs from other unit concepts
described in this study in that the content is of a limited and special-
ized nature and the spatial and temporal dimensions are combined
in very unequal proportions. In theory, a horizon style, as the
name implies, occupies a great deal of space but very little time.
It may be roughly defined as a specialized cultural continuum
represented by the wide distribution of a recognizable art style. On
the assumption of historical uniqueness of stylistic pattern, coupled
with the further assumption that styles normally change with con-
siderable rapidity, the temporal dimension is theoretically reduced
to a point where the horizon style becomes useful in equating
phases or larger units of culture in time that are widely separated
in space. As one of the present authors has already observed: “The
horizon styles are the horizontal stringers by which the upright
columns of specialized regional development are tied together in
the time chart.”
   Thus the horizon style is one culturally determined means of
establishing a horizon, but the latter must be defined in broader
terms. This is the step we neglected to take in our first paper. The
horizon-style concept has a limited application, since it presupposes
a level of aesthetic development that many archaeological cultures
in the New World failed to reach. It is conceivable, however, that
other kinds of cultural data might serve equally well to mark
horizons, although this is a proposition that has not been sufficiently
investigated. We have in mind such items as highly specialized
artifact types, widely traded objects, new      technologies, unusual
modes of burial, or peculiar ritual assemblages—in other words,
any kind of archaeological evidence that indicates a rapid spread
of new ideas over a wide geographic space.
  Rouse recommends a stricter definition of the horizon. In a letter
to the authors, written subsequently to his paper from which we
have just quoted, he makes it clear that his conception of the hori-
zon is on his distributional level and operates ideally with inde-
pendent extracultural dating criteria, whereas ours, he points out,
  25. Willey, 1945a, p. 55.



                                    METHOD AND THEORY     3>
                              IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
is on the genetic level and is therefore unsuitable for use in distribu-
tional correlations and should be called by another name. If we
could be convinced that it is possible at all times to maintain a clear
cut distinction between distributional and genetic methods of corre-
lation, we would be inclined to accept this suggestion. However, it
seems to us that certain horizon styles—or horizons, to use the
 more inclusive term—can be looked upon as both distributional
 and genetic in Rouse’s terminology. For example, the presence of
 Southern Cult horizon-style elements in various far-flung cultures
 of the southeastern United States links those cultures genetically,
 in the very broad sense that they reflect some kind of contact, but
 the cultures so linked are quite different from one another and,
 so far as we can see, have very different genetic relationships in
 all other respects. Though the genetic implications cannot be
 ignored, the primary concern of the archaeologist with the South-
 ern Cult style is often purely distributional: he thinks of it as a
 horizon marker whose appearance in various regional sequences is
 useful in cross-dating. However, we are prepared to waive this
 point and agree that it is best to use only independent, extracultural
 dating in distributional correlations or, as we call them here, area
 chronologies. We adhere, therefore, to our original notion of the
 horizon, not quite agreeing that it cannot be used for purely tem-
 poral correlations, but freely admitting its kinship with the concept
_of tradition on the genetic level of interpretation. The horizon,
 then, may be defined as a primarily spatial continuity represented by
 cultural traits and assemblages whose nature and mode of occurrence
 permit the assumption of a broad and rapid spread. Vhe archaeological
 units linked by a horizon are thus assumed to be approximately
 contemporaneous. The word is italicized because it is recognized
 that horizons based on cultural criteria unsupported by independent
 dating may have considerable temporal depth and that the assumed

    26. We trust that the reference to Rouse’s “levels of interpretation’’ is not
 producing confusion in respect to our “‘levels of organization” as described in
 the introductory section of this study. All his levels fall within the definition
 of our descriptive level.



                               ARCHAEOLOGICAL    UNIT   CONCEPTS    33
correlation is not necessarily horizontal but may, and probably
does, have a “‘slope’”’ depending on the amount of time required for
the spread of the elements used as horizon markers. Notwithstand-
ing these limitations, the horizon is an invaluable integrative unit
for the investigation and expression of external relationships over
wide geographical areas. If we have agreed that it is of dubious
value in establishing purely temporal equations, it is merely to
avoid blurring the useful distinction between Rouse’s distributional
and genetic methods of correlation in the formation of area chronol-
ogies, a point we shall return to later.
   Tradition is another integrative concept that seems to have origi-
nated in South American archaeology. A familiar, not to say indis-
pensable, word in any historical context, “tradition” has of late
acquired a special meaning in archaeology, or rather a number of
meanings, for it is still in an early stage of formulation and does not
mean the same thing to all who use it. Owing to the fact that the
concept is designated by a term that has long been used in archaeo-
logical writings, it is difficult to say just when it began to be a
methodological tool. In the Andean area it came into use as a
counterpoise to the horizon style and was at first applied only to
pottery. Once it became apparent that the utility of the horizon
style depended upon the combination of broad spatial and short
temporal dimensions, it was clear that some other formulation was
needed to express a different kind of ceramic unity in which these
proportions were reversed. This gave rise to the term “pottery
tradition,” certainly not a verbal innovation, but perhaps the first
use of the term “‘tradition” with a definite methodological sense.
   The relationship of the two concepts, horizon style and pottery
tradition, proved to be so important in Peruvian archaeology that
one of us may be permitted to repeat himself, as follows:
   These speculations concerning the relationships of the later White-on-
red styles to the earlier component styles of the White-on-red horizon lead
us to wonder if there are not other widely inclusive historical units of an
order different from that of the horizon style. It appears certain that the
Peruvian Andes and coast were a unified culture area in that the important



                                      METHOD AND THEORY      34
                                IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
culture developments were essentially local and basically inter-related for
at least a thousand years. This fundamental cultural unity justifies seeing
ceramic developments in terms of long-time traditions as well as coeval
phenomena. The concept of a pottery tradition, as used here, includes
broad descriptive categories of ceramic decoration which undoubtedly
have value in expressing historical relationships when the relationships are
confined to the geographical boundaries of Peruvian-Andean cultures. The
pottery tradition lacks the specific quality of the localized pottery style,
and it differs from the horizon style in that it is not an integration of artistic
elements which has been widely diffused at a given time period. A pottery
tradition comprises a line, or a number of lines, of pottery development
through time within the confines of a certain technique or decorative con-
stant. In successive time periods through which the history of ceramic de-
velopment can be traced, certain styles arose within the tradition. Trans-
mission of some of these styles during particular periods resulted in the
formation of a horizon style, other styles in the continuum of the tradition
remained strictly localized. The distinction between a horizon style and a
pottery tradition should be kept in mind as the two are opposable concepts
in archaeological reconstruction.?’

   Shortly after this idea of tradition had first been injected into
Peruvian studies, Wendell Bennett enlarged the concept very con-
siderably under the name “‘area co-tradition.” This formulation he
defined as ‘‘the over-all unit of cultural history of an area within
which the component cultures have been inter-related over a period
of time.’’”? The emphasis implied in the ‘“‘co-” is on the linkage of
whole cultures, each with its own history and persistent traditions,
and on the area in which this linkage takes place. Thus the area
co-tradition is a vast enlargement over the simple tradition in terms
of content, since it is no longer confined to a single technological
development but becomes a broad coalescent cultural continuum.
At the same time, it introduces a restriction in that stable geo-
graphical boundaries are implied.
   The subsequent history of the area co-tradition and the contro-
versies that grew out of attempts to apply it in other areas”® need

    27. Willey, 1945a, p. 53.             28. W.C. Bennett, 1948, p. 1.
   29. Martin and Rinaldo, 1951; Willey, 19534, pp. 373-74; Rouse, 1954;
Cotter, 1954.



                                ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS    35
not detain us, since we are not proposing to incorporate the con-
cept in the nomenclature described here.
   About the same time that the Peruvianists were beginning to talk
about pottery traditions, McGregor introduced the term into the
archaeology of the Southwest with somewhat different connota-
tions. He defined tradition very broadly as “more or less deeply
rooted human characteristics—persistent attitudes or ways of do-
ing things—which are passed on from one generation to another,’’*
thus emphasizing the non-material and configurational aspects of
traditions and the social and behavioral continuities reflected in
their persistence. He maintained that characteristic attitudes can
be inferred from material traits and that the determination of tra-
ditions (as defined by him) is not only possible but essential in
making broad archaeological comparisons. McGregor’s traditions
are for the most part technologically oriented: house types, pottery,
ground stone, etc.; he merely advocates that they be formulated in
terms of the preferences and attitudes they reflect. There is nothing
revolutionary in this, but it is a point of view that cannot be too
often stated.
   The first significant use of the tradition concept in eastern North
American studies, so far as the authors are aware, was by John
Goggin, whose definition follows:
    My concept of Florida cultural traditions is similar in theory but more
inclusive in content than a ceramic tradition. A cultural tradition is a dis-
tinctive way of life, reflected in various aspects of the culture; perhaps ex-
tending through some period of time and exhibiting normal internal cultural
changes, but nevertheless throughout this period showing a basic consistent
unity. In the whole history of a tradition certain persistent themes domi-
nate the life of the people. These give distinctiveness to the configura-
tions.

   Goggin recognizes ten cultural traditions in Florida archaeology,
allowing to them a great deal of latitude in spatial and temporal di-
mensions. It seems to us that here he has discovered the outstand-
   30. McGregor,   1950. (Paper submitted in 1946.)
   31. Goggin, 1949, p. 17.



                                       METHOD AND THEORY        36
                                 IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
ing merit of the tradition as a methodological tool, namely, its
flexibility. Goggin also, rather more than others who have used the
concept, emphasizes the importance of environmental factors in
the shaping and conserving of traditions. Here again he has put his
finger on another virtue of the concept. It offers a most effective
means for giving expression to culture-environment correlations.
   From the examples just given, it may be seen that the concept
of tradition has been expanded considerably since its first use in
Peruvian archaeology. In our original paper we expressed satisfac-
tion with this growth and gave a definition of our own that was as
broad as, if not broader than, any previous ones. It may be asked,
however, whether by such radical expansion the tradition is not
deprived of some of its utility as an integrative unit. In the blunt-
ing that is inseparable from increased generalization it tends to lose
its primary significance of long temporal continuity as a counter-
poise to the broad spatial continuity represented by the horizon.
Furthermore,   since the publication of our first paper, we have
come to realize that, for expressing the maximum segmentation of
culture-history, the old standbys “culture” and “‘civilization” will
not be easily supplanted by such cumbersome expressions as “full
cultural tradition.’”’ We are therefore now proposing a return to
something like the original meaning of tradition in Peruvian ar-
chaeology, with emphasis put back on single technologies or other
unified systems of forms rather than on whole cultures. ‘The tradi-
tion thereby takes its former place as a means to integration, with
the culture or civilization standing as the product of integration.
Our first definition is accordingly amended to read: an archaeological
tradition is a (primarily) temporal continuity represented by persistent
configurations in single technologies or other systems of related forms.
The lack of specification in respect to the spatial dimension may be
supplied by the use of qualifying terms, as in “regional tradition,”
“areal tradition,” and so on.
   This definition of tradition takes us not quite all the way back to
the original pottery tradition of Peruvian archaeology. Some expan-
sion is left, in that traditions may be based on more complex sys-


                          ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   37
tems of forms than that represented by a single technology. We
have in mind something like the functionally interrelated trait com-
plexes of the ethnographer. About the same amount of expansion
is involved in substituting the concept of horizon for the horizon
style. The working relationship between horizon and tradition,
therefore, remains the same as between horizon style and pottery
tradition in the passage quoted above (pp. 34-35).
   After making the decision to cut back the tradition, as outlined
above, we received a manuscript copy of the report on the Society
for American Archaeology’s seminar on “Cultural Stability” held
at Ann Arbor in August, 1955. At this meeting the concept of
tradition was thoroughly anatomized. In defining it as “a socially
transmitted form unit (or series of systematically related units)
which persists in time,” the conferees were careful to avoid any
qualifications as to size, either in terms of content or in spatial and
temporal dimensions, beyond the obvious implication of long dura-
tion in the clause “which persists in time.’’ They were evidently
prepared to think of “whole cultural traditions,”’ but most of the
discussion, and nearly all the examples, applied to traditions of less
than whole cultural scope. Our impression is that such limitation
made the tradition a more useful tool in their investigation of cul-
tural stability. ‘““Thus, although it is logically necessary to entertain
the possibility of traditions ranging from the smallest to the largest,
it is also important to recognize that the cultural and historical
significance of a tradition diminishes toward either size extreme.”’”
   The reference in the Ann Arbor definition to social transmittal
serves to emphasize the fact that traditions operate on Rouse’s
genetic level of interpretation, perhaps even more surely than hori-
zons. Thus, if we may express the reciprocating relationship be-
tween them without too flagrant a confusion of categories, the
tradition gives depth, while the horizon gives breadth, to the genetic
structure of culture-historical relationships on a broad geographic
scale.
  In seeking to polarize such essentially fluid concepts as horizon
  32. Haury et al., 1956, p. 39.



                                         METHOD AND THEORY   38
                                   IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
and tradition, we have unavoidably overstressed their salient fea-
tures and produced an impression of profound difference between
them that may be misleading. Looked at from the broader view of
total archaeological method, horizon and tradition are not really
very different. Both are unit concepts in the sense that their formu-
lation involves the combination of cultural data and spatial-tem-
poral dimensions. They differ considerably in the nature of the
cultural data and, theoretically, in the quantities and proportions of
the spatial and temporal dimensions; we have stated with tiresome
repetition what those differences are supposed to be, but in practice
such standards are difficult to apply. Our first apprehension of a
major archaeological continuity, as of the proverbial elephant in the
dark, is usually so‘tenuous that we do not know what it is or what
to call it. The same continuity may be viewed by one investigator
as a tradition, by another as a horizon. Even when the outlines are
fairly clear, it may still be thought of either way, depending on the
problem under consideration.      For   example,     Hopewellian   zoned
rocker-stamped pottery, when looked at from the standpoint of its
geographic extension in the eastern United States, may be quite
legitimately thought of as a horizon phenomenon; on the other
hand, when the interest is centered on the course of its develop-
ment through successive phases in a particular region, it may
equally well be regarded as a tradition. This is perhaps an extreme
example of the fluidity we have praised in describing these integra-
tive concepts.
   There remains but to mention briefly the useful but largely neg-
lected concept climax. In reference to the integrative units just de-
scribed, the climax may be defined as the type or types of maximum
intensity and individuality of an archaeological horizon or tradition.
This is necessarily a value judgment, but only in relation to the
horizon or tradition involved. In whole cultural terms the climax
becomes the phase or phases of maximum intensity and individuality
of a culture or civilization. So far as possible, in this wider context,
the emphasis should be multilinear, not confined to exquisite de-
velopments in aesthetics. Such developments may conceivably take


                          ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS   39
place in periods of low cultural intensity. Theoretically, there
should be a climax in every horizon, tradition, culture, or civiliza-
tion, on all stages of development. Our choice of the term “classic”
—which means about the same thing—to denote the climactic stage
of New World culture is by no means intended to preclude its use
in more humble contexts. Any horizon or tradition may have its
classic type, as any culture or civilization may have its classic
phase. The word makes equal sense whether we are talking about
the classic black stirrup-mouth jar of the Chavin horizon, the
classic Folsom point of the fluted-point tradition, the classic Pueblo
III phase of the San Juan Anasazi culture, or the classic stage of
New World culture as a whole.

                     OPERATIONAL    RELATIONSHIPS   OF BASIC

                                    AND   INTEGRATIVE    UNITS

   Before we go on to a consideration of large-scale area schemes
and maximum archaeological units, it may be well to summarize
briefly the working relationships between the unit concepts so far
described, because these constitute, in our opinion, the most effec-
tive apparatus for the integration of the primary archaeological
data. These relationships are crudely diagramed in Figure 1, which
is designed to show the difference between the basic units, com-
ponent and phase, and the integrative units, horizon and tradition,
not in their nature as archaeological units but in the way they oper-
ate in large-scale integration. The relationships in the component-
phase system are predominantly formal and static; those in the
horizon-tradition system are fluid and historical or, as Rouse would
say, genetic. In the first pair, the spatial and temporal dimensions
that inhere in all archaeological unit concepts are, in this larger
context, reduced to negligibility. This is what permits us to refer
to the phase as the “manageable” unit of archaeological study. It
can be manipulated in large-scale area schemes as though its internal
dimensions were non-existent.
   Up to this point most archaeologists would probably go along,
though many, depending on the areas in which they have worked,


                                     METHOD AND THEORY     40
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
would prefer to use other terms in place of “phase.” Where our
point of view differs is in the conviction that the phase, as defined
in these pages, is the largest archaeological unit that can be so
manipulated. Our later discussion of some of the characteristics
of the maximum units, culture and civilization, we need anticipate

                                    iT
                                     '
                                     '
                                     '
                                     !
                                     \
                                     \
                                     '
                                     '
                                     '
                                     \




                                    !
                                    '
                                    \
                                    '
                                    1
                                    |
                                    '
                                    '
                                    \
                                    |
                                    T
                                                C= Component
                                                P= Phase
                                              TT=  Tradition
                                              HH = Horizon
    Fic. 1.—Diagrammatic   integration of components,    phase,   horizon,   and
tradition.


here only to the extent of pointing out that these are in a very real
sense the ends, not the means, of culture-historical integration.
Their vastly greater internal spatial and temporal dimensions, par-
ticularly the latter, render them completely unmanageable as units
of study in both formal and spatial-temporal comparisons. Forms
are fluid, changing constantly through space and time; with ex-
pansion of these dimensions, the changes in forms within the unit


                            ARCHAEOLOGICAL   UNIT   CONCEPTS      4]
are such that the unit can only be described in progressively more
general terms—the familiar phenomenon of shorter trait lists for
larger taxonomic subdivisions. For example, at the Woodland Con-
ference   in 1941,%* eastern   North   American   archaeologists   laid
down a formal definition of the Woodland cultural pattern couched
in such general terms that, as later discovered, but for the inclusion
of pottery, it fitted the Archaic pattern just as well.** In a similar
manner, temporal relationships between large units become im-
possible to describe through excess of internal time dimensions and
the consequent possibilities of overlap. Failure to recognize this
is responsible for many fictitious problems. The Adena-Hopewell
problem, a long-standing subject of debate, might be cited as an
example. The sequential arrangement of these two cultures in the
Ohio Valley and their correlation with other units of comparable
dimensions in eastern North America became faintly ridiculous
when radiocarbon dates indicated a probable overlap of several
centuries in their time spans. This is not to maintain that spatial
and temporal relationships of cultures and civilizations are not
legitimate problems for the archaeologist, but to point out simply
that in this wider arena the variables of space and time are more
difficult to control. Such questions certainly cannot be investigated
and expressed by the crude diagrammatic methods ordinarily em-
ployed in large-scale area schemes.
    To return to the cabalistic diagram in Figure 1: if it be granted
that the component-phase system operates mainly with relation-
ships of a formal nature, it will certainly be allowed that horizons
and traditions belong to a different system—a system in which the
element of formal content is reduced in importance, while the vari-
ables of space and time have the dominant roles. The real point,
however, is not how like or unlike these two pairs of units may be,
conceptually or operationally, but that there is no built-in taxonom-
ic relationship between them. Components and phases enter into
horizons and traditions; their external relationships are expressed
   33. Woodland Conference, 1943.
   34. Sears, 1948.



                                     METHOD AND THEORY   4)
                               IN AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
by these units, but they are not combined to form them. In fact, the
opposite is more nearly the case. A single phase may conceivably
enter into more than one horizon. For example, the Esperanza phase
in the highland Maya sequence at Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala, par-
ticipates in both the basal-flanged bowl horizon and the Teotihua-
can tripod-jar horizon.** The basal-flanged bowl, of presumably
lowland Maya inspiration, is a widespread horizon marker for the
period of the Early Classic cultures in southern Middle America.
The tripod cylinder jar, deriving from Teotihuacan about the same
time, has an even more extensive distribution and imitation. As for
traditions, there is certainly no question that a number of these may,
and usually do, converge in a single phase. This is clearly seen, for
example, in the Mochica phase of the north coast of Peru. Mochica
red-and-white modeled pottery represents a convergence of the old
Cupisnique, or north Peruvian Plastic and Incised, traditions, with
the north Peruvian White-on-red tradition that first made its ap-
pearance in the Salinar phase.* In sum, the effectiveness of this
apparatus, as we see it, depends on the free interplay of basic and
integrative units without rigid limitations of a systematic nature.
   35. Kidder, Jennings, and Shook, 1946, p. 250.
   36. Willey, 19454.




                            ARCHAEOLOGICAL UNIT CONCEPTS   43
