Chapter 4


Things Depend on Humans


My image here is of getting on a plane, sitting in my seat, and then being told of a delay in departure because of metal fatigue or electrical faults. Maintenance men in yellow coats, electricians, engineers start walking up and down the aisle, disappearing into the hidden recesses of the plane. The men cannot fix the fault and so in the end I am allowed off the plane into the ensuing chaos. What has been set in motion by the plane’s fatigue is the large elaborate network of people and things that care for the plane and keep it from causing accident and death. There are part manufacturers and part distributors. There are institutions like insurance companies and investors in aviation stocks and shares – all involved in the likelihood of the plane crashing. And yet in the end the plane wins out. I miss my connection, and am not there to give my lecture. As I wait for another plane home, I ponder on how much of my life is involved with people who keep things and bodies going – garage mechanics, plumbers, electricians, cable and broad-band providers, software code writers, gardeners, doctors, vets.

At one level it is a tautology to say that things depend on people because since the start of Chapter 2 I have concentrated on those things which are solid entities made by humans. It is obvious that things depend on the people who make them, use them, repair them, discard them. Things depend on humans all along the behavioral chains and throughout their use lives. In this chapter I will include domesticated animals and plants as things made by humans, and again it is self-evident that animals and plants that have been made domestic depend on humans.

And yet there is an emphasis that needs to be added here. There is an oft-expressed assumption in anthropology and the social sciences that things, objects, are stable and fixed. For example, Michel Serres (1995: 87) wrote ‘Our relationships, social bonds would be airy as clouds were there only contracts between subjects. In fact, the object … stabilizes our relationships’. Following Serres, Olsen (2010: 140) argues that things produce ‘stability, concreteness, and security’ (see also Latour 2005). ‘Things shape the temporal structures, allowing for social order to be stabilized and reproduced’ (Preda 1999: 347). We seem to think that the things themselves are fixed while the meanings we give to them swirl and change. While this may often appear true in the short time-span of ethnographic enquiry, from an archaeological perspective things seem transient, always changing, problematic, unbounded. As noted in Chapter 1, things are not inert. Things are always falling apart, transforming, growing, changing, dying, running out. We know about the constraints on humans from the material world, at least in the Marxist sense of the dialectic between the relations and forces of production, or we know about environmental determinism, ecosystem constraint and so on. But at the scale of those living in societies and institutions, there is also the need to deal with the impermanence of things.

A 300-year old sandstone church may seem very stable. And yet in his study of such a church in Manchester, Edensor (2011: 238) describes matter as ‘continuously emergent’. He follows DeLanda (2006) in focusing on entities such as the church as heterogeneous assemblages that are fluid and never stable, full of relationalities and potentialities. Matter, labor and knowledge circulate through the building. Even what appear to be inert objects are made up of the spin of microscope particles which will eventually split, decay and transform. Some of the agencies that interact with the supposedly solid and obdurate stone of the church to transform it are the weather, air pollution, rising ground water, impact from metal supports and attack from micro-organisms. The result of all this is that new connections and networks are needed to supply stone that can replace the ailing parts of the church, and maintenance workers and technologies are brought into play, including new conservation technologies such as lasers, ultrasound and heat lances. When problems will emerge is very unclear – stone blocks suddenly start falling off the tower despite regular inspection and planning. The multiplicity of complex interactions creates emergent problems.

The walls made of unfired mud brick at Çatalhöyük provide another example. We have put the walls of houses on display. They appear solid and timeless; after all they have stood for 9000 years. But this appearance of permanence is an artifice of the massive use of chemicals, consolidants and grouts inserted by our conservators. Our team is in an endless daily struggle to keep the walls up (Figure 4.1). We find the walls leaning at dizzying angles. Mellaart had found the same thing. Talking of VIB and earlier walls, he wrote (1964: 39) ‘walls leant at drunken angles, developed large cracks upon drying, and were a menace all round’. The people at Çatalhöyük had the same problem.

This instability is the nature of unfired, sun-dried clay – but it is especially true of the smectitic clays used at Çatalhöyük. Chris Doherty and others doing the archaeometric work on the materials and environments of Çatalhöyük have begun to build up a picture of how these clays were used. Smectite-rich soils are found in many semi-arid environments which have a local volcanic geology. Çatalhöyük is in a semi-arid zone and the site is surrounded by alluvial soils that derive from volcanic regions to the southwest. We know these alluvial soils were used for building houses – as demonstrated by the extraction pits by the site. Smectites are prone to very quick expansion with water, and very high shrinkage when dry and this property continues when they are used as constructional materials. The relationships between molecules in the clay produced relationships between people in society at Çatalhöyük as they worked together to solve the problem of collapsing walls.

Figure 4.1 The walls at Çatalhöyük did not stay upright (Source: Çatalhöyük Research Project and Jason Quinlan).



People in Neolithic Çatalhöyük dealt with the problem in a variety of ways. For example, they supported the walls with large wooden posts; they also recruited the ancestors to hold up the house – in Building 6 a human skull was placed at the bottom of a post. But they also had other solutions such as frequently covering the walls in a plaster layer (we have found up to 450 thin plaster surfaces on one wall) and doubling walls (adjacent houses do not share walls; rather walls are built up against or support each other). During the occupation of the site, large trees for making house posts disappeared from the area (perhaps through over-use, or because of human-induced ecological change). One solution was that people started making thicker walls with bigger bricks and getting sandier clays. The greater use of sand made the smectite more stable. In the end, right at the top of the Neolithic mound, in Levels I-III and on the following Chalcolithic West mound (6000–5500 BC on the other side of the river) internal buttresses were added to give increased support (Marciniak and Czerniak 2008, Biehl and Ravenstock 2009, Erdou 2009).

The use of sandier bricks involved digging deeper into the ground (Doherty pers.comm.) and the deeper extraction pits changed the environment around the site and increased the formation of colluvium. But the use of sandier clays allowed shifts in brick technology and people changed from making bricks by laying wet clay directly on walls to making thicker bricks with the use of moulds. The use of moulds involved a more complex technology, and the laying out of bricks to dry implies making bricks in advance of construction and probably off site. Brick manufacture would thus have to be scheduled in relation to other activities. Making stronger and more stable bricks involved greater labor and work scheduling. So people increasingly got trapped by bricks at Çatalhöyük (Figure 4.2). Dealing with smectite led to various implications that increasingly trapped people in further relationships with things.

The bricks and other human-made artifacts entrapped people in long-term relationships of material investment, care and maintenance. A related example has been identified by Philippa Ryan (pers. comm.) in her work on the phytoliths from Çatalhöyük. The exploitation of the reed Phragmites australis in the area around Çatalhöyük led to an aggressive proliferation of this species in wetter areas. The proliferation of the Phragmites near the site may initially have been encouraged by the digging of pits for clay extraction that filled with water (Figure 4.2). The exploitation of this plant for roofing and other functions led to invasion by this plant with a resultant lowering of the water table and a competitive expulsion of other species (perhaps including trees). Thus an unintended outcome of the winning of clay from pits may have been the expansion of an aggressive plant that proliferated near the site and would have had to be cut back in an endless battle in order to allow continued dependence on the local wetland resources which were an important part of the Çatalhöyük diet. Humans were forced to invest more in order to stay in the same place.

Figure 4.2 Sequences of entanglement resulting from brick making at Çatalhöyük (Source: the author, Chris Doherty and Philippa Ryan).





Things Fall Apart


Things do have a primary agency, not because they have intentionality but because they are vibrant and have lives and interactions of their own. As they grow, transform or fall apart they have a direct impact on human lives. This is not a secondary agency delegated to things by humans (Gell 1998, Latour 1996). The falling apart of things draws humans into their care. This dependence on maintenance can have widespread and dispersed connections, as we would expect given the dispersed nature of all thing-thing interactions (as seen in Chapter 3). I want to illustrate the extent of these connections around maintenance with another type of wall. In the north of England vast areas of grazing land in the Yorkshire Dales are divided by dry-built stone walls that cross valleys, meadows and hill tops. The skills involved in making walls of undressed stone without mortar or fill are considerable. The wall surfaces slope in slightly, and there are longer stones that tie both sides of the wall together. But the main skill is in the selection of stones so that they bed down together, producing a stable and long-lasting wall.

Stable as they appear to the casual passer-by, the walls are a nuisance in that they frequently start to collapse as wind and rain disturb them and as sheep and walkers try to scramble over them. Their maintenance depends on those with the requisite training and experience, and with the contacts with sources of new stone. But the maintenance of the Dales walls does not just depend on some skilled craftspersons and their access to suitable stones. We can see this in the fact that today there are few people in the Dales who still have the requisite skills to make dry-stone walls. And many walls are now left unrepaired or replaced by barbed or electric wire fences. All this suggests there is a whole system that keeps the walls up, not just some craftspersons.

Traditionally the dry-stone walls of the Dales were part of a mixed farming system that developed since Iron Age and Roman times. The walls identified boundaries between grazing and arable fields, between private and common pasture, and between roadways and fields. Today the landscape is dominated by heavily-subsidized sheep farming, maintained by European regulations and grants. Large-scale supermarket chains such as Tesco now condition farming methods as they have pushed down prices and imposed their own expectations of product quality. Many parts of the Dales are also seen as heritage landscapes worthy of maintenance in their own right. The National Trust now cares for large swathes of the Dales imposing sensitivities tinged with nostalgia for rural ways of life, organic foods and the resurrection of traditional flowering meadows in which no insecticides are used. That the walls are maintained today thus depends on a fragile alliance of European regulations, big retail business and national conservation. The falling dry-stone wall needs a person and an expertise to keep it up. It forces people to attend to it, to care for it. And they do so, because of a widespread and dispersed tangle of interests.

During the Enlightenment new things emerged as they came to be seen by new instruments and machines. The microscope, telescope and the air-pump allowed new things, new phenomena to be brought into view. These new things, stars, microbes and vacuums depended very much on humans. By being identified they were brought into relations with new connections and possibilities. As noted at the start of Chapter 2, the air-pump used by Boyle allowed new things to be seen (Shapin and Schaffer 1985: 26). The pump sucked air out of a glass globe so that experiments could be conducted in a vacuum. But the air pump needed a particular type of human-thing context if it was to survive. ‘Scientific instruments therefore imposed both a correction and a discipline upon the senses. In this respect the discipline enforced by devices such as the microscope and the air-pump was analogous to the discipline imposed upon the senses by reason’ (Shapin and Schaffer 1985: 37). Getting the air-pump working required a lot of effort and organization. ‘Establishing matters of fact did require immense amounts of labour’ (Shapin and Schaffer 1985: 225). In particular, the air-pumps kept breaking down. All the air-pumps built in the 17th century were ‘always in trouble, either directly because of leakage or indirectly because of rival attacks’ (Shapin and Schaffer 1985: 229). There were, as a result, very few pumps working at any moment. The air-pump depended on humans not just to make it and use it, but also to keep it going.

So within the more general notion that things depend on humans I focus on the idea that the behavior of things, plants and animals traps humans into various forms of care, regulation and discipline. Things cannot reproduce and therefore cannot exist without humans. Of course, a house that has fallen down still exists. And domesticated species can revert or go feral if untended. So it is more that things cannot exist for humans, in the ways that humans want, without human intervention. Things depend on humans and this dependence draws humans in, sometimes seems to lock them in, to specific forms of behavior – a human behavior adjusted to, even at times regulated and disciplined by the behavior of things. Resources, wild or domesticated, animate or inanimate, need tending, conserving, protecting if they are to exist in the ways that humans want them to.

It is in the nature of things that they break, get dirty, decay, disperse. Even small things falling apart can have large consequences (as is seen in the 1958 [1994] book by Chinua Achebe). So things need people to maintain them in the forms that they require them. Objects have to be conserved, cleaned, repaired, looked after. The things require maintenance, energy input, and they themselves depend on other things and people. Archaeologists are good at exploring this type of knowledge. They have built up much knowledge about costs, labor, distances, access, skills needed to maintain things. They are good at assessing labor input into technologies and their relative efficiencies in different environments. They are good at decay, maintenance, breakage, loss, repair, deposition, sequence even if specialism in knowledge about such areas is sometimes seen as not contributing much to archaeological theory.





Behavioral Archaeology and Material Behavior


I have focused so far on one aspect of the behavior of materials – that they fall apart and transform and so draw humans who need them into their care. But there is a lot more to the behavior of materials that draws people in. In Behavioral Archaeology as was noted in Chapter 3, the stages of human use of materials include procurement, manufacture, exchange, use, discard. Throughout the lives of things they draw people into labor and involvement. In particular, the facts that things are not inert and are not isolated involve humans. There are many examples. A species will die out unless maintained by humans and a lake will dry up as surrounding soils are deforested. A pot has to be fired to exist and has to be looked after so that it does not break. A computer has to be turned on. We need not, and should not, assume a ‘telos’ here. I am not saying that the pot intends to reproduce itself by depending on humans. That would be a fallacy. But the existence of these things in a specific form draws people into their care and into the lives of things.

We can return to the examples described in Chapter 3 from the point of view of thing-thing interactions. Fire gave a lot to humans – warmth, energy, light, cooked food and from early on we know that the fire became a hearth around which social activities and stone tool reduction took place. Human use of fire dates from the Lower and Middle Pleistocene (Goren-Inbar et al. 2004). Kebara cave in the Middle East has deposits which span from the Middle Palaeolithic through to Natufian, or from roughly 60 000 to 10 000 BC. The Middle Palaeolithic deposits show repeated use of part of the cave for hearths, while an inner part of the cave was used as a dump area (Goldberg 2001). The hearth area has deep deposits of overlapping hearths, each of which results from several episodes of combustion (Meignen et al. 2000: 14). These multiphase hearths indicate long periods of repetitive use in the same depression (Meignen et al. 2000: 15). All this implies investment and labor since the fire depended on having a fire pit, and it needed fuel, and it needed someone to watch over it and keep it going. Humans had to feed the fire. In doing so they became involved in labor and schedules set by the fire. One of the most fascinating insights offered by the discovery of the prehistoric Ötzi Ice Man in the Alps was his portable fire basket – in which moss was used to keep embers alive (Fowler 2001). Thus the fickleness of fire, its tendency to go out, created the need for human labor and for social regulation and self disciplining. Both Prometheus and humans had become bound.

The frequent (monthly or seasonal) replastering of the internal walls of houses at Çatalhöyük provided the inhabitants with many advantages such as light, hygiene, protection from mosquitoes, the dampening of odors. As noted above, the plaster covering the mudbrick walls (inside the walls but also sometimes outside) helped to protect the walls and keep them standing. But the absorbent smectitic clays also blackened quickly as they took up the soot from the oven and hearth in the room. So here the fire plus the plaster produced problems that humans had to deal with. The blackened plasters reduced their effectiveness in terms of reflecting light and in terms of the social and symbolic valences given to whiteness in these houses (the burial platforms in the northern and eastern parts of the main rooms of houses were kept very white – Matthews 2005). The plasters also had a tendency to crack and flake so they needed frequent replacement. Each time the walls in the main rooms and over the burial platforms were replastered white, marl had to be collected from the plain at river exposures or in extraction pits. It had to be mixed with plant material and with water in order to make the basal layer. After this had dried a second whiter layer with very little organic content could be applied, left to dry and then burnished smooth with a pebble. As noted in Chapter 3 other tools and processes were also involved. Carrying all these marls, water and materials up onto the mound would have involved a considerable amount of labor at frequent intervals (perhaps every month in the winter months). The replastering seems to have had important social and symbolic roles. The quality of the plastering is always superior in the more elaborate houses, and it tends to be finer and better applied over and around the burial platforms – very little effort is made in the side and storage rooms. So the plastering may have been seen as renewal. Replastering the walls may have been seen as linked to the replastering or refleshing of human skulls (Hodder and Meskell 2011). The need of the plaster for maintenance undoubtedly absorbed humans and human labor to a considerable degree. It forced a discipline on the members of the house as regulations, customs and traditions emerged about who did the re-plastering when and with what level of skill.

The introduction of the wheel might be seen as a straightforward labor-saving device, allowing carts to carry greater loads longer distances. Indeed the wheel became widely adopted and it has continued to be a major component of lives and economies to the present day. And yet the wheel was not adopted in the Americas before the arrival of Europeans. Toy or model wheels did exist in pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, but not real wheels on carts. This is almost certainly because of the lack of suitable domesticable draught animals in the Americas. Roads existed, for example the Inca trails, but not the cattle and horse that could be trained to pull wheeled carts. Indeed, in Europe and the Middle East the adoption of the wheel in the 4th millennium BC is closely tied to the more intensive use of animals for secondary products such as draught and wool (Sherratt 1981). Thus the use of the wheel may have saved labor but it also depended on greater labor investment in the management of animals, their provisioning and foddering, the organization of herd structures and so on.

In all these cases, then, we see that things depend on humans and that humans get drawn into greater labor and into a variety of responses in order to keep things as they are wanted. Fire goes out so humans have to invest in ways, social and material, of keeping the fire going. Plaster gets covered in soot so we have to replaster. Wheels get us caught up in building roads and finding fodder for animals to draw carts. Foucault (1973) discussed the relationships between knowledge and power and we could say that for Foucault things are often complicit in discourses of power. The most famous example used by Foucault (1995) is Bentham’s panopticon – an annular building in which from a central tower all the cells in the outer walls can be surveilled. The cells have windows on the inner and outer walls so that light passes through the cells and people in the cells can be seen by the supervisor in the central tower. For Foucault the panopticon is an idea, a paradigm that can be applied in diverse contexts such as prisons, asylums, schools, hospitals and so on. Agamben (2009) argues that Foucault’s discursive formations or epistemes deal with the total formation of knowledge in relation to power. The panopticon is an example used to build a general model of the functioning of the disciplinary modality of power. One of Bentham’s aims was to design a prison that was an efficient way of managing large numbers of people with minimal cost. Its design at least in part derived from functional considerations such as lines of sight, backlighting and the use of walls to isolate individuals so that group action is minimized. But Bentham’s prison was never built. The design has inspired many prisons (for example, the Eastern State Penitentiary built in 1829 in Philadelphia), and it is in the practices of prison construction and use that we should look to see the workings of disciplinary power. All buildings have both a paradigmatic, ideal purpose and a lived in everydayness. The panopticon makes use of functional considerations such as lines of sight and walls to achieve its paradigmatic purpose. But in practice the building is part of a network of dependences between humans and things. The network itself is disciplinary as humans are forced to look after their individual cells, clean them out, change the linen, clean out the slops and as managers are forced to provide light, warmth, clothing, access to recreation for the individual inmates. Food, water, electricity, heat flow in, through the building and out again. These flows are managed and manipulated by warders and inmates. The disciplinary regime of individualized surveillance is produced and negotiated as humans get drawn into a particular material world.

One area in which archaeologists have developed their own theories about how things humans make or interact with force humans into various forms of labor and organization is refuse discard. The study of taphonomy (Lyman 1994) has led to increased understanding of bone breakage and deposit formation under different conditions, including human trampling or scavenging. So as archaeologists we have an increasingly sophisticated understanding of how things transform into residues and deposits. The work of Schiffer in his (1976) ‘Behavioral Archaeology’ (see also Schiffer 1987) has been successful in defining different forms of refuse deposition. Primary refuse is the intentional discard of items at or near the end of their use-life, in their location of use. Secondary refuse is the term used to describe the disposal of items in areas other than where they were used. De facto refuse is the tools and materials abandoned in an activity area but still usable. In many complex tell or urban sites it is necessary to add Tertiary refuse, defined as all the items of refuse that become incorporated into deposits as background constituents of the deposit matrix. Work on discard patterns has been used to explore questions such as degrees of sedentism and density of occupation, the assumption being that as societies become more dense and sedentary so they are forced (because of the build up of odors and disease and general hindrance) to organize refuse into refuse areas away from domestic habitation, into pits and ultimately, in modern urban conurbations, into rubbish tips or land fill. Other approaches to the organization of refuse have focused on its social and symbolic role (Hodder 1982, Deetz 1977). It is my aim in this volume to cut across this opposition between material and symbolic processes. Thinking about the ways in which things like refuse draw humans in provides an example.

It has long been argued (Rathje 1974, Rathje and Murphy 1992) that humans say things about their behavior that studies of their refuse contradict. Thus public statements about levels of alcohol or meat consumption can be shown to be false or inaccurate when garbage bins are examined. Whether this is a matter of connaissance versus savoir faire, or whether it is conscious duplicity is unclear. But we can assume that at some level of consciousness humans become faced with refuse build-up that forces reaction and response. Rathje and Murphy (1992) in fact suggest that a garbage crisis would have emerged as humans became sedentary. Hardy-Smith and Edwards (2004) have explored this idea in relation to the early farmers of the Middle East. At the semi-sedentary Early Natufian site (c 10 000 BC) of Wadi Hammeh 27 in Jordan there was little attempt at organized refuse disposal. By-products of artifact manufacture, bone scraps, cached items and human remains were allowed to build up close to where they were used. In fact half a million artifacts were found on interior hut floors. There was very little secondary refuse. Looking more widely in the Levant, Hardy-Smith and Edwards see initial attempts at refuse organization in PPNA (8500–7400 BC) with more consistent refuse organization in PPNB (7400–6000 BC) where internal house floors are often swept immaculately clean and well-defined external middens appear.

By the PPNB ‘it was no longer possible to ignore accumulations or refuse and artefacts underfoot, particularly the razor-sharp products of lithic reduction, without suffering significant discomfort’ (Hardy-Smith and Edwards 2004: 283). In some places, the provision of hard plastered floors would have exacerbated the problem, although at Çatalhöyük the floors remained soft. But the rise in frequency and duration of use of buildings, alongside changing concepts of the dead and of history and house abandonment – all this mix of material and conceptual considerations, made it increasingly important to deal with the problem of the accumulation of debris inside houses. In the PPNB, houses often ended up surrounded by piles of refuse and through time these piles themselves led to problems of management and removal. At times at Çatalhöyük refuse pits were dug and these became common in later prehistory in many parts of Europe and the Middle East. As humans became more and more dependent on things they had made in early settled villages, so they gradually found themselves having to deal with what became a massive drain of labor and energy – refuse. In dealing with the refuse they developed ideas and practices that drew them towards and away from things.





Behavioral Ecology


Another source of ideas about how the behavior of things, plants and animals draws humans into various forms of care is Behavioral Ecology. Much Behavioral Ecology takes its intellectual source from Tinbergen (1963) who was himself inspired by Konrad Lorenz to develop the following four postulates about animal behavior: that ‘its short-term causation can be studied in fundamentally the same way as that of other life processes; that its survival value can be studied just as systematically as its causation; that the study of its ontogeny is similar to that of the ontogeny of structure; and that the study of its evolution likewise follows the same lines as that of evolution of form’ (Tinbergen 1963: 430). Thus, behavior is seen as part of the adaptive equipment of animals. According to the first postulate, many behaviors are influenced by biology, and each animal is endowed with specific behavior mechanisms. These are proximate or mechanical explanations (Bird and O’Connell 2006). The second postulate explores how these specific mechanisms of behavior contribute to animal survival in particular settings that develop historically through time. The third, ontogenetic level of explanation, deals with change of behavior machinery during development and with the relationships between learned and innate behavior patterns. The fourth point deals with the evolutionary study of behavior, common descent or convergence. It seeks explanations that are general or universal and deal with fitness-related costs and benefits.

These different forms of causation of behavior, proximate and ultimate, short-term and long-term, historical and universal, can be applied to plants, animals and humans in terms of adaptation, survival and evolution. From the point of view of this book, this work in ethology or Behavioral Ecology is of importance in defining the life histories and interactions of plants and animals. Through an understanding of behavior and its varied causes we can explain how humans that come to depend on plants and animals get drawn into specific behaviors themselves.

There are many ecological and experimental studies that explore the ways in which plant behavior draws humans into specific investments and responses. For example, Wollstonecroft et al. (2008) examine the use of sea club-rush (Bolboschoenus maritimus) in the Epipalaeolithic (c 24 000–12 000 cal BP) in the Middle East. ‘The results demonstrate how the biologically inherited functional properties of a species interact with specific food processing techniques to promote or hinder its edibility and nutrient bioaccessibility’ (Wollstonecroft et al. 2008: 1). During this period over 250 wild plant taxa have been identified on archaeological sites. Many needed processing before being edible. There is evidence that both fire and ground stone mortars and pestles started to be used for plant processing in the Epipalaeolithic. Hunter-gatherers were investing more in plant food gathering that led to the need for more intensive processing such as pulverizing, grinding and heat treatments such as boiling, roasting as well as washing, peeling, baking, pit-cooking, preservation and storage. The potential for nutrient release from plants is closely related of course to the biology of the plant, for example the possibility of cell rupture and cell separation. Wollstonecroft et al. explore the sea club-rush experimentally to see how these biological factors interact with food processing. They find that heating alone does not lead to a softening of the tuber tissue. Some pulverizing or pounding is needed to create cell rupture and separation. It is clear then that the functional properties of the different plants interact with the types of processing and labor input that are needed. Hunter-gatherers using these types of plants are drawn into certain kinds of labor and artifact production including the need to obtain sources of ground stone, or engage in exchange relationships to obtain the stone, and so on. We have already seen in this chapter the related case of the use at Çatalhöyük of the reed Phragmites australis. Exploitation of the reed led to an aggressive proliferation of this species in wetter areas, resulting in lowering water tables and a competitive expulsion of other species – and thus greater labor from humans in order to cut back the reeds.

Perhaps the best example of how plants that depend on humans have drawn humans into particular forms of investment and care is provided by the domestication of cereals. As Fuller (2007: 903) notes, ‘domestication results from the earlier stages of wild plant food production and systematic cultivation, making crops more dependent on humans for survival but also more productive.’ People ‘put increasing labor effort into a single unit of land’ (Fuller 2007: 903) but the payoff was increased productivity on that unit of land. Fuller examines the interplay of cultural behavior and plant genetics. ‘Thus, fruit trees, vines and tubers are not “domesticated” in the same way as grain crops such as cereals and pulses, in as much as they tend to be reproduced vegetatively and to represent the human choice of favorable mutants’ (Fuller 2007: 904). Often thought to be the most important domestication trait is the elimination or reduction of natural seed dispersal, for example the appearance of non-shattering rachis in cereals or non-dehiscent pod in pulses. This ‘makes a species dependent upon the human farmer for survival’ (Fuller 2007: 904). But this means the addition of human labor (threshing and winnowing) and then dispersal of seeds by the farmer (Fuller et al. 2010). Once the tough rachis had been selected for, the plants depended on humans for their regeneration. Wheats and people had become involved in a co-dependency relationship. The reproduction of wheat came to depend on our continued intervention. We obtained increased production per unit area of land but we also got trapped into clearing, planting, weeding, harvesting, winnowing, pounding, roasting, grinding and so on, together with all the additional tools involved.

Domesticated plants thus came to depend on humans for their propagation, but they retained a role in how that propagation occurred. Their biology and ecology drew people in in a particular way. For example, Fuller (2007: 911) discusses the evidence from the Middle East that wheat took longer to domesticate – perhaps 2000 years, in comparison to barley – perhaps 1500 years. Some of the contributing factors include ecological factors – such as the fact that slightly higher average rates of cross-pollination are reported for barley. Another factor may be that barley ‘is more prone to be a weed of cultivation, thereby maintaining introgression, whereas wheat cultivation, which is more water-demanding and may have been more carefully located, would have been cut off from the wild progenitor’ (Fuller 2007: 911).

Thus many plants have come to depend on humans for their reproduction and survival. But this is more than a mutualism and co-evolution between plants and humans since the reproduction and processing of the plants put a double burden on humans. Humans both depended on plants and got drawn into elaborate procedures that maintained propagation and edibility. It is necessary to explore the behavioral and biological properties of plants in order to understand the ways in which humans got drawn in. The same arguments can be made in relation to animal biology and Behavioral Ecology. It is clear that the use by hunter-gatherers and farmers of wild and domestic animals was and is closely tied to the behavioral possibilities and potentials of the animals.

An underlying assumption of Behavioral Ecology ‘is that an animal’s reproductive cycle, group size, density and composition, and movements are adaptations to the available food and water resources, predators and commensals, and the requirements and tolerances of the animal itself’ (Martin 2000: 15). By exploring animal behavior in this way, archaeologists are able to understand the ways in which human exploitation of the animals gets drawn in. For example, Louise Martin (2000) obtained data from 18 modern populations of the genus Gazella, in order to explore the factors that influence behavior. Such data allowed her to suggest how gazelle would have behaved in particular environments and under particular constraints in the past. She was mainly interested in applying this to the period from 20 000 to 7500 BC in the southern Levant when sites commonly have large frequencies of gazelle bones. In fact during early sedentism in the southern Levant (that is from 12 500 BC to 8500 cal BC in Natufian, PPNA and early PPNB contexts) it was gazelle that was mainly exploited (Horwitz et al. 1999, Clutton-Brock 1981). But humans never managed to domesticate gazelle sufficiently to control reproduction and cause genetic change. Garrard (1984: 125) notes that the mature males of the types of gazelle and deer common in the region are individually territorial for part of the year. The dominant males attempt to isolate oestrous females from fellow male competitors. To keep such animals in concentrated herds at the time of the rut will lead to social stress and a decrease in body condition. Deer and gazelle are also extremely agile which means that very high fences are required to pen them. They are adapted to escape from fast predators (Clutton-Brock 1981). They are nervous and can run very fast – when constrained by high fences they can panic. It is much easier to keep sheep, goat, cattle and pig in captivity than deer or gazelle. The latter ‘are not easy to manage, they are territorial in their behavior and much less flexible in their feeding habits than goats and sheep, also they will not breed easily if kept in close confinement’ (Clutton-Brock 1981: 50).

Horwitz et al. (1999) make a similar point regarding goats. They note an increase in wild goat in sites in southern Levant in middle PPNB. But they suggest that sheep were probably the first domesticated animals in late PPNB in the southern Levant, probably introduced from the north (Vigne 2008). They argue that the attempts to domesticate the goat in the middle PPNB in the southern Levant failed for ethological reasons. For sheep ‘with some very simple techniques, it is possible to link a herd of animals to individuals within a human group. Ethological data seems to indicate that Capra, which was domesticated later, is a more independent animal’ (Horwitz et al. 1999: 67).

The behavior of sheep and to some degree goats is often described as being well adapted to associate with humans as they became more sedentary. Ovis orientalis, the Asiatic mouflon, was probably the ancestor of all domestic sheep and like other Eurasian wild sheep had a ‘submissive posture’ that enabled personal relationships to develop between an animal and man (Clutton-Brock 1981: 55). Deer and gazelle are territorial animals that live in groups but they do not have a social structure based on dominance hierarchies (Kaya et al. 2004, Schaller 1977). ‘Man, sheep, and goats, on the other hand, have a social system that is based on a single dominant leader’ (Clutton-Brock 1981: 55) and they have a home range but do not defend a territory. They flourish well when crowded together. Ewes form close bonds with their offspring and this encourages following behavior, with an older and more independent animal towards the front. Smaller groups of males are segregated from the female flock but share an overlapping home range. Sheep are not as nervous as deer and gazelle, cannot run so fast, and they can be trained to stay close to a human settlement as their own home ranges are relatively localized.

The characteristics of animals that would have led to closer relationships with humans as they became increasingly sedentary included palatability, high yield, a reasonable number of offspring a year, limited agility, a wide environmental and dietary tolerance (Garrard 1984). Also important were that the species live in large herds, organized along hierarchical lines and including both sexes. Best are those species with minimal fighting so that there is little social stress when confined. The foursome of sheep, goat, pig and cattle to varying degrees fulfill these requirements in contrast to deer and gazelle. In addition, there is an ecological compatibility between the four. Cattle and sheep can be kept on the same pasture, cattle eating the tips of the grass and sheep the bases. Goats are browsers and pigs general omnivores (Garrard 1984). But all these animals begin to transform as they become more closely associated with humans. Sheep, for example, begin to decrease in size as they are increasingly penned and placed within an anthropogenic environment. Ewes have access to poorer graze and their offspring are smaller; or larger ewes under stress might not be able to come into oestrus – so a perhaps unintentional result of closer management is a decrease in size. In the wild, sheep and goat are skittish, darting and stopping, but once kept and managed they become more docile, perhaps because of the selective culling of young males and a resulting decrease in competition between them. The decrease in competition between males may also lead to males being smaller. In all these ways sheep and goats (as well as cattle and pigs) became increasingly dependent on humans for their care and reproduction.

This dependence of sheep (and the other domesticable animals) on humans trapped humans into greater investment, care, regulation and discipline. Zeder and Hesse (2000) argue that early pre-domestication human practices involved selective killing of younger male goats in the western highlands of Iran at Ganj-Dareh and Ali Kosh at 8000 cal BC. This may have been a conservation measure to safeguard females and their reproductive potential. But by killing off young males in sheep and goat flocks, humans were changing the genetic make-up of the flock and the selection and management of stud males would have become of importance – forcing cooperation and organization amongst humans. As soon as humans started investing in sheep and goats they needed to protect that investment – caring for the females, selecting and caring for stud males. The investment involved protecting sheep from wolves. But the sheep needed to be kept in groups or flocks of a certain size (perhaps 50 – Louise Martin pers comm.) in order to maintain genetic diversity. But households were small. Again cooperation between humans was forced. Wild sheep have home ranges that gradually shift in relation to resources. But as they are corralled and managed so feed has to be provided or humans and perhaps their dogs have to travel with them as herders over increasingly wide distances.

Right from the start of husbanding and then domesticating animals, humans got drawn into their care. In recent arguments, Vigne (2008, Tresset and Vigne 2007) has pointed to evidence that early domestication of animals may not have been primarily in order to obtain more meat. One of the reasons for early domestication of animals may have been milk, and domestic animals may also have been used to provide dung in agriculture, building and heating, and to provide load-bearing and draft power capabilities (mainly in relation to cattle). Within such a scenario, large amounts of human labor would have become tied up in milking and processing milk and its by-products. There is all the organizational effort in herding animals in relation to arable fields at different times of the year, and all the labor in collecting dung and drying it for fuel. There is all the investment in training animals and providing equipment so that they can carry or pull loads.

These labor investments increased through time. Halstead (1996) argues that mixed farming characterized much of Greek prehistory, but that as shifts to more specialized pastoral economies occurred there were larger herds, grazing had to be scheduled to enhance nutrition and productivity, and there was specialization in particular products for exchange. Complex strategies had to be followed to make sure that sheep, especially pregnant ewes and young animals at particular times of the year got sufficient nutrition – through providing specific grazing for them or fodder. Looking after animals became increasingly labor intensive.

Humans depend on animals as they increasingly husband and domesticate and breed them. But it can also be argued that animals depend on humans to propagate them. In some views, domesticates are seen as manipulating humans for their own evolutionary advantage, using humans to ensure their widespread dispersal (Rindos 1984). Certainly it is possible to argue that both partners in the relationship derive benefit from the other (Zeder 2006). Plants and animals have increased reproductive fitness and their range expands. Humans gain higher productivity per unit of land, greater security and predictability in their access to resources. Thus Zeder et al. (2006: 139) state that ‘domestication is a unique form of mutualism that develops between a human population and a target plant or animal population, and has strong selective advantages for both partners … It is a cumulative process marked by changes on both sides of the mutualistic relationship, as both partner populations, over time, become increasingly interdependent.’

Zeder (2006) argues that domestication does differ from other forms of mutualism amongst plants and animals in that humans have intentionality so everything happens more quickly and with more interference. In the terms argued in this book, the forms of dependence that emerged between humans, plants and animals involved both human dependence and dependency. There was more than just mutual reliance (dependence). There was also an ensnaring and entrapment (dependency) as humans tried to maintain plants and animals as they wanted them. Plants and animals could be said to have invested in the domestication relationship with humans in that they underwent genetic change, and became isolated from populations not involved in the relationship. Humans became involved in such a way that they had to work harder, becoming constrained by the dependency. Humans found themselves involved in tilling, watering, burning, clearing land, sowing, and transplanting plants, or in taming, protecting, herding, culling, and selectively breeding animals (Zeder 2006). In addition there were all the issues of property raised by the investments in land, plants and animals. There were all the tools, the social relationships, the houses and buildings and walls that allowed the animals and plants to be kept, stored, guarded, exchanged, maintained. Humans had become multiply bound – by the nutrition gained from the plants and animals, but also by tending to the behavior of the plants and animals and by managing all their connections and interactions.





Human Behavioral Ecology


In relation to animal and plant behavior there is of course a vast range of literature in Behavioral and Evolutionary Ecology that can be used as a basis for understanding the ways in which humans wishing to gather and cultivate plants or wishing to hunt and domesticate animals would have been drawn into certain types of behavior. We have looked above at how the Behavioral Ecology of plants and animals helps archaeologists to understand how humans are drawn into their care as they become dependent on humans. Human Behavioral Ecology on the other hand directs its attention to human behavior (especially of hunter-gatherers) itself and how it makes use of resources differently in different conditions. The approach explores the processes and interactions of humans and things. Like Behavioral Ecology more generally it makes optimization assumptions, and assumes a larger Evolutionary Ecology framework.

Human Behavioral Ecology (HBE) is having increasing influence in archaeology (Winterhalder and Smith 2000, Winterhalder and Kennett 2006). Winterhalder and Smith argue that HBE is largely concerned with how humans behave in specific ecological conditions. Hypotheses deal with ‘the potential fitness-related trade-offs individuals may face in particular socio-ecological contexts’ (Bird and O’Connell, 2006: 146). Behavioral diversity is seen as largely the result of variability of context. Unlike the evolutionary models to be considered in Chapter 6, there is little focus on historical determinants. Behavioral costs and benefits are evaluated in universal terms, but adjusted to specific contexts.

Some of the most popular models (Bettinger 2009), often quantitative, that have been used in HBE include the diet breadth or prey-choice models influenced by Optimal Foraging Theory in which it is assumed that maximizing the rate of nutrient acquisition enhances fitness (Bird and O’Connell 2006: 146). Fitness can be defined not just in terms of number of offspring but in terms of a multitude of factors including survivorship of self or offspring. In the diet-breadth studies the aim is to model how humans balance different parts of complex decision-making – such as evaluating the costs and benefits of searching for game against the costs and benefits of handling and processing the game after an encounter and kill. In other words, is it in my interests to kill and handle game that I come across or should I wait until I have a better opportunity? The answer is seen as depending on the abundance, and thus the encounter rate with the highest ranking prey, where rank is determined in terms of relative return. Encounter rates are also related to the ‘patchiness’ of the prey.

It is assumed that humans will exploit those resources which have the highest rate of return – and that humans will go down the ladder to lower rates when pressures on resources increase (Bird and O’Connell 2006). Depending on the model, the rate of return could include the costs of collecting, processing and making tools, and in terms of sustainable exploitation the rate of return can include conservation measures. HBE studies include those that explore resource acquisition decisions that are conservationist – defined as ‘any resource use restraint that sacrifices short-term yield and fitness gains in order to realize long-term benefits from heightened sustainability or yield’ (Winterhalder and Smith 2000: 56). Thus diet-breadth models can be construed as including descriptions of the ways in which the behavior of resources (that is their depletion or conservation) depend on further action by humans. For example, Bird et al. (2005, Bliege Bird et al. 2008) have documented the complex interactions between Australian Aboriginal burning of landscapes and the availability of different types of game suggesting that while anthropogenic fire is used for immediate gains in hunting, the resulting mosaics can be beneficial to other plants and animals. The outcomes may also vary depending on factors like gender: in a study of fishing among Torres Strait Islanders, Rebecca Bliege Bird (2007) has documented the complex interplay between the behavior of different types of fish and the behavior of men and women as they obtain resources and incorporate risk differently into their strategies.

One diachronic expectation from diet-breadth models is a gradual shift from high ranked resources to lower-ranked resources if humans negatively impact the highest ranking resources. For example, in northern California and in the Middle East, ‘harvests of highly ranked species (e.g. sturgeon, elk, white-tailed deer) drop steadily relative to low-ranked species (e.g. shellfish, acorns, small mammals)’ (Winterhalder and Smith 2000: 58). This shift to a broad spectrum economy in the Middle East heralds the intensive exploitation of plants leading to agriculture. In more general terms HBE work has shown that this shift often involves a shift to prey with high handling costs relative to energetic yield, and a shift to using more distant and thus costlier patches. However, Codding et al. (2010) have argued that declines in the abundance of highly ranked prey can also occur as a function of stochastic environmental events (such as droughts) and as a function of differences in the social costs and benefits of hunting (not just food benefits).

An example from Çatalhöyük helps to indicate the value of such an approach, especially if expanded to consider more than relative returns in terms of nutrition acquisition. During the course of the 7th millennium BC sequence at the site, the faunal assemblage shows a decline in the frequencies of wild cattle such that by the end of the sequence the frequencies of domestic sheep and goat attain an increased dominance. This shift may be explainable in terms of movement to lower ranked nutritional resources with higher handling costs (all the costs of herding and maintaining domestic sheep). But the contextual evidence from the site also suggests that this shift is towards a lower ranked resource in social terms. Wild cattle had high social value at the site as seen in their depiction in wall paintings, in the large numbers of cattle horn figurines and in the installation of cattle horns and skulls in houses. Domestic sheep and goat had lower rank in social terms as is seen in the fact that they do not occur in the art and symbolism. The value of a HBE approach in this context is that it draws attention to the handling costs and energetic returns from these animals. That there were increased handling costs and lower energetic returns for sheep and goat is evident from all the evidence of intensive processing of sheep and goat. The bones of these animals were broken up into small pieces and intensively processed, probably by boiling in pots, in order to extract fats and marrows. Wild cattle bones were less thoroughly processed. They were often consumed in feasting. It is possible to argue that as wild cattle were hunted and depleted it was necessary to turn to lower ranked resources (sheep) and the more intensive processing that made their exploitation worthwhile. And it may indeed be the case that use of wild cattle for subsistence, feasting, displays of prowess and social competition led to their depletion in the landscape and so a switch to lower ranked resources. But the complex decision-making certainly involved more than nutrition and handling costs; it also involved the social prestige of the animals. Losing the social prestige gained from killing and feasting on wild cattle was certainly part of the trade-offs that had to be taken into account. The decline in wild cattle in faunal assemblages and installations at Çatalhöyük occurs at the same time as gradual shifts in burial practice, more frequent rebuilding of houses, less exact replication of houses, larger houses more focused on domestic production and storage and so on (Düring 2006, Hodder 2006b). Given all these other changes going on, it would have been ‘cost-effective’ (including social costs) to shift to a greater focus on domestic sheep and goat. The types of question asked by HBE allow some of the links of the chains to be explored; but they could be extended to a wider consideration of all the trade-offs involved.

Cost and benefit decision-making can also be considered in relation to technologies. There has been consideration of the trade-offs involved in different types of manufacture, maintenance and repair of stone tools (Bird and O’Connell 2006: 152). For example, Elston and Brantingham (2002) look at the costs and benefits of using microliths in making projectile points rather than using simple stone or wooden points. The microliths are set into shafts made of bone or wood. They find that the microlithic multi-component projectiles are more expensive to make but they are less likely to fail and they are easier to repair – so they will be preferred in certain climatic and demographic contexts. Such work is of value in exploring how the falling apart of things can be taken into account in understanding the decision-making that leads to new technologies. The projectile point depends on humans to be maintained – and HBE helps define the factors involved in making the decisions about whether to maintain a thing or not. But again, such decisions are unlikely to be just about climate and demography – there is so much else involved in all the thing-thing, human-thing connections surrounding projectile points, such as distance to the source of lithic material (Beck et al. 2002), friability and workability of the material, exchange relations, availability of technological expertise, prestige of elaborate points (Belfer-Cohen and Goring-Morris 2002).

HBE ‘takes into account the costs of making and maintaining gear, the returns gained as a result, and the time period over which the technology is to be deployed’ (Bird and O’Connell 2006: 153, see also Bettinger 2009). It offers a systematic way of exploring the trade-offs, the complex decision-making that lie behind technological choices. Bird and O’Connell (2006) suggest that increased investment in handling or processing technologies can be read as evidence for greater diet breadth. If humans are investing in expensive food processing activities such as making and using pots, the adoption of low-ranked, hard-to-handle resources is implied. High investments in processing imply a low nutrient return ratio. Again we can explore this idea at Çatalhöyük where cooking pottery was introduced in Level VII. The pots seem mainly to have been used in the intensive processing of sheep and goat meat, bones and fat. So the evidence fits the model that the investment in a labor intensive processing technique – making pots to process food and fats – is associated with a low-ranked resource. But again, there were many other things going on at this time at Çatalhöyük. The introduction of cooking pottery involved a shift from organic to mineral tempered wares in Level VII. This shift may itself have been made economically viable by a shift at the same time to a new type of sandier brick for house construction. The coincidence of these two sets of changes suggests that as people dug deeper to get sandier clays for mudbricks, they also collected sandier clays for pots. As we have seen, the shift to sandier bricks probably involved more complex schedules and labor organization. This change in brick organization may itself have been linked to the more specialized production of thinner walled pots for cooking. There are other links such as the increased use of dung fuel to fire pots. ALL these interlinked factors are part of the trade-offs in decision-making (comparable to the ‘opportunity costs’ as defined in HBE – Winterhalder 1998: 47). It is not adequate to focus just on the immediate nutrient return in relation to the effort involved in the processing of sheep and goat meat, bone and fat. There is much more involved down the chains of dependences.

The reductionism of HBE can be seen as one of its virtues – because reducing a problem to its key elements is an element of good science (Bird and O’Connell 2006). We have seen by contrast that all humans and things are dependent on other humans and things in complex webs. HBE is of value in exploring how things and humans work practically in relation to each other along these chains. The focus on the practical issues of nutrient extraction and maintenance costs is an important component in the study of human-thing dependences. It draws stark attention to the fact that increased dependences between humans and things often involve quantifiable decreases in the return for each unit of energy expenditure even if they increase productivity overall or per unit of land. But it cannot be adequate to stop the consideration of factors, choices and trade-offs at some arbitrary point along the chains in the networks. We need to take all the research described in Chapter 2 seriously; humans depend on things for more than nutrition and these complex dependences play a part in decision-making.

Focus on the complexity of behavioral adaptations should allow a retreat from optimization models that are based on maximizing nutrient acquisition and minimizing costs of tools and handling. As the full complexities of links along chains of interaction are absorbed into behavioral models, it becomes clear that more general measures can be defined. The minimizing of costs comes to be seen in relation not to a universal standard of time and energy expenditure but in terms of, for example, minimizing disruption to other parts of the system. The maximizing of benefits can be defined not in terms of universal measures of nutrient input but in terms of benefits to linked parts of the system or network. In these ways the focus on enhancing ‘fitness’ becomes transformed into an examination of increased ‘fittingness’ as will be described in Chapter 6.





The Temporalities of Things


An impetus that led to this book was the work by Woodburn (e.g. 1980, 1998) on delayed return subsistence systems. He distinguished different types of hunter-gatherer society. Those with immediate return systems shared the meat from animals soon after the kill. They invested little in equipment and as a result had little role for long-term social structures and institutions. In delayed return systems, on the other hand, humans invested in joint labor such as the making of boats or nets or the clearance of land that produced returns over the long term. Farmers too have delayed return systems as they dig land and harvest crops. Longer term social institutions are needed to hold the group together between the investment of labor and its return.

At the heart of this distinction between immediate and delayed return systems are the temporalities of humans and things. Humans invest labor, expend energy and in small-scale hunter-gatherer societies expect a quick return. But if they plant a cereal, or tend it in its wild state, they have to wait for the crop to be harvested before they get a return. If they build a boat it takes time and a lot of energy and skill – too much to repeat every time they go fishing. So they have invested in the boat which has its own temporality – the boat lasts so it can be reused. Humans are thus drawn in to the different temporalities of things.

Humans get caught up in the rhythms of the plants, their growing and maturing seasons and in the life-cycles of animals. But they also get caught in the time it takes for clay to dry, the time it takes for marl plaster to start to deteriorate, the time it takes for metal to heat and be hammered, etc. We have to ‘wait for’ the crops to grow and ripen, we have to ‘wait for’ the winter to pass and the spring growth to start. Or we try to ‘put off’ the time when the house has to be renewed, or schedule our lives so that we can go and make bricks and make pottery. In complex industrial societies ‘human actors have to “retreat” while machines process and produce some material results’ (Preda 1999: 353). The machines produce information that has to be interpreted and made sense of. So humans get caught up in a temporal structure that is partly produced by the machines. Rather as in Mauss’ gift exchange, the machines produce delays and intervals. In the process of postponement people get caught up. They have to construct societies in which humans live their lives to the pace of things.

In relation to human life-cycles there is an uncertainty and unpredictability to the life-cycles of things. Things have lives of their own that intersect with humans at specific points. As a wall stands over decades, centuries, millennia, it gradually erodes. This may not matter for many life-cycles of humans. But ultimately a point will come when the erosion of the wall impedes the functioning of the wall, whatever that may be. In rainy climates, walls often erode quickest at the bottom where rain spatters against the mud or stone. A wall enclosing a property may stand well for hundreds of years, but suddenly the wall may falter as the mudbrick or sandstone at its base dissolves. It is difficult to predict when this will happen. But for most walls some sort of collapse will happen at some point, requiring attention and care. At this unpredictable point the life-cycles of humans and things intersect. Humans are drawn in to invest further labor in the thing.

In the discussion of operational and behavioral chains in Chapter 3, I described how things have to occur in order. Productive sequences go through the order of procurement, manufacture, exchange, use and discard. A particular step in the process must wait for other things to happen in sequence and at the right time; so there is constraint and dependency in the scheduling. Decisions made at one point in the productive process have down-stream effects on later decisions and uses of a thing. Understanding the temporal cycles of plants, animals and things is key to understanding how humans are drawn in to their biographies. There is a certain predictability to growth cycles of plants and animals though even these can be hit by unforeseen larger scale climatic events. There is much less predictability to the durability of material objects. We know they may last for a time but there is an unruliness to the interactions between things so that it is difficult to predict when the wall will crumble, when maintenance and rebuilding will be required.





Conclusion: The Unruliness of Things


The aim of this chapter has been to extend the rather obvious point that things depend on people by focusing on the idea that the behavior of things, plants and animals traps humans into various forms of care. Things depend on people when they are procured, manufactured, exchanged, used and discarded but in particular they depend on people to maintain them if they are to remain as people want them. Or they depend on humans to maintain the environments in which they thrive. Made things are not inert or isolated. Their connections with other things and their maintenance depend on humans. So the main conclusion of this chapter is that this dependence of things on humans draws humans deeper into the orbit of things. Looking after things as they get depleted or fall apart or as they grow and reproduce traps humans into harder labor, greater social debts and duties, changed schedules and temporalities. This is true of plants and animals whose lives have been changed by humans, but it is also true of all things that involve some form of human investment.

It might be argued that humans, ever since the first shift to a broad spectrum economy in the late Pleistocene have been on a long-term program of increasing diet breadth as they adopted yet new forms of energy and nutrient capture that required yet more intensive processing, conservation and management. As they have increasingly ‘domesticated’ clay, metal, oil, nuclear particles, water, and so on, these diverse things have increasingly depended on humans for their care and maintenance. Humans have had increasingly to invest labor and new technologies to manage and sustain these things and have found themselves organized by them. The challenge posed by things, as in the current debate over global climate change, becomes ever larger and more intractable.

Indeed it could further be argued that humans become regulated and disciplined in their interactions with things in all their complexities and falling-apart uncertainties. The Department of Transport and its catalogues of rules and regulations are necessary to make sure we do not kill each other as we drive cars. To make sure we do not lose or mis-direct money we need banks; to manage our failing bodies we need hospitals; to look after decaying sites we need UNESCO; to deal with disputes about property we need lawyers and courts of justice; to prevent people steeling things and killing each other over things we need prisons. It is as if we cannot quite manage with things. They get us into difficulty – so we find ourselves regulated and disciplined. We go towards things, we need them and want them but we have to be kept away from them also. Things and humans become fickle and unruly in relation to each other. The different temporalities of humans and things create uncertainty and the need for vigilance and discipline. Far from society being based solely on the stability of things, it seems that human-thing relationships create instability that needs to be stabilized.

In the above paragraph it is apparent that it is not just the falling apart of things that that produces unruliness and the need for regulation. As we saw in Chapter 2 and will see throughout this book, things unleash potential in humans. This potential includes human conflict over the ownership and control of things. Put yet more generally, humans have the capacity to always think differently about things, including whether things should be alienable or inalienable, made or owned by the community or by the individual, exchanged or horded, preserved or destroyed. There is always the potential for contestation and conflict about things and the labels and tags we give them. Because humans have limitless potential in their relationships with things, there is the potential for unruliness and the need for regulation.

The unruliness of things derives from the fact that they are not inert and not isolated, but it is exacerbated by the fact that humans and things live in different temporalities. The unruliness derives also from the complexity of human-thing dependences so that it is very difficult to monitor all the possible interactions and conjunctions. The multivariate connections multiply possible outcomes and make predictions difficult. But also humans become unruly in their relationships to things, contesting and challenging rights and duties. For all these reasons, things and human-thing interactions are often surrounded by regulation and systems of management and care.

In this chapter I have focused on approaches that explore the behavior of materials, plants and animals. When these different things come to depend on humans for their continued existence in the way that humans want them, humans too get drawn into their specific behaviors and temporalities. Humans get trapped looking after wheats that will not reproduce without them; they get trapped by walls that will not stay up without them; they get caught up in the lives of sheep. In the next chapter I will elaborate on this notion of getting ‘caught up’ in things within a theory of entanglement.





Chapter 5


Entanglement


The plane is waiting on the tarmac while its metal fatigue is examined. For several hours I am stuck inside, thinking and fuming – thinking about the huge discourses of health and safety, rules of procedure, massive bureaucracies all dealing with keeping planes flying safely and all of which mean that none of the passengers can get out of the plane until security procedures have been put in place, luggage retrieved, an available gate found. For the moment I am stuck inside the plane – I cannot get out.

The previous three chapters have examined how humans depend on things (HT), how things depend on other things (TT), how things depend on humans (TH). If we add the obvious point that humans depend on humans (HH), then entanglement, at one level, is simply the addition of these four sets of dependences and dependencies.

Entanglement = (HT) + (TT) + (TH) + (HH)

The defining aspect of entanglement with things is that humans get caught in a double bind, depending on things that depend on humans. Put another way, things as we want them have limited ability to reproduce themselves, so in our dependence on them we become entrapped in their dependence on us. Already in Chapter 4 I described how thing dependence on humans entraps humans into investment and care. But this is only because humans are so utterly dependent on things in the first place (Chapter 2), and it is amplified because things depend on other things (Chapter 3).

There is thus a dialectic relationship between dependence, often productive and enabling, and dependency, often constraining and limiting. Humans and things, humans and humans, things and things depend on each other, they rely on each other, produce each other. But that dependence is in continual tension with boundaries and constraints as things and humans reach various limits (of resources, of material and social possibility) that are overcome by, that demand, yet further dependence and investment. Entanglement can thus be defined as the dialectic of dependence and dependency.

Most studies of the social realm concentrate on the relationships between humans, in relations of exchange, power, representation and so on. Things are certainly involved but as mediators or tools, actively involved in social tensions and resolutions. Rather than this human-centered view, I have claimed that things exist in a world that is to some degree their own. Things have lives, vibrant lives (Bennett 2010) and temporalities, and they depend on each other and on humans. This separate world of things draws humans in. The social world of humans and the material world of things are entangled together by dependences and dependencies that create potentials, further investments and entrapments.

I wish in this chapter to differentiate my use of the term entanglement from other related terms and uses of the word, and also to explore some aspects and forms of entanglement.





Other Approaches


Many scholars have described the complex networks, mixes, engagements that result from the dependence of humans on things, things on things, and things on humans. For example, there are the actor networks or heterogeneous mixes of humans and things as defined by Latour and his colleagues that I will discuss below (Latour 2005). There is Renfrew’s (2004) material engagement between humans and things discussed in Chapter 2 or Heidegger’s (1973: 97) ‘equipmental totality’. As we saw in Chapter 3, French technological studies have long focused on the chaînes opératoires through which things and humans pass as artifacts are produced (Leroi-Gourhan 1964–65, Lemonnier 1993a) and the behavioral chains from procurement to discard have been described by Schiffer (1999). There is also the mutualism and symbiosis between humans, plants and the environment discussed in Chapter 4 and so well described by Darwin (1859) at the end of the Origin of Species and often used as a source for ideas on co-evolution and symbiosis: ‘It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank, clothed with many plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various insects flitting about’.

Mauss (1954, 25–26) wrote that ‘souls are mixed with things; things with souls’ and in this anthropological tradition others such as Marilyn Strathern (1988) have talked of enchainment or distributed personhood (as discussed in Chapter 2). The term ‘enchainment’ as used by Strathern refers to Polynesian and Melanesian cultures where an artifact is not ‘a thing-in-itself’. It does not acquire identity from those who use it nor give identity to people. A thing is part of a chain of obligations and desires as things circulate, passed around as gifts. ‘If in a commodity economy things and persons assume the social form of things, then in a gift economy they assume the social form of persons’ (Strathern 1988: 103). In this context persons are ‘dividuals’ or ‘partible persons’ – that is persons are the products of chains of socially reproductive acts, so there is no division between the social and individual persona. So every person is a product of others, or has an identity which is produced from all the social actions that were involved in marriage, giving birth, nurturing, etc. Enchainment is created because of the ‘hau’ of things – that is their need to be moved on, to be mobile. Gifts are treated as responsibilities that are to be quickly got rid of – it is wrong, impossible for something to be stationary. Others such as Munn (1986) and Weiner (1992) have described similar processes.

The complex inter-connections between people resulting from the exchange of things is also seen in post-colonial studies, as in Nick Thomas’ (1991) book on ‘entangled objects’. He writes of western and non-western peoples ‘mutually entangled in an array of rights and obligations, people who are “reciprocally dependent”’ (Thomas 1991: 14) in the exchange of objects in the processes of colonialism. ‘The notion of entanglement aims to capture the dialectic of international inequalities and local appropriations’ (Thomas 1991: 207). Rather than opposing European and indigenous, global and local, capitalist commodity and reciprocal gift, domination and resistance, Thomas and others working on colonial interactions (e.g. Dietler 1998, 2010, Gosden 2004, Jordan 2009b, Orser 1996, Silliman 2005, Stein 2005) build on notions of creolization and hybridity to attain ‘a more historically accurate consideration of the complexities of the colonial encounter’ (Martindale 2009: 61). In her work on contemporary South Africa, Nuttall (2009) describes the historical entanglements between blacks and whites. The more whites dispossessed blacks, the more whites depended on blacks (for labor) and the more blacks depended on whites. In their dependence on blacks whites erected an ideology of separation and difference – racism. In effect Nuttall describes a co-dependency. She problematizes simple oppositions between colonizer and colonized, metropole and colony, center and periphery, domination and resistance. She talks instead of an entanglement or ‘web, carrying with it the notion of interlacing, an intricacy of pattern or circumstance, a membrane that connects’ (Nuttall 2009: 3).

Archaeologists have often focused on how things create links between people (e.g. Chapman 2000, Gamble 2004). But the relationships between humans and things in the formula above are not interactions but dependences. The two forms of dependence and dependency were described in Chapter 2. The anthropological work on exchange and post-colonialism is alive to both these aspects of dependence. What they often lack, on the other hand, as was discussed in Chapter 2, is an adequate engagement with the object nature of things. The focus is on relationships between people, how things connect opposed categories and allow for hybridity and transformation. There is a lack of symmetry in the treatment of things. Strathern eschews the thing-in-itself.

But as we saw in Chapters 3 and 4, things themselves need each other and they need us. So when we use them we are drawn into their objectness and into the care of their unruly behavior. Cultural anthropologists are often wary of talking of the ‘costs’ of things and of the maintenance and care of things since ‘cost’ seems to imply some universal measure. But as we saw in Chapter 4, costs do not need to be defined only in terms of universal measures, maximum returns on some universal standard. Rather, costs can be defined in terms of the different types of investment made in things by humans from all parts of the tangled system and in terms of the disruption of all types caused to other parts of the entanglement. In other words, the evaluation of costs and benefits is a study of the flows of matter, energy and information through things. Least cost and maximum benefit can be defined in terms of the overall and specific flows.





Latour and Actor Network Theory


Latour and others in sociology of science studies do take material things in themselves seriously and they seek a more balanced or integrated analysis of humans and things. Sociologists have tended to see the social world as about interpersonal relations. But Latour (1990, 1993), Law (1999) and Knorr-Cetina (1981) have come to see how engines, measuring instruments, laboratory probes, detectors play a part as actors in structuring social relationships. These authors explore the production of scientific knowledge in the laboratory, but they also argue that similar social/thing processes occur more widely. They focus on the actor networks of big things like the computerized rail transportation system called ARAMIS (Latour 1996), but they also look at small things like pipettes, paper blueprints, computer screens and so on. Given this greater focus on material things than we saw in the various approaches discussed in Chapter 2 (material culture studies), it is not surprising that there is an increasing influence in archaeology (Olsen 2007, Shanks 2007, Webmoor 2007, Witmore 2007, Webmoor and Witmore 2008).

The aim of this type of approach, often termed Actor Network Theory (ANT), is to focus on relationality rather than on apparent fixed and essential dualisms such as truth and falsehood, agency and structure, human and non-human, before and after, knowledge and power, context and content, materiality and sociality, activity and passivity. It is not that there are no such divisions but that the distinctions are effects or outcomes. ‘They are not given in the order of things’ (Law 1999: 3). Thus ANT conducts a ‘semiotics of materiality’. It takes the semiotic focus on relationality and applies it to all materials, producing a relational materiality (Joyce 2002).

As an initial example we can take Latour’s (1988) study of the ‘pasteurization of France’ in which the microbe comes to be seen as an ‘essential actor’ (Latour 1988: 39). Microbes as things connect people and they connect people and things. Those in our guts connect us to what we eat. They also connect us through the spread of contagious diseases and because we depend on each other to be hygienic and defeat microbes (Latour 1988: 37). So there is a clear focus on dependence here. We depend on the microbes that pasteurize beer in order to have economic relations between brewers and customers. We depend on sterilizing milk in order to be able to feed our children milk products. At the end of the 19th and early 20th centuries, the triumph of hygiene allowed the First World War to be conducted since ‘without the bacteriologists, the generals would never have been able to hold on to millions of men for four years in muddy, rat-infested trenches’ (Latour 1988: 112). The dependence has costs – the costs of ‘setting up new professions, institutions, laboratories, and skills at all points’ (Latour 1988: 39).

In this case Latour describes the actors as heterogeneous, made up of linked entities such as hygienists, drains, Agar gels, chickens, farms, insects of all kinds. The actors are human, non-human, individual entities and large institutions. The aim is to avoid reductionism and to focus on the dispersed networks through which such actors come to have form and come to act (cf. Latour 1993). In another example, Law and Mol (2008) look at how sheep in Cumbria were caught during a foot and mouth epidemic in a network of vets, laboratories, theories about epidemiology and disease spread, economic considerations about loss of economic wealth from slaughter of sheep, farmers’ knowledge about flocks and their grazing patterns, slaughter houses, etc. In this view, action moves around like a viscous fluid – what any actor does depends on other actors; and yet each actor has its own stubborn specificity. ‘So much comes together in the collaborative webs of complex practices’ (Law and Mol: 73). The landscape depends on the sheep in order for it to be maintained in its present form but the Common Agricultural Policy encouraged farmers to put too many sheep on the landscape. So ‘the landscape depends on the sheep – but if there are too many of them, it gets destroyed. Activities have complex and often unpredictable effects. And the interfering webs that make up assemblages lead to surprises, too. All of which means that what emerges is hard to predict. For assemblages, like actors, are creative. They have novel effects and they make new things’ (Law and Mol: 74).

In such work there is an interest in what happens when things don’t work and go wrong, as discussed in Chapter 4. Knorr-Cetina (1981) discusses a broken laboratory instrument and the effects this had. The scientists started to use a centrifuge in place of the broken instrument. By tinkering with the centrifuge, the measurement process came to be redefined, leading to a reworking of the scientists’ problem. The humans, their research and the instruments were thoroughly entangled in each other. The network required continuous ‘social, technical, and financial maintenance, surveillance, and repairs’ (Preda 1999: 363). There is a ‘practical codependency between knowledge embodied by the researchers and knowledge incorporated in the instruments’ (Preda 1999: 352). Latour talks of this co-dependence as ‘a work of hybridization’ (1993: 11).

Given this strain in ANT of incorporating dependence and dependency into analyses and interpretations of human-thing interactions, the use of the term ‘network’ might seem inadequate. Latour (1999, see also 2005) argues that indeed the idea of network has lost its critical valency because of the emphasis on information exchange and networks of global interaction in the World Wide Web. He suggests that in ANT ‘network’ originally meant transformations and translations. It referred to the complexities of linkages that made things related beyond their supposed existence as stable regional entities. In Spanish ‘network’ is translated as ‘red’ and in French as ‘réseau’ both of which have the connotations of web or mesh. Ingold (2010) suggests that such terms give a better sense of rhizomic flows than does the term network (see also Latour 2005). The spider’s web is an extension of the spider and makes possible the life of the spider. Ingold prefers the word meshwork to give a better sense of flows of force and lived gatherings, rather than objects connected by networks.

And yet there remains a tendency for ANT to give insufficient attention to the ways in which humans and things in their physical connectedness to each other (Chapters 3 and 4) entrap each other. Latour’s focus is often on the mixing of humans and nonhumans and he rejects culture/nature oppositions. Indeed the whole of ANT is built upon a move away from fixed essentialist dualisms such as materiality and sociality, human and nonhuman. In my view this goes too far. When the ice melted at the end of the Pleistocene it had a widespread affect on human society. There was some relationship with the emergence of settled villages and domestication of plants and animals. Even if this effect was varied in different parts of the globe, and even if we do not understand the effects adequately, this climate change, unlike our own, was independent of humans.

Pierre Lemonnier took Bruno Latour’s symmetrical approach to task for its tendency to overlook material constraints and focus on sociological issues. In his response (Lemonnier and Latour 1996) Latour agreed that pure, asocial material constraints did not exist in his perspective. Because Latour is intent on moving beyond subject/object dualisms and dialectical relations, he often appears to show little interest in objects and object relations themselves and the non-human ecologies in which they interact. ‘Objects are never assembled together to form some other realm anyhow’ (Latour 2005: 85). ANT analysis is ‘not a matter of giving priority to “the material world alone”’ since the aim is to supercede subject/object oppositions (Olsen 2010: 149). For Latour, the lack of dualism is a positive aspect of Actor Network Theory (see also Knappett 2005: 32). But to bring everything into the dispersed human/non-human network risks losing one of the main motors of change – the limited unfixed nature of things in themselves and their relationships with each other. There are many changes in natural cycles, in daily, monthly, annual, decadal, millennial rhythms. There are many processes of decay and loss and depletion that impinge on human society and in which things have unacknowledged and unforeseen effects. Because humans and nonhumans are thoroughly embroiled in each other, these material changes entangle humans, they force responses and adjustments.

In his account of a Manchester church (see Chapter 4), Edensor (2011) critiques ANT by arguing that there are forces outside actor networks that cause problems and lead to change. In the church, the behavior of salts, weather and chemicals do themselves produce change (Edensor 2011: 249). There is tension between human and non-human that is partly caused by the interactions of objects in ecological settings. Latour (1992; see also Latour as Johnson 1988) describes how a speed bump acts to force people to be moral as they drive cars along a road in front of a school. Humans are forced to slow down or break up their cars – a morality is forced on them by the physical interactions between the car and the speed bump and the costs needed to repair a car that is driven fast over a speed bump. The speed bump acts as a delegate of humans and indeed in England it is called a ‘sleeping policeman’. The car driver is ‘policed’ at a distance – there is no need for a police officer to be there in person. For Latour in such analyses, there is no separation between thing and society. In 2005 he abandoned the principle of symmetry between humans and things because ‘the last thing I wanted was to give nature and society a new lease on life through “symmetry”’ (2005: 76; see also Olsen 2007). As a result, in Latour’s analyses things are always already caught up in networks of humans and non-humans and the object nature of things separate from society is not a key part of the analysis.

There are problems with the idea of a total mixing of humans and things in networks or meshes. At certain historical moments and in certain contexts humans appear dominant over things, but at other places and times things seem to have the dominant hand (for example during global warming at the end of the Pleistocene and perhaps during our own current experience of global warming). In ANT everything is relational and this insight is important. But it is also the case that materials and objects have affordances that are continuous from context to context. These material possibilities (whether instantiated or not) create potentials and constraints. So rather than talk of things and humans in meshworks or networks of inter-connections, it seems more accurate to talk of the dialectical tension of dependence and dependency, historically contingent. Rather than networks we seem caught; humans and things are stuck to each other. Rather than focusing on the web as a network we can see it as a sticky entrapment.

I have tried to encapsulate this notion of being stuck together in my attention to the word dependence, problematizing the concept by dividing it into various components - the reliance, the contingency (both in dependence) and the entrapment of dependency. It is especially the latter that produces the ‘stickiness’ between humans and things which in my view is inadequately dealt with in the networks and heterogeneous hybrids of ANT. It is the focus on being caught in all the forms of human-thing dependences that leads me to ‘entanglement’.





The Archaeology of Entanglement


The first phase of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in the Second World War in 1941 was called Operation Barbarossa. The Germans initially had the initiative, but there was rain in October and mud on the roads, and freezing conditions in November with temperatures down to minus 20 degrees C. The Germans had no winter clothing, not even gloves as they were not expecting a winter campaign. The Germans did not have suitable lubricating oil so their guns did not work. The wireless batteries froze. The Russians were better equipped and the Germans were forced to retreat in January 1942 – although there were later advances again by the Germans. But for this one operation in 1941 one sees starkly the entanglement of people in things, with deadly results.

In this book I have gradually built up a description of the ways in which humans and things are entwined, involved with each other, dependent on each other, tied together. This account is relevant for all things on which humans have some impact, but it is especially relevant for things made by humans. I have tried to show that humans and things are both same and different and that unexpected interactions occur in the interstices between them. While much of what I will argue in this book about entanglement is closely aligned to the approaches taken in the social sciences and humanities (e.g. Brown 2001, 2003, Nuttall 2009), I take a specifically archaeological perspective based on two characteristics.





The Physical Processes of Things


Most approaches to entanglement do not deal specifically with the material properties of things (Ingold 2007a). I focus on the ways in which entanglements between people that involve things create specific practical entrapments. In Chapters 2–4 we saw that the material objectness of things tends to trap humans into specific forms of co-dependency. In the practices of daily life things fall apart, decay, run out, go wrong, need each other in sequence. Humans thus get entangled in this physicality – however much they do so within social worlds. There remains a component of the entanglement which is produced by things themselves. While these dimensions of things are incorporated within the sociology of science research, the archaeological direction is more directly attuned to the physical processes of things in themselves. For some in the sociology of science tradition, as we have seen, there is some doubt about whether physical processes could ever be separated out within the human-nonhuman hybrids. Archaeologists are more comfortable, given their detailed work with artifacts, recognizing that there are physical processes that occur that are separate from, however much they are infused with, the social realm.

The term ‘entanglement’ joins the many others that try to bridge the divide between materialism and social construction. I do not want to reintroduce a materialism or an environmental determinism, or an ecological imperative. Scholars in the humanities and social sciences have done much to appropriate ecological and environmental concerns into the socially constructed sphere. But the success of such scholarship does not hide the fact that real world issues entangle us in entrapments and necessities. Much as we engage in these necessities through our socially constructed worlds, they nevertheless draw us into their webs of interconnections. Entanglement as a term aims to allow a materialism but embedded within the social, the historical, the contingent.

We have seen how the material attributes of smectitic clays entrapped humans into the care of houses at Çatalhöyük in Turkey 9000 years ago. Of course, houses can have much the same effect today. Consider a person who owns a house in USA which was built in 1790 and is a listed building of historic interest. The roof needs replacing, which involves getting a specialist roofer and specialist materials. The roof replacement might involve spending (in 2010) about $55 000 and thus requires the house owner to have a good job, to work hard, to sustain a set of social and economic relationships. It is not just the rotting of the beams in the roof that entraps humans in such entanglements. The entrapment is also caused by the way we have come to value old houses in the USA and by the interactions between decaying roofs and our historic sensitivities. It is these interactions that have resulted in regulations about listing historic buildings and have forced a compliance on us. So it is not just the building itself that entangles us – but also the ways in which we have come to construe and value old buildings.

We can take this example further by imagining that the house is worth $0.8 million but the owner has loans on the house that amount to $0.9 million. This situation of ‘negative equity’ is a good example of the way in which people get stuck in the web of things. The value of a house ends up being less than the loan owed on it. So it is impossible, or very difficult, for the owner to sell the house – the money received would not pay off the money owed. So the owner is saddled, caught, entangled in a set of debts and ownerships because of the material house, especially if the roof is rotting. Something has to be done to save the roof, but how is the $55 000 to be raised? But in this case again it is not just the house that entangles the owner; it is also the system of loans and the forms of ownership and the wider system of values and obligations that underpin the entanglement.

Entanglement is practical and it involves debts, duties, obligations. It also involves systems of general value in which these are embedded. For example, in a particular society like the USA it may be possible to ‘own’ a house even though the deeds are kept by a loan company or bank. Thus, ownership of a particular thing depends on wider ideas about ownership in a particular historical place and time. As we saw in Chapter 2, each society has its rules about who can own – for example, in other societies women may not be able to own houses. This discourse may then overlap into other thingly areas, for example influencing whether women can own cattle; or whether men can own women. So there is a continual interplay between our relationships with things and generalized systems of discourse and value. Rights and duties in one area thus extend out and get transferred to other areas.

It may be helpful to provide a further example of the ways in which material entanglements are simultaneously and seamlessly conceptual and social. Here is a puzzle. How is a plastic see-through letter- or post-box entangled with the Pentagon? As I was waiting in Heathrow, after finally being allowed off the plane with metal fatigue, I noticed a see-through post-box in the airport. Letter- or pillar-boxes in England had always been red and cast iron, I suppose to protect letters from prying eyes, theft and the weather. This one was plastic and had a red front, but the back was transparent so that I could watch my letter fall in and lie there. But I could also see there was no bomb. The transparent post-box had been introduced after 9/11 and the flying of planes into the Twin Towers and the Pentagon, and after the general rise in terrorist threats, often targeted on airports. So the material entanglement in which post-boxes and the Pentagon were caught involved bombs and terrorists, and running through that entanglement was a climate of fear. So, again, a system of emotions and values was part of the human-thing entanglement that linked planes and bombs and post-boxes.

Humans work within webs of meaning that often seem arbitrary, symbolic and representational. Their abstract and generalizing thought processes are dependent on these webs, on language, on systems of representation. But very often, these same symbolic representations gain their salience from being embedded in sets of practices and experiences. Most material symbols in particular tend to be iconic and indexical (Preucel 2006); there tends to be some relationship between sign and referent. Notions of contiguity and association abound. I am not, thus, arguing for a separate world of symbolic representation. Even linguistic meanings are thoroughly embedded in practice (Preucel 2006, Peirce 1932, Searle 2000). My aim here has been to say that the webs and networks in which humans live are as much symbolic, meaningful, spiritual, religious, conceptual as they are practical and technical, economic and social. Thomas (1991: 9) finds that the symbolic world is ‘practically muddled like everything else’. Keane (2003b) argues that signs and referents are bundled together in physical co-presence on objects. The web is seamlessly material and immaterial. The fear that is associated with post-boxes and planes today results from very specific historic circumstances that have heterogeneous dimensions.

So the term entanglement differs from materialism, ecological determinism, biological reductionism and the like. I argue that the source of transformation and constraint in human society is not in the material facts of existence but in the dependences between humans and things. We have to be careful here: clearly material objects and ecologies can themselves disrupt or have an impact on entanglements, as can intentional humans. Whether these stimuli (of whatever heterogeneous origin) lead to change or transformation of entanglements depends not on the materials (or intentions) themselves but on the form and tautness of the entanglement. The interlacings of the web are composed of bundles of material, ecological, economic, social, ideational, emotional and cognitive processes. Human movements to and away from things are made possible by, but are also bounded or channeled by, these bundles of material and immaterial interactions and dependences. These bundles make up strings or cables in which both humans and things are enabled and constrained. It is these multiple, co-dependent strands that create the webs in which societies are formed, endure and fall apart. The determination is produced not by an idealism or by a materialism but by the contingent ways in which the multiple strands of entanglement are tied together.

Entrapment is not produced by things, tools and environments in themselves but by all the forms of dependence summarized in the formula at the start of this chapter. In Chapters 2–4 we saw that humans are dispersed into things; and we also saw that things are dispersed into each other; and that things are dispersed into humans. So there is a mutual locking into a tangled skein. It is the totality of HT, TH, HH, TT that creates entrapment. All the dependences that things have on humans and on each other play a role at one and the same time as all the dependences that humans have on each other and on things. Humans get entrapped by the ways in which each node in the web is hyper-connected to other nodes, so that all nodes are maintained in position by the overall structure of the entanglement. The links are multi-stranded and practical and they involve notions of value and cost, ownership and identity, gift and debt as much as they involve the practical dependences of things on each other. In a practical everyday way, the chains of human-thing dependence provide us with opportunities and constraints. We seek pragmatically to make things work.





Temporalities


There is an important temporal dimension in entanglement. The dependence of things on humans means that humans are always busy along the strings or cables of entanglement mending things, putting fingers in dykes, fixing holes in buckets and so on. And because things and humans live in different temporalities, there is an unpredictability about where maintenance and innovation may next be needed. According to Achille Mbembe (2001: 14), the postcolony ‘encloses multiple durées made up of discontinuities, reversals, inertias, and swings that overlay one another, interpenetrate one another: an entanglement’. Mbembe tries to replace the notion of time as an evolving series with time as an interlocking of pasts, presents and futures. There is non-linearity and chaos as past ‘failures’ are returned to and retrospectives abound (see also Nuttall 2009).

Material things play a large part in the unraveling of linear time. When I drive my car I am immediately and directly indebted to the invention of the wheel in the 4th millennium BC. When I eat my morning cereals, the wheats have genetic material that was first selected for during the domestication of plants in the Middle East eleven millennia ago. I noted in Chapter 4 that while the focus in behavioral approaches on how things work is important, the lack of consideration given to history limits the ability to understand entanglement. We can take as an example my wrist watch. I depend on the watch to get me to work on time, finish my lectures on time, be the sort of person I want to be (punctual – not early not late). This is the type of dependence discussed in Chapter 2. But the watch also depends on the leather strap and metal clasp to stay on my wrist (Chapter 3) and it depends on me to replace the battery when it runs out, and to replace the strap as it wears out or gets dirty (Chapter 4). The watch also depends on a vast edifice of spatial and temporal connections as we began to see in Chapter 4.

In Chapter 1 we saw how the yearly calendar on which the date on my watch is based was first fixed by Julius Caesar and then by a Gregorian calendar. The system of 12 hours and 60 minutes is based on the mathematics of the Sumerians and the time systems of the Babylonians and ancient Egyptians (Dohrn-van Rossum 1996). Ptolemy subdivided each of the 360 degrees of latitude and longitude into smaller segments that became known as minutes (partes minutae primae) and seconds (partes minutae secundae). But minutes and seconds could not be used for everyday timekeeping until the development of mechanical clocks, especially the spring powered clocks of the 1500s. By the end of the 16th century these were able to display minutes.

But how do I know what time to set my wrist watch to? The time is based on a global system of time keeping which has developed over centuries with the expansion of empire, mechanized travel and global capital. As Britain developed its international trade, Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) was established in 1675 in order to aid those at sea to determine longitude – although that itself depended on inventing a clock that could withstand the rocking and buffeting of ship movements (by John Harrison in the 1760s and 1770s). GMT was based on the use of telescopes at Greenwich to measure mean solar time. Gradually, through trade and imperial networks, GMT was adopted worldwide as a reference time (Howse 1980). But the first time zone in the world was established not at sea but by British railway companies in 1847 to replace the variable times in towns and cities around Britain and in 1883 four time zones were established for the railroad systems of the United States. Between 1880 and 1930, most major countries had adopted hourly time zones based on GMT. Greater needs for travel, communication and trade, associated with advances in the calculation of time using electronic and atomic clocks led to further international standards. In 1976 the second was redefined as the duration of 9 192 631 770 energy transitions of the cesium atom and in 1972 GMT was replaced by Coordinated Universal Time as the international time reference, maintained by atomic clocks around the world.

Time has its social, political, economic and religious contexts. Le Goff (1960) describes the differences between church time and market or merchant time in medieval Europe, and Marx drew attention to the role of the technical rationality of the clock in the regulation and alienation of labor under capitalism (Thompson 1967). Today the pace of our lives is measured in micro-seconds as we surf the web, conduct international business in stocks and shares and race to airports. Humans have become increasingly regulated by time. My watch produces a particular type of person and life. A vast edifice of humans and histories, things and their connections stretched out over years, centuries and millennia and spread out from Greenwich to every part of the globe traps me into a particular way of being. It is the actual watch with its circuits and hands as well as the institutions and global agreements that trap me. But the connections seem unfathomable. They have no end, involving wheels, ships, trains, telescopes, springs and atoms, satellites, countless engineers, politicians making international agreements, mappers, astronomers and mathematicians – all spread out over millennia and present within my watch and its working in relation to me. So the me in California that looks at his watch as he gets ready to call a colleague in Turkey is caught within, and is invested in maintaining, a time system with its own temporality: one that links me directly to Julius Caesar and John Harrison, the first wheel and the discovery of the atom. The person I can be depends on this particular temporal conjuncture of humans and things, institutions and practices.

There is more to history than a linear account of sequences of events; there is also the material history, the heritage of past acts, the detritus of past millennia that bumps up against us in a non-linear way (Lucas 2005). It is this material history that continues to play a role in the present. We have seen how refuse builds up, creating problems for future generations. Past generations create environmental problems for future generations. Human-thing entanglement at one point in time directs where future action can take place. In Britain today many roads in cities and across landscapes are Roman in origin. Once built a road connects to other roads, and to buildings and facilities along roads. The roads are difficult to change because there is so much connected to them. In the 1960s/1970s there was discussion of changing driving in Britain so that people drove on the right of the road as on the continent, where the habit of driving on the right had been spread by Napoleon. But the costs were deemed too high. Not only car production would have to change, but road signs, intersections, access to buildings and airports and so on. So the legacy of Napoleon and his failure to conquer Britain lives on in Europe – not because of the story of Napoleon although that played an initial role, but because his material legacy has been invested in and absorbed into the economic and social fabric of society.

And the things in this system exist in their own temporalities and so affect us in unexpected ways. Some hangover from previous decisions made in the growth of a system can suddenly hit us unawares causing adjustments at potentially great costs. As an example we can return to the example of time-keeping. As the year 2000 approached it was suddenly realized that a great calamity was imminent – the millennium bug or the Y2K problem. The problem arose because many computer systems had been set to store information about the year as only two digits. Thus 1910 was often stored as 10, and would thus be indistinguishable from 2010. In other computer systems it was thought that a computer might try to represent 2000 as 19100. Banking and data storage systems were put at risk and companies spent very large sums globally in order to rectify the recording of years. In the event the dangers to information systems may have been exaggerated, but there can be no denying the disruption and costs. Committees were set up by governments, experts employed and books written (Murray 1984). The United States government passed the ‘Year 2000 Information and Readiness Disclosure Act’. It is estimated that the total global cost of work done in preparation for Y2K was 300 billion US dollars (BBC News – 6 January 2000). The reduction of four to two digits to represent years derived from the costs of computer memory in the 1960s and the effort to save space on 80-column punch cards. This two digit system on cards was carried over into later digital systems. It was not until the particular conjunction of this system and the year 2000 that a potential crisis was recognized.

Humans and things have their different temporalities. Within all the entanglements, within all the complex flows and dependences, there are transformations of things that can suddenly burst out. A dam may suddenly burst through, a volcano may explode, the mud on a hillside may unexpectedly slip down and smother a village, a shift in the axis of the earth may force a resetting of the global network of atomic clocks. Decisions made in earlier times about the preference for cars fueled by petrol rather than by electricity in turn impact on later decisions about supplies of oil, international trade and warfare and global warming. Reasonable decisions at the time in which holes were punched in cards have an enormous impact on computers and information systems 30–40 years later. Humans are forever working along the strands and cables of their webs fixing things, putting things right as past decisions made by past generations, even generations millennia ago, come back to have impact.





Forgetness


Entanglements have components that have deep histories. We saw in Chapter 4 that humans at Çatalhöyük in Turkey 9000 years ago depended on wild cattle for social status, beliefs, feasting, social display. This heavy use of wild cattle may have led to a depletion of cattle in the landscape and the introduction of smaller domestic cattle from farther east. But Diamond (1997) argues that the close association between humans and cattle in domestic settlements led to the spread of diseases from cattle to humans in the form of measles and tuberculosis. He further argues that human populations in Eurasia built up some degree of resistance to these and other diseases linked to domestic stock. Human populations in the New World, however, did not have cattle, sheep, goat and pig and did not develop any degree of resistance to the accompanying diseases. When Europeans came to the New World they brought the diseases leading to large-scale population decline amongst native Americans. After 10 500 years, the repercussions were felt of a Neolithic entanglement that had become a taken-for-granted part of life in Eurasia (see Wilcox 2009 for a more complex account).

There are many other examples. Since the Neolithic of the Middle East, humans and domestic cattle have increasingly become entangled such that today the need to feed vast herds has led to deforestation in the Amazon and to a major contribution to global warming. We did not see it coming that the invention of the wheel in the 4th millennium BC together with the development of the internal combustion engine in the 19th century would lead to conflicts over access to oil in the Middle East and further contributions to global warming.

We tend to forget the history of things. They can easily become taken-for-granted. We use them as we find them, working with them on the day-to-day, blind to the complex entanglements that have great historical depth. There were early warnings about the Y2K problem but few paid much attention until near the time. I was fascinated by the example of my wrist watch because I live with and use my watch oblivious to the enormous spans of spatial and temporal links in which it is entangled.

One of the reasons we are entrapped in things is that we do not see them or we forget them, even though they are still present and potentially active. In Chapter 2 I discussed levels of consciousness in relation to things, our reflective and non-reflective awareness of them as discussed by many authors from Pitt-Rivers and Heidegger to Leroi-Gourhan and Beckaert. Much of our interaction with things occurs at the non-reflective level. Things are there, on the table in the hall, but they can become invisible to us, part of the background, the frame of our lives. I also referred in Chapter 1 to the ways in which the workings of things are often hidden at the back, removed from view. The historical archaeologist James Deetz (1967) wrote of ‘small things forgotten’ and a book on the global dependencies of contemporary artifacts is subtitled ‘the secret lives of everyday things’ (Ryan and Durning 1997).

ANT uses the term ‘punctualisation’ to refer to the ways in which actors, relations, institutions, and objects come to be concealed from view (Law 1992) in order to provide the appearance of unity. John Law describes a television set, which most of the time is ‘a single and coherent object with relatively few apparent parts. On the other hand when it breaks down, for that same user—and still more for the repair person—it rapidly turns into a network of electronic components and human interventions’ (1992: 4). Much of the engine and workings of a car are hidden from the average driver who just knows about pedals and steering wheels – but depunctualization occurs when things break down and humans become aware of the engine.

Why does this forgetness occur?

Because in order to use something we do not need to know how it works unless it breaks down. We manage on the day-to-day without knowing the theories and histories of things.

Because of the non-reflective routinization of our every-day relationship with things.

Because the workings of things are often hidden, concealed in back regions of daily life.

Because the strings of entanglement are so long, complex and ‘chaotic’ that it is difficult for people to monitor and understand and predict. According to ANT some things are too large, too complex, or too fleeting and ephemeral to be grasped in their entirety by one person (Preda 1999: 350).

Because of the different temporalities of humans and things. A wall erodes or leans over at a pace too slow for most humans to bother with. That is until the wall is about to collapse or fall over.



Because things go out of use as entanglements transform. Returning to the example of the pebble collected from a beach that I used in Chapter 2, the pebble gradually becomes associated with and owned by a person or family, but it is also common for a pebble collected from a beach and placed in a box in a drawer at home, or placed on a shelf in the bathroom to be there so long that the inhabitants of the house forget what it is and what memories it evoked. When the house is sold it may be part of the ‘junk’ that is thrown out onto landfill.



Because things become distanced in place and time. Thus I might make an object and it is a thing for me, but it moves away from me and becomes separate from, distant from its context of production and use. With the passage of time, through exchange, or decay, the thing threatens to become distant, object-like. There may be traces on the object of its history, but its history comes with it only partially. The object is too easily de- or re-contextualized.



The effect of all this forgetness is that humans get entangled unwittingly. Things and their connections and dependences have implications and consequences of which people are not aware and which may be unintended (Giddens 1979). But suddenly the things return or transform and have to be dealt with. Suddenly the junk gets so large that it has to be moved or recycled. Suddenly global warming becomes obvious enough that something has to be done. Suddenly we take note of Y2K and spend huge amounts of resources to mitigate the problem.





The Tautness of Entanglements


Earlier in this chapter I referred to Darwin’s entangled bank. So what is the difference between the use of the term entanglement in this book and the use of the term to refer to ecological symbiosis and mutual or co-evolution? The main difference is that entanglement as the term is used here involves dependency. The species in Darwin’s entangled bank are engaged in symbiotic relationships. The flower and the bee depend on each other mutually. Species co-evolve and in this way they are tied together. But the bee does not tend the flower to make it grow. Theirs is a relation of dependence as I have defined it in this book. But when humans domesticated plants they did not just harvest or forage – they cultivated and sowed and weeded. There is a single bind between flower and bee. But the human is caught in a double bind with the domesticated wheat in that the human has also to make the wheat grow. As humans increasingly live in a world they have produced, they have to work harder to reproduce that world on which they depend. This is dependency.

As already noted, the tautness of entanglements is produced by the totality of the HT, TT, TH and HH dependences and dependencies. More specifically entrapment or tautness within entanglements occurs for a number of reasons, including the following.

The things humans have affected and depend on need constant reproduction and care: dependency involves constraint.



As described in Chapter 3, there are bottle-necks and hold-ups in the carrying out of any complex action. We have to wait for the pot to dry before it can be fired. The different temporalities of things and humans impede each other. Things get stacked up in relation to each other, constraining each other along operational chains.

As described at the end of Chapter 4, dealing with the unruliness of things in relation to humans leads to regulation and discipline.

We have invested labor, resources, time in things and wish to protect that investment.

We have come to depend on the positive benefits deriving from the greater flows of resources and information through the network.

Various forms of ownership of things may lead to rights and obligations towards each other. Inequality usually involves the control of resources by dominant groups and the restriction of access to others.

In exchange, there is an obligation to return a gift.

The multiplicity of the links in the entanglement creates entrapment. To make a change at one place has impacts in many other places.



Underlying all these aspects of entrapment within entanglement is one simple and utterly obvious fact – that what we do at one moment is channeled by what we did previously. I will discuss the roles of trajectories in relation to entanglement more fully in Chapter 8, but for the moment I want to point out that the historical role of things is not simply linear so that a affects b affects c affects d. While such historical sequences can be described in relation to events, things have temporalities such that a may affect d directly. I gave many examples above. When I drive my car I am directly connected to the invention of the wheel six millennia ago. In England I often drive directly on a Roman road. The millennium bug of 2000 resulted from decisions made in the 1960s. Things and the effects of things endure across temporalities very different from humans and the events that so occupy them.

We often talk of such processes as ‘digging ourselves into a hole’, as archaeologists know better than most. When I excavate at Çatalhöyük I dig a trench or hole in the ground and from long and bitter experience I know that the hole I dig restricts later actions. For example, as I dig I decide where to place the earth from the hole. If I place the earth in a large heap on one side of the trench it becomes very difficult to expand the trench in that direction – I would need to expend much labor and costs moving the heap of spoil before I could dig under it. In any case, as the trench is made deeper, any expansion sideways at the bottom involves moving a lot of earth at the top. And then there are our efforts to deal with the unruliness of things. At Çatalhöyük we follow UK Health and Safety regulations so that we do not dig straight down but step in the trench gradually as we go down. So the trench gets smaller and smaller as we go down in case the deposits we have dug through shift and collapse on the excavators. So expanding sideways a small distance at the bottom of the trench involves expanding much larger distances at the top of the trench. Archaeologists very much dig themselves into holes so that earlier material decisions constrain later action. This is true of most material action. It becomes very costly to change road systems, stop global warming, get rid of the millennium bug because we have dug ourselves into real material holes that need a lot of fixing. Tautness is partly an historical product.

Many of these ideas about humans becoming locked into entangled webs are components of path dependence as discussed in economics (David 1985), political science (Pierson 2000), sociology (Mahoney 2000) and to a lesser extent archaeology (e.g. Lucas 2008, Hegmon et al. 2008). In a well-known study of the persistence of the QWERTY arrangement of letters on a keyboard, David (1985: 332) argues that ‘a path-dependent sequence of economic changes is one of which important influences upon the eventual outcome can be exerted by temporally remote events, including happenings dominated by chance elements rather than systematic forces.’ The lock-in effect from remote events occurs, from an economist’s point of view, largely because the costs of switching from one alternative to another increase over time. The costs of exit from a particular strategy rise through time. Path dependence in the social sciences is also linked to other additional factors that inhibit switching paths. These include the presence of a linked infrastructure which itself is difficult to change; for example, changing paths in car design and use has to contend with the entanglements between cars, road systems and networks of fueling stations (Pierson 2008). Other factors that create path dependence are law and convention, systems of authority and power differentials. There are thus many similarities between path dependence and the entrapment of entanglement, particularly the idea of getting locked into paths that become difficult or expensive to change so that early choices have a great effect on later action. But entanglement theory attempts to define dependence more fully and to focus particularly on the practical material interlacings of humans and things.





Types and Degrees of Entanglement


Can we say something provisional about types and degrees of entanglement? A first point to make is that entanglements (sets of inter-linked dependences between humans and things) are not necessarily complete and holistic. They are not like cultures and systems. They can be very localized, partial and marginal. Entanglements are identified empirically as specific flows of matter, energy and information. Some are hyper-connected and very far-flung. Others are local, short-term and disengaged. Practices that produce carbon emissions affect us all today, but my fixing of a tap in a house on one side of London may well be unrelated to the stumbling over the piano keys of a student playing the Moonlight Sonata on the other side. At Çatalhöyük it remains to be demonstrated whether any links can be found between pottery production and burial practices. We need to search for any empirical evidence of associations or oppositions that might suggest some linkage between the entanglements surrounding burial and those surrounding pottery.

So entanglements are always specific and local, but they are also open-ended. Thus in the case of the tap fixing and the piano playing on different sides of London, both may be interrupted by a news item on TV or both the tap and the piano may have metal components obtained from the same source. In the diagrams shown in Figures 3.1 and 3.2 it is always possible to go on outwards, for example in Figure 3.1 from the fire to the fuel to the basket to contain the fuel to the reed used to make the basket to the tool used to cut the reed to the obsidian from which the tool was made to the mountain from where it was obtained and so on. These are the heterogeneous strings of entanglement along which humans are continually drawn in order to carry out maintenance and fixing.

The degree to which humans and things are entangled partly relates to the length of connected but often invisible links that are involved. Despite the open-ended nature of the links around the fire, the number of links and their length are greater for the use of clay at Çatalhöyük (Figure 3.2). But each of these entanglements is miniscule in relation to the 1–20 000 parts needed for the modern car, obtained from all parts of the globe and involving trade agreements, tax systems, bureaucratic procedures and transport systems. And in our world the car is a small thing compared with the entanglements of all the parts in a ship, or in an airplane.

Some things seem to entangle more than others. I have pointed several times to the ways in which the cultivation and then domestication of plants entrapped people into a dense and complex entanglement. Cereal domestication locks humans into greater labor per unit of land as ground is cleared, prepared, dug over, seeds are planted followed by weeding, protecting from animals, harvesting, threshing, winnowing, roasting, pounding, grinding. And all this investment is returned over the long-term, leading to obligations, debts, ownership. The early use of domestic sheep on the other hand seems to involve less entrapment. As noted in Chapter 4, the behavior of wild sheep can be made use of by humans as they make use of the existing dominance hierarchies in the flocks, the tendency of flocks to follow leaders and to move limited distances around the landscape. Certainly entrapments occurred as breeding was increasingly controlled, as pens had to be made, as animals had to be kept off crops. If animals were domesticated as much for milk, wool and portage the degrees of entanglement would have been greater. But in general terms it is clear that some things require more investment from humans and more involvement from other things.

It might be thought that one could argue for some generalization about entanglement that related the degree of entanglement with the technological complexity of the object. Thus very simple and widely available objects might be expected to have fewer material, practical, human entanglements than complex objects made with parts that are scarce. Thus a pebble from the river bed used to smooth a plaster wall at Çatalhöyük is likely to have involved less entanglement than a (serpentine) bead that had to be traded over long distances and took a significant amount of technology to drill and polish. In our own times, a car involves fewer entanglements that an airplane. However, if we turn from the material entanglements to all the wider forms of entanglement, the social, religious, ideological, semiotic, phenomenological and so on, we quickly see that the generalization is difficult to maintain. Collections of similarly-sized white pebbles were collected and cached in the floors in houses at Çatalhöyük. We do not know their significance, but in some way these objects were selected out and treated specially. And some cars, because of their use in films (the Bond cars for example), or because they won a particular Grand Prix or were driven by a famous driver in his or her last race, take on a special social significance that may involve entanglements as great as or greater than a normal airplane. Because entanglement is both material and immaterial, involving debts, values, ownership and beliefs, it is not possible to generalize a priori about the overall entanglements of an object, although the material side certainly helps as a starting point in evaluating entanglement.

Despite their open-endedness, heterogeneity and historical specificity, entanglements can often be characterized using general terms. They may be strong, weak, integrated, redundant, concentrated, dispersed and so on. In Chapter 3 I gave the example of a sail boat in which all the many parts depend on one small 1 inch long piece of metal – a small pin on the shackle that links the top of the mainsail to the halyard that pulls up and keeps up the mainsail. Without this minute item the boat does not work. Without it one cannot sail, even if everything else is working fine.

We have all come across similar situations – where one has a perfectly functioning engine or system, except for one small part. We could call such systems highly integrated. In other systems, it might be possible to manage without a part (and even on the sail boat there may be some parts which are less important). For example, in a rowing eight, if one person falls out and takes his or her oar with him or her, the boat can still be rowed, if not so efficiently as before. This entanglement is less integrated and more dispersed. Some systems have large numbers of equivalent parts, they may be low technology, and we might call them redundant or simple. We could in fact borrow the language of complex systems (Bentley and Maschner 2003) for such distinctions as will be discussed in Chapter 8. We might go farther and suggest that certain types of complex system are more efficient at carrying out certain tasks, or that different types are more or less prone to change, and so on.

An alternative vocabulary is provided by Jean Baudrillard’s (1996) ‘system of objects’. Baudrillard describes how a system like the car engine starts off having independent entities or units in it, but through time the design of the car engine changes so that the parts come to be more dedicated to the functioning of the system as a whole – that is the engine and its parts become more integrated, achieving a functional synthesis. The parts in these systems he calls ‘technemes’ on the analogy with language. Baudrillard also notes that the technical functional system of everyday objects can be at odds with larger systems of cultural needs. Thus both within the car engine and in the relationship of the car engine to wider entanglements there can be degrees of integration, changing through time.

While awareness of such variation is important, it is not my aim to produce a classification of entanglements. My own view is that it is more helpful to focus on the variety of entanglements and their historical specificity. I also wish to insist on the difference between the ideas of entanglement and system (however complex, open and chaotic they may be). As noted above, entanglements involve notions of dependency and entrapment. They thus have histories that need interpreting, debts and obligations that need understanding, modes of labor organization involving inequalities. Entanglements are heterogeneous involving beliefs and values. It is not enough simply to model the contingent flows of energy, matter and information through a system since the fact of being caught up within an entanglement also involves power, history, beliefs, values and material practices. As we will see again in Chapter 8, the study of complex systems needs to be located within wider social and historical theory that deals with the interpretation of human skills, perceptions, and engagements and is sensitive to the practical holes into which we dig ourselves.





Cores and Peripheries of Entanglements


The small pin on the shackle that holds up the sail at the top of the mast is essential. It is core to the functioning of the boat – that it sails. For many sailors it does not matter so much what the tell-tale (that indicates the wind direction) is made of, or whether the stove, toilet and the sinks work. On my own boat sometimes I find I have been wrong about the importance of components of the boat. On one outing I decided that it did not matter that the battery was flat. But as a result I got stuck on a sand bank that day. The battery runs the depth sounder. Without it I did not see that there was a sandbank in my way. But for others who come on my boat the small pin in the shackle and the battery matter even less. For some, the stove and sink are more essential because the main function of the sail boat for them is not to sail but to relax, eat and entertain. So, once again, entanglements are related to perspective, purpose, belief. The relative importance of parts of the entanglement, whether they are central or peripheral, depends on the purpose of the functioning.

So far I have described the functioning of the sail boat in terms of its functioning to sail or entertain. But in either case there are additional entanglements that need considering. The boat is sailed and moored in a bay and the bay is an ecological system in which there are other boats, plants, animals, fish, insects and so on. The use of boats in the bay leads to increasing regulation of the behavior of boats and boat owners, including what is painted on the hulls, how many moorings are allowed, and how effluent is managed on the boats. In this wider set of entanglements in which the Coast Guard and Park Service are most interested it is the paint on the hull and the toilet system that become core issues.

Of course I can exert power over those that come on my boat and insist that all items to do with entertainment are of secondary importance when it comes to spending time and money on them. But it is also possible for the Park Service to override my interests and exert their power over my boat, extracting it from the water if it does not follow anti-pollution guidelines. Core and peripheries in entanglements are often defined by the power of dominant groups in the centers, such that development in the periphery is constrained and channeled by the center. This is of course one of the main themes of the debate about the cores and peripheries of states and empires in World Systems (Stein 1999). As is clear from my frequent reference to scholars such as Thomas (1991) and Nuttall (2009), my use of the term entanglement is much indebted to post-colonial studies of the dependencies that emerge in core-periphery relations within world economic systems. Much of these arguments can be transferred to other forms of entanglement, most of which have cores and peripheries of their own.

The relationships between core and peripheral parts of entanglements change through time. In the early and middle parts of the 1400 year sequence at Çatalhöyük, the main social interest was in entanglements that had to do with burial, history making, feasting and wild animals (Hodder 2006b). It is the wild animals that are shown in the art, and it is their horns that are installed in houses. Art and decoration are found in houses, often related to the treatment of ancestors buried beneath the floors. Domesticated animals and plants seem peripheral at this time. Neither are shown in the art, the pots used to process domestic sheep and goat fat are not decorated, and the bins used for storing cereals are not decorated. The processing of domestic animals and plants seems almost unnoticed within the dominant social perspective. But it is in this peripheral arena that things start to change, with greater dependence on and intensification of animal and plant domesticates through time. In the upper levels of the site there is more evidence for intensive use of plants and animals. Wild cattle play little role in the economy and socially. Adult burial no longer occurs in houses by the time of the Çatalhöyük West Mound (Chalcolithic). Hearths move into the center of the main room in the house rather than being peripheral to it, and domestic pottery is elaborately decorated. Change that started in peripheral areas in the lower layers in the mound becomes central in the upper levels. Entanglements have cores and peripheries that change according to perspective, power, and historical context.





Contingency


‘It is perhaps this instability, historicity, and lack of historical containment that epitomizes the entanglement we all have with objects.’

(Thomas 1991: 208)

We often talk of societies as if they were coherent units that every now and then have to deal with and adapt to change. Societies are often seen as evolving and adapting in an orderly manner. Alternative new models describe a more chaotic process in which there is a large degree of uncertainty and contingency. I will explore these ideas from chaos and complexity theories in relation to entanglement in Chapter 8. For the moment I want to point to the ways in which the open-endedness of entanglements, the long threads of which they are composed, the unruliness of things, the unexpected clashes between the different temporalities of humans and things, the historical specificity of the practical holes we have dug ourselves into, mean that entanglements are always provisional, worked out in practice, temporary and partial. Things are always happening that have to be dealt with in a continual boot-strapping process. Simple material events in one domain might have all sorts of unexpected spin offs. In ‘A long way down’, Nick Hornby (2005) describes a man who became a priest because he went into a shed and the lock slipped and he could not get out. In the long darkness he found God. One cannot argue that the lock caused the finding of God, but it is these odd and unpredictable entrapments with things that make up so much of social life.

Approaches to societies, economies and cultures that focus on systems and structures differ from those that explore the messiness and contingency of entanglements. Entanglements are difficult to understand and control because they are not contained and are difficult to predict because of the strands that seem to spread out everywhere. They are practical and every-day, involving real forces as much as imagined ones. They are in continual movement as events happen unexpectedly and are multiplied in their effects along the complex heterogeneous strings and pathways.

In Chapter 1 I referred to riding a bicycle as an example and metaphor of the ways in which human-thing entanglement involves movement. When the bicycle lies on the ground, apparently motionless on its own, the entanglements are limited. The bicycle goes through a process of decay, but it does not function as a bicycle until it is picked up and ridden. I remember taking that first bike ride, trying time and again to stay on the bike as it went down a slight slope. I remember the exhilaration of finally being able to stay on the bike as we picked up speed; I remember the moment of trusting myself to the bike and me on the bike. In motion the bike had become dependent on me; and I had become a bike rider, able to move at speed and go where I wanted. I was free to ride away from home, but was yet trapped in the movement of the bike. I had to keep going or fall off. I and the bike could only function in relation to each other if we kept the momentum up. And at any moment a bump in the road, a sharp corner, my shoe laces caught in the chain, could end the exhilaration.

The entanglement between humans and things always involves some of this movement in co-dependence as investments in things are made, managed and curated and as the unpredictable unruliness of things threatens to get out of control. Humans in their relation to things are always running, or riding, or sailing to stay in the same place. What one does not see in the bike-riding example is the huge wake of entanglements that make this one entanglement possible, including my parents’ income at the time, the international trade that brought rubber, metal, oil and plastic to England, the invention of the bicycle in the 19th century linked to social movements (Bijker 1997) but also to technological developments in chains and tires and ball-bearings. My small experience of individual freedom multiplied over entire populations created a demand for materials that produced bikes but at the same time entrapped humans into yet more intensive extractive and industrial entanglements. Municipalities across the globe have had to introduce traffic regulations to ensure the safety of bike riders. Keeping moving on bikes involves keeping moving in order to produce, maintain, use and discard bikes.

If I am to keep riding my bike today a lot else has to keep going to keep me moving. Ryan and Durning (1997) have studied the entanglements of a bike. A 30 pound bike in the USA is made mostly of steel, aluminum, rubber and plastics. The steel in the bike began in a Chicago junkyard. The scrap was sorted and delivered to a mill where it was melted down in an electric-arc furnace. Once the steel had been molded into tubes a truck took them to a factory in Wisconsin where they were cut, sanded, cleaned with chemicals and sprayed with paint. Once painted the frame went to an assembly line in the same factory where all the parts were added on. The gears, brakes, spokes were made of aluminum which was obtained in Siberia by smelting Australian bauxite ore using hydroelectricity from a dam near Lake Baikal. The nylon cable guides were made in Delaware, the polyurethane handlebar grips were made in Italy, the tires were made of butadiene rubber from Taiwan. Each one of these material entanglements involved payments, regulations, bureaucracies, obligations, debts, ownership and the full gamut of human social, economic and ideological relations. All are brought into movement and depend on each other, trap each other into a vast expanding web as I gather pace down the hill on my bike.





Conclusion


So societies appear to be made up of humans interacting with each other, forming groups and associations, entering into various forms of relationship with each other, forming governments and exercising power. It has long been accepted that material things are involved in this process, assisting in the exchanges of matter, energy and information. But the material things do more than facilitate. They tie the webs of interaction with dependence (the more general term involving both dependence and dependency as defined in Chapter 2).

I have tried in this chapter to carve out a specific definition for entanglement and to differentiate it from related notions such as networks, systems, structures, societies, cultures. The distinctive aspect of entanglement derives from the attention given to the term ‘depend’ in the relationships between things and between humans and things. Dependence, as described in Chapter 2, involves reliance and contingency, and constraint in the notion of ‘dependency’. Humans get caught in a double bind in relation to things since they both rely on things (dependence) and have to reproduce things they have made (dependency). And since humans and things depend on other humans and other things along long chains, the dependences are spread out across space and time. And as things are unruly and unstable, humans are forever chasing along the chains to fix things, forever drawn into further dependences.

The chains of the entanglements are heterogeneous. It is the skein of tangled links that plays determinative roles in human social life. I have therefore been unabashedly able to embrace both a degree of materialism and a degree of idealism. This is because the determinative factors in human action are neither material nor ideal. What is determinative is the entanglement itself, the totality of the links which hold and produce individual events, things, humans.

The notion that humans dig themselves into the holes of human-thing dependences does indeed appear very determinative. Once a hole has been dug, there are very few options left moving forward. On the other hand, we have seen that entanglements are open, far flung and contingent – things keep happening as the different temporalities of things collide and as things run out, break down and fall apart. Like riding a bicycle, humans are always involved in making adjustments in order to keep things going. There is a tension between the historical build up of ever more intricate and constraining dependences and the open and contingent nature of entanglements.

I will return to many of the themes of this chapter, especially movement and change, contingency, complex systems and trajectories in Chapters 7 and 8. But we need first to look more closely at how entanglements are put together. Are they really just contingent intersections – or is there something that holds them together – something other than ‘society’ or ‘culture’? How do some things come into play more appropriately than others?





Chapter 6


Fittingness


Humans and things have attributes that ‘fit’ or ‘come into play’ in specific historical contexts. The adjective and verb ‘fit’ has two broad but closely related senses (Webster Dictionary). The first is ‘adapted to an end or design’. The second is ‘acceptable from a particular viewpoint’ or ‘harmonized with’. The first sense seems related to function – whether an attribute affords a human or thing the ability to function; the second to coherence of assembly – whether an attribute fits together with other attributes. In scholarly discourse, the first is often related to adaptive fitness and the second to meaning and culture and, as such, the two types of ‘fit’ have often ended up on opposed sides of disciplinary debates. I intend to try to use the term fittingness to cover both aspects of fit and to emphasize their dependence on each other.

Any human or thing has ‘n’ properties that could be listed and defined. But only in certain contexts do these properties have value to or are useful to human action. Properties ‘come into play’ by affording types of action that achieve an end. Affordance, discussed in Chapter 3 and further below, is one type of fittingness, dealing with how things work in relation to some project. Thus the pin on the shackle affords the sailor to hold up the sail on the mast and thus to sail. But we might also say that this type of threaded pin on this type of shackle on this type of boat is coherent with a particular life-style and concept of leisure that the sailor enjoys. Here the fittingness is not only about whether the shackle works but also about whether it seems appropriate within a phenomenal world of concepts, emotions and feelings. But note how closely affordance and coherence are linked. We have seen that entanglements involve material and technical as well as immaterial, symbolic and conceptual components. Entanglements involve perceived functions (of the role of the boat for example). We have also seen that material symbolism is based on indexical and iconic relations between meanings and referents. Thus the small screwed pin that closes the shackle on the boat only affords technical possibilities that cohere within (make sense within) a wider frame.





Nested Fittingness


Fittingness is nested and multi-scalar in the cases of both affordance and coherence. For example, the game of tennis has changed through time, and certain things ‘fit’ better at different times. As tennis has become more of a high-pressure sport, with mass audiences and huge prize monies, players have increasingly contested decisions by line judges and referees. And judgement of whether a ball is in or out has become more difficult as the speed of service has reached 100 to 150 mph. As a result a new technology has been introduced. A laser machine emits a ‘beep’ whenever the ball is outside the white line in the service box. The beeper takes away personal judgement. Judgement has been delegated to a machine – although it is treated like a fallible person, and the referee can over-rule the beeper. Another machine called ‘Hawk Eye’ is used by television companies to discern whether the ball is in or out, or on the line. But people did not initially trust this machine and so it was not used by the referee at Wimbledon in 2008.

A beeper or a Hawk Eye would not have made sense in the time of Perry or Laver. Back in the time of amateur sport there was less at stake. Today, as a result of television and advertising amongst many other factors, the winner of Wimbledon gets over 600 000 UK pounds and overall every year Wimbledon Lawn Tennis Club hands out over 10 million UK pounds in prizes, and the other financial benefits for successful players from advertising and endorsements are enormous. In such a highly competitive, high stake context each uncertain line call costs and is endlessly argued over. Before World War II ‘gentlemen’ played tennis and did not argue with the referee, hence the initial negative response to the un-gentlemanly behavior of those like McEnroe who started shouting at the referee.

So here we see a nested hierarchy of fittingness:

Beeper

Tennis

Wider entanglement

The beeper technology comes into being because it has a role in the game of tennis, but only at the particular point where professional tennis fits into the larger context of a mass spectator sport with high income rewards. One would not use a beeper in a local club or on a court in a friend’s back garden. One could extend the hierarchy further – to the larger context of high capitalism in which making money is sought and is thought achievable regardless of background. But the main point is that fittingness is nested and hierarchical.

Perhaps a dominant theme of this tennis example is affordance. At other times the dominant theme may be aesthetic coherence. So in tonal music a note fits in because it creates harmony. In the scale of ‘C’ certain notes and harmonies and certain note sequences are seen as fitting. In the tonal system of classical and romantic music some notes are more important than others. These are the notes that are part of the 8-note scale (do-re-me-fa, etc.). Other notes, such as F# in the C scale (equivalent to fa#) are of secondary importance. By the time of World War I music began to be written that used an atonal system in which all 12 tones or notes in the scale had equal importance (all the notes being all the black and white keys on a piano). In such a context F# has equal importance to all other notes. As we will see below, the production of this new type of atonal music at the start of the 20th century is related to wider social and political changes.

So again there is a nested hierarchy of fittingness:

A note

A type of music

Wider society

Entities (beepers or F#s) get selected which are fitting at one level and which allow further fitting at other levels.





Return to Affordance


The shackle on the sail boat affords the holding up of the sail because of what it is made of and its exact shape and size. The threaded pin has to fit neatly into the shackle. If it did not, the pin and the shackle would not work, they would not afford the desired function. Archaeologists have discussed such affordances in relation to many material processes, especially metal, stone, bone and ceramic production. For example, van der Leeuw (2008) provides diagrammatic summaries (e.g. Figure 6.1) of the factors that have to be taken into account in preparing paste, in getting materials, and so in making pots. He discusses many examples of affordances (potentials and constraints) offered by the materials, by the economic system and by social tradition. A water jar has to have a high center of gravity, a handle, a spout and the vessel wall has to be waterproof. Affordances are produced by workshop organization and marketing and by the tools available. In effect, van der Leeuw is detailing Heidegger’s equipmental totality (see Chapter 3).

In Chapter 3 I also discussed the chains of Behavioral Archaeology and the ways in which the choice of materials to make a pot are influenced by downstream knowledge about what the pot will be used for, how long it will be kept for and so on. In Chapter 3 I suggested that the value of Leroi-Gourhan’s notion of tendance was that it focuses on the interactions and fits between technical acts. There is a tightness to the interactions between things that is in large part produced by the ways in which thing processes have to fit together in sequences but that is also produced by the ways that things have qualities that object, stand in the way, and thus constrain what can be done. Lemonnier (1993a: 13) uses Leroi-Gourhan’s idea of ‘favorable technical milieu’ (milieu favorable) to refer to the way novelty finds its place in a technical system. The favorable milieu describes the surrounding conditions which allow a trait to be accepted into a system.

Figure 6.1 Some of the factors involved in one stage in the production of pottery: paste preparation (Source: van der Leeuw 2008: 235). With kind permission from Springer Science+Business Media B.V.



These technical systems in which certain functions are afforded are, as we have seen, nested and embedded (Jones 2004). Sillar and Tite (2000) have used the term ‘embedded technologies’. The notion of embeddedness in relation to technology indicates that ‘every technique is part of a wider context of artefacts, environments, ideologies, economic systems and social structures’ (Sillar 2001: 291). In Chapter 3 I described the three-tiered ordering of technical systems identified by Pierre Lemonnier (1993b and 2012), from the components of a specific technique at the first level, to the linking of techniques at the second level, to the embedding in wider social and cultural processes at the third level. There are many approaches to studying the embeddedness of technologies in other aspects of society (Latour 1988, Ingold 2000, 2004).

I described some different possible forms of entanglement in Chapter 5 – highly redundant versus highly integrated systems; highly centralized versus highly dispersed. Some entanglements are highly locked in, and others less so. In Chapter 5 I described the factors leading to different degrees of entrapment which might be seen as different degrees of tautness or fittingness in the web. Another distinction that will help us explore the idea of different forms of fittingness is that made by Porter (1996) in his account of operational effectiveness versus strategic positioning in different types of business corporation or company. As companies go about the task of creating, producing, selling and delivering a product or service they may do these tasks better, faster, with fewer inputs and defects than other companies. Their operational effectiveness is greater. Entanglements, technical systems, productive systems are often considered by archaeologists in these terms – that is in terms of their efficiency at minimizing costs and maximizing returns (see Chapter 4).

Porter argues, however, that companies that follow a path based solely on operational effectiveness are less likely to succeed long-term. The reason is that the best practices pursued by a company in achieving operational effectiveness are easily copied and the competitive edge is lost. Porter argues that the companies that have been most successful over recent years have followed a different path, based on what he calls strategic positioning. The emphasis is on developing a distinctive strategy for each company and performing a different assemblage of tasks held together by some special characteristics. The aim is to identify for each company a unique mix of practices and values that all fit together.

At times through this book I have provided anecdotes and examples from my air-travel experiences. Many of my negative interactions with airlines have been with large, monolithic companies that are struggling to cut costs so as to increase operational effectiveness. At the time of writing, the degree of profitability of these companies is decreasing. But Southwest Airlines seems to be doing rather better than most. Porter argues that this is because the company is pursuing strategy rather than simply cutting costs. Certainly the airline is characterized as low-cost, but this attribute is linked in to a broader style or strategy which fits the parts of its activities into a coherent whole (Figure 6.2). Southwest Airlines offers short-haul, low-cost, point-to-point service between midsize cities, and avoids large airports. It has fast turn-around at the gate of only 15 minutes, so it can keep its planes flying longer and have more frequent commuter-like flights. The fast turn-around is partly possible because there are no meals, no assigned seats and no interline baggage checking. Only one type of aircraft, the 737, needs to be used, cutting down maintenance costs.

Porter’s main point about the strategy is that it is about fit. Other airlines, including those providing full-service, have imitated some of these practices from Southwest, but when they have tried the result has often been failure because the practices do not fit other parts of their company. For example, Southwest can avoid airports with congestion that introduces delays. The full-service airlines committed to being able to take anyone to anywhere cannot make such savings. ‘Fit locks out imitators by creating a chain that is as strong as its strongest link’ (Porter 1996: 11). Southwest’s activities complement each other to create real economic value.

Figure 6.2 The organization of Southwest Airlines (Source: Porter 1996).



Porter describes three types of fit. The first-order fit is just the consistency between each activity and the overall strategy, which in the case of Southwest is low-cost, no frills, short-haul. Second-order fit occurs when activities are reinforcing. It is not just that activities are consistent with each other but that the use of only one type of aircraft and the lack of need to get meals on board reinforce the quick turn-around at the gate. Third-order fit is optimization of effort. This involves coordination and information exchange across activities to eliminate redundancy and eliminate waste. Taking these three types of fit together, the focus in strategic positioning is on how the parts fit into a whole and on the competitive advantage of the whole system. In such a system imitating between companies is more difficult as each part has to be linked in to other parts.

Certainly the fittingness that Porter describes affords adaptive fitness in relation to the goal of increasing profit margins, at least for the moment as I write this chapter. Future competitive pressures, such as the rising price of gas and airline mergers may force additional changes and even possibly put Southwest out of business. There is a nested scale of entanglements within which an adaptive niche is found. But there is also something else. There is a certain coherence to Southwest that crosses domains (types of food, types of ticketing, types of airport, types of flight). The lack of food, lack of assigned seats, avoidance of major airports, avoidance of long-haul flights all add up to a particular style that is very present in other aspects of Southwest’s marketing and corporate image.





Coherence: Abstraction, Metaphor, Mimesis and Resonance


The Porter study of companies suggests that the understanding of fittingness is not restricted to questions of how well the parts contribute to the functioning of the whole. Going to Southwest’s website one sees that a key marketing image is a love heart, and that the company foregrounds ‘gay travel’ and its sponsorship of the National Hispanic Cultural Center. Presumably all these activities also contribute to the considerable economic success of the company, but what is the link between a low-cost airline and these activities? We may all recognize some link, but what is it and how would we describe it? When we ask why a love-heart fits in such a context, we are asking why it seems appropriate in some way other than increasing profits – though it may well do that. What is it about love hearts, gay travel and Hispanic culture that make them appropriate or coherent in making profits in this airline?

So far I have focused on the affordances within entanglements – how the parts allow other parts to function in relation to some end. Some of these parts are abstract and conceptual. Presumably the love heart icon, the support of gay travel and Hispanic heritage are all part of an idea that Southwest management thinks appropriate in a company that focuses on being friendly (low cost, quick and efficient) to people, taking care of people, listening to their different and diverse needs. As we saw in previous chapters, entanglements are heterogeneous. They involve ideas and symbols that are seen as fitting. But it may be possible to take a further step. The ideas and symbols may be entangled in themselves, and they may themselves influence the way the practical entanglements take shape. Thus it may be the case that the ideas and symbols in the larger society about diversity and community have led companies such as Southwest to develop a particular low-cost, people-centered strategy.

At the start of this book in Chapters 1 and 2, I noted that thoughts, ideas, sounds, words were also things. Since Chapter 2 I have largely focused on things that are hard material entities. At this juncture we can return to thoughts and ideas as things. In many ways, these types of things have similar properties to material objects. Humans depend on them, invest in them, care for them; they may have legal ownership of them. Ideas and thoughts and words in the form of brain activity or spoken sounds have temporalities too short to become entangled in human lives. They fade and die out too quickly. But of course when remembered, included in stories or myths, written down, otherwise recorded or memorialized they do come to have a presence that endures, falls apart and requires fixing. We do get entangled in their materialization. But we also get entangled in intangible heritage, however oral or musical it might be. The full suite of ways in which we get entangled in ideas and thoughts is beyond the scope of this volume, but I do wish to point to the fact that we get entangled in abstractions (that organize our thoughts). I also argue that we become entangled in the desire to create various forms of coherence (even if the coherence is dominated by a search for dissonance), both at discursive and bodily non-discursive levels. So in this section I will discuss abstractions, metaphors, mimesis and resonance (bodily coherence across domains) as various forms of production of coherence in which humans can become entangled. This is a different type of entanglement to that discussed in Chapter 5, but it is an important dimension of human-thing dependences.





Abstraction, Metaphor and Mimesis


Southwest is very conscious of its own corporate ‘way of life’. A list is given on its website under the heading ‘culture’ of the desired characteristics of a Southwest person (perseverant, egalitarian, passionate), and these qualities are abstracted into the more general injunctions to be low cost and have high customer service delivery, and the mission statement talks of warmth, friendliness, individual pride and company spirit. So there are clear abstractions here that create a unity and coherence to activities across domains. Throughout this book I have shown how entanglements involve material and conceptual components. In Chapter 2 I described a pebble on a beach that was brought into different assemblies with other things depending on how it was recognized, remembered and owned. In that chapter too I described how the equipmental totality of a thing depended on the different theories about and perspectives towards it. In Chapter 3 I used the quote from Gibson that ‘an affordance points both ways, to the environment and to the observer’ (1986: 129). In Chapter 4 I noted that the maintenance of walls in the Yorkshire Dales depended on expert ideas about organic foods and recent collective nostalgia for a rural way of life. In Chapter 5 I showed how a sail boat had different entanglements, and different affordances depending on the perspectives of sailing, entertaining and protecting the ecosystem of the bay. These ideas about the boat are themselves tied to wider ideas about what is leisure and how the environment should be protected.

So entanglements and affordances and functions are always tied to abstractions (ideas, thoughts, words, feelings and senses). These abstractions are hierarchical and nested as noted above, and they often cross domains so that humans seek unities, coherence, metaphor within different realms of experience. Abstractions are general and can often be applied to more than one domain of activity. Their transferability creates a new form of entanglement – one based in ideas, the coherence of logics and philosophies, the use of analogy and metaphor. Tilley (1999) has provided a detailed and persuasive account of how metaphor affects material culture and creates links between different types of artifact and social domain. Thus tombs may be metaphors of houses and landscapes metaphors of social systems. The metaphors are ‘solid’, grounded in the experiences of material things as they are encountered (Tilley 1999). Ortman has shown that conceptual metaphors linking the decoration of textiles, pottery and kivas in the Great Pueblo period (AD 1060–1280) in the American Southwest were linked metaphorically: ‘the Mesa Verde kiva was a metaphorical expression of an earth-bowl and sky-basket cosmos’ (Ortman 2000: 638).

In a fascinating account of the cultural and scholarly fluorescence of fin de siècle Vienna, Schorske (1961) explores the intellectual coherence across artistic domains. The work of the late 19th century urban planner Otto Wagner was characterized by rationalism and efficiency, but he also saw man as uncertain in a fast-moving world. Architecture had to provide lines of guidance for movement (as in Wagner’s use of Art Nouveau within buildings). Freud at the same time argued for a science of the psyche. ‘Freud gave his fellow liberals an a-historical theory of man and society that could make bearable a political world spun out of orbit and beyond control’ (Schorske 1961: 103). During the same period the artist Gustav Klimt reacted against classical realism in order to explore inner meaning and repressed suffering in an increasingly complex world, and his paintings are full of symbols influenced by Nietzche and Schopenhauer. In the early 20th century, Arnold Schoenberg created in Vienna the breakthrough into atonal music. Schoenberg knew Freud and Klimt and was aware of the emphasis on social flux and the repression of self. Before Schoenberg all western music was based on the tonic triad. Of course there was dissonance but only to create tension and a return to the main key and triad. Schoenberg wanted to break the established order and rationalism of tonality. He introduced a system in which, rather than some notes having more importance than others, each tone had an equal power. Schoenberg sought the dissolution of boundaries. So according to Schorske, running through all these different artistic domains there was a general idea, a problematic that dealt with the role of the individual in a disintegrating society and a shift from the rational to the psychological. These themes themselves had their context in political movements, in particular the role of liberalism in relation to anti-Semitism, socialism and nationalism.

We can argue on the basis of examples of this type that humans get caught up in the attempt to make links across domains, to create intellectual coherence, to seek metaphor and unity of idea. So humans get entangled in ideas, or rather in making sense and coherence out of ideas. But is it adequate to argue that it is abstractions that produce intellectual coherence? In his book ‘The Sense of Order’, Gombrich (1979) discusses the writing of Alois Riegl in the late 19th century who had a perceptual theory of style that saw different media unified by general themes. His thesis was that ‘the history of art from ancient Egypt to late antiquity is the history of the shift of the Kunstwollen [will to art or will to form] from tactile (Riegl says haptic) to visual or ‘optic’ modes of perception. The shift can be observed not only in the figurative arts, it also manifests itself in architecture and in the decorative crafts. Every architectural motif, every brooch or fibula of a given period, must and can be shown to obey the same inherent laws of stylistic development that drove art relentlessly from touch to vision’ (Gombrich 1979: 196). Thus classical sculpture was more about touch whereas late antique sculpture had deeper drilling, as opposed to the use of chisels, and so was best seen at a distance. Riegl saw the unity of style as resulting from abstract and deep principles, embracing the Hegelian notion of governing spirits. Gombrich is critical of this approach. He asks how the principles of Greek architecture can be transferred to an ordinary pot? Maybe the so-called unity is just the result of force of habit?

By way of contrast, Gombrich discusses the work of Heinrich Wölfflin who again in the late 19th century was critical of a Hegelian view and looked for a more bodily sense of coherence and unity within the visual realm specifically. He argued that ‘we respond to shapes much as we respond to music by dancing inwardly’ (Gombrich 1979: 201). In his 1888 book ‘Renaissance and Baroque’, Wölfflin argued that ‘there is … a Gothic deportment, with its tense muscles and precise movements; everything is sharp and precisely pointed, there is no relaxation, no flabbiness, a will is expressed everywhere in the most explicit fashion. The Gothic nose is fine and thin. Every massive shape, everything broad and calm has disappeared. The body sublimates itself completely in energy. Figures are slim and extended, and appear as it were to be on tip-toe. The Renaissance, by contrast, evolves the expression of a present state of wellbeing in which the hard frozen forms become loosened and liberated and all is pervaded by vigour…. The most immediate formal expression of a chosen form of deportment and movement is by means of costume. We have only to compare a Gothic shoe with a Renaissance one to see that each conveys a completely different way of stepping; the one is narrow and elongated and ends in a long point; the other is broad and comfortable and treads the ground with quiet assurance’ (quoted by Gombrich 1979: 202).

Wölfflin recognizes that these general styles are not always mirrors of their time – sometimes architecture can get out of step with the moods of the age; and also there may be technical explanations for certain themes. But Gombrich suggests that Wölfflin was on the right track despite the difficulties. ‘We all feel sure that a Rococo ornament would look out of place in an ancient Egyptian temple or a chinoiserie in a Renaissance church’ (Gombrich 1979: 203). There is an affinity in Art Nouveau between painting and decoration in the use of sinuous lines. But not all buildings and furnishings produced in the period of Art Nouveau used the same principles or themes. In fact different media in art at any one time period may play off each other in contrastive ways.

In discussing the Southwest Airlines use of the term ‘culture’ I placed the word in quotes. The foci on entanglement, affordance and coherence seem to me to argue against ideas of culture, tradition and repetitive practices or routines as established wholes that somehow determine what we do. They seem to me to argue against any over-emphasis on Bourdieu’s (1977) notion of habitus. We often reify these concepts and give them explanatory force; as commentators we get entangled in their logic and reify their presence. Thus we assume that there are cultural ways of doing things, or traditions or routines that all human actors have to work within because it is easier not to upset and change them (Gell 1998: 215, Gosden 2005: 196) or because they have become embodied. Perhaps in some cases these types of argument are needed. But we cannot take these assumptions for granted. Another possibility is that humans are always seeking and searching to find solutions that ‘work’ in a particular context within a particular strategy. This is more the view of Human Behavioral Ecology as discussed in Chapter 4. If cultural traditions, routinized practices, traditions and styles are found we should initially suppose that they afford something within a particular entanglement. Depending on them and maintaining them may afford humans the ability to achieve some goal. In speaking of what appears to be the logical development of styles, Gombrich (1979) preferred an approach based on K. R. Popper’s ‘logic of situations’ in which one focuses on the courses of action a human might choose in pursuing a particular aim. Crafts-persons or their patrons might want to gain prestige and status by making designs more complex or more simple, or they may have other, financial constraints that lead to a desire for simpler designs. Or those working for Southwest may decide, rightly as it has turned out, that in a particular market certain ideas and abstractions will lead to increased profit margins.

The process of copying or mimesis is often complex, involving the idea that the copy gains some power from the thing copied (Taussig 1993). The problem of ‘style’ in archaeology has long been debated (Conkey and Hastorf 1990), and I have argued that style is often highly social and active (Hodder 1982, 1986). Stylistic similarity and difference are related to questions such as prestige competition, emulation and group affiliation. We never copy things blindly. As we make, use and reproduce things using routine practices we are at the same time dealing with broader goals and purposes that cross material domains as well as with the specifics of situational logics. Highly active and situational mimetic and transformative processes work within corpuses of objects that have their traditions and ways of doing things. But when we do things socially with artifacts in the specific circumstances we find ourselves in, we are both entangled in what affords our social goals and we are caught up in webs of abstract ideas and metaphors that often cross domains.

The entanglements that humans are caught in are thoroughly material, as argued in Chapter 5, but they are equally laced with abstractions. Humans are entangled in concepts and ideas as they seek pattern and coherence at a higher level that crosses domains. Humans are entangled in things and in their ideas about things. And as one moves up the ladder of abstraction, so different domains of activity get entangled with each other.





Synaesthesia


I also want to argue that there are mechanisms that produce coherence across domains in which intellectual abstraction, metaphor and mimesis play little part. The embodied coherences described by Wölfflin remain tied to intellectual abstractions. I want to argue that there are bodily processes that themselves seek coherence across domains. It seems to me that we understand very little about these mechanisms but I nevertheless wish to argue that they exist and are powerful forces in creating unities and coherences that contribute to entanglements. The two forms of bodily coherence I wish to refer to are synaesthesia and what I will call resonance.

An example of the bodily search for coherence across senses and domains is the process termed synaesthesia. I have often conducted the following task with a large class of students. I show them the two drawings seen in Figure 6.3 and ask them to assign to them the nonsense names takete and maluma on the basis of what name seems most appropriate for each figure. Over 90% of the students always select takete for the angular drawing and maluma for the circular one. I got the idea of doing this task from the psychologist Köhler who conducted a controlled experiment of this type that has been replicated many times and at least once cross-linguistically among Lilongwe-speaking children in Tanzania (Berlin 2006). In earlier work Sapir showed his subjects figures of two tables of different sizes, indicating that the nonsense words mil and mal were the tables’ names. He then asked subjects which name indicated the larger table. They invariably chose mil for the smaller table and mal for the larger (Sapir 1929). On the basis of a general review of such examples, Berlin (2006: 26) gives his own definition: ‘synaesthetic sound symbolism can be thought of as the cross-modal mapping that unites specific speech sounds and one or more distinct sense modalities (sight, touch, smell, taste)’.

In general, Berlin (2006) argues that high tones and high-frequency consonants are associated with high-frequency sounds, small size, sharpness, and rapid movement; low tones, low vowels and low-frequency consonants are associated with low-frequency sounds, large size, softness, and heavy, slow movements. ‘The representation of… lip and tongue movements in [our] motor brain maps may be mapped in non-arbitrary ways to certain sound inflections in auditory regions [of the brain] and the latter, in turn, function as non-arbitrary links to an external object’s visual appearance’ (Berlin 2006: 39).

Figure 6.3 Two drawings to which the terms takete and maluma are assigned (Source: the author)



Gombrich too discusses synaesthesia. He notes (1979: 287) that colors can be described as warm, sweet, loud or cheerful and sounds can be described as bright, soft, harsh or sad. He reviews the many centuries of thought on the relationship between music and color. In the 18th century the Jesuit P. Castel built a color piano, with the primary colors corresponding to the triad. Synaesthesia can be seen as a normal dimension of experience of the world in which sensory coherence is sought across domains. Shore (1996) argues that synaesthesia is an elementary form of meaning construction linked to analogy and metaphor. He follows Donald (1991) in suggesting that mimetic processes occur prior to language in the evolution of humans and that there is a central mimetic controller that looks for associations across domains and senses. Although there may be a universal component to synaesthesia it seems also possible to argue that cross-domain mimesis simply results from the fact that when we perceive the world we do not use our senses separately – rather we use them simultaneously. ‘The information conveyed by one sensory channel is often closely intertwined with that conveyed by another’ (Clarke et al 2010: 43). Tilley (2004: 14–16) discusses synaesthesia in an archaeological context and describes it as the fusion of the senses. ‘Synaesthesia, the overlapping or blending of the senses (seeing sounds, hearing colors), is usually regarded as a peculiar, romantic or even pathological experience … but instead it can be regarded as our primordial preconceptual experience of the world’ (Tilley 2004: 14).





Resonance


Recently I was talking to someone who said the following about a liberal, politically left, small college in the United States. ‘They are very good on gender politics. It’s all very granola-ish.’ What is this strange link between a type of food and a political philosophy? What I have argued so far in this chapter is that this type of play on coherence across domains can make use of a range of factors including abstraction, metaphor and mimesis. People get entangled in things, as we saw in previous chapters, but they also seem to get entangled in their thinking about things. I stayed in the house of a ‘granola person’ recently. The sheets were brown not white, the shower room was tiled in raw stone slate rather than ceramics, and you could hardly move for all the plants.

Of course I am oversimplifying, and many people work between and across such cultural categories, mixing and transforming them into new styles and anti-styles. But it remains the case that humans often categorize each other using abstractions that cross domains. There may also be some universal basis for this search for cross-domain coherence as indicated by the work on synaesthesia. But archaeologists know that there are no universal meanings for curved as opposed to jagged decoration on pottery. There is too much specific social load that is placed on such distinctions, and interpretations have to be specific and contextual. It remains possible that there is some form of process by which at a non-discursive level coherence occurs across domains in historically specific contexts. It is this specific process that I refer to by the term ‘resonance’. What is the non-discursive contextually-specific process of embodiment that makes a person find certain things appropriate across domains such that another person recognizes their behavior as granola-ish?

It might be thought that the answer to this question had already been provided by those working on practice and embodiment. Bourdieu (1984) in his work on ‘distinction’ in 20th century Paris, shows how different groups in society, partly defined by income and educational level, prefer different types of music, food, furniture and so on. He is less interested in the coherence issue that I focus on here, but he does show how people higher up the social ladder tend to act and think in ways that are influenced by the abstracted notion that they are distant from the material practicalities and necessities of life, and from the material immediacies of everyday existence. They tend to prefer music which is ‘difficult’ to understand in its intellectual complexity. Across domains, they prefer more complex and time-consuming and elaborate food, and read difficult authors.

Clearly there are material bases for social and cultural difference – whether one can afford the time to learn about and listen to complex music (or afford granola) is part of the realm of affordances discussed earlier. My concern here is to accept these affordances within entanglement and to explore the process of coherence-seeking across domains – the production of general styles of doing things. Bourdieu’s work is an important reminder that coherences across domains are to a very large extent dependent on affordances – what can or cannot be done in specific social settings. They depend on the tautness of dependences and affordances within entanglements.

But the question that I have here is rather different. The Parisian elites may have been drawn to difficult music such as Ravel’s Piano Concerto for the Left Hand as part of a fascination with forms of experience opposed to the easy and more immediate, including music such as ‘The Blue Danube’. ‘Easy’ music, or music that was ‘easy’ to listen to were associated with lower classes. So here we are talking about coherence produced by abstractions as discussed above. But it has never been clear to me why the Blue Danube should be seen as easy, popular and for the masses. Why is ‘The Blue Danube’ seen as ‘easy’?

We have seen that Schoenberg introduced ‘difficult’ atonal music, certainly from within an intellectual elite in late 19th and early 20th century Vienna. But in making sense of this shift Schorske moves beyond the notion that it was just difficult and associated with elites. He suggests that Schoenberg was dissolving established structures, exploring equalities of tones, creating dissonance – all as part of a general social and political movement of the time.

And yet we have seen that Schorske’s approach appears too intellectual. Perhaps the example of music can lead us towards a better understanding of the human search for bodily coherence. I have already quoted the statement from Gombrich that ‘we respond to shapes much as we respond to music by dancing inwardly’. What could this possibly mean?

I want to suggest that the example of music, or at least some types of music, may help us to understand a bodily affinity or resonance across domains that is developed contextually. The aim is to use the example of music to see if it might help to understand the bodily process by which granola and brown sheets feel right in a certain social context. The solid metaphors of Tilley (1999) suggest that granola and brown sheets are metaphors of earth and of a particular social approach that is sensitive to the environment and left-wing politics. Again it seems to be some abstract idea here that links grains and earth and brown. My aim in using 19th century music as an example of bodily resonance is that this type of music sought not to use symbolic reference. Its meanings were to work differently.

Let me give an example. In the early 19th century Beethoven started doing something new with classical music. Some would argue that he got it from Mozart, but Beethoven was identified throughout the 19th century as the towering figure that all Western composers sought to emulate and transcend. The something new, the new sound that Beethoven started demanding of pianos in salons and orchestras in large halls came to be called romantic. This ‘romantic’ is one of these abstractions that cuts across many domains. Romanticism is usually opposed to classical rationalism and is often associated with political liberalism, but there is a great danger in assuming an overall coherence to the term since it is and was used in many different senses and there is no simple link between romanticism and political movements (Dahlhaus 1989). What were the specific things that Beethoven started doing that so changed music and came to be called romantic at the abstract, conscious level?

Beethoven’s work is often divided into three periods and it is mainly the third period after 1815 that is most obviously, to us, romantic. This later music had various characteristics including a more lyrical and expressive style. In his later works Beethoven used themes in complex and multi-leveled ways that cut across movements and even whole symphonies. There is an ‘element of ever-increasing reflection’ (Dahlhaus 1989: 85). Audiences were attracted by the ‘feeling’ and emotion in Beethoven’s music. They were aroused to new individual introspection. They were awakened to nationalistic sentiments by the use of folk songs set in the context of large orchestras and loud resounding music. ‘Music that did not reach the heart … was considered meaningless noise’ (Dahlhaus 1989: 89).

In the 18th century, music remained very tied to words. Music was seen as secondary to and heightening the significance of words (Cook and Dibben 2001). Purely instrumental music came to dominance in the later 18th and 19th centuries. Music in these later times often did not represent anything; it was something to contemplate in its own right. In the classical sonata form of the 18th century there is a contrast of themes of different character, an opposition of tonic and dominant, and resolutions of oppositions. Zaslaw (1989) argues that the classical style in music was akin to the classical style in architecture and that the sonata form does for music what the neo-classical façade does for architecture: create order and symmetry, balancing tension and resolution. In romantic music there is more of a focus on tensions and frustrated, incomplete resolutions that lead to more tensions in a series of waves. There is often reference to other ‘lost’ themes, and a sense of longing, absence, fragment and ruin (which of course takes us across to another domain born of the 19th century – the archaeology and preservation of ruins).

To be more specific about what Beethoven and the romantics did to music, the classical style which they built upon and reacted against was based primarily on the relationship between tonic (first note in an 8-note scale) and dominant (5th note) harmonics. The subdominant is the 5th below the tonic. By moving in a circle of fifths one returns to the starting point in an elegant and mathematical progression (Rosen 1997). The sonata form goes through a simple progression of themes in the tonic and dominant keys. The romantics increasingly disrupted the neat symmetry of this rational structure as they introduced longer melodic lines and complex emotions that broke out into surprising keys and tempos and crescendos. Beethoven explored more the major and minor versions of keys, and used the median and submediant rather than just the tonic, dominant and subdominant. The romantic form was less syntactical and more cumulative in effect (Rosen 1997); increasingly there were so many changes of key that it was difficult to know what key the music was in.

This new form of music had its context. I do not argue that it was part of some cultural ‘whole’, but I do argue that it was caught up in a series of specific entanglements. An important new context was the shift in the context of music from the 18th century court to the 19th century concert hall. Public concerts did take place in Vienna from the 1770s onwards, but Haydn and Mozart depended very much on aristocratic support. Beethoven obtained support from wealthy aristocrats early in his life but not in his later years. As aristocratic patronage of musicians declined into the 19th century more generally, composers earned money in public and private performances, composition and in teaching and working for the theatre and church (Hanson 1985). There was a huge rise in public concerts as well as an increase of salon music in middle class homes. In Biedermeier Vienna, nearly all middle class houses now had pianos.

Another important context for Beethoven was an idealism born of the French Revolution (Hanson 1985, Ringer 1990). Early romantic music was linked to revolutionary songs sung by the republican masses – such as the Marseillaise sung after the French Revolution. For many (though see the caveat above), romanticism was ‘a cultural expression of the spirit of political liberalism’ (Samson 1991: 3). Many composers tried to capture the power of loud marching songs and the republican zeal of folk and nation. National anthems emerged as of importance and folk songs were used in symphonies and in chamber music at home.

This same period at the start of the 19th century in Europe is often seen as a key moment in the rise of individualism (Foucault 1995, Taruskin 2005). The industrial revolution allowed cheap editions of music to be mass produced for the home and for private music. So with one’s own mass-produced piano at home one could reach solitude and inwardness. Salon performances by Beethoven or later Schubert or Chopin allowed a domestic display of emotion, intimacy and virtuosity. There was a search for inward-looking sensibilities and subjectivities (Tomlinson 1999).

Another important context at this time was the rise of the bourgeoisie and the decline of elite wealth and privilege. Without aristocratic patronage, musicians had to cater to a broader public – to be popular. There were ticket sales so that larger numbers could now attend the new larger concert halls that were constructed. There were also important technological changes. There were new instruments (violins and pianos) that could play louder and more complex pieces (Taruskin 2005). Change in piano technology in the 18th and 19th centuries led in the 1820s to the American invention of the cast-iron metal frame with hitch-pin plate made in a single forging which was the basis for all later piano manufacture (Grafing et al. 1974). As we have seen, things depend on things, and these sturdier frames then allowed the invention in Britain of the use of piano wire made from cast steel. The development of new wires for pianos benefited from the invention of other special wire products such as that used in early telegraphs and in barbed wire.

So at one level, the example of 19th century romantic music allows us to see once again how entanglements between humans and things always involve abstractions that affect many areas of life. The ability to forge iron and the conjunction of the development of telegraphs and barbed wire played their role together with political and social change in a new set of ideas that came to be called romantic and affected many areas of life.

But at another level, the example allows us to probe the links between an area of cultural expression and its wider context. My aim has not been to link romantic music to everything occurring in society at the time. There were many different strands to early 19th century social and cultural life, many more rationalizing and classical than I have been discussing here. But I have wanted to understand the links between romantic music and a particular set of entanglements. Some of the links do indeed seem representational. The tunes of folk songs used in symphonies and in salon music do indicate the folk and the nation very directly; the crescendos produced by large orchestras in which the violins have new steel strings perhaps reproduce the fervor of revolutionary zeal and the cry of the nation.

But there seems more to it than representation and discursive abstraction. Beethoven railed against piano makers, asking them to make louder, bigger pianos. He was very affected by the French Revolution and originally named the Eroica Third Symphony the Bonaparte before angrily scratching out the name when Napoleon made himself emperor. He was very affected by ideals of equality and freedom. In many ways he lived a romantic life, in poverty and inward reflection because of his deafness, self-consciously living only for his art. He was abrupt and unconventional in his behavior. But as he sat composing he did not represent all this – that was not his music’s role. Rather he found chord sequences that thrilled the spine or seemed to create endless unresolved tensions, long melodies that brought tears to the eyes, themes that returned unexpectedly and longingly. Using precise instructions as to how to play their music (for example when to use the piano pedal) romantic composers ‘enlarged the role of sound’ (Rosen 1995: 40). They stretched and stretched to awaken emotions, self-reflection and national belonging.

There seem to be bodily associations between emotions, sound and the world that bypass representation and conscious thought however much they may be rationally linked to them by observers and participants. We seem able to respond directly to ‘dumb’ sounds such that we tingle inside, feel sadness, cry, fear. Some of the associations may be at least partly based on universal synaesthetic links – soft quiet sounds associated with sadness and reflection for example. And yet there is something very specific about Western music of the early 19th century. It does not sound like or work like earlier music or like Chinese music of the same time period. Beethoven’s music plays with a particular tradition in very particular ways.

In trying to understand these connections that are made within the body, linked to but separate from abstractions, we need to know more about how the human nervous system works. In general terms, recent work on mirror neurons suggests that we empathize with others and with things through embodied simulation (Freedberg and Gallese 2007). The actions and sensations we see around us activate our own internal representations as if we were experiencing a similar emotion or sensation. Thus if we see pictures of a hand reaching to grasp an object, the motor representation of grasping is activated in our own brain. ‘The observation of static graspable objects activates not only visual areas of the brain but also motor areas that control object-related actions such as grasping’ (Freedberg and Gallese 2007: 200). Or ‘when we see two objects touching each other, our somatosensory cortices are activated as if our body were subject to tactile stimulation’ (Freedberg and Gallese 2007: 201). There is thus neuroscientific research that supports Merleau-Ponty’s (1962) view that paintings or sculptures arouse a sense of physical involvement, or Wölfflin’s notion that observation of specific architectural forms engages the onlooker’s bodily responses (see above), or Gombrich’s description of inward dancing.

Becker (2001) seeks to understand music as both cultural and biological. She uses the idea of ‘structural coupling’ to argue that we internalize and externalize our musical sensitivities. ‘ ”Structural coupling” describes the internal, structural changes that occur within an organism as a result of interaction with other organisms and with a world; changes of one’s being or one’s ontology’ (Becker 2001: 136). So the music maker and the music listener are engaged in flows of interaction with each other and with the world such that biology and culture align themselves to each other. In the case of music a key player may be the cerebellum. Levitin (2006: 178) suggests there may be ‘a plausible connection among the cerebellum, timing, music, and emotion’. Many parts of the brain are involved in perceiving and liking and responding to music, but the cerebellum seems to play a significant role. Many of the functions of the cerebellum are preconscious and involve coordinating things like running, walking, grasping and reaching – music seems linked to these functions in some way. Intense musical emotions – the thrills and chills of music – are also associated with brain regions linked to reward, motivation and arousal, such as the ventral striatum (Levitin 2006: 179). Neuroscience shows that there is a link between movement, the brain, and music (Levitin 2006: 210). The pathways from the brain stem and cerebellum to the frontal lobes can weave all sensory experience and coordinated muscular movements into a homogeneous fabric. According to Clarke et al. (2010: 101) ‘music creates a direct sense of virtual movement’ as the listener hears in sounds the movements of the performers and the composer.

So as Beethoven sat at the piano he was plausibly involved in a process that explored deep emotions aroused by the complex entanglements he found himself in. These were not the only entanglements prevalent in the years around 1800, but they were the ones that Beethoven responded to and interacted with – revolution, individual freedom, nationalism. There were also other aspects of the entanglement of the time that played a role – new technologies for casting iron and making wires, large concert halls, new bourgeois buying power and so on. Within the musical corpus that was handed down to him he imitated but also transformed and manipulated into new sounds. In exploring sound he was exploring new emotions. As he moved his hands over the piano there was a new freedom in what he did, a new explosion of anger, and new movement towards sadness or reflection. It all resonated deep inside him. The movement and the emotion and the music all seemed to work together with the world in which he found himself and with his passions and frustrations about it. The new bigger and louder pianos he played on allowed him to find these emotions inside himself. He did not just impose his abstract ideas on the music. The piano awakened new potentials in his body that resonated with the world.

And those that listened to his music found something aroused in them also. Those in similar entanglements to Beethoven found that his music resonated but also awakened. They, brought up in and living in similar worlds, found their spines tingle and their sadness deepen. They came to feel themselves in new and different ways. Beethoven, other composers and artists can be said to have produced individualism and nationalism as much as they responded to it. Gombrich may have been right that we dance inwardly when we respond to music and to shapes – and to the world around us. Music can in its rhythms and melodies and chord sequences produce bodies that seem fitting in particular contexts of entanglement and abstraction. Granola and brown sheets resonate with each other in the sense that at a non-conscious level they contribute to the production of a body attuned to a particular environment.



Music is produced that resonates through the body with the world around it. As well as these non-discursive resonances there are also discursive abstractions produced that cohere with the world around them. These abstractions can ‘seem right’, ‘feel right’ based on the objective evidence of one’s own body. A human feels, senses, knows in herself that the atomized individual or the patriotic nation are ‘true’. One has the evidence of the tingles and chills, the calm, tears and sadness that well up inside one’s body as the music is played.

Much the same can be said of all things that humans produce. These resonate through our bodily interaction with them in the world. They come to ‘feel right’ in particular contexts. Or else we reject them because they cannot be made to cohere, either through abstraction or bodily resonance. Conscious abstraction and bodily coherence work with affordances to produce a particular way of being entangled, in which humans have bodies of a particular kind and things have forms of particular kinds.





Coherence and Resonance at Çatalhöyük


After this musical interlude I want to return to provide an example of how this type of thinking can be applied to the archaeological context of Çatalhöyük. Here I want to look at the relationships between affordances and the two types of coherence I have identified: resonance and abstraction. I suggested in Chapter 4 that humans at Çatalhöyük recruited the ancestors to help hold up the unruly walls of their houses. In one instance they placed a human skull at the base of one of the support posts. In 2009 we made an interesting discovery at the site. By a small protruding platform (or ‘capital’) at the top of a post in Building 79 we found a human skull (Eddisford 2009). This skull may have been dislodged from elsewhere in the collapse of the building, but the close association with the top of the post invited the interpretation that the skull had been placed on the platform at the top of the post. Perhaps the posts were seen symbolically as ancestors, as clearly were the upright stones with human arms and belts at the earlier site of Göbekli in southeastern Turkey (Schmidt 2006). Whether this interpretation of the Building 79 skull is correct or not, the skull placed at the base of the post in Building 6 suggests that one role of ancestor skulls was to help support the posts and walls of houses.

Another role of the skull was to create long-term relationships through time. In early agricultural societies a key concern was to build relationships between people that held together in the delay between the input of labor and the receipt of some return for that labor (in the form of harvested crops and meat from domesticated animals). Some version of skull manipulation occurs as early as the Natufian in the Southern Levant. I have argued that from very early in the intensification of plant and animal use in the late Epi-Palaeolothic and Natufian in the Middle East houses are built on houses and on previous burials in order to create ancestry and lineage (Hodder 2007a). All of this afforded the possibility of long-term delayed agricultural systems. The dead were placed fleshed beneath the floors of the houses at Çatalhöyük, and the houses with many (up to 62) burials beneath the floors can be termed ‘history houses’ (Hodder and Pels 2010). Only a few burials in the history houses were then revisited and the heads removed.

But what made skulls and burials and houses appropriate modes of achieving this adaptive affordance of creating duration at Çatalhöyük? There were abstractions about skull use across the Middle East in the millennia leading up to the occupation at the site. Removal of skulls was widespread in the PPNA and PPNB (Kuijt 2008a, Verhoeven 2002) and there are many known cases of plastering of skulls to create facial features as is found in one case at Çatalhöyük (Bonogofsky 2005, Kuijt 2008a, Verhoeven 2002). The functions of these severed heads probably varied across space and time (Testart 2008; Hodder 2009) but there are some widespread similarities in the ideas with which they are associated. At Çatalhöyük, wall paintings show headless bodies with vultures. At Göbekli a pillar is engraved with a headless body associated with a bird. Stones engraved with vulture images like those at Çatalhöyük occur at Jerf el Ahmar (Stordeur et al. 2000). A relationship between birds and human heads is also seen at Neval? Çori in southeastern Turkey (Hauptmann and Schmidt 2007: 67–8).

So practices and ideas about head removal, plastering of human skulls and an association between head removal and birds were widespread throughout the Neolithic of the Middle East and Turkey over millennia. These ideas were drawn on at Çatalhöyük. Were they just repeated practices or were conscious abstractions also involved? It is clear that the latter were involved to some degree. The representation of these practices and abstractions in paintings and engravings suggests that at some level narratives, and perhaps myths, were associated. Conscious re-enactment of head removal is also seen at Çatalhöyük where figurines often have dowel holes for the insertion and removal of heads – and again the figurine heads are sometimes found separately (Meskell et al. 2008).

We can see that these abstractions crossed over into other areas of life at Çatalhöyük, and indeed throughout the Neolithic of the Middle East. Already at Hallan Çemi in Turkey in the 11th millennium BC there is an aurochs skull on a wall of a ‘public building’ (Rosenberg 2007) and by the time of the PPNA and PPNB there is widespread use of bucrania, animal skulls and horns (Hodder and Meskell 2011). At Çatalhöyük these animals skulls are often plastered to recreate facial features and are installed on walls or pedestals. A conscious metaphorical link is made between human and bull heads in the decoration of the pot shown in Figure 6.4. There are bull heads on the two sides of the pot and human heads at the two ends. In addition at Çatalhöyük both human and animals heads are plastered.

Figure 6.4 Decorated face pot from Çatalhöyük (Source: Çatalhöyük Research Project and Jason Quinlan).



So we can see that people in the Neolithic in the Middle East, and specifically at Çatalhöyük, were caught up in ideas and metaphors that crossed distances and domains. We can also argue that bodily resonance was involved. As the heads were carefully removed from human bodies, the cutting and lifting would have recalled the cutting and lifting of heads of animals. As plaster was smeared over the human skull, so the similar movements and practices of smearing plaster on animal skulls would have been recalled. It is further possible that the plastering of interior house walls and the plaster floors above burials would have resonated with the refleshing of human and animal heads (Hodder and Meskell 2011). All of these replasterings produced a particular type of body and person – one that could be refleshed to live again and one that could be divided up and passed between people. So humans became stretched out over time. Most of us today find the burial practices at Çatalhöyük offensive; it seems deeply unpleasant to live centimeters above decaying flesh and to live in the smells of decaying bodies and to divide up human bodies and pass them around. To our bodies, produced in part by the romantic individualism of Beethoven’s time but since then further nurtured into a sacred holism, the Çatalhöyük practices seem wrenching and disgusting. But ethnographic cases are known (e.g. Firth 1936) in which humans live close to the dead and may even value the odors of the ancestors on them.

At Çatalhöyük there were abstractions that circulated, probably as myths. These abstractions got tangled up in themselves as people built metaphors across domains. Different areas of life were made coherent through transfers of ideas. Some of the cross-domain coherence was also produced by a bodily resonance that gave a biological certainty to the abstractions. Produced in the specific context of delayed returns for labor and long-term associations that endured beyond individual lives, these new bodies ‘felt right’ and underpinned the abstractions they resonated with. The treatment of the dead and the plastering of human and animals skulls produced a certain type of person – one that could be divided up and dispersed; one that could endure through time; one that, in contrast to Beethoven’s sensitized individualism, valued the social and the collective as primary.





Conclusion


The tautness of the entangled web of humans and things is produced by various forms of dependence and co-dependency as discussed in Chapters 2 to 5. In this chapter I have argued that an additional form of tautness in entanglements is produced by the human tendency to seek coherence. I have not wanted to argue that humans become entrapped in something called ‘culture’ or the ‘social whole’. I have tried to avoid these reified and difficult terms. I do not argue that there are cultural wholes or cultural traditions that determine entanglement. The fittingness of entanglements is the product of affordances but also the product of concepts and ideas as we have seen in previous chapters. Humans have a tendency to seek coherences in this conceptual realm and in its relationships to affordances. They do this in two broad ways – abstraction and bodily coherence. Humans thus become entangled in various forms of fittingness, including affordances, abstractions and resonances.

A final case-study will serve to exemplify the argument in this chapter, taken from research of enormous scope. In his account of the relationship between sweetness and power, Sidney Mintz (1985) lays bare the entanglements of sugar. As the demand for sugar in Europe increased through the 18th and especially the 19th centuries, Europe and the Caribbean became ‘interlocked’ (Mintz 1985: xvi) in the circulation of ships, slaves, sugar. The production of sugar from sugar cane in the Caribbean proved difficult and it was necessary to introduce an industrial organization of field labor from early on in the Caribbean involving boiling houses and mills. Through time there was an increased cycle of colony seizure, plantation, slave import, ship building and sugar import leading to heightened consumption in Europe in the 19th century. Sugar had lots of uses and functions, all interlinked: medicine, spice/condiment, decoration, sweetener, preservative. There were entanglements of sugar with tea, coffee and chocolate. A cup of tea in Europe mixed sugar from the Caribbean with tea from huge estates in India. The sugar trade involved planters, bankers, slavers, shippers, refiners, grocers and government regulators. Legislation was introduced in Britain to regulate purity and quality standards.

So the entanglements of sugar were far flung and highly complex. Humans (slaves) and things (machines) afforded a massive increase in global sugar consumption. As sugar became cheaper and more available it also became linked to changes in abstractions and practices. The organization of the meal sequence during the day changed in Europe, with the consumption of sugar-rich foods consumed in 10-minute breaks in factories, away from home. But there was also the establishment of high tea in the front room of the house. Globally ‘refined sugar … became a symbol of the modern and industrial’ (Mintz 1985: 193). In the house it became associated with new meal practices, themselves associated with refined gentility and social display.

The resonances of sugar are related to bodily desire perhaps partly because sugar is high in calories. Mintz suggests that sugar satisfies a possibly universal desire for sweetness, but ‘it also seems, in so doing, to awaken that desire anew’ (Mintz 1985: xxv). Mintz (1985: 136–7) argues that the English already had a sweet tooth before the widespread availability of sugar from the Caribbean. They made mead from honey, and even added sugar to wine to make a candied wine. As sugar became more available they added it to tea, coffee, chocolate and to puddings, jams and cakes. Thus the sweetness of sugar resonated especially strongly in England, stoking the demand for yet more production and trade. Sugar also became associated with particular ‘sweet’ foods, drinks and occasions. It allowed new sorts of relationships, whether labor relations in the factory or social entertaining in the front room. One of the most famous descriptions of resonance is provided by Proust (1981) in his account of Swann eating a ‘petite Madeleine’ cake. As the cake is dunked in tea and placed on the tongue, memories and feelings regarding taking tea with his mother are opened up. There is a bodily reaction to the sweet cake and tea that draws in feelings, memories and emotions. In France as in England a sweet-seeking human body had been produced.

We see in this example the tight skein of humans and things that are caught up in sugar. All the different components are heterogeneous but they are at the same time seamlessly linked together so that it is difficult to separate them. I have tried in this chapter to define affordance, abstraction and resonance as different dimensions of entanglement. I identified them, however partially and inadequately amongst all the muddled business of entanglement, because they are dimensions that lead the different parts to be fitting in relation to each other. Sugar comes into a context in England and it reinforces a certain way of doing things; and through time this way is transformed. There is always a way and a style to entanglement, and bodies and things of particular types are produced.

The notion of fittingness is thus much broader than that of fitness. As we shall see in the next chapter, fitness is often described in evolutionary studies as reproductive fitness, which can be measured in a number of ways such as survival, or survival of offspring, or of offspring’s offspring. Proxies of fitness are also often used such as efficiency in resource acquisition. I have argued here that traits may be adopted because they are fitting within a system of affordances. These systems may include the affordance of survival. But it is also clear that traits may be adopted because they cohere within abstractions and resonances.

Fittingness may itself afford reproductive fitness but whether it does or not is a matter of investigation rather than assumption. As was noted above, certain aspects of abstract coherence may get out of step with other aspects of entanglements. Cohering to norms is often not the best strategy; cheating or opposing or foot-dragging may work equally well or better in terms of individual survival.

One of the unfortunate results of the splits within the social sciences and archaeology between those studying culture and those studying adaptation and evolution has been that style has been studied as a complex phenomenon by the former and affordance as a complex phenomenon by the latter. Despite recent attempts to break down this divide (e.g. Knappett 2005, Jones 2004, Shennan 2003) in archaeology, it remains the case that culture, meaning, representation and style are often seen as forming a domain separate from the nitty-gritty of biological survival and the tools needed to achieve it. I have argued in this chapter that our bodies become ontologically transformed, through processes that seek bodily resonances between abstractions and affordances. Cultural abstractions and adaptive processes are thoroughly and seamlessly combined. In the following chapter I will try and develop an approach to the evolution of things that similarly draws on both sides of the debate and uses as a key theme the fittingness of entanglements.





