Chapter 7


The Evolution and Persistence of Things


Still sitting in the plane on the tarmac. The plane has a fault and people are inconvenienced (or worse). But beyond this banal fact is the question of how many times faults and delays have to occur before people stop using this company, or type of plane or plane part. Plane parts get selected for if they are fitting in relation to the goal of the plane and the other plane parts, but humans often show great tolerance of inefficiency and failure. Plane travelers put up with a lot of inconvenience. This is at least partly because the alternatives are limited. But if someone could come up with a better plane or plane parts so that there were fewer faults then presumably these new planes would be preferred. But the adoption of a new plane type depends on so many factors. I remembered back to the examples provided by Pierre Lemonnier (1989) of planes with odd shapes were not adopted even though they worked very efficiently. No-one felt safe flying in planes that looked odd.

It is the claim of this chapter that entanglement and fittingness offer an alternative systematic approach for the study of the evolution of humans and things. Existing approaches have often tried to understand the evolution of cultural traits within a biological and neo-Darwinian perspective. But most things are not selected for on the basis solely of reproductive fitness, adaptive resource acquisition or replicative success in transmission. Rather they are selected for because they are fitting within a taut web of entanglements. The reason, returning to my example in Chapter 1, that the piano is not found in a Mesolithic camp site is that the piano needed a whole entanglement involving barbed wire and telegraphs, cast iron and an industrial scale of production, but also a type of music attuned to nationalism, individualism and concepts of the romantic. None of this was even remotely available in the Mesolithic. It is true that a piano in the Mesolithic would not have led to reproductive or adaptive success, and it could not have been replicated, but the reasons for these failures are to be found in the fittingness of entanglements. Reproductive and replicative success may play only small parts in these entanglements.

A similar case can be made for other examples I have used in this book: the watch, the wheel, the bicycle, the sail boat. The wheel could not enhance reproductive or replicative success in pre-Columbian America because it was not entangled there with the draughting capacities of cattle and horse. It is the fittingness within entanglements that determines whether a trait is selected for or not. The long-term persistence of wheels has had very little to do with the reproductive success of the people who made and used wheels; but it has had a lot to do with the long-term persistence of domestic cattle and horse, the construction of roads, international trade in rubber to make tires, the invention of the internal combustion engine, and all the multitude of associated entanglements across millennia.

So why should we explore evolutionary theory at all? One reason is that it takes seriously long-term change. We have seen that entanglements incorporate many temporalities, many stretchings out over much longer spans of time than are dealt with in most social, cultural and economic theory. Another reason is that most of the theories discussed in Chapter 2 that have dominated the social and humanistic sciences over recent decades, are very human centered: they deal with agency, meaning, phenomenology, self and personhood. As a counter-balance there is a need to explore theories that are less human centered. Evolutionary archaeologists such as Dunnell (1980) ‘asked what the operation of evolutionary forces would look like from the point of view of the cultural attributes or artifacts themselves’ (Shennan 2008: 78). While Latour and Actor Network Theory provide a counterpoint to human-centered approaches, we saw in Chapter 5 that they do not deal well with the long term. Darwinian evolutionary theory when applied to cultural change very clearly de-centers the human. But the main and third reason for exploring evolutionary theory in this chapter derives from this book’s focus on entanglement. If entanglement consists of a taut set of dependences, abstractions and resonances amongst humans and things, then the adoption and persistence of traits depend on how the traits are fitting within the entanglement. Darwinian theory provides a potential source of ideas about variation, adaptation, selection and persistence that might be applied to the study of change within entanglements.





Evolutionary Approaches


According to Boone and Smith (1998) natural selection has three conditions: variation, inheritance (transmission) and differential fitness leading to selection (see also Mesoudi and O’Brien 2009). A fuller account of the evolutionary process has the following components: (1) genetic variation is continually produced by mutation and recombination; (2) this variation interacts with external environmental factors to shape phenotypes; (3) these phenotypes and associated genotypes are differentially successful in surviving and reproducing; (4) offspring inherit (some of) the genes and thus tend to develop the associated phenotypes of their parents; (5) the proliferation of more successful genotypes results in transgenerational increase in phenotypes that are better adapted to local environments (Boone and Smith 1998: S142). Four approaches that use aspects of such a framework in relation to the cultural realm and that will be discussed here are evolutionary ecology (HBE), evolutionary archaeology, dual inheritance theory and niche construction theory.

But before exploring these different approaches to see whether they provide a framework for studying the evolution and persistence of traits within entanglements, it may be helpful to make some general points about how cultural and material things are construed within them. For many writers using evolutionary approaches, material culture is seen as part of the phenotype. In biology the phenotype, as opposed to the genotype, is what an organism looks like as a consequence of the interaction of its genotype and the environment. It is the observable characteristics of an organism as determined by both genetic makeup and environmental influences. Cultural traits can be considered as part of the phenotype – extensions of bodily interaction with the environment. But of course, the artifacts are also part of the environment. Artifacts in the environment – boats, cars, watches and pianos – constitute part of the environment within which adaptation and selection occur. For example, it has been argued that the evolution of the ability to make tools changed the environment such that human hands and minds developed in particular ways (Deacon 1997).

So things, like genes, play a double role as part of the phenotype and part of the environment. Another general starting point that might be helpful is a distinction between reproductive success and replicative success. One can clearly argue that a cultural trait is the hard part of the phenotype – like the bird’s nest. These phenotypic traits are selected for because they enhance reproductive fitness – which can itself be measured in a number of ways such as survival, or survival of offspring, or of offspring’s offspring. In the socio-cultural realm, Hughes (1986) and Voland (1990) have used parish records to show that occupational status (whether a person is a farmer or a craftsman in historic Europe for example) and income have a long-term effect on number of offspring.

Alternatively Darwin can be used in a broader sense to describe replicative success. Cultural and material traits are selected for and they become more common because of the emulation of high status or successful people or for some other reason. There is no necessary assumption that replicative success is linked to reproductive success of the carriers of the traits. Rather the traits themselves are successful. This is an attractive approach in that much cultural change is very fast, too fast to have been the product of reproductive success (Shennan 2003).

Having made these general points, I wish to start by examining the first three approaches identified above as applying Darwinian theories to the evolution and persistence of cultural traits.





Evolutionary Ecology (HBE)


The first, evolutionary ecology, or Human Behavioral Ecology was discussed in Chapter 4. According to Boone and Smith (1998: S141) this ‘explains cultural and behavioral change as forms of phenotypic adaptation to varying social and ecological conditions, using the assumption that natural selection has designed organisms to respond to local conditions in fitness-enhancing ways.’ Plasticity in adaptation to the environment is seen as having a causal role in phenotypic variation. There is less focus on heritability. Behavioral plasticity allows more speedy adaptation of organisms to environmental perturbations, and that is why it has evolved. Shennan (2003: 171) gives the example of the decline of the plough, wheel and domestic animals in late pre-modern Japan. A cost-benefit analysis showed that the mountainous landscape and the very high population meant that human labor was cheaper than animals and ploughs. As another example, the diet-breadth model discussed in Chapter 4 argues that humans will exploit those resources which have the highest rate of return – and that humans will go down the ladder to lower rates when pressures on resources increase. Boone and Smith (1998) give the example of the snowmobiles used in the subarctic by the Cree, in contrast to those people still using snowshoes. Boone and Smith argue that the snowmobiles spread simply because the Cree individuals could see that snowmobiles were more efficient. In fact with the introduction of the snowmobiles the Cree had a narrower diet because it became efficient to concentrate on higher ranked resources, in concordance with the optimizing diet breadth model.

In Chapter 4 I discussed the importance and value of this type of research into the mechanics of how things and humans work in relation to each other. I also suggested that the focus on optimization could be expanded to include evaluation of how well a trait contributed to the workings of other parts of the entanglement (not only concentrating on resource acquisition and reproductive success). These same points are relevant here again to the study of change and adoption of traits. The approach often focuses on individual objects, disconnected and disentangled except in terms of resource acquisition, signaling behavior or reproductive success. In the case of the snowmobile, it seems obvious that the Cree may use snowmobiles because they make hunting more efficient. Whether groups do or do not use snowmobiles is related to many other factors the authors do not consider. How did these hunters get snowmobiles? How did they get the wages and income to buy/rent them? The costs and benefits of the snowmobiles depend on the larger picture of how people worked to get the money, get loans, make investments, etc. And how do they get the gas and oil to run the snowmobiles? The hunters must be linked to supply pipelines or trucks and roads and international markets. And who fixes the smowmobile? How many parts does it have and where do they come from? Whether there is increased use of snowmobiles depends very marginally on hunting efficiency and much more on these wider entanglements. The ability to concentrate on higher ranked resources and a narrower diet was entangled within a broader set of affordances and coherences. It would not seem difficult to carry out a rigorous and systematic study of the trade-offs involved in all the entanglement costs of using a snowmobile.

The persuasive and interesting work of O’Connell (2006) suggests how modern humans displaced Neanderthals. He argues that Neanderthals and modern humans in Europe appear to have been distinguished by differences in diet breadth, Neanderthals focusing on relatively high-ranked prey, moderns exploiting a broader, more expensive range of resources. This difference may have allowed moderns to replace Neanderthals by competitive exclusion. Similar arguments can be made regarding the success of early farming populations as they spread across Europe (Shennan 2008), although again the costs and benefits of farming involved much more than resource acquisition at a particular settlement itself; there were also very many other costs associated with making new types of tools (groundstone axes and ceramic containers for example), becoming more involved in long distance trade, and all the costs of maintaining long-term social relationships as we have seen at Çatalhöyük. Aunger (2009) argues that HBE tends to focus on subsistence-level societies and does not deal well, in its focus on plasticity, with larger-scale infrastructures and networks (see the discussion of macro-evolutionary theory in Chapter 8).





Evolutionary Archaeology


If evolutionary ecology and HBE approaches focus on immediate plastic responses to environments by knowledgeable actors, evolutionary archaeology concentrates more on history and heritability. Researchers such as Dunnell (1980), Lyman and O’Brien (1998) are interested in building cultural lineages and then asking how evolutionary processes produced the lineage patterns. Evolution is seen as the result of natural selection, genetic drift, or both. The branching, diverging and converging of the lineage tree can be explained in terms of adaptiveness or drift. ‘Our view is that things found in the archaeological record – projectile points, ceramic pots, and the like – were once part of human phenotypes and were therefore shaped by the same evolutionary processes that shape somatic characters. This makes artifacts part and parcel of any discussion of human phylogeny. Tools do not breed, but tool makers do breed, and they do transmit information to other tool makers, irrespective of whether those other tool makers are lineal descendants. Cultural transmission is a different kind of transmission than what is produced intergenerationally by genes, but this is irrelevant as far as phylogeny is concerned’ (O’Brien & Lyman 2000). This type of focus has long existed in archaeology. In the late 19th century, Pitt-Rivers ([1875] 1906) often couched his study of branches on the evolutionary trees of material culture styles and language in Darwinian terms. ‘The principles of variation and natural selection have established a bond of union between the physical and culture sciences which can never be broken’ (Pitt-Rivers [1875] 1906: 24).

Returning to the snowmobile example, Lyman and O’Brien (1998) argue that adaptive decision making does play a role in the adoption and persistence of this trait but they suggest that the ultimate reason snowmobiles replaced snowshoes is that those that inherited the trait outcompeted those that did not, enhancing both their reproductive success and the replicative success of the snowmobiles. Such claims about reproductive success are often difficult to substantiate. In the study of parish records, as already mentioned, it has proved possible to demonstrate convincingly that wealth or occupation of an individual/family at time t, correlates with having more descendants at time t+1,2…n (Hughes 1986, Voland 1990). But in archaeology it is rarely possible to follow genetic lines of this sort. In any case, recent work (e.g. Jones 2009) has argued that with regard to fitness, survival (or somatic success) is what matters, not reproduction (or reproductive success). Jones shows that there is strong selective pressure on surviving to beyond age 5 (or so). Entanglement provides a way of exploring the material and social factors (such as social support, status, etc.) that may enhance efforts by parents to raise children successfully. It seems, then, that measuring reproductive success in archaeology is not only difficult but also insufficient, as the selective pressures leading to reproductive success and survival are largely to be found in human-thing entanglements.

O’Brien, Darwent and Lyman (2001) apply a cladistics approach to Palaeoindian projectile point types such as Clovis, in the southeastern United States. They define a series of characters (such as base shape) and character states (such as arc-shaped and triangular base shapes) to produce a tree diagram of branching types from ancestors. All of these character states or variables would be entangled with technologies, hunting efficiencies, competitive social prestige. The location of maximum blade width, base shape, outer tang angle, tang-tip shape, fluting, and various length/width ratios are all entangled in hunting and prestige efficiencies. Exploring these wider entanglements, using the approaches described within evolutionary ecology or HBE, would be appropriate in understanding the selective factors that led to the success of the carriers of these points or the replicative success of the points themselves. But the angle that is provided by evolutionary archaeology that is important is temporal continuity – the lineages of ways of doing things. The variants that are present at time t have partly to be understood in relation to the pool of variation available in time t-1.

Evolutionary archaeology understands these continuities of tradition as ‘transmission’: the curves and branches of lineages of traits derive from the processes of transmission. As Shennan (2008: 80) notes ‘clearly, transmission implies continuity but continuity does not necessarily imply transmission.’ Shennan argues that continuity can also be the result of drift or the product of a constant environment or function. A constant environment or function plays a similar role to continuities produced by the tautness of entanglement – the entrapment that I described in Chapter 5. If humans and things are situated within complex webs of various degrees of tautness, the web itself limits what can be done. Evolutionary ecology has a history held together by the entanglement of humans and things. It is true that archaeologists repeatedly identify increases and decreases in the presence of cultural traits through time (the battle-ship curves) but these changes through time can be the product of the direction and gradual transformation of entanglements, as will be explored in Chapter 8.

As I argued in Chapter 6, entanglements include abstractions and ideas that cross domains and get caught up in themselves, their internal rules and logics. I also argued that bodily human-thing resonances can have the same effect of entangling different domains of cultural behavior together. These linked ways of doing things co-evolve through time and evolutionary archaeology is of value in describing this process. Riede (2009) discusses the co-evolution of linked artifacts and searches for co-phylogenetic patterns that might emerge. The example used by Riede is the co-evolution of knives and forks in European table ware from the 16th to the 20th centuries. He ends up with a ‘tanglegram’ that incorporates the two cladograms for knives and forks. A lot more would have to be done here to situate this tangle of two types through time into the wider entanglements of table etiquette, foodways, class, industrial production and international trade.





Dual Inheritance Theory


We will see that comments related to those made above can be applied to Dual Inheritance Theory (Boyd and Richerson 1985, Shennan 2008, 2009). As many have argued, cultural and biological transmission differ, and there has been much discussion in archaeology of cultural variants (a term used by Richerson and Boyd 2005 and by Schiffer 1999) and of Dawkins’ memes. In Dual Inheritance Theory, Boyd and Richerson, and archaeologists such as Stephen Shennan, focus on cultural transmission and argue again that ‘some cultural variants persist and spread because they cause their bearers to be more likely to survive and be imitated’ (Richerson and Boyd 2005: 238). A cultural complex exists ‘because the beliefs of one generation are learned by the next’ (Richerson and Boyd 2005: 3). Throughout, Boyd and Richerson (1985) define culture as information held in the brain, though also stored in writing or in pottery decoration. They describe various forces leading to the evolution of transmitted traits, such as cultural mutation and drift, guided variation and biased transmission. In terms of biased transmission there is a results bias that occurs when people change what they do because a new way of doing seems more effective, or a context bias that occurs when the person copied is prestigious or when people conform to local traditions. Indirect bias involves imitation of the most successful role model and sticking to that model. Guided variation is where people copy others but try out their own solutions so that there is a lot of unique variation.

Recent debates have explored the value of Dual Inheritance Theory in relation to examples such as the persistence of hoplite warfare in Greece from the mid 7th to mid 4th centuries BC (Runciman 1998; Hallpike 1999, Dunbar 2002). Bettinger and Eerkens (1999) apply the approach to prehistoric projectile points in California and Nevada. At about 1350 BP there is a decrease in size of projectile points that equates with the shift from use of the atlatl to the bow and arrow. In central Nevada, light narrow based forms were introduced for use with bows and arrows. But in eastern California light forms were sometimes narrow, sometimes wide based. There is more variation in projectile points in eastern California. Bettinger and Eerkens apply the Boyd and Richerson notion of guided variation (in which people copy others but try out their own solutions so that there is a lot of unique variation), and indirect bias (in which people copy social models and stick to them as when people copy successful hunters). They suggest that eastern Californian bow and arrow technology was maintained by guided variation so that there is more variation, whereas in central Nevada it may have been maintained by indirect bias. A possible reason for this difference is that in eastern California people obtained the bow and arrow from people they only interacted with minimally, so there was more experimentation (Bettinger and Eerkens (1999: 238).

Boyd and Richerson (1985) certainly contribute to our understanding of why certain forms of social learning are selected for in certain environments. But the accounts of culture in Dual Inheritance Theory often seem disconnected from developments in social and cultural anthropology. In most cultural anthropology, culture is no longer understood as a packet of beliefs handed down from one generation to the next. As soon as one says ‘cultural evolution refers to the changing distributions of cultural attributes in populations, likewise affected by processes such as natural selection but also by others that have no analog in genetic evolution’ (Shennan 2008: 76) the floodgates seem opened to all the possible factors that anthropologists have discussed over decades in exploring how people manipulate material culture socially. It is inadequate to gloss this complexity in terms of forms of biased transmission. There seems a real need for the more nuanced types of perspective seen in materiality or agency or memory studies (Dobres and Robb 2000, Meskell 2005a, Miller 2005b, Van Dyke and Alcock 2003). Dual Inheritance accounts of culture as transmitted information, held in the brain, seem a long way from, for example, Taussig’s (1993) subtle accounts of the mimetic process. In most anthropological work material culture is nowadays seen as actively engaged in social processes. What and how culture (in the Boyd and Richerson sense) is transmitted depend on culture (in the anthropological sense) – that is on the active engagement of people in their entangled lives.

If we take a more anthropological view we see that humans and things are caught up in complex webs – and these webs of technology, social obligation, exchange relations, phenomenological understanding, ideological perspective, social jockeying are all part of the complex environment that mean that a certain trait is or is not used. One thing depends on another thing. It is these entanglement processes that produce so-called battle-ship curves, and it is within them that transmission takes place or ceases. We need to focus more on the selective context that leads to the persistence of traits, and focus less on the humans and their transmissions one to the other. In biased transmission, a results bias occurs when a particular way of doing things seems more effective, but what is effective depends primarily on the rest of the entanglement. The increases and decreases of a results bias are primarily to be understood in terms of the shifting entanglement as a whole. In the case of the Californian and Nevada projectile points, research could explore how the different arrowhead shapes relate to function. The authors discuss the effects of resharpening, and the availability of materials may have had an impact within the projectile point entanglements. Variability versus conformity in projectile points through time may have very little to do with transmission itself.

One approach to the inheritance of cultural traits is to model the transmission process as random drift. The null hypothesis is set up that innovation occurs and individuals copy at random, without any form of bias. Variations from the random drift expectations can then be identified (Bentley et al. 2004, Eerkens and Lipo 2005). Recent work, however, has shown some of the difficulties here. Mesoudi and Lycett (2009) find that some combinations of non-random processes can produce frequency distributions of traits very similar to those produced by random copying. Steele et al. (2010) explore rim variation of bowls in two phases of occupation of the Turkish Upper City of Boazköy-Hattu¸sa where it has been argued by the archaeologists that there was an increased use of solid versus liquid foods, an increase in larger vessels and an increased use of coarser wares perhaps to save labor. Steele et al. suggest that these other factors may be more important than the rim details in determining the waxing and waning of styles. An entanglement approach would explore these multiple factors.

A further problem that is also relevant to evolutionary archaeology concerns the methods of identifying cultural sequences and lineages. Any object can be defined in limitless ways, and so which characters and variables are to be chosen in constructing lineages by archaeologists? The construction of lineages in language has been relatively successful but material culture is more frequently manipulated by people as they memorialize some things and forget others. Anthropologists have long studied what Hobsbawm and Ranger (1992) called ‘the invention of tradition’, and prehistorians of all people know that typological similarities and differences can be manipulated by political interests in order to construct lineages and sequences of affiliation (Diaz-Andreu and Champion 1996). It is a very outdated view of anthropology and culture to imagine that culture is a package of stuff that is just handed down, objectively marking descent. In fact sequences and lineages are always to some degree invented – both in the past and in the present. If Dual Inheritance Theory accepts the play of these biases in the past, then it must also accept their role in the construction of affinity and descent in the present.





Evolution and Entanglement


The great attractions of evolutionary theory for the study of entanglements and their change through time include, as noted at the start of this chapter, the focus on the long term and the thing-centered perspective. But can the approach be modified to allow an understanding of the ways in which things and humans are selected within entanglements?

At first sight the prospect seems hopeful. As noted at the start of the chapter, one important strut of evolutionary theories is variation. I have argued throughout this book that things are always going wrong, running out, dying out, being unruly along the strings of entanglements. It may seem inadequate to try and develop a theory of long-term change that is based on ‘things going wrong’, but this is a core component of Darwinian explanations of evolutionary change where spontaneous gene mutations create variability. Things do not go wrong randomly for the most part. Things have their own temporalities so the timing of when they cause problems or back-ups or bottle-necks may seem random to humans. Things have their own relationships and interactions so that how things go wrong is structured to some degree. Humans also produce their own immediate variability as they engage with others and with things within the entanglements.

But we run into greater problems when approaching a second strut of evolutionary theory: inheritance and transmission. While humans do of course learn from those around them, they are also prone to tinker and transform (Gombrich 1979, Levi-Strauss 1965). They often seem tradition-bound (Hosfield 2009), and yet they just as easily invent traditions (Hobsbawm and Ranger 1992). Whether they do or do not copy and repeat what is around them depends. And so we are taken immediately into all the dependences and dependencies that have been discussed in this book regarding human-thing and thing-thing relationships. Humans work within a corpus of things around them that they refer to, but the factors affecting whether they copy or not include whether they can afford to copy and whether the copies are consistent both abstractly and in terms of bodily resonance. The tautness of the entanglements, the degree of entrapment, influence what is inherited and transmitted. People can rarely afford to copy prestigious people (context bias) or stick to the imitation of a successful role model (indirect bias) or copy more effective solutions (results bias). Whether they can try out their own solutions (guided variation) depends.

Similar concerns surround the third strut of evolutionary theory: differential fitness. In evolutionary theory this fitness usually means reproductive success within specific environments, measured in terms of survival of offspring down several generations, efficiency of resource acquisition, or success in replication as successful people are copied. While all these factors must be relevant, to greater or lesser extents in different contexts, they are themselves embedded in entanglements of humans and things that are complex and entrapping. Rather than focus on fitness, I have suggested in Chapter 6 that the more inclusive term of fittingness be used. This incorporates affordances, abstractions and resonances that are woven together and influence whether a trait is likely to survive or not. A trait may be fitting and survive in such an entanglement regardless of whether it enhances reproduction, efficiently acquires resources or is used by successful people. Fittingness itself is an adequate framework within which traits are or are not selected, prosper, persevere and die out. Fittingness is a heterogeneous matrix: it does not require a reductive moment. It allows a non-reductive evolutionary theory.

It could be argued that there is another way to think the linking of evolutionary theory and entanglement. Human-thing entanglements can be seen simply as environments in which genes and cultural traits circulate. Thus variation, inheritance or transmission and fitness take their place within specific entanglements. So, following the outline of evolutionary theory described above on p.140, (1) variation in genes and traits is continually produced within entanglements; (2) This variation interacts with entanglements to form human-thing phenotypes; (3) These phenotypes (such as a domesticated cow) and genotypes (such as lactose tolerance in humans resulting from the consumption of cow milk) are differentially successful in surviving, reproducing and replicating; (4) New generations of humans and things inherit the genotypes or develop the phenotypes of previous generations; (5) The proliferation of more successful genotypes and phenotypes results in transgenerational increase in phenotypes that are more fitting within entanglements.

This scheme seems to work in a general sense, but with the same caveats as noted above. Evolutionary theory provides no anthropologically adequate account of processes that lead new generations of humans to inherit phenotypes from previous generations. We have also seen that the very definition of traits as phenotypes is fraught with difficulty so that a rigorous anthropologically based description of lineages of traits must depend on understanding how traits work in specific contexts – that is they must depend on the full gamut of dependences described in Chapters 2 to 5 and on the analysis of entrapment and fittingness as discussed in Chapters 5 and 6. Evolutionary approaches in archaeology focus on the ‘battle-ship’ curves of increases and decreases in the frequencies of traits, these lineages of inheritance. It is of interest that in South American archaeology the Spanish term for battle-ship curve is ‘huso’, meaning spindle and referring to the way a spindle is swollen into a lenticular shape by the wool wrapped around it. Thus an alternative to the idea of blocks of culture passed down through time is again the idea of strings of entanglement bundled together in specific ways in specific moments of time.

Dependences, abstractions and resonances select for certain traits certainly. This is the attraction of including some aspects of evolutionary theory in a theory of entanglement since the selection of traits can be considered without focusing only on human intentionality and agency. Abstractions, resonances and what can be afforded all have an impact on entanglements and thus on the selection of traits. As already noted evolutionary theory plus entanglement allows a non-reductive approach to the evolution and persistence of humans and things. Within evolutionary theory an argument closer to the one being made here is provided by the concept of niche construction.





Niche Construction


Organisms, including humans, often modify their environments and in so doing they affect which genotypes survive and reproduce (e.g. Durham 1991). For example, many mammals build burrows that create an environment in which burrow defence, maintenance and regulation are selected for (Laland et al. 2000), and humans build cities which have an effect on gene transmission as a result of increasing epidemic disease, while the buildings themselves within the cities provide ideas about architecture without any teaching being involved (Shennan 2009: 7). ‘Niche construction refers to the activities, choices, and metabolic processes of organisms, through which they define, choose, modify, and partly create their own niches’ (Laland et al. 2000: 132–3). ‘The reciprocal feedback between organisms’ activities and their selective environment is known as niche construction’ (Jablonka 2011: 784). The environments organisms construct influence the evolution of those organisms and of other organisms.

There is much here that parallels the focus on temporality and entanglement in this book. There is a real interest in material legacy. The earthworm transforms the soil in which future generations of earthworms are selected, or the burrow is a physical legacy influencing future evolutionary pathways. Each offspring inherits not only genes but also an ecology modified by ancestors (Kendal et al. 2011: 786). An ecological inheritance is thus added to genetic inheritance in evolution. This ecological inheritance can be expanded to include cultural transmission, by which Kendal et al. (2011: 787) refer to ‘semantic information – anything that reduces uncertainty about selective environments, relative to the fitness interests of organisms’. Culture is again seen as conservative, traditional and static rather than as fluid and processual. Another recurring limitation is that much of what is inherited and passed down has nothing to do with the fitness interests of organisms, at least if fitness is defined in terms of reproductive success. So again we need to shift to fittingness in all its forms (resonance, affordance, abstraction) if we are going to understand why certain forms are selected for and become common.

Despite these caveats, studies of niche construction seem much closer to the arguments in this book that things themselves are involved in entanglements and temporalities that produce continuities in the lineages of humans, their genes and their cultural products. Riede (2011) conducts a case study from the southern Scandinavian Late Glacial in which the phylogenetic relations between projectile points are traced. The different types of lithic tool could then be explored to see if they were associated with the use of dogs for hunting and intensive reindeer exploitation. The hypothesis was that when communities could not make use of dogs in herding, intensive reindeer exploitation was less viable. Although some of the statistical results were disappointing, the study suggests that the association of dogs with reindeer leads to greater reproductive and replicative success. This discussion of niche thus draws the understanding of the evolution and persistence of tools into a broader entangled context.

A further example of niche construction concentrates more on the evolutionary ecology approaches described in Chapter 4 and the Human Behavioral Ecology perspective on evolutionary change described earlier in this chapter. In their account of niche construction, Broughton et al. (2010) return to the example of the diet breadth model and the expanded array of lower-return resources that came to be exploited in many parts of the world in the early Holocene. Broughton et al. provide two archaeological examples of how resource depletion can act as a form of niche construction. In the case of Late Holocene hunter-gatherers of the lower Sacramento Valley of Central California, they show gradually increased use of smaller animals and fish and also low return plants. Since animals with larger bodies provide greater return for effort expended, this increase in diet breadth and use of low ranked resources indicates lower foraging efficiency. They also find evidence of increased violence and declines in human health in the skeletal evidence through the same time period. Thus it is argued that the increased diet breadth changed the selective context for human health.

In the case of the Mimbres-Mogollon culture in southwestern New Mexico, Broughton et al. extend the argument to a consideration of the reasons for agricultural intensification. They argue that intensification will occur if individuals experience a decline in foraging efficiency, perhaps as a result of the depression or over-use of wild resources. A shift to smaller prey is again identified and interpreted in terms of lower foraging efficiency. This lower efficiency resource system created a selective niche that favored more intensive agriculture, and indeed various measures, including changes in settlement location, do show increased agricultural use of the environment at this time. Broughton et al. (2010: 407) provide some interesting examples of the types of trade-offs involved in such a process. ‘Engineering studies show that the “capacity” of a grinding implement, or its output per unit time, is a function of its grinding surface area: larger tools can be used to grind more material to a given consistency in a given amount of time than can smaller tools. The use of larger grinding tools entails a trade-off, however, because they also require more physical effort on the part of the person doing the grinding. Given this trade-off between tool efficiency and the degree of effort required, it is to be expected that larger grinding tools will be used when more time is spent using them’.

The increase in agriculture in the Mimbres-Mogollon is thus seen as a response to the reduction in returns provided by wild resources. Broughton et al. (2010: 410) recognize that many factors were involved such as settlement change, grinding tool technologies, the emergence of hereditary inequalities, migration but they focus not on an interconnected system in which there are multiple causalities, but on the one factor of resource depletion as creating a niche in which selection occurs. Rather than isolating one variable as ‘the niche’ and focusing on resource depletion as the primary causative factor, it would be more productive to explore the interaction of many variables within an entanglement. Indeed, the depletion of resources and the shift to resources requiring more labor provide an excellent example of entanglement: the decline in a natural resource produces entrapment into increased labor. But to focus, as in many of these evolutionary and behavioral ecology approaches, on resources and reproductive success produces a lop-sided view of the complex entanglements of humans and things (see the discussion of Human Behavioral Ecology in Chapter 4).

The concept of niche construction brings evolutionary approaches closer to entanglement as defined here, and yet the notion of niche remains rather passive, a background to change, rather than engaging with the dialectical tensions between all the dependencies and dependences within the full realm of entanglements. There remains the potential, however, for exploring the ways in which an evolutionary approach can contribute to understanding the transformations of entanglements. In the next section an example is provided at Çatalhöyük.





Evolution at Çatalhöyük


Returning to Çatalhöyük, the Neolithic entanglement with clay, associated with a domestic mode of agricultural production, led to the mud-brick house (Hodder 1990, 2006b). The mud brick house was the social focus of material, social, symbolic and sensual life. Some houses started and then finished after no, or just a few, rebuilds, the vacant lot then being used for midden. Other houses were more successful, being rebuilt in the same way and in exactly the same location up to six times (Hodder 2006b). This variability of surviving and non-surviving houses seems ripe for a Darwinian analysis. Surely the long-lived houses were those with greater reproductive or replicative success?

The evidence at present intimates that the Çatalhöyük houses may not have been machines for the reproduction of genes. Using tooth morphology as a proxy measure for genetic distance, Marin Pilloud (2009, Pilloud and Larsen 2011) has demonstrated that individuals buried beneath the floors of houses were not more closely related to each other than individuals in the population as a whole. And those buried beneath the floors of the long-lived houses do not seem to have been better off in terms of health either. The health indicators so far studied by the team led by Simon Hillson and Clark Larsen (pers. comm.) do not show differences between the long-lived and shorter term houses. And there is no evidence so far of greater productive success. Storage and productive space, for example, remains much the same in both long-lived and short-term houses (Hodder and Pels 2010).

It is possible to argue instead that the houses that successfully persisted were those that were fitting in relation to other aspects of entanglement at the time. They were the ones that were most successful at performing this local version of what Maurice Bloch, Webb Keane and Peter Pels, working at the site, have classified as a version of a ‘house society’ (Bloch 2010, Keane 2010, Hodder and Pels 2010). Those in the long-lived houses were most successful at keeping the walls up, repairing them and furnishing them. They were the ones that were most effective at using ancestral cults and memory construction to keep the house going. They were the ones that were best at constructing ‘history’ through the passing down of animal and human skulls and body parts. They were the ones that best performed a particular material, social, symbolic and sensual repertoire – they did things that were fitting within a particular entanglement involving clay, bricks, skulls, bulls and houses but also involving ideas of history, ancestry, relations with the dead. We can find no evidence that the long-lasting houses controlled production or exchange or had better resources in some way. Rather, once they had successfully started to build a history and to amass evidence of that history (skulls, bucrania, body parts, images of feasts), these houses were able to elaborate on and perform that history more powerfully than others. So an entanglement in which history was important, and which was itself fitting within the long-term relations of delayed-return economies (Woodburn 1980), was a context or niche in which those humans and things good at building continuities and memories were more likely to be successful and be selected for.

Individuals at Çatalhöyük were sensuously tied to clay and to the clay house and hearth (Hodder 2011). We have seen also (Chapter 4) that they engaged in a variety of strategies to keep the house from leaning and falling apart. The more it fell apart, and the more humans caused change to the local environment, the more they had to intensify, change brick technologies, build thicker walls. Looking after the house involved recruiting the ancestors to hold up posts. A good feast may have not only solidified the social ties of the ‘house’ of people but may also have helped the material house to stand. In performing history humans depended on the house, but at the same time the house depended on humans. House, human and society were all materially entangled together. Any material, technological, social, symbolic, stylistic change only persisted in so far as it was fitting within these entanglements.

The introduction and spread of pottery at Çatalhöyük provides a further example. Fired clay objects and plaster occur from the earliest levels (around 7400 cal BC), but fired clay pottery starts in Level XII, at around 7000–6900 cal BC. At first the quantities of this thick, undecorated, organic (straw) tempered pottery are very small (Last 2005, Table 5.2), increasing gradually through time. There is little evidence from exterior smudging that these early, thick, small vessels were used in cooking over a fire. Rather, in the early levels up to Level VII cooking seems to have been achieved with the extensive use of balls of clay that were heated and placed with food in containers of basketry, wood or clay (Atalay 2005).

Figure 7.1 Mineral tempered cooking pot from Çatalhöyük (Source: Çatalhöyük Research Project and Jason Quinlan).



Around Level VII, these clay balls die out and at the same time pottery changes to being thin-walled and mineral tempered (Figure 7.1), and the pots have larger capacity. Frequent evidence of smudging on the outer surfaces of these pots suggests they were used in cooking, and experiments in behavioural archaeology have shown the greater efficiency of heat transfer in mineral-tempered pots in contrast to organic-tempered pots (Skibo et al. 1989). So what was it that selected for the use of clay pots in cooking instead of clay balls in Level VII at Çatalhöyük?

Careful comparison of cooking with pots and clay balls, using ethnographic and experimental data, demonstrated that the main advantage of cooking in clay pots over a fire was that the cook was more able to do other things at the same time (Atalay 2005). Use of clay balls involved continual monitoring of the cooking process, moving the balls back into the fire as they cooled down, shifting the balls around. But a cooking pot could more easily be left on the fire, acting as a ‘delegate’ of the cook (Latour 2005). The cook was more able to do other things and leave some of the cooking to the pot. Efficiencies of this type may well have become significant around Level VII in the Çatalhöyük sequence since it is in Levels VII and VI that the settlement seems largest and most densely crammed with houses. There is also more evidence of symbolic elaboration and burial in houses in Levels VII and VI. With more going on in the houses and more pressure on available resources, behavior (or human-thing entanglement) that allowed greater efficiencies and multi-tasking in houses was selected for.

But the entanglements between humans and things at Level VII were yet more complex. The shift to sandier bricks described in Chapter 3 also occurred in Level VII. As noted above, this shift in brick composition involved new sources of clay and new technological processes as bricks were now made and dried prior to being brought to site. The shift to new sources of clay with mineral inclusions and off-site production of bricks could have had an impact on the simultaneous switch to the production of pottery with mineral inclusions (Doherty 2008). The same sandier clays used in the bricks were also used in making pottery in Level VII and after.

Another aspect of the entanglement of cooking pottery was its use for processing animal fat. Residue analysis has suggested that the mineral tempered cooking pots were used for processing the fats of small ruminants, probably domesticated sheep and goat (Copley et al. 2005)). There is much evidence from the faunal remains that domesticated sheep and goat were by far the most common domestic animal at the site, and that the bones were very carefully processed to remove all fats and grease (Russell and Martin 2005). Given the importance of sheep and goat in the diet, and the intensive labour involved in breaking up bones to gain fats, the efficiencies gained by switching from clay balls to pots in cooking would have been significant.

I have described the fittingness of mineral tempered cooking pottery in the entanglements of Level VII at Çatalhöyük. But why was that pottery undecorated (Figure 7.1)? Why was undecorated pottery fitting in the main sequence at the site? As we have seen, the cooking pots were used to process domesticated sheep and goat products. These animals hardly, if ever, appear in all the rich symbolism at the site. It seems fitting, therefore, that the pots in which their fats were processed were similarly not decorated. Rather, decoration and symbolism concentrated on wild animals, on hunting, baiting and feasting on them, as well as on burial (Hodder 2006b). Burial platforms in houses are often marked with red ochre or painted decoration. It is remarkable too that a clear rule existed at Çatalhöyük: whole pots could not be placed in graves with humans. Pots, rather, were entangled in a world of domestic production and processing, separated from the entanglements surrounding the production of histories, wild animals, death and burial.

Except, that is, for the pot shown in Figure 6.4. This was a one-off. Found in pieces in a midden in the northern part of the site, probably close to Level VI in time, this is a remarkable pot. Not only is it unique in levels in which all pottery remains undecorated, but also it encapsulates so effectively the main themes in the production of history at the site. The pot has a human face at either end, with eyes not marked. At Çatalhöyük, a human skull has been found with facial features modeled (Hodder 2006b) in plaster. The eyes are not shown and the same lack of eyes is found on the pot, and so it is possible that the human faces on the pot are of the dead. On the two sides of the pot are shown the heads of bulls. It is mainly bull and human heads that are collected and kept or passed down at Çatalhöyük in order to build histories. Wonderfully creative as it is, this pot was never copied, never transmitted. It is in the wrong medium. At this time in the occupation of Çatalhöyük, all pottery was undecorated because it was entangled in cooking and sheep and goat fat. This decorated example did not get copied. It was not fitting in the entanglements at the time.

Figure 7.2 Chalcolithic painted pottery from the West Mound at Çatalhöyük (Source: Çatalhöyük Research Project and Jason Quinlan).



At the end of the Çatalhöyük sequence and on the ensuing West Mound, decorated pottery of the type shown in Figure 7.2 appears. This time the decoration is massively copied. This time decorated pottery, sometimes with human and animal imagery, is introduced, spreads and the new trait persists for at least 500 years. The proliferation occurred because a new set of entanglements gradually emerged in which pottery got caught up. The propensity towards pottery decoration at Çatalhöyük increases gradually from Level V upwards (towards Level I) at the same time that we begin to see shifts towards an erosion of the emphasis on the production of history in the house, so that there is less evidence of exact repetition of houses built on top of each other in one place, and less of the bull and other installations in houses (Düring 2006). It is possible that wild bulls became less available in the landscape after the intensive hunting in Levels VII and VI. In the uppermost levels (III and above) the excavations by Team Poznan have found a tomb rather than in-house burial (Marciniak and Czerniak 2008) and by the Chalcolithic West Mound (6000–5500 cal BC) there is no evidence of adult burial beneath platform floors. In the latest levels at Çatalhöyük and on the later West Mound the houses change in character. The houses become larger, with more rooms, and with more storage and productive space. The hearth moves into the centre of the main room and pottery is used both for cooking and for serving and consumption. It is mainly this display pottery that is decorated. Pottery decoration in this context was fitting. It allowed the expression of productive potential around the central hearth in these new large houses focused on production (Hodder 2006b).

In this account, we see cooking pottery increasing, and then decorated pottery increasing. And we do see continuities of tradition in which transmission must have played a part. But really the persistence of that tradition can only be loosely linked to reproductive success of the carriers – it is difficult to see how one could even begin to explore that idea in the archaeological data (unless one resorts to proxies such as the varying economic success of households for which, as we have seen, there is little evidence). And it seems unlikely that we can explain all this by mode of transmission – even if we could demonstrate what that was. Rather the increase of cooking pottery and then the increase of decorated pottery are tightly linked to a complex interweaved web of other changing factors – the role of the house, the placing of the hearth, the production of bricks, the role of cooking, etc. The battle-ship curves (or spindles of wool) for cooking pottery and decorated pottery both show gradual increases. But the key to understanding these lineages is not reproductive success or mode of transmission. It is in getting to grips with the selective context for reproduction and transmission.

Fittingness here is different from fitness in natural selection in that the former is not based solely on reproductive success or survival but on how a trait works within entanglements consisting of the mutual dependences of humans and things. But as in Darwinian evolutionary theory, change in human-thing entanglement comes about through the co-evolution of traits. Entanglements change through the co-fittingness of traits and their mutual adjustment. This change can be gradual or sudden depending on numerous contingent factors and on the complex interactions of variables, as complexity theory has so effectively argued (Kohler and Gummerman 2000 and see Chapter 8).





Conclusion


So it may be the case that the pin on the shackle that holds up the mainsail on a boat could in some way lead to the reproductive success of the owner or user of the boat. It might at some point be possible to prove that people with boats with this type of threaded pin are more successful in leisure racing than other boats and as a result have children and great grandchildren that survive longer. It might also be possible at some point to show that this type of pin on a shackle persisted longer than other shackle pins and had greater replicative success because owners of this type of boat had more status and were more likely to be copied. But in both cases the reason for the success of the shackle pin is not to be found in reproductive or replicative success but in the fittingness of the pin in relation to other things and humans in a specific entanglement. The fittingness of the pin may or may not enhance the reproductive success of the owners. It is likely to enhance replicative success for the pin. In both cases fittingness is established in relation to overall entanglements.

In describing the transformation of human-thing entanglements through time it has become clear that some sort of engagement with Darwin-inspired approaches is useful as they deal with the long term and de-center from humans to the things that get selected for. But two of the struts of these theories, selection and transmission, seem more acceptable if reworked within a theory of human-thing entanglement. These shifts in focus lead to a non-reductive theory of change that explores innovation and the selection of traits in relation to the tautness of heterogeneous entanglements rather than in relation solely to reproductive success, resource acquisition and the transmission of information from successful individuals. We shall see at the end of the next chapter that a focus on the entanglements within which traits are selected can lead to a macro-evolutionary approach rather different from the evolutionary approaches discussed in this chapter.





Chapter 8


Things happen …


Life is what happens to us while we are making other plans.

(Allen Saunders)

So if we take over from the last chapter the aim of integrating evolutionary accounts into less reductive, more anthropologically adequate discussions of the selection of things and their persistence through time, it may be useful to explore other approaches to cultural change that pay attention to heterogeneous complexity. Throughout this book, I have drawn attention to the ways in which the different temporalities of things and humans result in the unruliness of things. The unruliness and uncertainty create variation from which selection occurs. But traits are selected and persevere in highly complex environments. For some time archaeologists have been attracted by theories of complex systems. Renfrew stimulated a discussion of Catastrophe Theory in the 1970s and 1980s (Renfrew and Cooke 1979) and more recently the non-linear properties of complex self-organizing systems have been discussed by van der Leeuw and McGlade (1997; see also Redman 2005, Kohler and Gummerman 2000, Bentley and Maschner 2003, Bentley et al. 2005, Lane et al. 2009).

As we shall see, discussion of the complexity of entanglements in relation to debates about change in open systems leads to two main questions. The first asks why it is that entanglements tend to increase in scale and complexity. Is there a directionality to human-thing entanglements, and if so why? The second question concerns the expectation that as entanglements increase in complexity and extent they become more fixed and difficult to change – more entrapping. But in fact archaeology shows an exponential increase in the rate of change as entanglements increase in scale and complexity. Why is this?





The Complexity of Entanglements


Open, Complex and Discontinuous Entanglements


In Figure 3.1 I identified some of the factors involved in lighting a simple fire in a hearth. The variables were bounded by the diagram into a closed system. But In Chapter 3 I showed how in any particular case the wood may be too wet to light, the wind may have changed direction, or one’s hands may be too cold. In addition there are numerous social considerations, such as whether the person who normally provides the firewood or fire stones has left the settlement for a day or whether a child is sick and needs a bigger fire to keep warm. The diagram cannot encapsulate all the variables that might end up being relevant to a fire lighting. The system is open and other variables come into play all the time. In practice, one has to work it out, to cobble something together.

My entanglement diagrams (such as Figure 3.1), or something like them, might exist as cognitive structures in a fire-lighter’s mind. Presumably such knowledge could be stored in a number of ways – as lists learned by rote or with mnemonics, as groups of material kept in a recess in the wall of a cave, as operational sequences. Presumably how the information is stored is varied. But in actually making a particular fire we are forced to improvise and manage using all sorts of practical knowledge about wetness, strength of the wind, coldness of our hands, who is in the settlement today and so on.

The diagram gives the impression of controlled variables and determined systems. But as I argued in Chapter 5, entanglements are not holistic and bounded. They are open, partial and indeterminate. My opening a fridge to get some milk on a Monday morning may be only loosely entangled, if at all, with the decision by someone on the other side of town to use a B minor chord in a composition for a school play. Some things are not very closely related to other things. And the variables that are involved in one part of the entanglement at any one time are uncertain and complexly linked. Things get out of control.





Unruly Things: Contingency


Harold Macmillan, Prime Minister in Britain in the late 1950s and 1960s is reputed to have said, in response to a question from a reporter asking him what was most likely to cause a government to change direction, ‘events dear boy, events’. Things are always going awry or offering new potentials and opportunities. It seems difficult to predict them. They just seem to happen. Things and their interactions with humans have temporalities that result in their coming upon us unawares.

Change can be initiated by events anywhere within an entanglement. Materialists would argue that significant change always starts in relation to the material conditions of life. When productive resources can no longer be provided within a particular technology a tension emerges between the forces and relations of production, leading to conflict and change (e.g. Friedman and Rowlands 1977). Within ecological schools, climate change or resource depletion cause perturbations leading to change; some authors argue that when least costly technological solutions are depleted, more expensive solutions are developed (Tainter 1988). The work of the Annales school provides many examples from medieval Europe of change being instigated in ideational realms (Le Goff 1992, Duby 1980), and the social and political sources of change have been widely discussed (e.g. Renfrew 1984). Ideational, social and political realms produce events out of the interactions between humans and things, whether religious wars over access to holy places, social conflict over ethnic leadership or political tensions over forms of government. The conjunction of temporalities from anywhere within entanglements can produce events that elicit response and change.

Regulation is needed to build competitive games and careers around the not-completely-predictable bouncing ball in tennis. Society needs degrees of predictability in order to function. We need stable categorization systems in order to be able to give and exchange, in order to eat and sleep and think. Agency is possible only on the basis of a certain amount of order and regulation. And yet the openness of systems means that unruliness is always present. As discussed in Chapter 4, unruliness derives both from the falling apart of things and from the ways in which things unleash a human potential for conflict and disorder. Much as governments try to fix things and keep them in place, events keep occurring.

A focus on contingency is seen in the study of self organizing complex systems (Prigogine 1996, Van der Leeuw and McGlade 1997, van der Leeuw 1998). In exploring the non-linear properties of societal systems, these approaches escape from the traditional anthropological and archaeological accounts of culture as a coherent integrated whole. They focus instead on instability, and on ‘becoming’ rather than ‘being’. This is an emphasis I have made throughout this book, arguing that things are really flows of matter, energy and information, unstable and unruly. There is a focus on disequilibrium so that evolution may proceed ‘precisely because of the non-adaptedness or non-optimal states within system structures’ (van der Leeuw and McGlade 1997: 11). As I described in Chapter 7, entanglements contain many components that may be fitting in relation to one goal or function but may not contribute to success in another realm. The different parts of a sail-boat may be fitting on one dimension but an encumbrance on another. And as we saw in Chapter 6, abstractions and resonances may get out of step with many aspects of the wider entanglements within which they are situated.





Conjunction of Temporalities


We live our lives with daily cares. We live to the beat of our hearts, the surge of our impulses and the injunction of our thoughts. In our short lives we see many seasons of birth and decay, social upheavals, wars and famines. But there is a temporality to things that far exceeds our human spans. The sandstone wall that bounds an Oxford college gradually flakes and erodes until at some uncertain moment it requires intervention. The walls at Çatalhöyük gradually lean over until they have to be propped up. In Chapter 5 I used the example of the millennium bug that caused large expenditure to fix and resulted from decisions made decades earlier. As a result of the blast at the Cernobyl nuclear power plant in 1986 about 2.4 million Ukrainians have received some level of contamination. The site will be radioactive for at least 300 years (The Times June 2010). 9000 years ago in the Middle East, Neolithic cattle were domesticated. The massive increase in beef consumption over the ensuing millennia has led to cattle having significant environmental impact. They account for 18 % of global greenhouse gas emissions, largely as a result of deforestation that makes way for animal feed plantations and land for grazing. More people than die of AIDS in southern Africa today lose their lives from tuberculosis, a disease that may have spread from cattle to humans. We are dealing today with problems that were set in motion long ago. The invention of the wheel in Eurasia six millennia ago led to horse-drawn vehicles, motor vehicles with engines measured in horse power, and to further carbon emissions, global warming and wars for oil.

I have described in earlier chapters the various types of chains within entanglements. There are the chains of dependences within the equipmental totality (see Chapter 2). So domesticating a cow involves the provision of pens that are made of stakes that are cut from trees with axes that are polished on skins and so on. There are also operational sequences that make up behavioral chains of procurement, production, use, discard or that involve the series of gestures that go into making a stone tool (Chapter 3). But in addition there are historical chains, lineages or genealogies (Chapter 7). Thus, the domestication of cattle in Eurasia preceded and was a precondition for the invention of the wheel. Through time these two heterogeneous strands or genealogies have followed their partially independent paths, at times coming into close conjunction, as in the initial invention of the wheel (linked to agricultural intensification and draught animals), and at times diverging, as vehicles became motorized and independent of horse and cattle (although the links continued through the use of tractors on farms, etc.). The genealogies of domesticated cattle and motorized wheeled vehicles have converged again recently in their joint contribution to greenhouse emissions and global warming. So each string or strand made up of heterogeneous components has its partially separate trajectory, and these trajectories come together at certain moments to create conjunctures that are difficult to control or predict.

A good example of this process is provided by Timothy Mitchell (2002) in his account of the spread of malaria in Egypt in the 1940s. In 1942, Rommel’s Afrika Corps crossed the border from Libya and was halted at al-Alamein with terrible casualties. Meanwhile, at the other end of the country, descending down the Nile from Sudan, was the mosquito Anopheles gambiae carrying in its stomach the deadly malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Over the three years of the ensuing epidemic in the south, between one and two hundred thousand people died. ‘The war and the epidemic interacted with a third threat to the country, a severe wartime shortage of food’ (Mitchell 2002: 20). One of the main reasons for this shortage was the delayed effects of Nile dam construction that had started in the mid 19th century. The dams allowed most of the country’s land to be converted to year-round irrigation. The annual Nile flood had previously fertilized the soil by depositing silt and nutrients. Now massive amounts of chemical fertilizer such as ammonium nitrate were needed, and by the late 1930s in Egypt most of these fertilizers were supplied by a German business group. These supplies were cut off in the war. In the south of Egypt the lack of fertilizer contributed to populations being weakened by famine and malnutrition so that malaria epidemic casualty rates were very high.

The relationships between all these contributing factors were complex. The network of dams enabled the mosquito to jump barriers from one region to the next. The dams also encouraged the growth of an aggressive pondweed which could be made use of by Anopheles gambiae. One of the attempts to eradicate the disease was to spread Malariol, diesel oil mixed with a spreading agent, over standing water to prevent the mosquito larvae from hatching. But Malariol was often used instead to keep the irrigation pumps going. On a larger scale, it proved difficult for fertilizer factories in Europe and America to provide more fertilizer because they had been converted into the production of another ammonium nitrate product, high explosives.

There were other complex and conjunctural relationships within and between this set of entanglements. I shall list three here. First, there was a shortage of quinine for use as a treatment against the infection because at the same time that the gambiae malaria was reported in Nubia the Japanese occupied Java, cutting off the Dutch cinchona plantations whose trees supplied the drug to Europe. Second, the construction of the dams in the inter-war years, including the Aswan dam, had proved a messy and haphazard process, and the interactions of things caused many problems and huge unexpected costs. The Portland cement used for the Aswan dam led to leakage and erosion, and there were subsequent problems of silt accumulation, seepage and evaporation. Ancient things got embroiled too as the dam inundated the Temple of Philae and other sites, leading to public outcry similar to the response to the construction of the Aswan High Dam and hydroelectric scheme in the 1950s. Third, the search in the textile industry in Europe for a mothproofing agent led to the discovery of the toxicity of dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane. In 1943 DDT was introduced as a way of eradicating the gambiae in southern Egypt. It was not known how DDT worked but through time it was realized that it killed beneficial as well as harmful insects, was poisonous to fish, and harmful to all forms of plant and animal life. It was not until 2007 that the United Nations Environment Program supported the end of the use of DDT altogether (Mitchell 2002: 49).

So the chain of events in Egypt connected war, disease and agriculture. There were connections between rivers, dams, fertilizers, food webs and capitalists. The linkages were thoroughly heterogeneous involving hydraulic, chemical, military, political, etiological and mechanical processes. The entanglements and conjunctions brought together different genealogies and temporalities in complex and indeterminate ways. The intersections between the strands are unruly, countered within regulatory discourses. Mitchell argues that in the Egyptian case there was an expansion of the ‘rule of experts’. Indeed the problems caused by the Aswan dam gave rise to the new field of cost-benefit analysis (Mitchell 2002: 37) to which the theories of Human Behavioral Ecology are related, themselves thus discourses for the regulation of things. The rule of experts feeds off the continued uncertainties of the build-up of temporalities and their interactions.





Catalysis: Small Things and the Emergence of Big Effects


If we put three aspects of complex systems together – openness, unruly contingency and the conjunction of temporalities - then one conclusion is that small things and small events can have big effects within entanglements. There are many versions of this idea. For example, there is the butterfly effect in Chaos Theory where small differences in the initial set-up of a complex dynamic system can produce large variations over the long term (Bentley and Maschner 2003). Thus it becomes difficult to predict the weather over the long term as the starting conditions are difficult to determine precisely and because the system is complex and open. A related idea is the domino effect. This is a chain reaction that is self-sustaining and is set off by a small change. In archaeology, Deetz (1977) argued that ‘small things forgotten’ had hidden importance that reverberated through many spheres of life. In the Egyptian example provided by Mitchell, there were long-term processes such as the increased dependence on fertilizers as a result of dam construction and the increased erosion and leakage of the Aswan dam. But specific small-scale events such as the spread of the malaria-carrying mosquito into southern Egypt acted as catalysts that interacted with other conjunctural events and with the long-term processes to create large-scale change.

Sudden and large-scale change can also be produced by the slow and smooth interaction of variables. Relationships between multiple variables in complex systems may bifurcate, twist and turn (Renfrew and Cooke 1979) so that there is sudden, large-scale change, even though individual variables are only changing gradually. Systems may become unstable at such moments and spontaneously reorganize, creating a new order in the system (van der Leeuw 1998). This notion of emergent phenomena has widespread appeal. Van der Leeuw and McGlade (1997: 9) argue that these spontaneous restructurings of the social order lead to new institutions and practices emerging without a designing or directing mind. Van Huyssteen (2010) and Shults (2010) suggest that the human capacity for religion may be an emergent property of other human abilities such as imagination and emotion within complex human systems.

In philosophy and the natural sciences, ‘emergence is the view that new and unpredictable phenomena are naturally produced by interactions in nature; that these new structures, organisms, and ideas are not reducible to the sub-systems on which they depend; and that the newly evolved realities in turn exercise a causal influence on the parts out of which they arose’ (Clayton 2004: vi). In the social sciences and humanities, there is increasing adaptation of this idea to explain change. Small-scale processes can in aggregate result in larger-scale patterns or processes that may be unanticipated and thus emergent (Adams 2001, Bentley 2003, Kohler and Gummerman 2000, Wilkinson et al. 2007). As an example, Jason Ur (2009) discusses the emergence of an urban settlement pattern and two thousand kilometers of roadways in Early Bronze Age northern Mesopotamia. Rather than seeing the radiating networks of roads around the settlements as coercively imposed by a centralized elite, he sees them as the unintended result of the interaction of small-scale processes. Each household within a nested hierarchy of households was motivated to increase production in order to support exchanges of food and drink. Household and personal relationships were forever being renegotiated through commensalism. Increased production involved increased movement of labor and livestock and carts and equipment and manure to the surrounding fields and pastures. Within the cultivated zone in particular, farmers, shepherds and their flocks adhered to the roadways to avoid trampling crops. Although there was some top-down extraction of surplus by elite households, the Early Bronze Age roadways were not constructed by a coercive central authority but emerged from the actions of individuals as they maintained their fields and took their animals to pasture (Ur 2009).

Agent-based models often include some form of emergence within complex systems. For example, in their Village Ecodynamics Project, set in southwestern Colorado, Kohler et al. (2000, 2007, 2012) seek to make various systems-level properties such as the local population trajectories, or the placement and sizes of residential sites, emerge from the interaction of households with each other and with the dynamic environments they inhabit. The study makes use of the high-resolution chronologies and climate proxies made possible by tree-rings. Kohler et al. (2011) use an abstract evolutionary public goods game to model the rise of leadership in the same area between AD 600 and 1300. In their model, households would prefer to live in a hierarchical rather than egalitarian society if leaders can reduce the likelihood of failures in cooperation due to free-riding or lack of cooperation. Such a shift is seen as optimal when cooperation as a group is needed but group size exceeds that in which leaderless cooperation is viable. Such a model successfully produces the emergence of hierarchy, but it does so at the expense of a full account of all the specific historical entanglements involved. As we saw with evolutionary and behavioral ecology accounts in Chapter 4 and 7, costs and benefits are evaluated only in universal terms. Hierarchical societies are assumed to be more efficient in organizing cooperation, but the example of the dense population at Çatalhöyük that thrived successfully for at least a thousand years without significant hierarchy suggests that local and specific factors need to be taken into account. Models that assume a universal rationality need to be embedded within the possibility of different rationalities.

The focus in this book has been on the ‘thingness’ of things – that is their role in tying society, humans together into heterogeneous entanglements. This tying function leads to entrapment in a web that has affordances as well as abstractions and resonances (local forms of cost-benefit ‘rationalities’). Things create assemblies around them, they draw people together. But things can also act as catalysts for change. A fence around a field can suddenly become a crisis point as neighbours argue over maintenance and access. ‘A substance or thing chosen to stabilize an assemblage may successfully co-constitute it for a while. However, it has the potential to act against coherence because its emergent properties may no longer accord with the rest of the assemblage, or become untethered or melt away because it is catalyzed by other agencies from within and outside the assemblage’ (Edensor 2011: 239).

Catalysis occurs in chemistry when a substance accelerates a reaction without changing itself. The word comes from kataluein, the Greek word to annul or untie. So things also have an untying function within entanglements. Human-thing assemblies may occur in a fairly stable state for some time, until something happens, a flash point occurs, and the strings of entanglement for a moment become untied and resorted. There was for a long time a fence around the Greenham Common military air base in England. It had functioned as an air base since 1942. But the deployment of nuclear Cruise Missiles at the base in 1980 led to the formation of ‘women’s peace camps’. These focused on the fence, on cutting it, forming a human chain around it, and on the gates through it. Suddenly a fence had become a catalyst for social movements, nuclear disarmament and political change. Another example of a material catalyst for change was the Native American occupation of Alcatraz in San Francisco Bay in 1969. After many years of Native American activism, the occupation of the prison and the claiming of it galvanized the Native American movement. In more recent years the flying of planes into the Twin Towers and Pentagon on 9/11 2001 acted as a catalyst for widespread change in security, surveillance and politics in the United States and globally. When street vendor Mohamed Bouazizi burned himself in Tunisia at the end of 2010, his act sparked a sudden and unexpected spread of revolutionary movements throughout North Africa and the Middle East.

In November 1989 a wall came down in Berlin. The dismantling of the wall that had long separated east and west Europe resulted from numerous complex factors. Some were long-term such as the gradual decline of the Soviet Union; others were medium-term such as pressure from the United States and Ronald Reagan; others were short-term such as the partial opening of the borders between Hungary and Austria in the weeks before the collapse, or the lack of communication between political authorities in East Germany and the guards at the border crossings as crowds built up at the gates in Berlin on November 9 1989. 1989 was a year of revolutions partly triggered by the collapse of the Soviet Union. Earlier in 1989 the Tiananmen Square protests in Beijing were brutally put down. In Poland elections led to a non-communist government taking office in September 1989. In October 1989 a non-communist party was established in a new Republic of Hungary. The Velvet Revolution in Czechoslovakia led to the setting up of a non-communist government on December 10 1989. The collapse of the Berlin Wall and the reunification of Germany in 1990 were part of the breaking up of Soviet domination but they also acted as catalysts for further change. The destruction of the wall prised open the entanglement of the Cold War; suddenly change was possible. The dates of the toppling of communism tell their own story of the speed of change: 1990 – Lithuania, Slovakia, Romania, Bulgaria; 1991 – Latvia, Estonia, Belarus, Ukraine, Moldavia, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, Macedonia. It is often argued that the effects were much more widespread: in South Africa negotiations started in 1990 to dismantle Apartheid; in 1991 in Angola Marxism-Leninism was abandoned, as it was also in South Yemen, Mozambique and Congo (Antohi and Tismaneanu 2000).

Catalysis or untying occurs as the entanglement accommodates and realigns in reaction to events (another example is provided by the 1848 revolutions in Europe although most were quickly overturned). It is at these moments that there is an untying, an opening, a loosening of the entanglement. In that opening there is possibility for change, but also uncertainty in the untied moment, and sometimes a backlash. What results is always very contingent – it always depends. But it can be very radical as the web is for a moment loosened and it seems that ‘anything can happen’. This untying also occurs mundanely as everyday events happen, one’s fingers are too cold to light the fire, or the designated fire-lighter is out of the settlement. There is an endless tension between the tied-up web and the untying moments. Catalysis is going on all the time as things fall apart and events happen. In Chapter 4 I argued that things unleash potential in humans, whether it be the tool that releases the potential of the hand, a Beethoven chord sequence that awakens the possibility of individualism and romanticism, or a fence that crystallizes conflict. The outcome of the untying or unleashing can be very small-scale change or very large-scale disruption. It all depends. But often something emerges, contingently and unpredictably from the complex interactions of variables in the moment, that is new and enduring (at least for a time).

There is often a spatial component to the untying of entanglements. They are often most easily untied in places away from the center of an entanglement. It is in marginal peripheral areas where the entanglement is less dense, less regulated, less scrutinized that it can more easily be undone so that change occurs. It was on the western fringes of the Soviet block that the 1989 revolutions started. Throughout the history of Dynastic Egypt, the focal centers shifted from North to South and back again – in a catalytic transfer. While the classic entanglement of the Levantine PPNB came to an end in the period around 6500 BC with many of the larger sites being abandoned, at the same time in central Anatolia there was a major expansion in the number of large sites including Neolithic and then Chalcolithic Çatalhöyük (Baird 2005). In recent centuries, Eurocentric and American-centric global systems are being replaced by the economic and cultural centrality of previously less-developed regions (India, Brazil, China).





Is there a Directionality to Entanglements?


If entanglements are open, complex and uncertain, continually generating emergent phenomena, it might be presumed that change is largely random or non-directional. Indeed, according to most contemporary versions of the evolutionary process it is non-directional. The idea of directional change was common in the 19th century when it was linked to ideas of progress. Versions of evolutionary theory such as that of Leslie White (1959) argued that societies moved in the direction of harnessing more energy from the environment in order to counter entropy. Social evolutionists often argued that societies became better adapted and more complex through time. In the 20th century many scholars became wary of such notions since any suggestion of directionality seemed in the interests of dominant groups who could argue for a natural progression towards ‘people like us’ and away from the less developed ‘people like them’. This may be one of the reasons that Darwinian theories of change are increasingly popular since variation, transmission and selection do not by themselves lead in any particular direction (alternative macro-evolutionary perspectives are discussed at the end of this chapter).

Of course, saying that evolution is directional needs to be distinguished from the claim that it is influenced by history. Darwin was certainly of the view that evolution can only work on what is already there – the existing variability. Genealogy, heritability and transmission are at the heart of the evolutionary archaeology and dual inheritance approaches described in Chapter 7. But to note the historical nature of the evolutionary process is quite different from arguing that the process is directional. Social theorists have long pointed to the dangers of teleology in explaining long-term change. If we were just to say that hunter-gatherers became farmers and moved into cities because they had the aim or intention (the telos) of being farmers and city dwellers then explanation of the past would be very easy! It would also not get us very far as we would not have explained how the change occurred or how the idea arose. It is difficult to explain an effect by arguing that it comes before the cause!

Evolutionary change is historical but it is not teleological. It is not intent on going anywhere. And yet cultural evolution certainly seems to have direction. 20 000 years ago we were all hunter-gatherers. Today very few of us are, and those of us that do live as hunters and gatherers have often developed in relation to pastoralists and farmers (Wilmsen 1989). The eradication of most hunting and gathering societies results from colonial expansion, global exploitation, destruction of habitats and so on. But why has it not gone the other way? Why have humans not returned to being hunter-gatherers? At times we have. For example, after the adoption of farming in northern Europe there was a return to hunting and gathering by Pitted Ware cultures (Whittle 1996) or a return by the hunter-gatherers themselves. The Okiek hunter-gatherers in modern Kenya move in and out of herding cattle and being pastoralists depending on the availability of cattle (Hodder 1982). Such ‘returns’ are usually short lived and they are seldom a return to less entangled lives. In an important rejoinder to Diamond’s (2005) claim that societies sometimes ‘collapse’, contributors to the book ‘Questioning Collapse‘ (McAnany and Yoffee 2010) argue that supposed collapses of societies usually see continuities and even revitalizations. There are of course many cases in which societies copy earlier times or return to earlier themes, as in neo-Classical or neo-Gothic or retro styles of architecture, music or dress. But these renewals are usually situated within entanglements that are quite different from the earlier versions.

It is very difficult to argue that there is not some directionality to human-thing entanglements. It is very difficult to claim that overall, along with huge inequalities in wealth and access to health, the world is not more entangled in terms of the scale and intensity of human mobilization of resources, communication and inter-dependence. Archaeologists in their introductory lectures expound the long-term shifts in technology, scale of society, elaboration of symbols, speed of communication and so on. Is it possible to find some non-teleological way of making sense of this apparent directionality?

A non-teleological directionality is produced very simply by the difficulty of going back down evolutionary pathways. It can be argued that complex systems have irreversible directions of change (van der Leeuw 1998, Prigogine 1996). In the study of self-organizing complex systems, history is reconceptualized ‘as a series of contingent structurings which are the outcome of an interplay between deterministic and stochastic processes’ (van der Leeuw 1998: 47). Directionality is not produced by a future orientation towards a better, more complex, more connected society but by the inability to go back. Why is going back so difficult?

We can return to some of the examples used earlier in this book in order to try and explore this question. As noted above, although cattle were domesticated over 9000 years ago we have become increasingly dependent on beef consumption. Indeed the domestication of cattle by humans has been an enormous evolutionary advantage for cattle as numbers have increased to about 1.5 billion head globally. These cattle are an enormous environmental cost; they take up nearly 27% of the land mass of the planet, consume enough grain and corn to feed hundreds of millions of people and account for 18% of global greenhouse emissions (Pollan 2006). As many environmentalists argue, we need to decrease our dependence on cattle but it would be impossible to go back 9000 years and do without domestic cattle (and this of course is not being suggested). The global human population has grown too large to survive without this significant source of meat protein. Or take the example of the car, itself ultimately the result of the domestication of cattle which made the invention of carts and wheels possible. Emissions from cars contribute to global warming but we have all become very dependent on cars; it is inconceivable that we solve the problems of global warming by giving them up. That people commute to work is a cornerstone of modern economies and urban zoning; the layout of cities and the locations of industries are tied to the car, at least in countries like the United States and in states like California. It would be impossible to go back to using horse and cart rather than car. Life has become unthinkable without telephones, cars, electric lighting, and computing. These devices have become woven into our everyday existence and into our economies and social systems (Boivin 2008). Going back is not an option.

Directionality, at the most general of levels, is produced by a bias or imbalance in the ways humans go to and from things. I discussed the dual aspect of human relationships with things in Chapter 2. Humans go to and from things. If they went equally to and from things then it might be expected that there would indeed be no directionality in entanglements. But in fact humans can never escape things. I argued in Chapter 2 that human thought, feeling, existence depend on things. Human being is awakened in thingness, and so an immaterial human is a contradiction in terms.

More specifically I argued in Chapter 5 that entrapment in entanglements was like digging oneself into a hole. What one did earlier affects what one can do now. But this history is not just linear. And it is not just a story of events and humans. It is also a story of things and the traces they leave. Because of the duration of material things and their entanglement with each other and humans, even very distant decisions by humans still affect us today. There is a build-up of the past that surrounds us.

The sides of the hole we dig for ourselves are unstable and are always about to fall in. So humans are always involved in a process of investing more to protect what they have already invested in. They need to shore up the hole with planks and beams, struts and metal sheets. Entanglements always expand because as humans fix things that go wrong or run out along all the chains and strands, they make further investments, use new tools, seek new solutions, create new institutions, develop new social relationships and so on. The fixing occurs within the existing entanglement, but extending it in some way.

So when in a child’s rhyme we say ‘there is a hole in my bucket’ the immediate response is ‘then fix it’ rather than ‘let’s stop using buckets and go back to pots’. The tendency is always to find solutions that work within what we have. This is not because people are inherently conservative but because it is in their interests (because of all the heterogeneous dependences) to minimize disruption to all the entanglements – a disruption usually spoken of as ‘cost’. We saw in Chapter 4 that the costs and benefits are best seen as broader than optimizing effort and maximizing resource acquisition. The entanglements that are disrupted by catalysis are heterogeneous.

So we tend to fix things within the existing entanglements. These are always complex and dense so that in assessing costs and benefits and trade-offs it makes sense to minimize disruption to other parts of the entanglement. Most fixing involves making do, bricolage, tinkering. But as noted earlier, sometimes there are catalytic events and moments when large parts of the entanglement unravel so that major adjustments can be made. Even in these cases it may make sense to minimize change to parts of the overall entanglements.

The notion of digging oneself into a hole is comparable to the sunk-cost effect described in economics, and also called the Concorde fallacy (Arkes and Ayton 1999). The UK and France continued building the supersonic Concorde even though it had poor financial prospects, on the ground that they had already invested or sunk a lot of money into the plane. Economic decisions are often based on past investments rather than expected future returns (Janssen and Scheffer 2004). There is thus an unwillingness to abandon a path of action if a great deal has been invested in it, even if future prospects are not good. Human decision making is typically influenced by the level of prior investments (in a wide sense, including capital, experience, and spiritual values). In Chapter 5 I introduced literature on path dependence in which humans invest in a particular choice of action and the costs of switching to an alternative path increase over time (David 1985, Mahoney 2000, Pierson 2000). Often, however, it is not just the costs of changing a particular path that are prohibitive, but the costs of changing all the inter-linked paths. Whatever the investment, it may be difficult to abandon a particular course of action simply because the surrounding entanglements have pulled that action into a particular hole.

An alternative metaphor to the digging of an archaeological hole is turning the course of a ship. There is too much momentum and too much weight to make a sudden change of course. At the smaller scale I described in Chapter 5 the close relationship in momentum between human and thing when riding a bicycle. With the ship and the bicycle we see how the dependence between humans and things is a movement, a flow of energy, information, matter. Human and thing are each dependent on the movement of the other. And this momentum is dispersed through increasingly large entanglements; the example of the bicycle becomes less relevant and the ship more so as we move into larger entanglements. More and more things have to be changed round if change is to occur. ‘Masterpieces are not single and solitary births; they are the outcome of many years of thinking in common, of thinking by the body of the people, so that the experience of the mass is behind the single voice’ (Virginia Woolf 1928: 106). Woolf is talking here about the difficulties of turning around centuries of male dominance and prejudice. I have written of the ‘movement of the mass’ as underlying change in prehistory, and in particular in the lead up to the adoption of farming (Hodder 2006b and see Chapter 9).

Some will say that the directionality in the tide of humans is just the result of tradition. They argue that the non-discursive mind tends to get stuck in routines and it is these that restrict change and going back. I doubt this. First because as argued in Chapter 6, non-discursive consciousness is highly complex and creative – as up for change as the rest of our being! And second, as noted in Chapters 6 and 7, while humans crave tradition they equally engage in the invention of tradition and the social manipulation of history. Traditions and routines have to be explained within entanglements rather than assumed to be universal characteristics of human becoming.

We can return then to the discussion of cultural transmission and the battle-ship curves that archaeologists identify in the increases and decreases of styles. In much evolutionary archaeology there is a presumed assumption that humans copy in a conservative way. Riede (2011) argues that patterns of style change in archaeology show that social and cultural transmission tends to be conservative. But in fact humans are always monitoring and considering the costs and benefits (across a range of cultural and economic domains) of continuing down one path or another. Part of that evaluation concerns the difficulty of going back. Once a strategy has been started it often makes sense to try it out and follow it through (hence the first part of the battle-ship curve), and there will often be those that continue building on their investments in a particular track even as other options become available (hence the decreasing ‘tail’ of the battle-ship curve). As noted in Chapter 7, an alternative metaphor to the battle-ship curve is the spindle wrapped in wool. The increases and decreases are produced by the overall web of entanglements and by the directionality that results from the costs and difficulties of going back.

There is thus an irony to entanglement. It is the transformative side of entanglement that wins out overall and in the long term. But the entrapment side of entanglement nevertheless has the effect of directing change both locally in terms of particular strategies within entanglements and more generally or globally, usually towards greater entanglement.





Some Neolithic Examples


Things started well as the Natufian culture emerged in the southern Levant around 14 600 years ago. Population increased and there was some degree of sedentism. The site of ‘Ain Mallaha contained animals and birds from all seasons (Valla 1991) and there were commensals (such as the house mouse) indicating sedentism. Settlements occurred in the hill zones of Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria, and related sites have been found to the north in Mureybet and Abu Hureyra. Settlements in the early Natufian in the southern Levant included base camps around 1200 m2 in size and containing clusters of semi-subterranean huts. The later Natufian, however, appears to have suffered a set-back during the climatic deterioration of the Younger Dryas (12 900–11 600 years ago). In the Levant many but not all hamlets dispersed and became more mobile (Bar-Yosef 2001). But there was no returning back to earlier Geometric Kebaran times. Even though settlement had become more dispersed, small-scale and short-term in the later Natufian, people used abandoned early Natufian base camps as cemetery sites. A sense of place and history had developed in the base camps of the early Natufian; it is likely that social and economic systems had increasingly become entangled in delayed returns for labor input (Hodder 2007a). Even during more mobile and dispersed times, later Natufians continued to rely on a sense of history and place (seen in the reuse of settlements as cemeteries and in the circulation of human skulls) and they continued their intensive use of cereals and pulses (Zeder 2009). When better climatic conditions emerged after the Younger Dryas the stage was set for a return to sedentism and increases in site size, population and intensification of resource use in the PPNA.

Rather than talking in broad-brush terms, we can consider the specific case of a catalyst to change that occurred during the occupation of Çatalhöyük. Around Levels VI-IV (that is about 6400 BC) there was a decline in the frequency of wild cattle in the faunal assemblages. We cannot be sure that this decline was caused by decreased availability of wild cattle in the landscape, but this seems a likely explanation given the very intensive use of wild cattle in the preceding periods at the site and given the apparent introduction of domestic cattle during Levels VI–IV. Although there is some evidence of continued use of wild cattle in special deposits in the upper levels of the mound, any decreased availability of wild cattle would have been a major social and economic problem. For example, we know that wild cattle were central in the provision of feasts. They were central in the feats surrounding teasing and baiting wild animals. They were central to the construction of ancestry and history within houses. Wild cattle looked after the dead and revitalized the house. So their lack of availability caused a real untying of the entanglements that centered on the history houses and history making. A solution was the adoption (from farther east probably) of domesticated cattle. This of course was a new investment involving greater inputs of labor to tend animals, organize grazing, control breeding, build pens and so on. These new investments in domestic production led to major changes in the upper levels (IV–I) at Çatalhöyük. Houses became larger and became foci of domestic production.

Would it have been possible to respond to the decline in wild cattle by going back? Would it have been possible to go from Level IV at Çatalhöyük back to Levels VII/VIII – that is back 400–500 years to when the role of wild cattle in feasting and in symbolism in the house was just increasing? This would have been difficult. It would have meant building smaller houses again with less going on in them, less burial, less symbolism – less of all the ceremonies and social events that were supported by the teasing, baiting, killing, feasting and circulating of wild cattle and wild cattle parts. And after Level VII people had come to depend on pots while cooking in houses. The pots allowed them to get more done in the houses as more and more activities were brought into the house and as houses increased in size. But back in Levels VII/VIII food was cooked without pots, but with clay balls. So all the social and economic relations surrounding the manufacture and trade of pottery would have to be undone. There would have to be a return to simpler obsidian technologies and a resuscitation of exchange routes and sources that had now been changed. In all these ways to go back would have involved giving up on investments, on ownership, on rich social networks and established histories. If the increase in house sizes indicates increased populations in houses, it would have been difficult to maintain these population levels within houses with simpler obsidian technologies and no cooking pots. It would have been difficult to hold the household group together without the feasting on wild cattle and the histories associated with them. Given increased population per house by Levels VI-IV it would have been hard work to go back to smaller houses with simpler technologies such as clay balls rather than pots for cooking.





Macro-evolutionary Approaches


A focus on directional change within evolutionary theory has been explored over recent decades by biologists and archaeologists. We saw in Chapter 7 that much evolutionary theory in archaeology concentrates on the micro-processes of variation, transmission and selection of genes and traits. Of course selection can only act on variation that is produced from within an existing pool of traits or genes, so in this sense Darwinian approaches are always historical. But most evolutionary theory in archaeology does not see the variation, transmission and selection of traits as leading anywhere or going in any particular direction.

Some recent macro-evolutionary processes take a different tack. Inspired by the work of evolutionary biologists Gould and Eldridge, archaeologists such as Spencer and Redmond (2001), Rosenberg (1994), Chatters and Prentiss (2005) ‘reject neo-Darwinian perspectives that portray evolution as confined to changes in allele frequencies within individual organisms shaped by gene flow, genetic drift, and, especially, natural selection operating on phenotypic expressions of random genetic variation’ (Zeder 2009:3). Instead they see organisms or groups of organisms as having bundles of traits that have a structure or architecture. Instead of focusing on the adaptive value of individual traits, the macro-evolutionists argue that the architecture and its history constrain the evolutionary process. Evolution operates at multiple levels at the same time – genes, organisms, populations and taxa. Some macro-evolutionists see the organizing architecture as made up of resource management strategies such as hunting and gathering or farming. Others place more emphasis on a socio-political architecture such as the organization provided by a band, tribe, chiefdom or state. Others such as Rosenberg see the architecture as ideational (Zeder 2009).

As a result of their focus on organizing architectures (Gould and Lewontin 1979), macro-evolutionists reject the neo-Darwinian view that evolution is relatively undirected. Directionality is produced by the hierarchical nature of cultural processes; it is also produced by historical contingency or path dependency when cultural attributes are carried over from ancestral forms. Boyd and Richerson’s guided variation and biased transmission produce a Lamarkian aspect to cultural evolution. Direction is also produced by ‘exaptation’ – this is when a feature takes on a new adaptive function different from its original function, leading to greater organizational complexity through time.

There are parallels between entanglement theory and macro-evolutionary theory, particularly with regard to the recognition of the directionality of change. Similar to the notion of exaptation is my argument that fixing tends to minimize disruption to other parts of the entanglement. Humans tend to work within what they have got within entanglements, and so there is a gradual cline towards organizational complexity. There are other similarities. Zeder (2009) argues that micro-evolutionists tend to see change as gradual but in macro-evolutionary theory, as in complexity theory, major change is seen as being possible very suddenly, at times producing punctuated equilibria (stasis and then rapid change). This notion is parallel to the emphasis here on catalysis.

But the main difficulty with the macro-evolutionary perspective in relation to human-thing entanglement is the rather mysterious role played by structure, architecture or bauplan (Zeder 2009). What exactly is this determining force? Where does it come from? Why do farming and hunter-gathering constitute different structures (after all many societies incorporate both forms of resource acquisition)? And why cannot socio-political structures include aspects of both tribes and chiefdoms, as indeed they often do? On what grounds do we identify structure – what is this mysterious thing? And why should it be either subsistence based, socio-political or ideational rather than a heterogeneous mix of all three? I suspect that in answering these questions fully, macro-evolutionists would end up with something looking like entanglement – a heterogeneous mix of humans and things with all their dependences, resonances and abstractions. The ‘structure’ or ‘bauplan’ is in fact just the tautness of the web produced by thing-thing dependences, human debts and obligations to each other, and so on. The hierarchical nature of the evolutionary process is produced by the different scales and temporalities of entanglements.





Why Do Entanglements Increase the Rate of Change?


In Chapter 4 I used a quote from Michel Serres who argued that material objects stabilize the relationships between humans. The quote continues in the following way. ‘In fact, the object, specific to the Hominidae, stabilizes our relationships, it slows down the time of our revolutions. For an unstable band of baboons, social changes are flaring up every minute… The object, for us, makes our history slow.’ (Serres 1995: 87 and see Olsen 2010). I argued in Chapter 4 that the mistake here was to be fooled by the short-term experience of our lives or of ethnographic enquiry into assuming that material things made by humans were inert. In fact they are always falling apart or drawing humans into their own cycles of existence.

I argue that as entanglements increase in size and complexity their rate of change increases. What is the evidence for this? I wish to take again the example of the adoption of farming in Turkey and the Middle East. As Renfrew has noted, at the start of the Holocene ‘human culture became more substantive, more material’ (2001: 128). Of course, humans had always lived in a material world, but by the start of the Neolithic much more of this than ever before had been interfered with by humans and had indeed become dependent on humans. Social life had become encumbered with domesticated plants and animals, but also with all the necessary tools and equipment. Ground stone, polished stone, worked bone, fired clay, multi-component microlithic arrowheads were all added in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic to substantial mudbrick housing. We have seen in examples provided in previous chapters, but also to be discussed in Chapter 9, how this rise in dependence on human-made things involved entanglement and entrapment.

One might have thought that all this dependence on material things made by humans would lead to a decrease in the rate of change. But in fact the opposite happened: rates of change increased. There must have been much perceived daily change in the lives of humans in the Pleistocene, but the rate of observable cultural change often seems glacial. Tool types continued over thousands of years, and the cave art of the Cantabrian and French caves is of a recognizably similar style for at least 10–15 000 years (Valladas et al. 2001). In the early tell sites in Anatolia and the Middle East, there is again remarkable continuity, with house built on house over centuries; even the hearths and platforms staying in the same place as seen in the deep sounding at As¸ıklı Höyük (Esin and Harmankaya 1999). In PPNA Jericho, there are 32 occupation horizons associated with the monumental tower (Kenyon 1981). Even in the 8th and 7th millennia at Çatalhöyük, there is remarkable continuity.

But there is also change. Detailed anatomies of the buildings at Çatalhöyük show an endless cycle of movement and reorganization. In particular the ovens and hearths and bins keep moving around the building, shifting from one side to the other along the south wall, or being blocked up and shifted into side rooms, and then back into the main rooms. There is an endless restlessness through the sequence of 18 levels as pottery comes in, obsidian becomes more specialized, stamp seals are introduced, figurines change in style, social differentiation becomes more marked, and houses become more independent. In more general terms it is widely recognized that the Neolithic begins to see a faster rate of cultural, social and economic change than the previous millennia.

One can also argue at a much broader scale of analysis that entanglements have increased through time since the Neolithic both in particular countries and globally. Some individuals, countries, nations are more densely entangled than others but particularly since the industrial revolution we have all become increasingly entangled in one global web. And yet it is apparent to most of us that the rates of change have increased exponentially over the same time period. We saw in Chapter 6 that at the end of the 19th century Europeans were concerned about their individual roles as societies appeared to be disintegrating. In our own times Andy Warhol suggested that each of us would in the future be world famous for 15 minutes, and today events have impacts that seem also simultaneous, spreading in nano-seconds through digital media.

So why is the exponential increase in entanglements positively correlated with the exponential rate of change, especially when we might have expected the opposite?



One explanation that might be proposed to account for the correlation between entanglement and rate of change is that, as we have seen, the production of human life depends on things. Things are needed to mobilize possibilities and potentials. Human physical, economic, social, ideational, psychological and cognitive existence depends on things. It might be assumed that as entanglements increase in scale and complexity there is the possibility of increased production: more resources, more opportunities, more differences can be explored and made use of. There is more energy available to fuel a greater speed of change. While this explanation may have some weight, it is weakened by the fact that increased access to resources need not by itself lead to change. It can equally be associated with limitation, domination and repression by elites that control resources. Another problem is that the explanation is too human-centered in that it assumes that is it human nature to increase production.

And so in my view a more adequate explanation derives from a balanced perspective in which both humans and things play their parts in entanglements. We have seen that entanglements are held taut by dependences, affordances, abstractions, regulations and resonances while at the same time being open, complex, unruly and contingent. Humans are forever working along the various chains and strands in order to fix things as parts of the entanglement get out of step with each other and as things fall apart, run out or start to fail. Things go wrong in unexpected ways and the different entanglements and parts of entanglement are continually coming in relation to each other in conjunctions that seem chaotic and contingent. As they collide and intersect, solutions have to be found. Small parts of the entanglement become untied for a moment and in that opening opportunities emerge.

I suggest that as humans and things get more entangled, and as the strands of the web get longer and denser, so there are more opportunities for things to go wrong. There is also more possibility for the strands to interact with each other in unexpected conjunctions and so to cause catalysis or untyings. In those moments of untying, variation is produced that then gets selected for as the entanglements move on. So entanglement has two components in relation to change. One is entrapment as discussed in Chapter 5. The other is the opportunity for change that is created by greater linking.





Conclusion


I will in the chapter that follows explore the notions of non-teleological directionality and irreversibility with respect to more detailed and fully argued examples. But I have tried in this chapter to consider some implications of entanglement for long-term evolutionary processes. My argument has been that entanglements are open, complex and discontinuous and aspects of complexity theory (despite its human-centered agent-based focus and its tendency to assume universal rationalities) are of value in exploring their workings. Humans and things have unruly interactions resulting from openness, discontinuity and the co-presence of multiple temporalities in social life. There is thus much contingency and uncertainty in processes of change; many unacknowledged conditions and unanticipated outcomes – again at numerous temporal scales. In the conjunctions that result, small things can have catalytic effects as parts of the entanglement are undone. Openings or windows of opportunity are created, and while fixing may often be routine and rule-bound, there is the potential for small events in complex and open systems to have large effects, producing emergent phenomena.

This discussion of catalysis and emergence is of interest in that it seems to offer an explanation for two observable characteristics of the long-term record of human achievement. The first is that the change of entanglements tends to be directional in that it is difficult to reverse human-thing dependences. Reversibility is costly given all the heterogeneous ways in which humans come to depend on things in which they have invested. Often too much has to be undone to go back. The second is that rates of cultural change have increased as the scale and complexity of human-thing entanglement have increased. I argue that rates of change have increased because as entanglements grow in scale and complexity so there is more need for fixing things along the chains and webs of human-thing dependence.

Certainly societies wax and wane in terms of organizational complexity, size and regional or global influence. The cultural sequence in ancient Egypt included intermediate periods of fragmentation and decline between the Old, Middle and New Kingdoms, and the sequence of Andean cultures in ancient Peru is marked by what archaeologists identify as intermediate periods. After the great expansion of the Roman empire into Europe there were the so-called Dark Ages. But as noted above, societies ‘in decline’ may continue or even revitalize (McAnany and Yoffee 2010). I have noted above examples of apparent returns from farming to hunting and gathering, but in these cases we do not see a going back to an earlier entanglement. Rather we see the forms of entanglement change. It would be necessary to carry out an analysis of entanglement of the type indicated in the following chapter to ascertain whether intermediate, or dark or collapsed societies really were less entangled than those that preceded them. It would also be necessary for such an analysis to explore whether larger scales of entanglement had incorporated the societies apparently in decline into their orbit. In the chapter that follows I will provide some indication of what such analyses of entanglement might look like.





Chapter 9


Tracing the Threads


The people of Çatalhöyük literally dug themselves into a hole. Chris Doherty has made a conservative calculation that the mound at Çatalhöyük, 150 000 m2 and 21 m high, has a volume of 750 000 cubic meters, equivalent to 1.13 million metric tons. Adjusting this calculation to take into account the organic component of the mound he estimates a clay volume of 675 000 cubic meters. We know that much of the clay for making the houses and other clay objects on site was dug from extraction pits near the mound. If this amount of material was dug from pits 1m in depth, an area would be required equivalent to a square with sides of over 800 m in length. In a series of cores taken from around Çatalhöyük, Doherty and other members of the archaeological team have discovered that there was indeed a very large hole or series of holes that were dug around the Neolithic East Mound at Çatalhöyük (Figure 9.1). This hole was later partly built over by the Chalcolithic West Mound. But the large Neolithic extraction area altered the local environment and affected water flow, run off and colluvium formation on the slopes of the East Mound.

Another effect of the large area of clay extraction pits was discussed in Chapter 4. Through time during the occupation of the East Mound, the prevalence of the reed Phragmites australis gradually increased in phytolith assemblages. This proliferation may initially have been encouraged by the digging of pits for clay extraction that filled with water ((Figure 4.2). As discussed in Chapter 4 the exploitation of this plant would have had on-effects such as a lowering of water tables and a competitive expulsion of other species, as well as increased human intervention to arrest invasive growth.

Figure 9.1 Surface of the marl surrounding Çatalhöyük showing depressions around Neolithic East and Chalcolithic West Mounds (the mounds are shown as white outlines) (Source: Chris Doherty).





Tanglegrams


Throughout previous chapters, Çatalhöyük has been used to exemplify the entanglement of humans and clay in the Neolithic of Turkey. In Chapter 3 a simple diagram (Figure 3.2) was used to explore the ways in which the use of clay plasters at the site depended on other tools; an example of things depending on things. In Chapter 4 the use of white plaster in rooms with ovens led to sooting of walls and therefore to the need for an endless cycle of replasterings with new fine white marls obtained from below the alluvium in the areas around the site. In Chapter 6 the replastering of walls was linked to the plastering of human and animal heads as part of the process of memory construction at the site. In Chapter 7 a complex set of entanglements was identified between the introduction of clay cooking pots, the shift towards sandier bricks in house construction and the use of pots for cooking sheep and goat meat and bone.

Figure 9.2 Clay entanglements in the first part of the sequence of occupation at Çatalhöyük (Source: the author and Chris Doherty).



These specific instances are just part of a very large and complex entanglement in which clay was situated at Çatalhöyük. Chris Doherty and I have tried to trace some of the threads of this entanglement in Figure 9.2. I wish to discuss this diagram here in order to see whether identifying the threads in past human-thing entanglements in this way can be useful.

The relationships identified in the diagram refer to the earlier part of the sequence at the site. Chris Doherty and I have adopted some conventions in putting the diagram together. Each arrow stands for ‘depends on’ using one of the definitions of dependence described in Chapter 2. Some dependences are one way. These are often enabling or productive relationships as captured by my use of the term dependence. Thus midden depends on clay (clay or marl was spread over middens, maybe to clean them up or level them) but clay does not depend on midden; mortar depends on midden (midden is the main constituent of much mortar at the site) but midden does not depend on mortar; painting depends on the house (in which it is located) but not vice versa (since houses exist and stand at the site without paintings); the use of pigment depends on the landscape from which ochres and minerals were obtained but the landscape does not depend on pigments; burial depends on personal artifacts (as grave items) but personal artifacts do not depend on burial (since they were not made especially for burial).

A two-way dependence or co-dependence is indicated by a two-way arrow. These relationships may be mutual dependences but they are often constraining dependencies (as defined in Chapter 2). Thus middens depend on dogs (to keep them clean from vermin) and dogs depend on midden (as space to live in since they were not allowed in houses) but dogs also add to the problem of midden by defecating on them; houses depend on midden (to be clean of refuse) and also middens depend on houses (for the refuse that constitutes them) but middens add to the problem of houses because they build up around houses causing erosion of walls and creating dirt beside houses; groundstone depends on landscape (as source) and landscape depends on groundstone (groundstone axes that cut down trees, etc.) but cutting down trees and obtaining rock change the landscape so that both trees and appropriate rock may be less available; cooking food depends on clay balls (before cooking pots were introduced) and clay balls depend on cooking (otherwise they would have no function) but the type of cooked food that is possible is constrained by the use of clay balls; house building needs wood and trees and it might be thought that trees and wood do not need houses but the persistence of trees in the landscape depends on how intensively this resource is exploited for buildings.

So the diagram is a mapping out of the threads of dependence and dependency surrounding the use of clay at Çatalhöyük. The links are based on interpretations of the material evidence from the site. For example, we know that dogs were present on middens given the large amount of animal bone in the middens that shows evidence of having passed through the gut of some animal. There are few pigs at Çatalhöyük and the bone fragments are too big to have been consumed by humans so it seems likely that the bones had passed through the guts of dogs. We find little deposition of bones that show evidence of consumption by dogs within the houses. And we do not find faecal material inside houses. So it seems likely that dogs scavenged on middens, keeping down vermin there (since we find the bones of mice and weasel and other vermin in and around the houses) but also adding to the faecal material (including human) on the middens. Similar arguments surround the other links identified in the diagram.

Initially in producing the diagram Chris Doherty and I had included humans as a node. But it became clear that nearly everything in the diagram had some degree of dependence in relation to humans. So we adopted the convention of identifying all nodes which were involved in a dependence relationship with humans as filled rectangles, leaving others as open circles. What is immediately clear is the overall dependence on humans as identified in the prevalence of rectangular boxes. Even the nodes that we have left as open circles are affected by humans to some degree. Thus the amount of clay, fish or wild animals available in the landscape very much depends on human action, even if it remains the case that the landscape, clay, fish and wild animals reproduce without human intervention. The distinction between squares and circles is thus not absolute but a question of degrees of dependence.

An important caveat about the diagram is that it cannot claim to be exhaustive. It is only a very partial mapping. A real-world mapping would be infinitely more complex. As we saw in Chapters 3 and 8, the diagram that I had drawn in Chapter 3 showing the factors involved in lighting a fire can never be complete. In practice lighting a fire takes place in an open system so that other variables not listed or foreseen can always come into play. The diagrams can only be broad schemas for what people do and what they have to think about. They cannot claim to be complete or stable.

One inference that can be drawn from the exercise of producing the tanglegram in Figure 9.2 is that, at least in the case of clay at Çatalhöyük, as one follows the threads of entanglement a very large part of the whole social and material system gets drawn in. We started drawing out the threads that surrounded extraction of clay for building houses but that quickly led to the whole set of entanglements, as might be expected in a small-scale open system. As noted in Chapter 5, in highly complex social-material systems there may be entanglements that are relatively disengaged one from the other. But certainly at Çatalhöyük everything very quickly gets drawn in.

It is also notable that the reasons for the dependences vary. Thus in the diagram, house is shown as depending on human and animal heads because of the role of the house in constructing memory. But house depends on mudbrick or wood as constituents of its fabric. And house depends on mats in order to be kept clean. This heterogeneity is one of the key aspects of entanglement as noted in Chapter 5. Many different components and dimensions of life are co-entangled. There are numerous forms of dependence and a priori none can be given greater causal weight.

Another inference derives from the recognition noted above that so many of the nodes are rectangles – indicating a dependence on human maintenance and action, on human labour and costs. In small-scale hunter-gatherer societies it might be expected that more of a tanglegram would consist of nodes that were self-regenerating or involved in mutual adaptations in which humans were little involved. I would expect that as hunter-gatherers become more complex with greater investments in equipment and managed resources, the tanglegrams would more and more indicate human entrapment. By the time of Çatalhöyük the degree of dependence involving humans is indeed remarkable. The degree to which humans had by this time become involved in the labor of production and reproduction in all directions is striking. As noted in Chapter 8, this degree of entanglement led to both constraint and to a heightened pace of change.

Also very clear in the tanglegram is that some things are more entangled than others. Some nodes have more arrows linked to them than others. These turn out to be the key struts of these particular social arrangements. In the case of Çatalhöyük, many of these relate to environmental features – such as clay, wood, wetland and wild animals. But these highly connected nodes also include early social institutions such as fields, domesticated sheep and in particular the house. I have argued for some time, as have Watkins and others (Hodder 1990, 2006b, Watkins 2004), that the house was the key social institution at this time – the house was ‘the world in a box’ (Carter pers. comm.) as everything was brought into it. Zeder (2009) notes a wider regional process whereby storage, for example, is increasingly brought into the house. At Çatalhöyük, in the absence of cult centers, administrative buildings or public spaces the house functioned as the locus for food preparation and consumption, tool production, burial, symbolism and social memory. The house was the key institution of social life (Hodder 2006b). The technique of tracing out the threads of dependence in a tanglegram seems effective at identifying these nodal things and institutions. The centrality of food in the tanglegram is related. One of the main functions of the house was the preparation and provisioning of food, indicated by bins and traces of plant and animal food preparation, the paired hearths and ovens in each house, the importance of feasting evidence in and around houses and the installations in houses of mementos of feasts. In a small-scale house-based society, eating was a central social and political process.

It might be expected then that as things go wrong in an entanglement, and as change occurs, it is these focal nodes that are likely to be the most resilient. They are the most entangled so that more depends on them. Change is likely to be managed so that the key nodal points remain. It is these nodes that are most costly to change so that trade-offs are sought elsewhere in the entanglement before change in the main nodes is tolerated (as discussed in relation to Human Behavioral Ecology in Chapter 4). Indeed, at Çatalhöyük the continuity and stability of the house is remarkable. For century after century the layout of the house and its internal function see little change. Even when radical change does occur, new arrangements are sought that retain the centrality of house, even if it is a house of a different form. In Chapters 7 and 8 I described how after Level V at the site much change can be observed, at least partly linked to changes in the availability of wild cattle. A greater dependence on more intensive uses of domesticated plants and animals is evident associated with a partial unraveling of the focus on ancestors and memories of great hunts and feasts. In all this change, history houses come to be less the focus of ritual and memory and more the focus of domestic production, storage and accumulation. The history house becomes more a multi-functional working ‘farm’, larger than its neighbours and the focus of competitive consumption and exchange. The nature of the house has changed, but the overall radical shifts in society have been envisaged and structured through the house. The house retains its centrality but in a new form.

Wild animals too have many linkages in the tanglegram in Figure 9.2. Given the nodal role of wild animals, especially wild cattle in the economic, social and ritual systems at Çatalhöyük we would expect that if change in this nodal area did occur there would be far-reaching effects, and this is indeed what happens. Recent work has demonstrated a decline in the relative proportion of wild animals (cattle, equids and boar) after Level VI with a corresponding increase in domestic sheep and goat (Russell et al. 2012). This is a time of major change at Çatalhöyük and it is plausible to link many of these changes to a decline in the use of wild cattle. Installations in houses decline and there is less of a focus on memory construction and continuities between houses (Düring 2006). There is a more intensive use of sheep and goat for secondary animal products and closer management of cattle. A new crop (hulled barley) is introduced and there is increasing enlargement of some houses that become multi-roomed, multi-story and with more space around them for outside activities including hearths, ovens and work areas. In the upper levels of the site pottery becomes more decorated as the shift towards display of production and consumption increases, and burial becomes associated with separate tombs and perhaps cemeteries. All these changes can be understood as linked to the decline in the centrality of ancestor and memory construction in history houses in which feasting on wild cattle were so crucial. So the decrease in the availability or use of wild cattle can reasonably be seen to be an important factor in producing these changes. If a central node has to change, the effects are far-reaching.

Other changes, in less central nodes, have less impact. In the tanglegram, clay balls do not have many links to other nodes. They were made of fired clay and were used to cook food. The food was probably placed in a container such as a basket. The clay balls were heated in the hearth or oven and then placed in the basket to cook the food. Experimental and ethnographic work has shown this method to be very effective (Atalay 2005). In Level VII the clay balls decline in number in the archaeological deposits and are rapidly replaced by cooking pots. The change occurs in Levels VII and VI. The shift from clay balls to pottery in cooking does involve some transformation elsewhere - in sourcing, labor, cooking methods, etc. But as expected, the scale of the change is slight. Hearths and ovens continued much the same (at least for a time) and similar sources of mineral gritted clay as used for the clay balls continued to be used in making pottery. The overall diagram does not change very much as a result of the shift from clay balls to clay pottery.





Locating Entanglements


Drawing out tanglegrams that trace operational sequences and dependences of various types does seem useful in understanding how entanglements work and change. Another way of exploring entanglement is to locate the various components in their spatial contexts. Archaeologists are adept at locating the sources of stones and clay, reconstructing systems of exchange or the locations of fields and trackways, establishing the movements of people around settlements and landscapes. A wide range of techniques from palaeo-economy to the phenomenology of landscapes have been applied to such questions (e.g. Ashmore and Knapp 1999). I wish to provide an example of mapping entanglements at Çatalhöyük.

We have already seen that the digging of clay near Çatalhöyük produced a large hole that would have filled with water and then with colluvium, with multiple implications for plant growth and the availability of local resources. We have also seen that many activities at Çatalhöyük were focused on the house. But how did these houses exploit the landscape and interact with each other? What was the spatial dimension of obtaining clay, plaster, wood, reeds, grazing sheep, hunting cattle and so on?

We are increasingly coming to understand the complex mosaic of resources across the landscape of the Konya plain and surrounding hills and mountains that were exploited from Çatalhöyük. Sheep were grazed over numerous widely-flung environments (Pearson 2012), pottery and groundstone were obtained from the volcanic uplands to the west (Doherty 2012, Wright 2012), shells were obtained from the Mediterranean (Bar-Yosef Mayer 2012) and obsidian mainly from various sources in Cappadocia (Carter and Milic 2012). I wish to focus here, however, on one aspect of this complex spatial network: the dependence of houses on each other within the settlement. After all it was these dependences and dependencies that structured the flow of resources on the mound itself and probably affected how the wider landscape was used.

We can see immediately in Figure 9.3 that the history houses (that is those houses with more burials beneath their floors) in Level VIB in the South Area, are dispersed within the excavated area – there is no central concentration of these special and more elaborate houses. In general terms we have found no evidence of centralization of storage, production, ritual, administration at Çatalhöyük. There is no chiefly residence or area and no ceremonial center. So the spatial organization of entanglement was dispersed. In addition there is much evidence that food storage, preparation and consumption were on a daily basis small-scale. There is limited storage in each house and much evidence for daily processing of plant grains to serve immediate needs. We know that people must have collaborated in working fields and grazing flocks, although the variation in sheep isotopes, including variation between individual houses and parts of the settlement (Pearson 2012), suggests that we should not exaggerate the amount of collaborative labor that was involved in subsistence.

How would houses have responded to risk and uncertainty? Without substantial storage, and with small-scale production and consumption, individual houses would have been very dependent on other houses in times of hardship. How were these dependences located spatially? The mosaic of resources (everything from birds’ eggs and reeds to wild cattle and volcanoes) utilized by the community as a whole would have helped to buffer risk. But we can also try and map the social networks through which resources could have been obtained during individual down-turns. For example in Figure 9.3 I have shown houses linked to history houses in which there are many burials. We know that not all the dead buried beneath the floors of history houses could have lived in those houses – in some cases there are just too many burials to have been provided by the inhabitants of the house. We can assume therefore that those houses with few or no burials contributed their dead to the history houses as shown in Figure 9.3. In other cases we can draw lines between houses that have distinctive cultural attributes. Thus in Figure 9.3 I have drawn lines connecting houses with leopard reliefs. These reliefs are very rare and the inhabitants of the houses with such reliefs must have had some connection – a connection that it might have been possible to draw upon in times of economic hardship. I have also drawn lines between houses that are distinctive because they have benches with bull horns, or hand paintings, or splayed ‘bear’ reliefs. What we see is that the different networks show some overlap but they do not coincide. The history houses are not central in all domains. The entanglement is not focal or centralized. Rather there is a complex overlapping so that any individual house has multiple possible relationships that it can draw upon in times of hardship.

Figure 9.3 The spatial distribution of entanglements at Çatalhöyük in Level VIB. (Source: the author).



The spatial dimension of Çatalhöyük entanglements is yet more complex. The settlement is divided into two halves or hills, which are themselves divided into sectors separated by lines or zones of midden (Hodder 2006b). But within these sectors there are radiating lines that start at the top of the mound and extend outwards. For the Level VIB settlement in the South Area these radial lines are shown in Figure 9.3. The lines separate groups of houses that are distinctive. Some of the radial zones have more elaborate houses than others, and some become midden areas at certain points during the occupation of the mound. So again, it seems likely that houses within a radial zone could call on each other in times of difficulty. But cross-cutting these radial zones are terraces. As one moves from the top of the mound down its slope, the houses are organized into terraces at decreasing height. These terraces are also marked in Figure 9.3. Perhaps these too acted as a group of houses on which individual houses could at times depend.

So the end result, shown in Figure 9.3, is highly complex. The mapping suggests a dispersed overlapping mosaic of relationships. The implication is that a person or house could get food (or obsidian or wood or clay) from people on their terrace, in their sector, in their burial group, in the group of people that have bears or leopards on the walls, in their bull-feasting group, in their neighborhood and so on. This type of entanglement allows individual units to depend on small-scale agriculture and to invest little in storage. The diversity of resources creates sustainability, but equally the complexity of the entanglements creates a dense network of dependences that can be drawn upon when needed. This is a form of ‘social storage’ (Halstead 1981, Halstead and O’Shea 1989) but it is more than that. The heterogeneous mosaic itself creates resilience and stability. Indeed, the rate of change at Çatalhöyük and related sites such as As¸ıklı Höyük is remarkably slow, even if speeded up in comparison to earlier Palaeolithic times. For example, the plants and animals exploited at Çatalhöyük remained remarkably consistent over at least 1000 years. This was a highly stable and successful society, perhaps mainly because the complex heterogeneity of its entanglements proved resilient as things went wrong.

Note that it is the tensile strength of the entanglement as a whole or the large amount of overlapping and redundant interactions that underpinned stability and resilience. The material conditions of life did not determine the persistence and durability of the system. Certainly technologies and production of food played a central role. Humans at Çatalhöyük shared food, exchanged obsidian, worked together in fields. But it was not this alone that maintained stability and buffered risk. It was equally the exchange of the dead, the joint feasting on wild bulls, and the participation in art and symbols. It was the heterogeneous linkages themselves that underpinned society and produced resilience.

The shelter that has been constructed in the South Area at Çatalhöyük has very slight foundations (Figure 9.4). We did not want to dig many deep foundation trenches to hold up massive metal pillars placed at frequent intervals across the excavation area as these would have harmed the archaeological deposits and made further excavation difficult. So the roof was constructed in such a way that it could rest on a shallow concrete belt around the edge, leaving the central area free. In order to do this the roof was constructed of multiple struts to produce a steel-frame truss system. In the end the roof was held together by the tensile strength of all the conjoined members. The roof holds itself up rather than being held up by numerous uprights. In the same way, the tensile strength of the mosaic of connections in the entanglement at Çatalhöyük resulted in a highly stable economic web. The tensile strength of the entanglement itself created the stability. I do not want to argue that the superstructure held up the base. As we have seen, the entanglement is redundant and heterogeneous, as much economic base as ideological superstructure. Rather it is the entanglement that holds itself together while allowing accommodation as things go wrong, run out or decay.

Figure 9.4 The roof structure over the excavations in the South Area at Çatalhöyük (Source: Çatalhöyük Research Project and Jason Quinlan).





Sequencing Entanglements – at Çatalhöyük


Entanglements are tied to spatial matrices, but they are also tied to multi-scalar temporal matrices of various kinds. In particular I wish to distinguish between (i) operational step-wise sequences, (ii) life histories of things, (iii) historical sequences of categories of things, and (iv) legacies.

(i) Various types of operational sequence were discussed in Chapter 3, including chaînes opératoires and behavioral chains. Tanglegrams can be organized according to the sequence of operations that are needed to achieve some end or purpose. There is a temporality to human-thing interactions. We have to wait for one step to be completed in a productive process before we can proceed to the next step. Often archaeologists focus on the stages of procurement, production, exchange, consumption, discard and so on. But at a tighter scale archaeologists can often also tease apart the various components of each of these stages. Thus in Figure 9.5 I have identified some of the steps involved in using clay balls to cook sheep meat in a basket at Çatalhöyük. First an oven or hearth has to be constructed, dung and wood obtained. Perhaps during the same period the clay balls have to be made and the baskets woven and prepared. Then the fire can be lit and the balls placed in the fire. When heated they are removed with wooden tongs and placed in the basket with uncooked meat and liquid. When they cool down the balls have to be returned to the fire and replaced with hot balls. The process continues until the meat is boiled.

Figure 9.5 The sequence of steps involved in using clay balls to cook sheep meat in a basket at Çatalhöyük (Source: the author).



It is of interest to compare this operational sequence with that involved in boiling or stewing meat after the introduction of cooking pottery. The production process of the pot itself adds complexity, involving considerable skill in the forming of thin-walled vessels that will not crack and break. But there are savings in that baskets are not needed and, most significantly, there is not the need to continually return items to the fire to reheat. Whether it is attractive and effective to use pots in this way will partly depend, as I argued in Chapter 6, on the other things going on in the house at the time. But the major increased entanglement is that pottery came to be obtained by exchange from volcanic areas to the west (Doherty 2012), involving the provision of items as exchange gifts and the maintenance of exchange relations.

Sequences of operations also have to be set within the seasonal round of other activities. As Flannery (1968) noted in reference to early Mesoamerica, the introduction of domestic maize would have had an impact on other resource procurement. The scheduling of the collection of a wide range of plants would have been disrupted as humans devoted time to the tending of this one crop, thus forcing an ever greater reliance on maize. Archaeologists are often able to use seasonal indicators (migratory birds or animals for example) in order to identify the parts of the year in which sites were occupied, and they are able to use knowledge of growing cycles in order to reconstruct the seasonal pattern of activities at a site. The evidence from Çatalhöyük suggests the scheduling shown in Figure 9.6. The complex interlacing of operational sequences is clear, and these temporal interactions constitute a key component of entanglement. Evidence from sequences of oxygen isotopes in the teeth of domestic sheep has been studied by Elizabeth Henton so that time of birth of the Çatalhöyük sheep can be identified. Henton (pers comm) shows that in the earlier levels at the site sheep tended to be born in April to July but in the later levels more were born in March. This earlier birthing suggests manipulation of the herds (since wild sheep in the area today give birth later) and it indicates the provisioning of fodder during the winter months, which itself implies the storage of fresh hay. The harvesting and storage of additional grasses would have increased pressure on the already very busy periods in the summer and autumn when labor-demanding activities such as crop harvesting, slaughter and preparation of meat stores, obtaining and storing fruits, collecting wood from across the plain, making of mud bricks and plastering walls took place. The increased pressure on this summer and autumn period caused by the early birthing of sheep may explain why in the upper levels of the site we see a decreased frequency of replastering of walls inside houses. Plaster in these upper levels is less white and is thicker, less often replaced. This shift to a new, less labor-intensive plastering regime may have been a trade-off to lessen the labor requirements in the summer and early autumn.

Figure 9.6 Reconstruction of seasonal activities at Çatalhöyük (Source: Fairbairn 2005).



(ii) A second scale of sequencing of entanglements concerns the life histories of specific things. Individual items go through processes of production, use, re-use and discard and the study of traces on things in order to reconstruct these sequences has been widely developed in archaeology. The scientific analytical techniques have been well developed and increasingly anthropological and materiality theories have been applied to the study of artifact life histories. Much of this work returns to the seminal work by Appadurai (1986) on the social life of things, but more recently there has been an interesting focus on artifacts as they become memories and markers, re-signified in changing social contexts. At Çatalhöyük there are many examples of bone artifacts being repaired and re-used (Russell 2005) but perhaps the best examples of things with long and complex use lives are human skulls and other parts of the human skeleton. A body may be initially buried entirely complete and fleshed. It may then be moved to a secondary burial. The skull may then be removed. The skull may itself be painted or plastered to re-create human features. The skull can then be deposited, for example at the base of the posts holding up a house (Hodder 2006b). The circulation of body parts and the creation of life histories or biographies for these artifacts are central components of the creation of history seen across the site but especially in the history houses.

(iii) As for the third scale of sequencing, study of the historical sequences of categories or types was described in Chapter 7. Much evolutionary archaeology has developed methods for the tracing of genealogies of types based on various measures of affinity and association. I argued in Chapter 7 that increases and decreases in types (battleship or spindle curves) needed to be situated within the entanglements that made them possible. Types and traits persist to the extent that they are ‘fitting’ within entanglements. I described the decrease in the use of clay balls at Çatalhöyük and the concomitant increase in cooking pottery. The shift from clay balls to cooking pots needed to be understood as a solution to problems that needed fixing. So rather than just plotting the frequencies of types (upper part of diagram in Figure 9.7), the sequence of balls and pots can be set within a decision-making environment (lower part of the diagram).

Figure 9.7 Sequences of types (clay balls and cooking pottery) set within a decision-making environment at Çatalhöyük (Source: the author).



(iv) By the fourth scale of sequencing, legacy, I refer to the ways in which things have their own temporalities that stack up around the present. Things hang around or die out. These active temporalities influence how humans and things behave. How humans respond to the residual stuff around them can tell us a lot about how a particular society is organized. The ‘house’ at Çatalhöyük was a social-material institution but it was also a thing with its own temporalities and its own spatial presence. The material house constituted and enabled the social house. But there was also a dependency constraint resulting from differences in temporality. For example, the house had unstable walls and needed constant tending. In addition, the house was most stable if built on the stubs of earlier walls. Once a house had been started, there was a tendency for all later houses built above it to have the same shape, regardless of circumstance. We can see this with regard to a building in the 4040 Area at Çatalhöyük. This house has a dog-leg in its northern wall. There is no contemporary need for this dog-leg; there is no adjacent house to avoid. But the dog-leg follows the outline of earlier houses in which packing had forced this unusual shape. Thus the shape of the house in one level is a legacy of the shape of houses in earlier levels – all because houses were more stable if built on earlier walls. Or put another way, all subsequent rebuilds of houses used the same walls.

The posts that helped to hold up the walls of the houses were very carefully curated. Difficult to obtain given that the oak and juniper from which they were made grew in the mountains to the south and west, the posts were always removed from buildings during abandonment to be re-used in later houses. The use-lives of posts extended over many generations (see Figure 9.8). Human skeletons too were sometimes dug up from earlier houses and redeposited as secondary burials. It is likely that cooking pots lasted several years; whereas wall-plasters seem to have been renewed every few months. Cereals were stored and were processed on a daily basis for immediate consumption. Figurines seem to have been used and discarded quickly.

Figure 9.8 Legacy diagram for Çatalhöyük showing differential persistence of things (Source: the author).



So we can build a legacy diagram which identifies the duration of things and humans in the house at Çatalhöyük. The layout of house walls, the burials beneath the floors, and the wooden posts of oak and juniper constituted a legacy that was made good use of in the particular context of Çatalhöyük. In fact all three were given special symbolic load as part of the construction of histories. The construction and dismantling of walls were carefully managed and often embedded within ritual. The upright posts were plastered and often affixed with installations such as wild cattle horns and heads. The human skeleton was at times dug up and used in the construction of histories (in the circulation of skulls for example). The everyday things of shorter duration and legacy seem to have carried less of a social and symbolic load at Çatalhöyük. Figurines were quickly made and discarded in midden. Food preparation and cooking pots were not surrounded in symbolic elaboration (the pots were undecorated as were ovens and bins). The short-lived wall plasters, on the other hand, were sometimes painted but this activity could have been an embellishing of the walls beneath the plasters rather than of the plasters themselves. In different societies material legacies are dealt with in different ways. At Çatalhöyük material legacies were important in constructing histories in a house society. Other societies may place more emphasis on the daily negotiation of things without legacy. A potential research aim is to explore these differences, and understand them in relation to degrees of entanglement.

Archaeologists have long been fascinated by legacy in the form of residuality. Look at the dates on the coins in your wallet. You will find that you may have few from this year, but most of the coins will be from recent minting. A few, however, might be very old. If we count the frequencies of coins of different dates in a wallet or in an archaeological deposit, they usually decrease with increasing age. The reasons for variations in levels of residuality have been discussed with reference to particular sites (Evans and Millett 1992) and with reference to economic systems and coinage circulation (Reece 1984). The shapes of residuality curves are linked to processes of circulation, value, curation and deposition. Some forms of entanglement absorb greater amounts of legacy and residuality than others, but this remains an area in which little archaeological research has been conducted.





Sequencing Entanglements – the Origins of Agriculture in the Middle East


Daily social life is laced through with entanglements that stretch out spatially and temporally. Some of the temporal sequences cover very long time periods. I wish to argue here that the origins of farming and settled life came about in the Middle East as part of a long-term process of entanglement.

The origins of agriculture in the Middle East are normally explained through various types of event or specific cause – most commonly climate change at the start of the Holocene, population increase, changes in the availability of resources, feasting and social differentiation or the emergence of new symbolic or cognitive systems (Belfer-Cohen and Bar-Yosef 2000, Bender 1978, Byrd 1994, Cauvin 1994, Flannery 1972 and 1993, Hayden 1990, Hole 2000, Renfrew 1998).

Animals, plants and artifacts produced by humans during this transition are usually seen as indicators of change or as technologies allowing adaptation. Childe (1951) described a Neolithic ‘package’ of traits, and in the years since his writing there has been much discussion of how the various elements in the package allow more intensive resource exploitation, sedentism and community building. But the things themselves and how they drag humans into dependences have been less well studied. In Chapter 4 I discussed work that explores the behavior of plants and animals and examines the specific ways in which humans are drawn into their care.

Zeder (2009) has recently documented the timing of the introduction of the 10 elements of Childe’s Neolithic package. It is now clear that the 10 elements were introduced at very different times (see Figure 9.9). (1) An agricultural economy based on domesticated plants and animals was introduced slowly over many millennia, with many phases of intensive herding and cultivation before the appearance of genetically altered domesticated forms in the 9th millennium BC (Nesbitt 2002, Weiss et al. 2006, Wilcox et al. 2008, Fuller et al. 2010); (2) various surveys (e.g. Henry 2002, Kuijt and Goring-Morris 2002) of settlement size and density have argued for population increase from the Natufian through the Pre-Pottery Neolithic; (3) Childe argued for the importance of storage of surplus and while storage is evident from the Natufian onwards there remains in my view no evidence that this storage was used to create social surplus during the early Pre-Pottery Neolithic in the Middle East; (4) sedentism had certainly become common by the early Natufian (12 500–10 500 BC) although examples may occur earlier as at Ohalo II (Nadel 2004); (5) trade networks for shells and obsidian expanded across the region from the Natufian onwards; (6) communal social institutions are evident by the Natufian at ‘Ain Mallaha and Hallan Çemi; (7) associated magico-religious traditions are evident at Göbekli Tepe in southeast Turkey in the 10th and 9th millennia BC (Schmidt 2006); (8) ground stone implements appeared by 24 000 years ago and were ubiquitous by 12 000 BC; (9) true clay ceramics appeared at 8000 BC in Iran and had reached across to central Anatolia by 7000 BC; (10) weaving implements in the form of spindle whorls appeared by 7500–7000 BC.

But it is possible to see these elements of the agricultural revolution not as a package but as an entanglement. Over a long period of time the elements became tied to each other, dependent on each other, but also channeling change in a certain direction as events happened and problems emerged that needed fixing. For example we can take the case of ground stone. Grinding, often associated with other processing and cooking, makes the nutrients in many foods more accessible and may remove toxins (Wright 1994). Starch grain analysis of ground stones from Ohalo II shows the grinding of wild barley and other grasses (Piperno and Wiess 2004) at 21 000 BC. The prevalence of grinding stones increases gradually through the Epipalaeolithic and they are common in the Natufian and Pre-Pottery Neolithic. Their occurrence is functionally tied to increasing population, increasing settlement size, increasing sedentism and increasingly intensive cultivation and dependence on wild grasses. Indeed, grinding stones made early agriculture possible and channeled adaptations in the direction of increased intensification of plant use.

Figure 9.9 The timing of the introduction of parts of Childe’s Neolithic ‘package’ in the Middle East (Source: Zeder 2009). With kind permission from Springer Science+Business Media.



Grinding stones also ‘structured the way in which foods were prepared and consumed, leading to breads, pancakes and other batter products’ (Fuller and Rowlands 2009: 23). In the Middle East the main domesticates (wheat, barley and rye) all contained the protein gluten and thus they could be made into leavened breads. An entanglement between grinding stones and cereals containing gluten led to a bread-based foodway that has continued to today.

In the processing of both wild and domesticated cereals pounding is needed at a late stage (see Figure 9.10) in order to remove husks and spikelets from grains. Ethnographic and experimental data have shown that dehusking is best achieved using wooden pestle and concave mortar (Wright 1994). Grinding with flat stone querns and handstones reduces the particle size of the grains and so exposes more starch to enzymes during digestion, permitting more nutrients to be absorbed by the gut. Further grinding to produce flour enhances the process. Ethnographic and experimental research has shown that although grinding increases nutrient uptake, the processing costs are considerable in terms of grinding hours per calorie (Wright 1994). In addition we need to take into account all the costs of obtaining and making the grinding stones themselves. Grinding stones are usually made of hard and heavy igneous or metamorphic rock. The stone has to be quarried in slabs or blocks and then pecked or otherwise worked into appropriate shapes. Grinding stones wear out and need replacing. All such activities hinder the mobility of hunter-gatherers and encourage decreases in mobility (Wright 1994).

Figure 9.10 The processing of wild and domesticated cereals in the Middle East (Source: Dorian Fuller).





The diagram is based on wild and domesticated emmer but is representative of any glume wheat (einkorn, new-type).

Weeds taxa are selected to be illustrative and not comprehensive, based on the taxa from Middle Euphrates sites like Jerf el Ahmar, D’jade, etc. published by Willcox et al. 2008. Small seeded grasses are put as weeds with the domesticated harvest and not in the wild harvest on the inference that these might have used as food more often in the wild harvest contexts, as inferred at Ohalo II, Abu Hureyra 1. Phytolith morphotypes included are not comprehensive but represent the types that are most likely to be useful for considering crop-processing ratios.

This diagram assumes that some or all wild harvesting is done by paddle and basket methods; this is method assumed by Hillman, and is widely reported ethnographically for wild grain harvests (North America, Africa, Australia, wild rices in India, etc.). Others (e.g. Willcox) would contend that most wild grain harvests in the Near East were by sickling of green ears. This method would increase the proportion of green ears and reduce, but not eliminate loose spikelets; it would increase the mature loose spikelets that fell and were added to the wild seed bank of harvested stands. If green ears are thoroughly dried they should still disarticulate without major threshing efforts, and basic contrasts would be more or less the same. Both basket and sickle method might have been used if we assume that there was variation among households and communities. Such variation, and experimentation, in practices would contribute to a slower overall rate of change in cereal morphology (on rachis shattering) and indicate different local forms of entanglement.



In the Middle East, already by the Kebaran (20 000–14 500 before present) ‘some mortars are too large to have been routinely transported’ (Wright 1994: 249). In the Natufian there is a marked increase in prevalence of ground stones, especially mortars and elongated pestles. The increase in ground stone appears centrally linked to population increase and more intensive plant production, while at the same time helping to produce greater sedentism. As humans became tied down by the extra labor of processing plants and obtaining and making ground stone they became increasingly tied to place. In the PPNA, ground stones are yet more prevalent but there is a shift from mortars and pestles to querns and handstones (Wright 1994). This shift probably suggests a greater emphasis on reducing particle size and the production of flour but at the expense of greater processing time – both in grinding the grains and in making and maintaining the grinding stones used to prepare them.

Grinding stones were also involved in social and symbolic life in the Middle Eastern Neolithic. They were used to grind ocher for paints (Wright 1994). Sculpted pestles (with goat or bird heads for example) have been found at a number of early sites such as Hallan Çemi and Nemrik 9 (Rosenberg and Redding 2000, Kozlowski 2002) suggesting the entanglement of pestles in metaphors and abstractions. Mithen, Finlayson and Shaffrey (2005) have convincingly argued that stone pestles in the southern Levant have phallic associations. The pounding of food may thus have resonated with sexual activity and had symbolic associations with the phallocentric emphasis in much early Middle Eastern imagery (Hodder and Meskell 2011).

We could extend the analysis of different types of entanglement sequences to all the other components in Childe’s ‘package’. In fact the different parts of the ‘package’ are entangled in complex webs that gradually thicken and become more complex over time. As we have seen storage is evident from at least Natufian times and must have been intimately connected to grinding and grain processing for a wide range of plants. The introduction of pottery for cooking would, in its turn, have enhanced nutrient uptake from plants while at the same time increasing labor (in the manufacture and trade of pottery); ground stones were often used to burnish the surfaces of pottery to increase their efficiency in cooking (Schiffer 1990, Schiffer et al. 1994). Chipped stone was traded over long distances for a variety of functions including the sickles used in harvesting wild and domesticated grasses. The winnowed residues from the harvested grasses were mixed with mud to increase the strength of the houses; PPNA daub or pisé (at Jerf el Ahmar) was found to contain wild cereal chaff including spikelets in considerable quantities (Willcox and Fornite 1998). So, within building material, grasses contributed to sedentism in yet another way.

Overall, then, the 10 components of Childe’s package became increasingly entangled with each other over a very long period, starting at least by 20 000 BC. We know some of the things that ‘went wrong’ in this period and needed fixing. For example, as discussed in Chapter 8, the climatic deterioration of the Younger Dryas at 10 800 to 9500 BC led to a dispersal of settlement in the Late Natufian and a temporary return to more mobility. We can assume there were many later events that needed managing, including the leaning and collapsing of brick walls and the build-up of refuse. Each fixing seems to have involved greater entanglement. Using daub and then bricks depended on the cutting of grasses in greater quantities or in new ways. Such cutting may have competed with or enhanced the use of grasses as a food source. Either way, human entanglement with grasses increased. The genetic changes in plants that we call domestication are frequently seen as unintended consequences of increasingly intensive plant use. But I argue here that the increasingly intensive plant use was entangled within a particular trajectory in which grinding stones, gluten, chipped stone, bricks and humans were all tied together.





Causality and Directionality


Note that none of this needs a prime mover such as climate change or increasing population. All it needs is for small things to go wrong every now and then. So let us say that around 12 500 BC at the start of the Natufian in the Levant a small semi-mobile group has started investing in ground stone to process plants of various types. Wright (1994) has documented the increase in ground stone use in the Natufian as opposed to earlier periods. The increased use of ground stone has allowed the group to gain more nutrients from plants and given areas of land. The extra labor required to grind plants and to make grinding stones helps push up population density in the area. This population increase may have led to shifts in hunting. Stiner et al. (2000) have shown that from the Middle Palaeolithic to the Natufian in the Levant humans gradually shifted their acquisition of small game towards animals and birds that took more work to acquire. In particular they started focusing on agile small game such as birds, rabbits and hares. In the Natufian the increase in efficiency of plant nutrient extraction may have been entangled with more costly small game hunting.

Let us further say that this semi-mobile group increasingly dependent on ground stone moves away from the source of ground stone. A problem has been presented that needs fixing. In deciding what to do, various trade-offs have to be considered. One solution would be to go back to the exploitation of less costly small game, decrease population levels and nutrient requirements and decrease the need for grinding stones. But of course all this would take time – to restock the area with slower-moving and less costly small game, and to decrease human population densities. The temporalities of things (the breeding cycles of animals and humans) have rather trapped humans so that they cannot go back. All humans can realistically do is seek other solutions – all of which involve further intensification, further dependences between humans and things. One solution would be to become more sedentary – to stop moving away from the ground stone sources. This of course requires many shifts, material, social and ideological. Another solution might be to enter into exchange relations with those living by the sources of stone, but that too involves costs (in the provision of goods for exchange) and may be unreliable. There will also be abstractions and resonances surrounding the social and symbolic roles of pestles that would influence decision making. But whatever the specific solution, there will be a tendency to minimize disruption to other parts of the entanglement. It will be more ‘cost-effective’ to minimize disturbance elsewhere in all the dependences. But these ‘cost-effective’ solutions usually seem to involve more work, more intensive dependences, more entanglement.

I am arguing then for a long term view in which towards the end of the Pleistocene humans were drawn into greater entanglements with things and thus with each other, forming larger communities and more intensively husbanding resources so that they could sustain the things (crops, fields, grinding stones, exchanges of goods) on which they had come to depend. In this scenario population increase, settlement stability, domestication of plants and animals are all just offshoots of a very general process in which humans and things depend on each other, humans fix things when they go wrong, and thus increasingly invest in things in which they become entrapped.

If this was so then we would expect the same process worldwide, with local variations depending on specific environments and cultural contexts. And indeed this is what we find. If we take a broad, global, view, it can be argued that sedentism, intensification and some degree of social consolidation or differentiation occur very widely in the early Holocene. This point has been restated by Diamond (1997). Many areas of the world show these traits. Some are associated with agricultural origins – in the Fertile Crescent, China, Mesoamerica, Andes/Amazonia, eastern United States, Sahel, tropical West Africa, Ethiopia, and New Guinea. But in many other areas, the same or similar effects are produced through the intensive use of ‘wild’ resources. In the Holocene, hunter-gatherers developed sedentary village life with increased population densities, complex material culture, and in some cases pottery and ranked societies in several areas such as Mesolithic Europe, Japan and maritime Far East Asia, the North American High Arctic, the Pacific coast of northwest North America, interior California’s oak woodlands, the California Channel Islands, the Calusa of Florida, the coast of Ecuador, and the Murray-Darling Basin of southeast Australia. There is a broad social process which happens to involve early agriculture in some areas.

Many would also argue that there was a widespread population increase in the early Holocene. The Neolithic Demographic Transition (NDT) has been recognized in many parts of the world in increases in site sizes, numbers and density and in changes in the proportion of immature skeletons in cemeteries (Bocquet-Appel and Bar-Yosef 2008). The specific evidence for an increase in population in the southern Levant is discussed by Kuijt (2008b) and there appears to be considerable variation in the timing and consequences. While population increase is often seen as the cause of social, economic and cultural change at the start of the Neolithic no universal relationships have been found and the direction of the causal arrow is often difficult to determine.

One general implication of the NDT that is often claimed is a decline in health (Cohen 2008). Worldwide there is much variation in the timing of a decline in health and of the domestication of plants and animals, and yet surveys of skeletal data often conclude that health suffered during the early Holocene transition (Larsen 1995). Cohen (2008) attributes the decline to diminishing returns for labor as humans switched to smaller game and small seeded plants leading to domestication. Diminishing returns are defined by Cohen in terms of caloric returns per hour of labor.

It is widely recognized that another general trend in the early Holocene is an increase in things made by humans. This increase is normally seen as a result of sedentism (Rollefson 2008). Renfrew (2001:128) argues that ‘human culture became more substantive, more material’ as a result of sedentism, population growth or more intensive resource acquisition. Usually the increase in material culture is seen as a secondary offshoot of these other developments. I would like to turn this argument round and suggest that the overall global process that we observe was not caused by population increase, climate change, domestication or sedentism – but rather that all these things were the products of a long slow process of increased entanglement between humans and things. We have seen that the package of Neolithic traits in the Middle East was stretched out over millennia. In addition to the package identified by Childe there are other changes that involved greater investment in things – such as the adoption and proliferation of multi-component arrowheads or the building of larger and more stable (including brick) houses. As humans became increasingly dependent on things they had made, including things that needed care and maintenance and came to depend on humans for their propagation, so they had to find ways of fixing things and problems as they arose. It was rarely possible to go back, and so humans became involved in a cycle of greater dependence on things, often requiring new technologies or more labor. The demand for labor would have produced a higher birth rate leading initially to population growth. To return to the example of ground stones, the need for constant grinding of food would have encouraged increases in family size. We can say the same about hunting more costly small game, or later making bricks or firing pottery. But as more people invested more in more things so they became more trapped by things, running faster to stay in the same place. In many places health declined and signs of stress emerged.

I have delved briefly into this large scale global view in order to make the point that entanglement provides a general framework in which change in human societies comes about as a complex process in which there are no set causal factors and much depends on the specific conjunctures that bring people and things together in specific historic contexts, and yet there is an overall direction. I discussed this directionality in Chapter 8, but I have used the example of the ‘adoption of farming’ or the ‘Neolithic’ in order to demonstrate how specific sets of data might be explored within such a framework.

It is important to emphasize, however, that beneath the general trends there are specific multi-scalar sequences and interactions that can be studied effectively with the entanglement approach. In particular I have used the example of Çatalhöyük to demonstrate the more well-grounded arguments that can be traced in the evidence. Certainly at Çatalhöyük it cannot be argued that greater densities of humans in large settled communities led to stress and poor health. The skeletal data from the site have shown remarkably good health of the population. And yet the site was densely packed with large accumulations of refuse (middens), full of human and animal faeces, rotting bones and reeds and so on. Clearly the inhabitants of the site had found ways to manage the site so as to minimize disease and ill-health. I discussed in Chapter 4 the ‘garbage crisis in prehistory’ (Hardy-Smith and Edwards 2004). And certainly dealing with the build up of refuse in sedentary communities became a major issue by the PPNB in the Middle East. But at Çatalhöyük the middens were managed. They were leveled frequently, often covered in burnt material or lime-rich ash and clay. These specific entanglements and solutions need studying before we can usefully build robust global models.

I have argued that no cause or single event led to the domestication of plants and animals. I also argue that, at the large scale being considered here, no choice or intent was involved. Certainly in the daily local problem solving, as things went wrong and had to be fixed, there was much choice, intent and agency. But at the scale of the overall direction of change towards increasing dependence on things made by humans, increasing intensification, population growth, sedentism and domestication there was no overall directional intentionality that somehow remained stable for over 15 000 years.

It is now widely accepted that plant domestication in the Middle East was unintended (Fuller et al. 2010). It was the result of a long build up of increasingly intensive use of plants starting at least with the use of ground stones (by 21 000 BC) and involving over the next 12 000 years more thorough processing, different modes of harvesting, the emergence of storage, sowing, ground preparation and so on (Fuller et al. 2010). All these interventions in plants and cereals had to be in place before the conditions allowed for the selection of non-shattering cereal genes. ‘The crop domestication process includes several distinct but entangled processes, some of which have an inevitability about them: unintended consequences of interactions between humans and proto-cultigens. We have referred to some of these consequences as ‘traps’, as they result in human farmers having to expend extra effort, e.g. on crop-processing or maintenance of soil fertility. This probably implies that, compared to their ancestors who made the very first steps in cultivation or who were hunter-gatherers, farmers became increasingly entangled into more labor demanding food-production regimes. The domestication pathway involved several ‘tipping points’ of intensification. This is so because morphologically domesticated cereals require more labor, both in terms of investments in cultivation (the soil nutrient trap) and in post-harvest labor (the crop-processing trap). The payback for this, however, is increased reliability in harvest and increased yield, and more controllable (owned) resources’ (Fuller et al. 2010: 23).

However much active intentionality was involved in increasingly intensive uses of materials, plants and animals in the period leading up to full domestication in the Middle East, there was no teleology of heading towards the Neolithic. Rather, the directionality towards domestication was a by-product of the tendency to fix things within existing entanglements and within the taut web of dependences.





Conclusion


I have wanted in this chapter to indicate the fruitfulness of the concept of entanglement. By using examples of the many ways in which we can analyze the threads of entanglement I have tried to show the potential for new methods, interpretations and explanations. It seems possible to trace out entanglements in terms of function and dependence, but also spatially and through time. Many different types and scales of temporal, historical and operational sequence can be opened up for study. There is the potential for new approaches to the tenacity, persistence and change of societies.

It might be argued on the other hand that the approaches exemplified in this chapter are simply versions of existing perspectives. The focus on temporal sequences has parallels with the lineages discussed in various forms of evolutionary theory (Chapter 7), and there are also obvious parallels with the networks explored by Latour and Actor Network Theory. As argued in Chapter 5, entanglements differ from actor networks in the focus on forms of dependence. The approaches used here are similar to network analysis as applied to the ‘pull’ of nodes within a settlement system (Knappett, Evans and Rivers 2008). Approaches combining insights from graph theory, social network analysis, statistical physics and geography are effective at exploring the behavior of complex networks (Evans, Knappett and Rivers 2007). They model dynamic networks that evolve so as to minimize the ‘costs’ of their maintenance, in much the same way that I have argued that entanglements adjust in order to minimize disruption, but they model links between nodes very simply, without the emphasis on forms of dependence that are the foci of this book. Nevertheless it would be of great interest to apply network models not to spatial relationships but to entanglements of the type shown in Figure 9.2. I have not as yet developed quantitative models for the analysis of tanglegrams and entanglements but there is clearly potential for quantitative analysis based, for example, on the relative trade-off costs of different pathways through entanglements (as defined in Chapter 4 in relation to experimental and ethnoarchaeological data, similar to Behavioral Ecology models) or on the analysis of complex networks.

The discussion of entanglement sequences in this chapter might give the impression that entanglement always produces gradual change. But we also saw in Chapter 8 that the complex interactions between humans and things can lead to untying as much as to stability. The untying can be sudden, leading to new unanticipated and emergent phenomena. Above I used the metaphor of a trussed roof that has tensile and self-supporting strength. But a rather different metaphor can be used. Imagine a whole group of skaters of various skills holding on to each other as they move slowly over the ice. Shoulder to shoulder they hold each other up and support those that slip and stumble. But if, at a particular conjuncture, it so happens that a large number of the skaters slip over together, suddenly the whole crowd might be downed. We saw in Chapter 8 that bifurcations and rapid transformations can occur in complex systems and I provided some historical examples. While claims have been made for punctuated events during the shift to farming in the early Holocene (Zeder 2009), the evidence is scant; on the whole people held themselves up very well as the Pleistocene ice melted! But we should not assume that stability is the norm in other cases.





Chapter 10


Conclusions


The thing has been associated with a malevolent ‘biological materiality that is or may be the result of our unknowing (usually atomic or nuclear) intervention into nature, the revenge of the blob … which imperils man.’

(Grosz 2001:167)

It is matter, the thing, that produces life.

(Grosz 2001: 168)

The key claims in this book have been the following:

Entanglement is the dialectic of dependence and dependency between humans and things (Chapters 2–5).

Central to human-thing entanglements are the temporalities of things, their scheduling and sequencing; things have to be done in a certain order (Chapter 3).

Entanglement is compounded by conceptual abstractions and bodily resonance, a reverberation between mind, body and the world of things (Chapter 6).

Entanglement occurs between humans and all things but the physical processes of material things contribute an entrapment, stickiness and practical messiness (Chapter 5).

It is not the material conditions of social life that determine the direction of change but the tautness (the entrapment) of heterogeneous entanglements (Chapter 5).



Human-thing dependence is unstable and unruly (humans and things have vitality) leading to processes of untying (catalysis) in which emergent phenomena appear and fixing solutions are sought (Chapter 8).



Things evolve and transform because they are fitting within particular entanglements (Chapters 6 and 7).

We dig ourselves into holes as a result of the tautness of entanglements so that overall there is an irreversibility to entanglement (Chapter 8).

The concept of entanglement allows a fuller integration of the humanities, social sciences, biological and material sciences in the study of things; entanglements are heterogeneous (Chapter 5).



My aim in this conclusion is to draw out some issues that are raised by this list of propositions.





The Object Nature of Things


Most people writing about ‘things’ nowadays focus on the topics I covered in Chapter 2. These topics are within the domain of social theory, material culture studies, materiality, memory and the like and there are increasingly sophisticated and persuasive studies (e.g. Mills and Walker 2008). I have argued that these approaches often pay little heed to the biological, chemical, physical thing. Most of this book has tried to move beyond the confines of material culture and social theory in order to incorporate mechanical, molecular things with their own temporalities and interactions with each other. I have wanted to take the object nature of things seriously, not to return to materialism and ecological determinacy but to seek a fuller account in which heterogeneous things and people are entangled in each other.

Many of those working in material culture studies have taken inspiration from Hegel’s writing on the ‘Phenomenology of Spirit’ (e.g. see Miller 2010). An example often given is Hegel’s account of salt. There are many attributes of salt, including that it is white, tart and cubicle. The perceived unity of the salt as a thing is pulled apart in the experience of its various different properties. The chemical and physical properties of the salt play a part in Hegel’s discussion of perception as a dialectical process of unity and difference, but in material culture studies the vast scientific developments in the understanding of matter since Hegel’s time are largely ignored. The molecular structure of salt ties together its whiteness, tartness, shape and weight, in much the same way that Keane (2003b) argues that material co-presence bundles concepts together. Adequate understanding of this material bundling, gathering and assembling needs to involve the analytical sciences, including archaeometry.

A key concern of this book has been to find ways to integrate archaeological and material science into a scientific archaeology of things and humans without descending into the object/subject debates and oppositions. In Chapters 3–4 I described thing dependence on humans and on other things. The main perspectives involved were from the material sciences and from behavioral research. These approaches are central to any attempt to break out of a human-centered, social-centered approach, but the difficulties with them are that they easily become reductive and ecologically or materially determinist. In Chapter 5 I argued that entanglement – as a heterogeneous mix of humans and things, potentials and constraints, ideas and technologies – avoids subject/object, material/ideal dualisms. Entanglement is a mix of humans and things, culture and matter, society and technology.

The determinative component in entanglements that pushes them in certain directions is not the economic base, the ecology nor the infrastructure; but neither is it ideology, systems of meaning nor the superstructure. Rather the entangling itself has a tautness that channels and directs humans and things as they go about their daily business of dependence and co-dependence. In Chapters 6–8 I explored this tautness as a heterogeneous fittingness. When things go wrong (as they always do, at some point or other), fixing has to occur relationally, in ways that are fitting with respect to the rest of the existing entanglements. Entanglements have a momentum and direction deriving from fittingness and also from the temporalities imposed on humans by things. Because of the human investment in and dependence on things it becomes very difficult to disentangle and to go backwards. Through time we dig ourselves into the hole of car dependence, cattle dependence, clay dependence. As we fix things within these holes, there tends to be a directional movement.

While this book has been about entanglement, much of the discussion has been about the core notion of dependence. This term has proved useful in identifying some key components of the relationships between humans and things, because it has a dual or dialectical meaning. On the one hand, we have seen humans depending on or relying on things to achieve goals (dependence). This is the enabling part of the human use of tools and symbols in order to form the subject, society and adaptation to environments. This is Grosz’ productive thing quoted at the start of this chapter. On the other hand, we have seen dependency and co-dependency when humans and things cannot manage without each other and, in this dependency on each other, they constrain and limit what each can do. This is the potentially malevolent destructive aspect of things as identified by Grosz. These two components of dependence, positive and negative, produce and constrain human action and lead humans into entanglements from which it becomes difficult to become detached. Because humans rely on things that have to be maintained so that they can be relied on, humans are caught in the lives and temporalities of things, their uncertain vicissitudes and their insatiable needs. Things appear as Hydra like, requiring Herculean skill to stop them multiplying and entrapping, and yet the entrapment is enticing and productive.

The material strings that tie us often seem invisible. They only become visible when we run into problems – as we are now with global warming. Our entrapment in material webs often occurs because things have different temporalities, often very long term, and we take them for granted or we forget history or we cannot predict how complex systems will respond. We do not know what to expect and when. Then suddenly a wall falls down, or cattle are realized to be producing too much CO2, or the Millennium bug appears. Or at Çatalhöyük the socially ‘invisible’ domesticates come to the fore as other parts of the entanglement shift (see Chapter 5). It is at these moments that our material entanglements are revealed, are recognized and are dealt with.

It could be argued that I have given too much weight to the vibrant nature of things. Surely it is an exaggeration to say that things are always falling apart, always changing and drawing us into their care; all that is solid does not melt into air. When we wake up each morning the house is still there, there is sugar on the table for the breakfast cereal, and the milk for the cereal is still cold in the fridge, the car is still in the garage and we can drive to work, the streets are still in place, and in the end the plane gets me to my destination, usually. And when something does go wrong, surely I can deal with it because on the whole I can trust that all the other things I need to fix it will be stable enough to get the job done. On the whole, is it not the case that self and society depend on the stability of things?

My main answer to this objection is that yes, things do seem stable on the whole. But this is because we are, or someone is, working very hard to produce that stability. We depend on the sweetness of the sugar, and the electricity to work the fridge, and the milk in the cereal, and the car and the plane containing petrol. But in order to produce this ready-to-handedness, this everyday expectation of stability and order, a vast apparatus of humans and things has to be mobilized on a global scale. To get the sugar to the table, to maintain the electricity grid, and to assure supplies of oil involves massive mobilization of resources, humans, dependencies. Things have lives of their own that we get drawn into and society depends on our abilities to manage this vibrancy of things effectively, to produce the effect of stability.

The notion that things are unstable is, from one perspective, the product of modern physics. For Newton matter consisted of a stable mass and the forces that set mass in motion through attraction and repulsion. But Einstein showed that mass and energy can be converted into one another and so can be seen as equivalent (Coole and Frost 2010). We now see matter as made up of atoms that are very active, with a positively charged nucleus surrounded by spinning electrons. At a lower level there are protons, quarks, leptons and so on. So at the atomic and sub-atomic level we see that matter ‘becomes’ rather than ‘is’. And at large scales, complexity and chaos theory suggest that the natural environment is more complex and unstable than was thought, with unpredictable and non-linear effects (Coole and Frost 2010).

Recent work in philosophy and the social sciences has come to similar conclusions (Bennett 2010) and there are descriptions of new materialisms that explore the ways in which matter ‘becomes’ (Coole and Frost 2010) within complex social-material worlds. Perhaps the best example of the argument about things and humans in motion in this book is the human riding a bicycle, where both human and thing launch each other into joint movement and depend on each other to keep things going as they are. So the focus is not on things and humans themselves but on their joint movement, that leads to unanticipated consequences that act back and create new problems and conditions. So I need to keep turning the wheels, keep adding fuel to the fire I have lit, keep working at maintaining supply lines to sugar and oil, keep earning to pay for access to the electricity grid, keep protecting my investments in the house. I have to keep moving to keep it all in place. In order to do this I often become increasingly dependent on the labor of others, and on energies provided by things and their interactions. These energies may be productive but they also produce constraint and increased expenditures of energy. We are drawn into protection of supply lines, procurement, new methods of manufacture, forms of maintenance, managing discard. We often manage to live relatively unaware of the full complexity of what and who provides us, but we are nevertheless deeply entangled in the vitality of things and the assemblages of their relations (Collier and Ong 2005).





Too Much Stuff?


In Chapter 5 I provided a simple formula for entanglement in which I took a fourth term HH (human-human dependence) for granted. Human interaction and sociality are of course the domains of much of the humanities and social sciences. HH dependence again involves dependency. It would be possible to turn the structure of this book around and argue that we should start with HH dependence and see all other forms of dependence in which things are involved as simply extensions of HH relations. It is in the HH realm that dependence has been best studied. We know that humans are primarily social animals and that in the early development of the child there is an immediate attraction to human faces, voices and nourishment. It might be possible to argue that our psychological and social dependence on things is usually a metaphor or replacement for relations with humans. We would prefer to have a human friend rather than a motorbike to help deal with depression, or we would prefer people to recognize our status and identity without having to use things. It is not material things that entrap us into relationships with people, but it is our debts and obligations to people that entrap us into relations with things.

However there are some problems with this argument. First, dealing with things is not the same as dealing with humans – people often prefer to deal with things precisely because they are not humans. There may be a security and an apparent predictability about dealing with things. Throwing a ball between depressed teenagers may at some moments be a more effective way of building confidence in social interactions than talking. Second, much of what things do for us is not doable by humans – tools and machines precisely do what humans cannot. HH interactions depend on the other three types of dependence (HT, TH, TT) and it is the complexity of these dependences that produces entanglement. It has not been my aim to under-estimate the importance of HH relations, but these relations often enlist the other three types of dependence and as a result humans are embroiled in things.

But perhaps I have over-emphasized the object matter of things because it is in my interests, as an archaeologist, to foreground material ‘blobs’. In our societies, it is archaeologists who have been charged with dealing with the material weight of the past. It is they who are aware more than most that things lie around in their own temporalities, suddenly coming to the surface, getting in the way of roads, quarries, housing developments so that they have to be dealt with. It is archaeologists who see most clearly how an objective material heritage entraps us. The world of heritage, museums, conservation and preservation is a good example of entanglement. Is all the theory I have discussed in this book only of interest to that small number of people whose job is to organize and regulate and systematize old things as they come to the surface? Is entanglement just a theory based on vested interest?

Certainly all theory is situated, but there are many influences other than the archaeological that lead to a focus on the object nature of things. I discussed the ‘return to things’ in the social sciences and humanities in Chapter 1. But there are also significant factors outside academe that make us all increasingly aware of ‘the revenge of the blob’. Most important may be the ‘limits to growth’ indicated by the material facts of global warming; or the constraints produced by the global availability of oil. There is also the brute force of terrorism and 9/11 that has come to limit us. Alternatively we can take a very different tack and point to the ways in which increasingly we live our lives in virtual e-worlds or engaged in distanced social messaging. In such a context there may be a nostalgic desire to return to hard, ‘real’ tactile things. I argue, then, that entanglement theory is of wide relevance and that the foregrounding of material ‘stuff’, not just as material meanings and social processes but also as matter that affects us, is a key part of an adequate social theory.

It may also be helpful at this point to restate my claim that while asserting the importance of material stuff I have not been arguing that human action is determined by material necessity and by the practical connections between things. My focus has been on flows of matter, energy and information, but the starting point in Chapter 2 was a human dependence on things that entailed cognitive, emotional, nutritional, technological and other dimensions. My starting point has been human need, even if we have also seen that need and desire are awakened by things in a dialectical affordance. Human dependences on things lead to human dependencies; the resulting entanglements are heterogeneous rather than materially determinative.





Temporality and Structure


The concept of entanglement as I have described it in this book is fundamentally about time. Amongst those that study systems or networks, the analytical focus is on the relationships and links between nodes, how they interact and feed back in positive and negative ways, how increasing population leads to increases in technology and pressure on resources ameliorated by ideologies and social structures and so on. The entanglement focus is different, or rather it adds to system and network the notion that the links between nodes involve temporal duration. The links are not just links, but involve debts and duties and investments. They involve schedules and bottle-necks. They involve humans waiting for things to happen and becoming involved in the duration of things and their processes. This focus on the temporal weight attached to nodes and links is captured by the terms dependence and dependency. In origin, the word ‘depend’ means to hang down (also the source of the word pendulum), and so the term can be used to refer to the ways in which things are weighed down in temporal duration. The nodes in a system or network are not free. They are weighed down by commitments, ownership, consequences and conditions. They ‘depend’ in the sense of being contingent in time. They involve productive dependence and constraining dependency, and in both cases there is a temporal weight as humans are caught in thingly interactions. There is something that endures beyond the flows, networks and systems. It is this heterogeneous something that I have tried to capture by the term entanglement.

The focus in this book has been on the thing-in-motion, both humans and things caught in a co-movement which cannot be reversed. I described the reasons for entrapment in Chapter 5, but overall the most important factor is that once we have invested in things in a particular way the co-movement makes switching paths very difficult. For example, by buying a house together two people have invested money, self, identity, status, time, effort. It is not so much that there is a structure of law that determines how to act, although that too exists, but it is more that the buying of a house together has a temporality. There are upstream and downstream effects since decisions made about the house purchase (such as what type of mortgage to get) and the house itself (when the roof will need repair) influence and limit decisions made down the line. Whether one can sell the house again in the future affects decisions made about whether to redo the roof.

The temporal weight of dependence is perhaps interpretable in terms of the notion of structure as used in the social sciences and humanities. Structures are often interpreted as rules, regulations, codes, embodied ways of doing. All these forms of structure, discursive or non-discursive, institutional or cultural, are often seen as historically produced and transformable through human agency. In this book all ‘structure’ is made up of webs of dependences and dependencies that lean forward and backwards, dependent on earlier investments and decisions and looking forward to expected outcomes. The gift of objects involves expectations about the return of the gift, about the full or partial transfer of ownership. Joint ventures in labor and maintenance involve duties and obligations. Procurement of materials is related to use, maintenance and discard down the line. Ownership is not a static category: it has to be worked at (see Chapter 2). We are always waiting for things to happen (Chapter 3). And they wait for us too (Chapter 4). The ‘structure’ then, is the emergent outcome of specific human-thing entanglements.

Earlier accounts of structure and agency (Bourdieu 1977,Giddens 1979) identified unacknowledged conditions and unintended consequences. The entanglement approach as construed here draws this focus on uncertain conditions and consequences from the margin into center stage. In his account of entanglement, Thomas (1991: 9) argues that the symbolic world is ‘practically muddled like everything else’ and he refers to the messiness and practical contingency of colonial encounters. Out of the muddles of entanglements new alignments and relationships are formed that tie humans and things into new dependences that have temporal duration and weight. These apparent structures are emergent and spontaneous bundles or assemblages of humans and things. It is the tying together within dependence that produces what we call structure. And this tying together is also the product of and makes possible power and agency.





Power and Agency


The terrain of entanglement is not flat and some entanglements are more entrapping than others. Although the tanglegram in Figure 9.2 is two-dimensional, there are concentrations of links, high-points of dependency and troughs between. When plotted spatially as in Figure 9.3, we can again explore the concentrations and discontinuities. The spatial mapping of entanglements at Çatalhöyük is relatively egalitarian, but a similar plotting at many other sites and in many landscapes would identify nodal points (chiefly centers, imperial capitals, dominant metropolises) around which dependence and dependency are aligned and controlled. On all forms of landscape the ‘taskscapes’ are differentially distributed (Ingold 1993) as are ‘ethnoscapes’, ‘mediascapes’, ‘technoscapes’, ‘finanscapes’ and ‘ideoscapes’ (Appadurai 1990). In all such cases, the peaks and troughs have much to do with the differential distribution of access and the unequal relationships between dependence and dependency. In short, they have much to do with power.

It might be argued that I have paid insufficient attention to the workings of power in my account of entanglement. I have rather taken power differentials as implicit in dependency and in ownership, obligations, duties and regulation. And yet power has been a constant theme ever-present within entanglements as I have described them. Humans depend on things (HT) in order to build, maintain and justify power. They depend on things to control others. Power makes use of the flows of meaning and energy in things, their associations and relationships. In terms of TT dependences, things are at the heart of the creation of relative value and the construction of forms of exchange and capital. Power is constrained by technologies and the availability of materials. In terms of TH dependences, the unruliness of things and their complex temporalities entrap humans into forms of care and maintenance, so providing a raison d’être for inequality and social constraint. I have emphasized that entanglements look different from different social positions and in relation to different interests (for example, the different views about which part of a sailing boat are important), and power is often or always concerned with which situated set of entanglements should dominate over others. Power is the differential flow of matter, energy and information through entanglements.

The temporalities of things and the unpredictable conjunctures that occur between them (‘events dear boy, events’) can enhance or erode power differentials, whether we consider the oil that stopped lubricating the guns of the invading German troops in the freezing cold of a Russian winter in Operation Barbarossa (Chapter 5) or whether we discuss the drop in the availability of wild cattle in the upper levels at Çatalhöyük (Chapter 9). It seems appropriate to critique the network theories of Actor Network Theories as being relatively unconcerned with power. But as I made clear in Chapter 5, entanglement is not just about networks – it is particularly concerned with dependences. As such it is immediately and directly concerned with power.

Human power to achieve goals and gain dominance over others leads to human-thing entanglement as resources are mobilized, ownership asserted and access restricted. But equally, forms of power are produced within particular forms of entanglement. Enduring structures of power are emergent phenomena produced within dense and complex sets of relations and dependences (Coole and Frost 2010). The entanglement of humans and things in the slave trade (guns, slaves, sugar, enabled by bigger, faster ships) became associated with appalling inequality as dominant groups protected their investments and coerced others into dependency relations with them. Entanglements can be productive and distributive but also viciously unequal, destructive and disempowering. The perspective provided by entanglement is that such power relations are not just about control of the means of production, or the control of social relations or social ideologies since those mechanisms of control are themselves set within wider human-thing entanglements. Today globalization is increasingly explored by anthropologists as a specific intersection of technology, politics and ethics. Collier and Ong (2005:12) argue that global power relations can be understood in terms of ‘heterogeneous, contingent, unstable, partial, and situated’ assemblages.

In the master-slave relationship the chains of the slave are produced within particular forms of entanglement and entrapment. Clearly, however, master and slave are differently situated within entanglements. Dominant groups have access to greater resources, networks and dependences. They work to protect their investments and to channel change in the direction of their own interests. In such a context slaves have little access to the flows of energy, material and information within entanglements. They are entrapped within the entanglements of others. Elites become entrapped in dependency relations that have to be maintained, are often fragile, needing to be worked at. They tend to pursue change that reiterates their position of control, but in the end wider shifts (in the case of slavery these involved hard-fought changes in attitudes as much as in technologies, economies and politics) may undermine or transform their control of humans and things.

In the extensive debates in the human and social sciences regarding human agency, there is broad understanding of the ways in which humans manipulate things in order to resist domination, transform meanings, undermine authority and power, create identities and sustain notions of personhood (Dobres and Robb 2000, Fowler 2004). We also increasingly recognize that the identification of agents and individuals is culturally variable (Gosden 2005, Meskell 2004, 2005b, Strathern 1999). Similarly, the mapping of entanglements involves detailing the potentialities available to humans in social action and describing the constraints within which they can work. The flows of matter, energy and information within entanglements make social life possible but they also entrap humans into various forms of dependency. And certain types of entanglement produce specific types of agent and individual. In the upper levels at Çatalhöyük there seems to be a heightened awareness of a separate self (Hodder 2006) and the pounding chords afforded Beethoven by new steel-framed pianos elicited a new romantic individual in the nineteenth century in Europe.

The study of agency contributes to the analysis of entanglement, but the emphasis in entanglement theory is less on the agent itself and more on the networks of entanglement that make possible and constrain certain forms of agency and certain forms of agent. There is not just a human subject creating agency but a distributive agency consisting of a ‘swarm of vitalities at play’ (Bennett 2010: 32). Agency is simply the ever-present force of things: the life force of humans and all organic things, and the forces of attraction, repulsion, etc. of all material things and their interactions. We are ourselves part mineral, produced by the flow of things through us. Humans have a particular form of life force, but all things are vital or vibrant (Bennett 2010). Within this heterogeneity, humans exert a problem-solving agency that finds fitting solutions that take into account many trade-offs and relative costs. In particular at catalytic moments, there is a partial untying of the knots of entanglement and there is much uncertainty of outcome. At such moments there is greater potential for individual actions to have far-reaching consequences, leading to bifurcations and radical transformation. Agency is intimately tied to the state and trajectory of entanglements.

Actor Network Theory is identified with the extension of agency to things. According to Latour, things can delegate for humans and in doing so they have an impact, an effect, and an agency even though there is no intentionality involved. In Chapter 2 I mentioned the work of Gell distinguishing primary human agency involving intentionality from the secondary agency of things that act for humans. I agree that things have a secondary agency as described by Latour and Gell, that is an agency given to them by humans. But I argue that in their objectness things also have primary agency. In this volume, I have tried to show that things have a primary agency, not derived from humans and not associated with intentionality. Rather, things have primary agency in that they act in the world as a result of processes of material interaction, transformation and decay. Materials and the forces that flow through them afford humans certain potentials and constraints. In these ways things are actors.





To and from Formulaic Reduction


We could reduce many of the arguments in this book to simple formulae. For example, we could say that

E + problem + fix = En

(where E is entanglement and n > 1)

or

Increase in dependence ⇒ Increase in dependency

(where ⇒ means ‘leads to’).

Another way of making much the same point as the last formula, is to argue that a solution that is less costly in locale A, may be more costly elsewhere and thus in E as a whole. Thus

E(locale A) + problem + fix = E(total)n

All these three formulae express the tendency for entanglements to increase in scale and complexity as things go wrong. I came across an example of the last formula recently when buying a fluorescent lamp for a wall fitting that had blown. The type of fluorescent lamp that I bought saves energy in my house when compared with traditional light bulbs. So at locale A (my house) I save energy. But I cannot throw the fluorescent lamp in the garbage because it contains mercury. I have to take the lamp back to the shop for special disposal. The instructions on the lamp packet say ‘Dispose of according to local, state or federal laws’. Costs have been shifted elsewhere in the entanglement – amongst other things to garbage disposal and regulatory procedures. Another example can be taken from the invention of the wheel. Introduction of the wheel made carrying loads easier (at the locale of the cart and its load) but costs increased elsewhere as domestic animals were needed to pull the carts.

Indeed it might seem as if we could summarize the whole argument of this book in a formal linear manner. This book has had a very linear structure. HT (Chapter 2), TT (Chapter 3), TH (Chapter 4) and HH dependences produce E (Chapter 5) in which humans and things are fitting (Chapter 6). But as conjunctural events occur leading to problems that need fixing (Chapters 7 and 8), fitting solutions are found leading to changes in the overall entanglement. So

E + fittingness + conjunctural event ⇒ problem ⇒ fixing ⇒ selection ⇒ E’

I do not present these formulae as laws or rules but as summaries drawn from the arguments presented in this book. They are both logically produced and based on the observation of data. But looking at them more carefully we see the problems involved in simplification and reductionism. In the last formula, the linear structure is cross-cut by the ever present play of entanglements. For example, events do not just occur at random. They are produced within entanglements, as a result of the specific interactions of humans and things. Many things that ‘go wrong’ are made to go wrong by human conflict and intervention. And whether we think something has gone wrong depends partly on our social positioning. In addition, fixing or problem solving depend very much on the specific entanglement – on what tools are available, on what tools are available to make tools, on the human social relationships and relationships of power that make tools available to certain people, on the human ability to maintain tools and the relationships on which tools depend and so on. There may be dependency constraints that delimit what can be done. Similarly, fittingness is composed of resonance and abstraction that are integral components of entanglements, and it is composed of what humans and things afford each other. What is seen as fitting will depend on social positioning and relations of power. As a result, selection depends on all the components of fittingness within entanglements.

In addition, the whole process occurs at multiple scales simultaneously. Thus the problems caused by the event of a pot breaking in the fire while cooking a lamb stew lead to responses – to repair the pot, or obtain another one or to reduce the temperature in the fire and so on. But these decisions are cross-cut by and intersect with larger processes such as the availability of clay to make pots or the availability of sheep to make lamb stews. And these larger processes are themselves caught within yet larger processes regarding the decision to cook in pots or to domesticate sheep and goat. And they are caught within power relations in whose interest it is to construe an entanglement from a particular perspective; for example I have several times in this book noted how different people, situated in specific ways, construe the entanglement of a thing like a boat (for sailing or leisure or for environmental protection).

So in the end there is no linear sequence. There is simply entanglement with all its conjunctures and temporalities. The reductionism is useful – because it simplifies complex situations and makes them accessible analytically. It allows one to model what are perceived as essential variables and their interactions. But we also need to explore the full irreducible complexities of human-thing entanglements. These complexities are themselves productive of entanglement (in the generation of bifurcations and conjunctures), and the details do themselves matter. We have seen that small things and little events can have large catalytic effects. There is thus a need to go back and forth, simplifying things and then exploring them in all their multi-dimensional complexities. If the researcher could disentangle an entanglement in order to study the separate strands and how they are wound round each other, then the entanglement would no longer be entangled! There is thus a need to explore entanglement itself, engaging in thick, rich, contextual analysis.

I have at various points in this book suggested that entanglement offers the opportunity for greater quantitative analysis than I have provided here. There is the potential for the analysis of trade-offs based on numerical data derived from experiment, ethnography and scientific knowledge of materials, as in the example provided by Wollstonecroft et al. (2008) regarding grinding of foods and described in Chapter 4. This type of quantitative analysis could, for example, usefully be applied to the study of the entanglements around the use of ground stone in the Middle East in Chapter 9. There is much potential for the quantitative analysis of tanglegrams, adapting the suite of techniques used by various forms of evolutionary archaeology and described in Chapter 7. As noted in Chapter 9 there is opportunity for the application of network analysis to the topography of entanglements (Evans, Knappett and Rivers 2007). On the other hand, as already noted, entanglement is a useful concept if it admits to the messiness, indeterminacy and relationality of social life. Entanglement is always historical and specific and these dimensions will always require an interpretive moment. We have seen that the drawing of entanglements depends on goal and perspective. There is a need to explore entanglements from different perspectives, and indeed to situate the different perspectives within higher-level entanglements both of participants and of observers, analysts and interpreters.





Things Again


I wish at the end to return to the definition of things. Throughout this book I have mainly considered material things, mostly hard things made by humans, but also animals, plants and natural materials like clay or water. I have paid scant attention to gases, vapors, smells and sounds although I have discussed music at some length (Chapter 6). In Chapter 1 I included thoughts and feelings as things, even if they pass very quickly and leave no material trace. I argued that things are really flows of matter, energy and information but I have focused largely on those flows that produce hard matter that endures.

Impermanent things can of course endure if translated into some other form, recorded on paper or on tape, memorialized in monuments or stories, or even if simply remembered in the brain. Once translated in this way, evanescent things can become part of entanglements. Humans may give fleeting things (thoughts, feelings) significance and duration; they may invest in them and get entrapped in their intricacies and logics and in their materialization. As argued in Chapter 6, words and ideas and emotions inform the abstractions and resonances that contribute to entanglement. But on their own, ideas, smells, glances, spoken words and thoughts do not have an enduring existence that can act back and create dependency. It is only when translated into some durable form that they do come to be central parts of entanglements.

I have also paid scant attention to institutions as things. I have tended to focus on things that have an object nature rather than on assemblies of people or of complexes of humans and things. These complex things are themselves often translated into or represented by material entities such as buildings, written documents and laws, insignia and the complex practices of interactions between people and things (all those working in a bank and all the flows of financial transactions that make up the bank and so on). The institutions are themselves human-thing entanglements of specific forms as we saw in the discussion of Southwest Airlines in Chapter 6. At a higher level these complex entanglements are things that behave in ways similar to smaller material entities. For example, we depend on them (to look after our money or to transport us to a destination). And they depend on other things (banks depend on computers as do airline companies). And they depend on humans (to maintain them). Entanglement occurs between humans and institutions because complex things have lives and temporalities that are uncertain and draw humans into their care. Humans invest in complex things and so it is in their interests to maintain them. Complex things like Southwest Airlines become selected for if they are fitting in a particular environment.

It seems then that a diversity of types of things can be included within the study of human-thing entanglement, even if I have focused in this book on material entities that have an object nature. Both fleeting, transient events and large-scale institutions have attributes as things that can lead to entanglement and to many of the themes discussed in this book. And as noted in Chapter 1, humans are themselves just complex things with a particular form of life force. As individual humans we depend on other humans, that depend on each other and that depend on us. Other humans fall apart, go wrong and return to dust. As individual humans we become entangled in our debts, duties and obligations to other humans but also in the flows of minerals and organic matter through us. We form dependence, dependency and co-dependency relations with other humans and things that influence the ways in which our lives and our societies unfurl. Like any other thing, the human frame is a transient bounded entity through which matter, energy and information flow, connecting it to other things.





Some Ethical Considerations


I have wanted in this book to retreat from an entirely relational treatment of matter, to rediscover the object nature of things. The thingly relations of things include object relations; materials provide affordances or potentialities to humans. The brute matter of things has effects on us that go beyond social meaning. We cannot reduce things solely to the relational, to a semiotics of things. To do so undermines the power of things to entrap, and particularly to trap the more vulnerable whether these be the victims of the AIDs virus, the work gang bound by chains, the women bound by child rearing, the populations bound by global agricultural systems.

In the modern world, we have come to see that we need to use things sustainably and responsibly, to care for things. But this care and sustainability themselves too frequently involve further management and control, of animals, plants, landscapes, resources and humans. So things have once again trumped us, entrapped us into their care. Whatever different detailed paths we have taken since we emerged as humans, we have as a species become more and more entangled in things. Ever since the first tool and the first fire, ever since we took the path of being dependent on things, we have been caught up in their lives. We have spent all our time as historians detailing the specific paths that have been taken within this broad movement. We have focused on the origins of agriculture and the emergence of property (Rousseau 1755, Marx and Engels 1846), or industrialization and the emergence of the nation state (Hobsbawm 1996, Anderson 1983), or on the emergence of new global technologies (Castells 1996). We have explored how some societies became entangled in guns, germs and steel so that they spread over the Americas (Diamond 1997), or we have explained why, ultimately for geographic reasons, spurts of activity occurred in the west rather than in the east (Morris 2010).

There is much to be done in terms of understanding the different paths we have taken as humans, caught up in our varied ways with things. But the big picture is clear. Since a dependence on made things became an evolutionary pathway, there has been one long movement, initially slow, but speeding up exponentially as the strands of human-thing entanglement lengthened and intensified.

We recognize the dangers, but always with a short-term view. We talk today of sustainable use of the environment, of renewable resources, of green energy, of maintaining biodiversity, of resilient alliances, of recognizing that small is beautiful. We try all these paths but they all have the same effects of increasing input, regulating access, managing and increasing entanglements. These short-term solutions do not look at the big picture, that as humans we are involved in a dance with things that cannot be stopped, since we are only human through things. Perhaps there is a future in expanding our dependence on things into the oceans and into space, although both are increasingly cluttered with our detritus and both would involve vast new inputs and colossal entanglements.

Recognition of the long-term increase in entanglement perhaps raises the stakes in our ethical consideration of the paths we should consider taking as a species. We have tended to deal with the dangers of nuclear accidents, environmental degradation and global warming by proposing regulations and redistributions, which over the long term only seem to increase entanglements. It seems right that we do what we can to save forests, decrease carbon emissions, protect endangered species. It seems right that we individually use less fuel in our cars and put solar panels on our roofs. All these attempts at fixing problems such as global warming conform to the ways in which we as a species have always dealt with problems before. It is in our nature to try and fix our problems now by fiddling and fixing and so becoming more entangled in things and technologies. It is in our very being to devour things. Our bodies incorporate minerals and energies that we gain from things; the electro-chemical activity in our brains depends on food from the world around it; our societies are built on and through things. The environment is not just a backdrop within which we fix problems (Bennett 2010); rather it is actively involved in our being as a species. And this co-dependence, as we have seen, leads ineluctably to dependency and more entanglement. So to fiddle and fix, as we always have done, seems to be the only solution. But we have perhaps come close to the end of the sustainability of this human impulse. Perhaps we need to face the possibility that fixing our technologies of co-dependency only increases rather than resolves the problem. The long term perspective of increased entanglement offered by archaeology and human evolution suggests the need to look deep inside ourselves and into what it means to be human. The moral choice is substantial, to change what it is to be human, to become something other than ourselves.





The Last Thing on my Mind


Although I have discussed a wide range of theory in archaeology in this volume, it has not been my aim to conduct a critical review of theoretical perspectives in the discipline. My reason for considering theories current in the discipline has been to explore whether they can contribute to the understanding and analysis of entanglement. In all the types of theory discussed, it is apparent that new insights can be gained. But I have been fascinated by the extent to which, when considered through the lens of entanglement, supposedly opposed perspectives have complementary parts to play. Of course, I have achieved this synthetic integration by selecting aspects of theories that serve my purpose. For example, I have argued that an evolutionary focus on variation and selection is key to understanding temporal trends in entanglements, but in doing so I have had to argue against the common emphases in evolutionary archaeology on transmission and reproductive success. Similarly, Human Behavioral Ecology is of great value in analyzing the cost-benefit trade-offs within entanglements, but only if the reductionism so valued within that approach is redressed and if costs and benefits are redefined so as to include the disruptions and contributions to heterogeneous entanglements (including the resonances and abstractions in which humans get caught).

Every scheme has its limits. Tang (2010) argues that however much theories in the social sciences aim to be comprehensive there is always something left over, some awkwardness where the theory does not quite work, or some gaps that are left unaddressed. In many ways entanglement does seem to me to be a neat scheme. It avoids the twin dangers of materialism and idealism, objectivism and subjectivism; it allows a more nuanced approach to colonial and post-colonial processes since it is less absorbed by domination and resistance; similarly it incorporates agency (in fixing problems and finding solutions) while at the same time de-centering the human in social life; it allows an emphasis on the immediate and short term but embedded within long-term evolutionary trajectories; it allows directionality without teleology. I am attracted to it because, as shown in Chapter 9, it opens up fruitful forms of analysis that can be carried out on archaeological data and that have developed from existing and specifically archaeological approaches (for example, operational chains, type sequences, behavioral mapping). Perhaps most important, it bridges between culture and biology, inserting a third term, the material, that forces a blurring of the boundaries between our biological, evolutionary nature and our culture.

But in this conclusion I have had to do some mopping up, dealing with the things left over or left out by the entanglement scheme, the inelegancies, the contradictions. I have pointed to the relative lack of focus on HH dependences and on power and agency. I have also noted the tensions between objective entanglement (as seen in a tanglegram) and positioned or situated interest; evaluating whether things go wrong involves socially positioned decisions. I have discussed the tensions between reductive clarifications and the full complexities of human-thing interactions, between quantification and contextual interpretation. I have noted problems in the definition of thing itself.

But in the end perhaps the main attraction of entanglement, ironically its main neatness, is its messiness. Entanglement is about being caught up in real things in specific conjunctural ways that come about through complex interactions. It is not bounded, schematic, theoretical. It describes the ways in which we live our lives struggling between webs of demand and potential, making do, working it out, unclear what is happening much of the time, not knowing the results of our actions or why. We can never mop up all this mess.

It is always difficult to end a book. The book has a beginning and an end and one wants to tie up all the loose ends before finishing. But the loose ends can never be neatly tied up – if they could it would be possible for there to be an end to entanglement. But humans cannot exist without things. And things, or at least this is my argument, cannot be wholly subjectified into humans. So the loose ends cannot be tied up and entanglement continues, well beyond the neat bounds of this book.





